THE ART OF Curing Sympathetically, OR Magnetically, Proved to be most true
both by its Theory and Practice, Exemplified by several Cures performed that
way.

With a Discourse concerning the Cure of Madness, AND An Appendix to prove the
reality of Sympathy. Also an account of some Cures performed by it in London.

Written originally in Latin by H. M. HERWIG, M. D.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Newborough at the Golden Ball in St Paul's
Churchyard, R. Parker at the Unicorn under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange,
Cornhil; and P. Buck at the Sign of the Temple, at the Temple-Gate in
Fleetstreet. 1700.

To the Right Noble JOHN, Lord Marquis of Normanby, Earl of Mulgrave, Baron
Sheffield, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
My Lord,
AS a Valiant Soldier is always forward to show his courage in the most
dangerous and difficult stratagems of War, being incited by the Example of his
great Commander and General, who, both in Sieges and Field-battels, has given
such glorious proofs of his Courage and Conduct, that the Valiant cannot behold
him without Envy, and Cowards without Terror. So those whom APOLLO has
inspired to aim at GLORY and not RICHES, always endeavor eminently to excel in
things most difficult or occult. The brightness of a Genius, like the flame of
a Torch, shines most splendid in the greatest obscurity; it appears but mean
and indifferent in matters that are clear and evident. I have here undertook a
subject, in which the most perspicatious have been but Moles; and have entered
the List, against almost all Naturalists and Physicians, that I might imitate
the courage of the Valiant Soldier, whom the event shows, not to be out-matcht
by the greatest danger. Right Noble Sir, I will here prove to you and the whole
Republic of Physic, that it is not rashly and Emperically that I have
recovered many persons by this Sympathetick way of curing, but by a method
truly Noble and Heroic. If I shall obtain any Honor by this Doctrine of
Sympathy, I most humbly dedicate it to your Honor; if otherwise, I can offer
this, that they were always esteemed praiseworthy, who bravely fell in the
engagement, tho they could not obtain the Victory.

Your Lordships most humbly devoted Servant, H. M. Herwig.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
MAny Troops of Enemies attack us on every side, yet if the Combat were to be
in the open Fields, a man naturally of a brave constitution, would defy all
their Forces; but because many times they make their onset unawares, and creep
in under the name of friendship, and do their mischief by little and little, it
is not to be admired, if Nature in its most perfect state should in time fall
to decay. Man wants Air, Meat and Drink, for his perservation. But what
inconveniences attend a bad Air, if it be unwholesome, or offend in its first
qualities, or if by the malignant influence of the Stars it breath a contagion.
How do Gluttony and Drunkenness defile humane nature, and destroy it? There is
nothing indeed in nature, that is happy in all particulars: Every thing has
its Honey and Poison, the one refreshes us, the other injures us; but are not
men's own voluntary thoughts contriving something that tends to his ruin? so
that it is most true, that man does himself the most mischief. Oh wtetched
condition of Man! who can be secure against the incursions of so many Enemies?
There is scarcely a man to be found, that in all respects is blameless. We
derive an unequal strength from our seminal beginning, the Coevous faults of
Parents are implanted into the Children, upon which account whole Families are
prone to some peculiar vices. Persons of the best constitutions, robust, and
well proportioned, cannot boast of immunity from decay, the best proportioned
bodies are liable to be infected with Malignant Fevers, that universally rages,
whose virulence often makes great havoc amongst them. Therefore in this small
Treatise, I intend to show how this may be prevented by Sympathy, or
Sympathetick Cure. All Physicians, as well Chemical as Galenical, have one and
the same design, the preservation of health; and to this end to cure
Distempers; but they have not all the same methods, for the Chemist, from mere
experience only, ridicules the fruitless endeavors of the Galenist. The
Galenists on the other side, observing how various events are, explode the rash
attempts of the Chemists, and extol their own way, and are mightily pufft up if
they can predict the events of Diseases. It is my established opinion, that
nothing is more safe in the cure of Diseases, than to join experience with
reason. Our Reasons are to be sought for from the examples of Nature, we ought
not to subvert the Nature of things, by our reasonings and preposterous and
erroneous experience. Nature is best explained by Nature, not to be overthrown
by Reason, which ought to be rejected if it is not agreeable to the necessities
of Nature. It is a sort of Intellectual weakness to relinquish sense for
reason. Upon which account the Honorable Mr Boil, in his experiments
concerning the various parts of Nitre, says, it ought to be our utmost
endeavor, if not in all things, yet as far as our thoughts can penetrate, to
have such sentiments that by expressing them, we may explain what our senses
perceive, how Nature herself is really discerned to operate, and not to
acquiesce in frivolous notions, and explications of things, all which rather
create confusion, and wherein there is no true knowledge, as an impartial Judge
will by what is said hereafter soon discern. When Men of curious thoughts could
not rest satisfied with this secret and preposterous way of explaining and
curing diseases delivered by the Moors, they received that Ancient Physic of
Hippocrates, and Hermes, illustrated by the principles of Democritus and
Epicurus, or rather of Hermes himself; in which Nature, and her Rival, the Art
of Chemistry, lend assisting hands. And here Theophrastus Paracelsus, was the
first that broke the Ice, and his ingenious restorer Johannes Baptista Van
Helmont, the Lord Verulam, and others that followed, who were a glory to the
English Nation, Sir Kenelm Digby, Descartes, Mr Boil, and other improvers of
sound Physic and natural Philosophy, who have not only illustrated, but in
many things enlarged, in others have abridged and better explained, and added
very many beneficial things, and adorned them with noble medicaments, and by
this way of study have rouzed several of the sluggish and lazy Physicians of
our age, from the old dull Physic, bringing a great deal more light, and
explanations to former inventions by the assistance of Chemistry, explaining
Nature by her self, and not by notions conceived in the head only, or the
dreams of fancy, but by natural experience well ordered and founded. Whence it
comes to pass, that now this Art of Physic is enriched with a vast stock of
knowledge. The supreme dispenser of things did not suffer the whole treasure of
knowledge to be exhausted in the Books of the Ancients, but has reserved some
discoveries for ours and future ages. Neither will the plea of Antiquity avail
here, the Old age of the World ought to be taken for Antiquity, which is
properly to be said only of our times, and not of the younger ages of the
World, as was that of the Ancients; that age is more ancient and great with
respect to us, but with respect to the World itself younger and less. Therefore
as we always expect greater knowledge and more mature judgment from an old man,
than a youth, upon account of his experience, from the abundance and variety of
things he has seen, heard, and considered of, for the same reason much more
should be expected from our age, than from the times of the Ancients; being in
a more adult age of the World infinitely more full of experiments and
observations. I have trod in the path of the Ancients, in this little tract of
Sympathy, and have not in the least varied from them, but paid them the
greatest veneration, only where I found them to dissent from sound Reason and
Experience. I have composed this small Treatise with abundance of pleasure, in
which is contained not only the observations of other Authors, but those I have
made and experienced myself, by my practice in Physic, manifold use of
Medicines, and what I have learned from Chemical observations; for by this
means I have found out many secrets (to hint some few out of great many) the
manner of curing Madness, Melancholy, Epilepsy, Palsy, Dropsy, intolerable
Headache, and to disperse Gouty pains in a very short time, and that it shall
not return suddenly or so violently; by the Assistance of God, I can perform
these cures, which the fact itself will testify, if any person pleases to make
use of my advice. But let others judge of this. As to what remains, in respect
to this Treatise, I beg no persons approbation, nor endeavor to draw any to my
party. The Commonwealth of Learning ought to be free, and every one to give his
vote according as Reason sways him. Let all things be done for the love and
study of truth, as becomes Philosophers, as becomes Physicians, etc. it is
sufficient for me to have sown the Seeds, and have cast them into the Earth,
which will either thrive or wither, according to the nature of the Ground, and
and the pleasure of God. So Reader, I I commend thee to the Divine protection,
and my self to thy Favor and Study.

Farewell.
CHAP. I.
Of the Physic of the Ancients and Moderns.
1. AS the affairs of mankind are always various and mutable, so we also
experience that Arts and Sciences are ^ikewise subject to vicissitudes. There
was never any Art or Science so sacred, but it had those that ^ated and
obstinately opposed it; (a^ongst which the art of Physic does ^ot deserve the
lowest place.). As from ^e wonderful effects of natural things, ^y reason of
the ignorance and infirmity ^f our minds, Philosophy or the Study of ^isdom
took its original; so the Impo^^nce of natural actions which proceeds ^^om the
defect of radical moisture, first ^ave occasion to the cultivating the art of
^hysick. Both are the undertaking of ^^e Physician, who being directed by the
^read of experience, and carried (...) to the end by the sagacious direction
(...) the understanding, still depends on the same principles. The Scope of one
is Truth, of the other Health; Physic moves upon this hinge only, as the sick
man's summum bonum, inregard there is nothing in Nature herself more worthy
inquiry after, nothing more profitable to be improved, nothing more pleasant to
be known; but here is the Difficulty, here is the Labor.

2. That it is in the power of any one Man to finish and complete this art, so
that nothing can be added to it, is not only folly to imagine, but the greatest
sign of Rashness to attempt, in regard life is short, and every art long.
Before Hippocrates his time they made use of only one Medicine, as is well
known. Hippocrates was so famous in this art, that he excelled all the
Physicians of his time, nevertheless, if we consider the present state of
Physic, it is far to be preferred before that of the Ancients.

3. There are a great many sorts of Medicines which mightily improve the whole
art of Physic, all which were unknown in Hippocrates time, by reason of the
negligence of Physicians in not enquiring into the secrets of Nature, and
diversity of Climates. For Rhubarb had not yet purged bitter Choler, nor Senna
the sour juice of the Milt, nor Agarick the sweet Phlegm, nor had Cassia, Sugar
or Manna filled the Apothecaries boxes, or an infinite number of Herbs of
different species, and almost Myriads of Flowers of various shapes and figures,
yet adorned the Botanist's Garden, and pleasingly deceived the eyes of Men. We
now abound in this Medicinal store for the comfort and convenience of the sick,
which we wanted in Hippocrates his time. All these lay buried through the sloth
of men, and therefore Physic could not flourish so in those times as it does
now, tho Antiquity boast of their Apollo, Aesculapius, Machion, Hippocrates and
Galen. These persons, if they could live again in these times would find men
far superior to them in experience, and more praiseworthy, and suceeding ages
will have those that will far exceed all that went before them. Every Art and
Science is infinite in regard it takes its original from infinity (that is God)
therefore by the goodness of God it daily increases and its knowledge is more
manifested. We now well understand those things which former ages could not
find out, and a great many more, by the assistance of the Art of Chemistry.

CHAP. II.
Of the necessity of the Art of Chemistry in this method of Curing.
1. I Cannot imagine how it came to pass, that so great a number of Physicians
should fall into this Error and opinion, to esteem Chemical Medicines to be
dangerous and destructive; Whether that was occasioned by the preparation and
administration of some pretended Chemists, who prescribe and exhibit in almost
all Distempers, a sort of precipitate Mercury and liquid Antimony melted into
Glass; who all ought to be expelled the Chemical Schools, nay indeed, to be
totally excluded from Chemical Physic, into perpetual banishment, never to be
recalled. But if these aforesaid Medicines, and an infinite number more, as
they come out of Natures hand are destructive, they may be so prepared by the
art of Chemistry, as to be divested of that destructive faculty, and become
very benign Medicines, and even Balsams: it is very true, and as manifest as
the day, that Nature produces nothing perfect, and in all particulars complete.
If therefore the blemishes and imperfections of Nature may be corrected by Art,
what Art finishes is more perfect than what Nature produces. for Art has evey
thing that Nature has, for it takes a perfect Nature from it; and moreover in
regard that perfection of Nature has something deficient, Art removes and
takes it away, and that perfection which before lay obscure, by its Natural
imperfections and blemishes, after Art has cleared it from them, seem then to
be more perfect. Whatsoever Medicines Nature produces, whether they are weak or
strong, always carry something connate with them, that is contrary to the
Nature of a Medicine.

2. If therefore nothing Natural is complete in every particular, but wants.
Art to perfect it, or at least wants Art to remove that which hinders and
retards perfection, that what, is perfect may appear and exercise its powers,
why then should not Chemical Medicines exceed all others; when beside^ the
perfection which they claim from Nature, by Chemistry they are cleared from all
things that would sully that perfection, so that being discharged from them,
they seem more perfect, in regard they retain nothing opposite therefore I
shall not be ashamed to prefer the excellency of Chemical Medicines on account
of their purity, which by the benefit of Chemistry, and by the rules and laws
of working by fire, they claim to themselves, befores all other Let then all
those who imagine that Chemical Medicines are destructive, lay aside this
opinion, for they are very mild as Reason dictates, and if they will not give
credit to Reason, even Experience it self will oblige them to alter their
sentiments.

CHAP III.
Concerning the influence of the Stars and Heaven.
1. NOr is it to be passed by in silence, whether in the preparation of
Chemical Medicines, regard ought to be had to Heaven, and the influence of the
Planets. No Philosopher will deny but that superior bodies act upon inferior;
what is seen by the eyes themselves cannot be denied. For we see every year
upon the Sun's return to us, Plants almost dead, fading and juiceless Trees
revive, and put on a green and juicy bark, at that time more especially the
Plants and Trees abound with vital juice; because the pores of the Earth being
rarefied by the Power of the Sun, causes nourishment more plentifully to ascend
to the roots of Plants and Trees. Nor do Plants and Trees only feel the
approach of the Sun, but all Animals, for in the Spring they are more excited
to copulation than at any other time, because their seed then especially
ferments, the animal spirits being increased by the approach of the Sun.
Minerals are also much affected by the presence of the Sun, for they grow more
plentifully, and send forth greater quantities of Mineral vapors in the Spring
than at other times, all things then abound with radical juice, and much more
than at other seasons; whence it cannot be denied, that Medicines gathered then
are best, and so the preparation likewise, for that pure that we look for in
the mixed, that it may be subservient to Physic is most plentiful then; this
is evident in the preparation of the Glass of Antimony, if the day be not clear
the Glass that is wrought off will be more dusky, therefore the calcination and
melting must be repeated till it come to a transparent and Violet color,
therefore this vitrification ought to be performed in clear weather, unless
necessity require otherwise, which is also to be observed in melting the
Regulus. I will also add, that the celestial volatile Spirits which descend
from Heaven upon Earth for the preservation of mixture, are more copious, and
not only the Earth and Water abound with those Spirits, but the Air and the
whole concave of Heaven also; whence it comes to pass whilst in mixed the Vital
parts are separated from themselves, like are joined to like by Sympathy and
Love, and there grows a pure out of the mixed, to be purified and prepared, the
wandering Spirits of Heaven which wander every where being gathered to it. But
let this suffice in general concerning the preparation of Medicines.

2. Generally all things grow in the Spring, but because mixed bodies are
different, and every one of them have their different forms and proprieties,
and radical moistures* which are subject to some peculiar Celestial Sign, which
has a Sympathy and kind of connection with that radical moisture, by which the
peculiar moisture of Mixed grows and flourishes; if so be its Celestial Sign
shine above the Horizon, and enjoys the benign aspect of the Sun, wherefore in
a just and exact Chemical preparation of Mixts, regard must not only be had to
the Spring, but also the particular and peculiar rising of the Planets and
Stars is to be considered, and especially the rising and setting of these
Planets, who have a sympathy and natural connection with the mixed to be prepared.

3. For we have in our selves the whole Firmament, with the Planets and Stars,
and as heat penetrates an Iron Furnace, and the Sun-Glass, so do the Stars Men
with all their proprieties; so that we may learn all natural things from the
starry Spirit of the Firmament. The Arthritick Gouty persons bear testimony to
this, who feeling before the change of the approaching season, are made
unwilling Prognosticators and Astrologers by their pain. So many sick persons
are beforehand sensible of future mutations in the four Elements, and the
Elements within Man have a foreknowledge of the changes of those without. The
constellations of Man and the Heavens are the same* For the Heaven is twofold
external, a^ all the bodies of the Stars in Heaven of the Firmament internal,
which is a Star^ or invisible and insensible body in al^ the Stars of Heaven;
that invisible and insensible body of the Stars, is the Spirit of the World, or
of Nature diffused into all Stars, or rather it is all Stars i^^ self; and as
that Spirit in the great world does particularly contain all Stars, so the
internal Heaven of Man, which is an Olympic spirit, particularly comprehends
all Stars, and so invisible Man is not only all Stars, but one and the same
altogether with the spirit of the world; as whiteness in Snow. As all things
from within spring, and proceed from what is invisible and occult, so also
visible corporeal substances come from incorporeal, and spiritual out of the
Stars, and are the bodies of Stars, and remain in Stars one in another.

4. The formation of things is in the Stars, as Iron in the fancy of the Smith.
Hence it follows, that not only all Animals, but also all Vegetables, nay, even
Stones and Metals, and whatsoever things exist are Nature, or endued with a
Starry Spirit, which is called Heaven or a Star: the unseen workman from whom
proceeds the formation, figure and color of all things. From this proper and
internal Star, being the Sun of the Microcosm, Man is generated, produced,
colored, formed, and governed; a Star is nothing but aninsensible body, or
living Spirit, without Reason in Vegetabies, but in those endued with life (as
in Man) with Reason, and is different according to the different forms of
things. But when we say all forms of things proceeds from the Stars, that is
not to be understood of those visible live Coals that sparkle in the Heaven,
nor of the invisible body of the Stars in the firmament, but every ones proper
Star; therefore the firmament above does not infuse virtues or secret powers
into what is specified below, as some conceit that the Stars of the firmament
do influence Herbs and Trees, but it is nothing so. Every Vegetable and Animal
carries its own Heaven and Star about itself, and in itself. The superior Stars
by their motion through the Zodiac raise up inferior Vegetables, supply them with
dew, rain and wind, but don't influence their internal Star, they do not
furnish them with smell, color, or form, but all proceed from that occult
workman their interior Star, and not from without; the external Stars do
neither incline nor necessitate man.

5. The Motion of the External Firmament, with its Constellations, is free and
governed by nothing, so the Motion in the Firmament and Stars in the Microcosm
(which is not performed materially, but by the Spirits of bodies) with its
Constellations is also free, and not in the least governed by the External
Firmament. All things are contained in Man, and he carries all things in
himself, he carries that whereof he was made in himself, he was made of the
World, and the World he carries in himself, and is carried by the World. The
invisible body of Man, from the breath of God, or which continues to all future
ages, is not subjected to the Stars. Moreover, as the first matter (which was
confused Essence without form) called by the Philosophers the Mother of the
World, or the Chaos) was the seed of the great World, so the Great World is the
seed of Man. Therefore Man is the last most Excellent, and most Noble Creature,
because he has the parts of the Great World, and there is nothing in the
greater World which is not really to be found in Man himself. All things were
created out of nothing. The great World was the womb of Adam, so the womb of
the Woman that of all his Sons is the Machine of the whole World. The Son in
all things is like his Parent. If you know the Parent you know the Son also.
Therefore Man is the most to be admired Extract and Kernel of the four
Elements, the chief and most finished Workmanship of God. Every creature is
truly the Example of God, because he is the whole World, and is alone entitled
to this honor, to cooperate and converse with them all. But I have said
enough on this subject, it is not my design at this time to demostrate all
things from the foundation, what cognation a Star has with Inferior things,
but to prove some Sympathy and Combination, as is sufficiently hinted before.

CHAP. IV.
Of the different way of Curing.
1 I Now come to the method of Curing diseases. This is done either by Nature,
by internal and external Medicines, or Sympatheticks. Diseases are most
principally cured by Nature, by Art as she is Natures handmaid; by the
Physician as the Servant of Art by remedies as they are applied by the
Physician by the direction of Art. But some Diseases are subdued by Nature
alone* others are cured by the cooperation of the Physician. No person is
preserved unless Nature separates the Distemper. No body dies unless Nature be
overcome: for Nature is active as well as passive in the cure of Diseases, and
those stand in need of no Physician; but sometimes by reason of the
stubbornness of the Disease, Nature is obstructed and languishes, then the
Physician is forced to lend his helping hand, and to finish and perfect the
lame and imperfect gifts of Nature, by evacuating, digesting, and corroborating
assistances. Sometimes the Physician goes beyond Nature, as in setting Bones
out of joint, and closing up wide gaping wounds, which Nature cannot
accomplish. When a Distemper affects the whole Habit of the body, as in an
Hectic Fever, because there is neither inclination nor aptitude, for the parts
to return to their natural state, this cure cannot proceed from a Natural
intrinsic cause, that being performed only by the unaffected parts; the cure
therefore of Habitual distempers require the assistance of Physic, though the
cure cannot be performed by Physic only, for the aformention'd Medicinal
operations cannot be perfected but by the intervening help of Nature; for the
Setting of limbs out of joint, and closing up wounds, is not perfected till
Nature strengthen the Joint, and breed new flesh; so also to the curing of an
Hectic Fever there must be a concurrence of the internal principle. Nature and
the Physician rectify all those things in our body that are repugnant to
Nature: for all Cures are performed either by Nature, or her servant the
Physician. When diseases are cured by the help of a Physician, they put him in
mind of his own duty, For a Physician is not only a servant of Nature, but
ought to be a servant of Art also. As therefore Nature moves primarily by its
self alone, when (without remedies) it overcomes, digests and concocts
distempers, and drives out the cause, restoring the body to its former state
(but this is to be understood of Diseases that Nature cures spontaneously) so
Physic and the Physician are not the first movers, but by the intervention of
helps that are opposite to the disease: but when Nature succumbs, and has not
strength of it self to rise, a Physician chosen by the benignity of God, and
one to whom almost all distempers are equal; for there is such an one, who
having attained to the universal Medicine, or Panacea, amongst many of the same
kind, is now no more a Servant, but an Interpreter, Ruler, and absolute Master:
for it is reported that this universal art of curing was by the Ancients ascribed
to some Physicians. The School of Paracelsus labored hard after it, giving
credit to his arrogance, whilst he says; This universal Medicine is invisible
fire, devouring some distempers. This cures the French Pox, Leprosy, Dropsy,
Cholick, Apoplexy, Cancer, Fistula, Schirre, and all interior maladies. To
which are added many others. Besides, a Tincture found out and prepared by
Paracelsus is a kind of universal Medicine amongst the Physicians, which
consumes all distempers, just as Fire does Wood.

2. Besides this Panacea has an effectual virtue in curing all infirmities
beyond all other Medicines, for it increases strength, preserves youth, keeps
the blood free from all putrefaction, purges whatsoever is contained in the
spirituous parts, and preserves all the members of the body. But it were to be
wished that what Paracelsus and others perhaps were Masters of (although many
very ingenious Physicians do much question it) were vouchsafed to us and
others, cultivators of the art of Physic, for by that means we might perchance
cure all diseases with more expedition, safety and pleasure. What great pains
might we save in searching to find out the place affected, and prescribing fit
Medicine for the part aggrieved, the Sex and Age and applying them at proper
times, and other things necessary to be observed in the art of healing? it
would then be sufficient only to know that the person was sick, the Physician
need not be solicitor after nicer inquiries: To what use would it be to study
Anatomy so exactly, to be well skilled in the several kinds of Minerals and
Metals, Plants and Animals, of which Medicines are compounded; to spend time
in finding out the differenc^ of diseases, and morbisick causes, and the places
affected, if one universal Med^^cine were an entire cure for all Distemper^

3. Therefore if by divine assistanc^ we may become Masters of that gre^^
Medicine, for I do not in the least question that there are a sort of Medicine^
as some preparations of Sulphur, which will by their sweet particles mightily
cherish the vital Spirits, yet this is not to be supposed sufficient, and that
Nature is thereby so corroborated, that without any other help and assistance
it will remove all the ill that affects it. As the vital Spirit is injured by
many causes, more Medicines than one will be requisite to remove these many
obstructions, for it is impossible that this Spirit shall be able to expel the
Serum in a Dropsy, or the foulness of the belly in those troubled with the
Iliack passion, without Anti-hydropick and Purgative Medicines; or dissolve the
Stone in the Reins or Bladder, or disperse arthritick nodes, but by Medicines
appropriated to that end. Two instruments, are required for the right
performance of all corporeal actions; one common, the other proper, the common
is the vital Spirit, the proper some certain parts of the body. For to a due
digestion of the chyle the vital Spirit is required, as the common instrument,
and a right and just constitution of the Ventricle. There is a diversity of
proper instruments, according to the diversity of Actions to be performed, and
to every part its peculiar constitution, different from all the rest. Hence
what agrees to one agrees not to another, and therefore there cannot be found
one Medicine to preserve all particular constitutions, or correct all errors.
Nor will it avail to say, as fire, consumes all sorts of wood, so this
universal medicine, as an invisible fire devours all distempers, for Elementary
fire does not destroy all things, but those only that will burn and flame; it
offers no violence to Gold, Glass, or Earth. But if this universal Medicine
should be allowed to be fire, how comes it to pass that it should only destroy
the noxious humors, and leave the blood and the other parts of the body
untoucht.

CHAP. V.
Of Sympathy, Physically considered.
1. BUt before I proceed further, it will be necessary that I should treat more
copiously of Physic, and Sympathetick, Magnetic or Diastatick Cure. That part
of the doctrine of Physic which treats of the Sympathy and Antipathy of
natural bodies is full of pleasure and admiration. Sympathy is a mutual and
natural affection and combination between natural things, arising from a
peculiar and occult cognation. From which affection it proceeds, that one body
attracts another to it self, or being joined to it is wonderfully assisted
either in generation or nutrition, in increasing, or producing certain powers.
Others call Sympathy a consent, when certain things are joined together by a
mutual marriage, as bound in a kind of league one to the another. Therefore
because amongst all natural bodies, there is a consent or dissent, confederacy
or war, we shall now treat of Sympathy and Antipathy in general; that if we
cannot find one universal cause, we may make some essays toward it. There are
six degrees of Sympathy and Antipathy established amongst natural bodies. The
first is betwixt Metals and Precious Stones, for example, between Coral and
Gold, who amicably conspire together to refresh the heart. The other degree is
between Plants and Metals, as some report of an Hazel twig sprit in two, by
which the Metallists discover Mines of Gold and Silver, therefore they call it
the divine Rod, the power of which twig increases and strengthens mineral
juices, or those that are of a near nature to Metals, whose juices this Hazel
switch sucks with its roots out of the earth thrown up in an heap, and thereby
is miraculously nourished and strengthened. They carry this Hazel rod at their
fingers ends, and to which part soever the Rod shall seem to incline, there the
Miners presume there are Mineral Veins. Some deny this virtue to be in the
Hazel* but others as boldly assert it. The third degree of Sympathy is reckoned
between* Plants and the Sun; so the Sun-flower.
Heliotrope and its species* and also the Tragopodium turn round with the Sun,
so that at Sun rising it turns its Flowers to the East, at Sun setting toward
the West. The fourth degree of Sympathy is between Her^^ themselves, as between
Rue and the (...) tree. Rue (says Johannes (...) a (...) under a Fig Tree (...)
bark. There is likewise a secret confederacy between Garlic Roses and Lillies,
for the flowers of them both will become more extraordinary fragrant if Garlic
be planted near them. The Sea Squill makes every thing that is sown near it
thrive extremely. All Pot Herbs grow mightily if the Herb Rocket be sown by
them. The fifth degree is between Plants and Animals. Many affirm it will tame
a Bull to tie him to a Fig tree. The sixth degree is between Animals
themselves, as between a Lizard and a Man, for a Lizard, as if he were fore
warning a Man against the approach of a Snake, will catch at him, and overlook
him to lick his spittle. This is true, that a Lizard is a most inoffensive
creature to a Man (unless it be provoked) so that a great many put them into
their bosoms without any harm. This is also evident, that where ever Lizards
are there are no Snakes, one always avoiding the place where the other is. It Is
also manifest that the Lizzard mounts his head when he sees a Man; and it is
observable, that if he be sprinkled with Man's spittle he seems mightily
rejoiced and solaced. So the Dolphin also is A Lover of Man.
philanthopo, for in^^^ting Mul^ets the Fishermen make use of Dolphins instead
of Dogs, who will also suffer themselves to be beaten, if they have been out in
hunting. There is also a mutual love between Storks and Partridges.

2. Antipathy is a natural enmity and repugnancy of natural things, or when
things disagree from each other by a mischievous secret discord, so the Lion
trembles at the Cocks crowing, the Elephant hates a Mouse, and cannot endure
the fodder wherein he has seen one. So the Snake cannot bear the very shade of
an Ash tree, and amongst Men very often there is a secret natural abhorernce of
one another; to this disagreement and Antipathy may be referred, that if the
murderer be present, blood will by little and little begin to flow from the
wound or nostrils of a Corpse lately slain. They therefore are mistaken who
imagine this very thing to be attributed to Sympathy; for the issuing out of
the blood is rather an argument of Revenge than of Sympathy and Love. For what
Sympathy could there be between inveterate enemies, hence also proceeds that
remarkable disagreement between Garlic and the Loadstone, for a Loadstone
rubbed with Garlic will not attract Iron. The enmity between the Oak and the
Olive Tree is so great, that one planted in the others place quickly dies* The
like instances of Antipathy may be observed in all kinds of Animals, but in
none so conspicuously evident as in Man. Many swoon at seeing Apples or Pears
pared, others cannot endure the noise of Cloth, some others can neither endure
to see nor eat Cheese, Butter, Onions, roasted Pig, Calves-heads; but all these
are rather to be referred to the imagination, as shall be said in its proper
place. They therefore deserve to be laughed at, who seek for the causes of
these, and the like effects, in the apparent and natural qualities of the
Elements; of which sort are those who reproachfully call occult proprieties the
refuge of ignorance. There are a great many dull and lazy genius's, who imagine
that all the proprieties of natural bodies are occult, and upon that account
neglect the study of Nature, or make no difference amongst occult proprieties
or qualities, neither exercise their understanding in searching out the causes
of those occult Qualities, of whom probable causes may be assigned. Of such it
may be justly said, that occult qualities are the Asylum of dullness and
ignorance.

3. Nor is their opinion to be embraced, who think that the exact causes of
natural powers can be nicely demonstrated; when on the contrary the Scripture
says, many things are difficult to be known, and inexplicable to the nature of
men, the causes of many things are occult, and many of the works of God remain
hid. Which also the greatest searchers into nature have acknowledged, amongst
whom Pliny says Many things are altogether concealed in the Majesty of Nature.
We must not enquire after Reason (says he) but the pleasure of Nature. It Is
certain, there are innumerable such natural powers and qualities in natural
bodies, of which the causes are concealed from us, and of which we ought
modestly to judge according to natural knowledge, which could never yet unfold
all the causes of natural powers. The cause is not to be enquired after in
every thing, it will be sufficient for some things to demonstrate that they
are. The weakness of our understanding will never penetrate so far as to attain
a perfect knowledge of the powers of occult proprieties, which more or less
reside in the most minute things; whence many very wise* Authors have accounted
it a certain kind of reverence, not to be more prying into those things than
was useful. For an over-scrupulous tracing of many things, produces the greater
ignorance, and confounds the understanding, that without all doubt we may
assert, that errors originally arose partly from Ambition and Envy, and partly
from an over-greedy desire of knowledge; but although the reasons of occult powers
cannot be evidently demonstrated from temperaments, yet it is not to be
doubted, but they proceed from a peculiar and singular temperament, which is
called Idiosugkasia, from a substantial form proper to every individual.

4. Idiosugkasia therefore is nothing, but the proper temperature of every
natural body, for whilst the Elementary Qualities, as well primary as
secundary, are ^uited together, by a certain celestial ^irtue, for the Heaven
terminates the ^oncretion of bodies, and affords them an exact measure of
vivifick light and heat so that by the accession of celestial heat and light*
in mixing there is made a particular coalition of the Elements, and so also of
the Elementary qualities, which corresponding in proportion, and analogy to the
forms of bodies, produces those occult powers or qualities. For example, bitter
Almonds by an occult power cure drunkenness, as many by experience know. If all
these occult qualities proceeded immediately from the form, why would not sweet
Almonds have the same effect, in regard sweet and bitter Almonds have both the
same specific form? Therefore in regard the cause cannot be found in the form
we must descend farther. And first bitterness itself cannot be the cause, in
regard there are a great many other bitter things, which have not the same
effect on drunkenness, but rather increase it. What is more bitter than Aloes,
and yet the bitter of Aloes has no influence that way. Therefore we must have
recourse to this (...), or peculiar temperament that is in bitter Almonds, in
which the Elementary qualities are reduced to a certain singular proportion by
celestial light and heat, that they may produce such an effect.

CHAP. IV.
Of Sympathy, Medicinally considered.
1. HItherto we have treated of Sympathy and Antipathy, under a natural
consideration, which was also absolutely necessary, now we will handle it
Medicinally so far as it assists us in the art of Physic.

It is long ago since this way of cure has flourisht; some think that
Theophrastus Paracelsus was the restorer of it, others attribute it to
Parmenses Anshelmus an Italian, and famous Magician. It is otherwise called
Magnetic, for as the Loadstone, by a secret and occult power attracts Iron, so
and by a like occult power a disease and a wound in a man is healed. This art
of healing Sympathetically has abundance of inveterate Antagonists, and is
miserably dilacerated and mortally hated, by those that should countenance and
defend it. This is so difficult, that after the contemplation of divine
Mysteries, nothing is more noble. This is truly the guide of Philosophizing, in
which it is lawful to pry into the secrets of things, and easily become masters
of their Arcana's. This is an exercise becoming good, wise and learned men, and
a noble pleasure to be desired beyond all others. And although in this our Iron
age, the number of Impostors and Sophists abound, and a good man is searce
discerned amongst them, so that those that endeavor to restore to light this
art of curing are not only thought illiterate and obscure, but also feel the
effects of an almost universal hatred. But let the enemies to this art go on
with their mere empty babbling, who acquire nothing but ignorance, in which
they mightily solace themselves. But the scribble of the ignorant* or such such
like things, will not be capable of destroying it, in regard it was confirmed
and established long before Paracelsus. Therefore they act very rashly, that
would ruin that, for the madness of a few persons, which has been confirmed by
long tract of time, which nevertheless cannot be accomplished, in regard it
cannot be suppressed by craft or combination. In the mean time Let every one
enjoy his own method of study. But my business is not in the least to spend
time in any further refuting of these things; but for brevity sake refer these
unskilful persons to the writings of the famous Tidicaeus, Goclenius,
Fracastoreus, etc. for whatsoever it wanting* and can be thought of, is to be
found there, with submission to others judgment: and why shall we discredit
such excellent men, and rather depend on some Sciolists, who out of a stubborn
temper argue that this art is vain and counterfeit, and exclaim that it was
invented, and obscurely delivered on no other design* but to exercise idle
wits. Far be it that we should imagine, that these learned men would designedly
have recommended any thing that was false to future memory, who always
industriously endeavored* by experience, and as much as was possible by
reasons, to find out truth, and made reputation with posterity their aim, which
was not acquired with empty trifles, but from sublime and difficult things,
built upon a sure and solid foundation. To this may be added the consent of
diverse Nations: for experiments of this Sympathetick or Magnetic Cure (not
only from the Latins, but also from the Greeks, especially the Egyptians, as
also the Arabians, Chaldeans, French and Germans, Spaniards and English) are
every day turned over by the hands of the learned, who all with one voice
(although in different Languages) assert this art of healing to be true and
natural, and not diabolical; of which more hereafter. Indeed Ignorance itself
is the mother of Admiration. For who is it that proceeds in this art as he
ought? or who can inform, that wants the foundation? Scarce one* and hardly one
of a thousand. What wonder then is it that many have found themselves
frustrated of their designed* end. They are happy whom other men's misfortunes
make wary. Why should they not believe the writings and most approved
experiments of such men, both ancient and modern, which say* that Art does not
deny us to use natural causes for the production of natural and true effects?
Wherefore they are Antipodes to the opinion of these learned men, who affirm
that all things that have life, as well Plants as Animals, do multiply by a
certain Spirit? (of which we have treated before) who give no credit to the
consent of such great men, but ascribe the effect of this cure not to Reason,
but rather to the Devil, and the vain trifling of Magicians, than to God, and
the power of Nature. But I pray who are generally the opposers of Art? Those
truly who have but just smelt to these men's writings, or never read Books but
in haste, just as the Dogs running drink water out of the River Nile; who in
regard they understand not the nice secrets of Nature, lay the blame of the
dullness of their apprehension on the inquisitive Philosophic Physician and
Art. But what is more unjust than for men to hate what they are ignorant of?
What is more rash than for an unskilful man to pass his judgment upon any
thing? It was not without cause that the Poet long ago said, Nothing is more
unjust than an unskilful man; who never thinks any thing well done but what he
does himself: as if he had said Knowledge has no enemy but the Ignorant. No
truly wise man ever denied this Art. Let them consider these things, if it be
an Art, how it is; if not, how it is not; or let them wait the time wherein God
and Nature may raise up some by whom Art may appear more bright and
conspicuous. And let not the Shooomaker go beyond his Last: For naturally the
like Nature in its own like Nature, has a perpetual action and operation, and
not different in Specie, much less in Genere. For by how much the diversity of
things is greater, by so much also the unity of things is greater.

3. Nature indeed disposes all things in potentia, for Art as much as it can
actually to perfect. Nature affords us the matter of Glass, it never produces
Glass itself. Nature is the Mother, Art the Daughter, where Nature ends, there
Art begins. And this is the order and rule of truth; and no otherwise* We can
make no certain judgment of those things which are not evident to us; and we
ought to give a favorable interpretation of those things that seem doubtful.
It is Wisdom therefore to suspend our judgment concerning those things of which
we have no knowledge or certainty, rather than so bitterly to inveigh against
them, in regard the abuse of any thing does not take away the true use. Amongst
Artificers of different degrees one must be more excellent than the other. For
Art does not depend on the Artificer, but the Artificer on Art. Therefore it
ought especially to be considered if this method of cure be lawful, or whether
it be forbidden by any divine or humane law; for that is the test of what is
lawful or unlawful. As for Holy Writ I can find no Text either in the Old or
New Testament where Sympathetical or Magnetical Cures are prohibited, when yet
the Divine Legislator Moses in Leviticus and Deuteronomy ennumerates a great
many sins. But as to the Civil Law, there cannot be shown one little in the
Digests, Books of Institutes, etc. which have any reference to a^ prohibition
of this way of Cure? How many Heretics has Holy Writ? How many Impostors in
Physic, and contentious Brawlers in the Law? But the piety and probity of
these disputes is praise worthy* (...) are desired to consider that the faults
of the Artificer are not to be imputed to the Art. But, as the Lawyer says, Let
not the punishment that is due to a Criminal, be inflicted upon him that has
committed no faults. In fine, no body loves that which he has no knowledge of,
but avoids, contemns, and thinks it not worth the learning. He only has regard
to his external body, and worships his mind, his own Deity. But by how much the
learning and knowledge of any thing increases, by so much the more is the love
of it augmented.

CHAP VII.
Of the Arguments of those that deny Sympathetick Cure.
1. IF any person is sollicitous to know the cause of Sympathetick or Magnetic
Cure, and especially concerning the Sympathetick Unguent, I will produce him
various Authors both for and against this subject, whose reasons I will
succinctly relate, and leave every one to a free and undetermined Judgment. And
in the first place, there are some who deny that there is any thing in it:
others opposing these, undertake to defend Magnetic Cure, and engaged as
warmly for their Sympathetick Powder and Ointment, as for Religion and
Property. The first, tho they allow the ingredients to be all natural things,
and the way of composition to be void of all suspicion, yet they say the cure
itself is without any Philosophical or Physical foundation. For first, that
cure is not performed according to the Indications necessary in curing
distempers and wounds: for in a Natural, Medicinal, and Methodical Cure of
diseases and wounds, many indications, and they different, occur, to all which
a particular regard must be had, in a certain order, according as the different
times of the diseases and wounds require; which is not done here, for by one
Remedy, and by only one Unction, they pretend indifferently to cure all
different distempers Secondly here is no natural manner of application for
mutual touching, whereby the power of the Medicine or Unguent may be conveyed
to the affected part, as is absolutely necessary.

2. But here is none, for the Medicine is not applied to the part affected, but
to water appropriated to a certain Sympathetick Medicine, and the Ointment or
Powder is rubbed on the instrument that gave the wound. Thirdly, here can be no
virtual action or touching. It is true indeed, that there are various occult
proprieties in Nature, from whence Sympathy and Antipathy take their original;
but in this Sympathetical Cure, there is no evident reason of a Virtual action.
The Lodestone attracts Iron, by an occult power, but not from a too remote
place, a just distance is required. Plants are hurtful, mischievous, and
unlucky to one another, and so likewise are Animals; but no action is
observable at a very remote distance, and that Power cannot be diffused to
immensity and infinity; but when by the power of Sympathetick Cure, only by the
Urine of sick persons, Sweat, Vomit, or Stool shall be caused, by certain
Sympathetick Medicines, or when we use Water or Sympathetick Powder prepared
for the closing up a wound in one traveling, or absent twelve twenty or more
miles, what proportion of distance is here between Agent and Patient? But if
that wonderful Magnetic and Balsamic Powder be efficacious with things very
distant, it is objected, How I pray can such a power proceed from a quantity of
Urine, clotted blood, and the purulent matter of wounds? how can those
Balsamic Spirits pass through so many heaps and folds of intermediate matter,
break through a Chest, have access to a remote languishing body, as also to a
wound in a Bed, perhaps and a Chamber close shut every way? but if when the air
is turbulent, the Suns beams can scarce exert their powers, and extend
themselves to our bodies, how will those traveling Spirits, which are so
easily agitated by rough winds, reach the body and wound of persons hurt? but
here is admitted no Vital or Medicinal Spirits operating at great distance.

3. In regard things of this kind do not remain in Urine, Blood split, and
purulent concrete matter, but vanish at the first moment; for Urine vanishes
immediately, as also Blood once cooled, can no longer exercise any faculty
pertaining to life. Fourthly, whether what is performed be done not by the
assistance of any Medicine, but by the help of Nature. We see that in wounds,
where Nature cures distempers, and endeavors and procures healing and
consolidation, especially if all obstructions are removed, and the wound be
carefully looked after, which is done by keeping it clean, and washing it twice
a day, with the Urine of the person, who will deny that consolidation to
proceed from Nature it self (to wit) by the internal Balsam of Nature promoting
its healing. Dogs and other Animals often cure their own wounds by licking of
them; and why may not something of this kind be expected from Nature? In the
Fifth place, No power can proceed from the Spirit or Soul of the world, which
is accounted the vehicle of this magnetic faculty; for a non entity has no
affection, no action, in the examination and confutation, whereof let us
consult other Authors.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Defense of Sympathetick Cure.
1. THere are others who oppose these strenuously, undertaking the defense of
Sympathetick cure. Fracastorius, Goclenius, Tidicaeus, Freigius, Helmont, etc.
are of opinion, that we ought not altogether to disbelieve it, in regard they
have proved this cure for so long a time, by the certain experience and
affirmation, not of vain men, but of those most worthy of credit; they say the
matter lies here, whether probability and verisimilitude drawn from the secrets
of Philosophy, and the testimony and approbation of the chiefest Philosophers
can add any thing to its reputation; they say the foundation of the whole cure
is that wunderful and occult consent of natural things, as the Loadstone, and
whatsoever has acquired a Magnetic Nature, in the Mariners Compass, in
Sun-dyals or Clocks, always and infallibly distinguishes* the Quarters of the
world from the North. So also, say they, the cure of bodies, although very far
distant, without all doubt may be performed by Medicines that possess a
Magnetic quality, by a energy arising from thence. And in regard that between
agent and patient there is required a kind of repassion, they assert that
something like it is to be found here. Man's Urine impregnated with a
Sympathetick Medicine, acts upon its own body, which causes sweat, vomitings,
and stool, and without any difficulty or detriment. Moreover, a weapon
sprinkled with humane blood operates on the wound given, and the wounded Flesh
also operates on the weapon, infusing something of it self into it, and
although that is so small, that the degree of its alteration and mutation
cannot be perceived by us, nevertheless it is so much that the weapon has
contracted a certain cognation, affinity and consent with the wound; and so
similitude, which is not the same, is as it were the same. From thence the
Magnetic Ointment acting upon the whole, is as if it acted on the wound, it
being joined in a sort of affinity to the weapon. The defenders of Magnetic
cure endeavor to explain all these things better, where amongst other things
they produce these. A Magnetic virtue is propagated from the weapon anointed;
to the wound, by reason of the Cognation and Continuation of Nature, which a
successive impulsion follows through the middle of the air, impregnated by the
universal and primary Spirit of the world, with a Magnetic Vigor and Power.
There is a Balsamic Spirit in the Unguent (Mummy especially being in humane
blood.) This is excited or rather called forth for the producing a particular
effect, by a like Spirit and Sympathetick to it, (to wit) by the universal
Spirit of the world. This Spirit, that calls forth, directs and disposes
bodies, and ties things to it self by a mutual knot of Nature, is not every
Spirit, but a determinate one, to wit, that which being present and touching,
causes the effect, and which failing, it ceases. Therefore this motion must be
acknowledged the first cause in all Sympathetick cares let it be what it will.
This directs and brings the Sanative power, sixth in the Spirit and Balsamic
Medicine, to the body and the wound itself; for these are Sympathetick Spirits,
and reciprocally desire each other; and by reason of this occult yet natural
appetite, they conspire to a determinate effect; so that in the whole it may be
truly said, the Magnetic cure of diseases, as well as wounds, is effected by a
mere transplanting of virtues, which the appetite between the Balsamic Spirit
and the Spirit of the World causes and perfects. That there is therefore
Sympathy in this Cure is sufficiently experienced; in which first is to be
considered, the subject or the matter in which, that is* humane Blood, Urine,
Excrement, etc. Secondly, the efficient cause from which; the universal Spirit
of the world viewing all things. Thirdly, the Instrumental cause, without which
the Cure cannot be perfected, which is the Medicine or Unguent sympathetically
prepared.

2. Libavius allows no Sympathy, and argues that it is only of natural things,
but Sympathy is a continuation of Nature, and its agreement: for although the
bodies of the Magnet and Iron are at a distance, yet Nature is so continued in
them, that they agree together: and why shall not we assert that there is a
kind of continuation, and therefore Sympathy between Urine and the Medicine,
the Wound and the Ointment, as also Powder magnetically compounded? But what
that is, in what it consists, and how it is performed, and what is its cause,
this is that which is to be enquired into. There was never any person yet that
was so arrogant as to pretend to demonstrate all these things particularly. Yet
we ought not to stand still, but to endeavor a search after it, as far as our
understandings can penetrate. Daily experience shows that many are Magnetically
cured in the most desperate diseases, sick persons being absent, by exciting a
great steam in Urine, without any pain at heart, and weakness in the head; and
this I my self have two hundred times experienced by those that have been
afflicted with an inveterate Headache, Palsy, Running Gout, Scurvy, Asthma,
Hypochondriac distempers, etc. For this is certain and no body in their right
wits will contradict it, that by the help of Sweat almost all distempers are
curable, by transplantation with Vegetables, by the means of Sulphur
microcosmically prepared. Much may be taken away from a morbisick constitution
by the help of Sweat, and likewise much may be communicated by it to other
bodies, as is manifest in those that have the Pox, Leprosy, Itch and Plague.
Howsoever it is done, it is infallibly true, that by the permission of God, men
are cured after this manner by Urine, and that Wounds are healed, although at
some miles distance. To what purpose then is it to shut our eyes against the
light manifest of experience, although we cannot trace out the true and
adequate causes, how these things come to pass? The Magnet draws Iron, and each
are in a wonderful manner mutually affected; but who yet has been found so
ingenious, to discover the true causes that produce that affection, although
many systems have been written on that subject; the same thing ought to be
thought of Sympathetick cure, and especially its Medicine, and not immediately
attribute it to a Diabolical art, although it is very effectual beyond belief,
or else we must call in question, or altogether deny the truth of matter of
fact.

CHAP. XI.
Of the false conjectures of those that think this Art diabolical.
1. BUt we ought here by the way to consider, whether the Devils have any such
power, as some attribute to them in this Magnetic cure. The power of the
Devils is great and tremendous, yet they could not so much as enter into the
Swine without divine command or permission. Moreover, there is no power granted
them over the will or understanding of man, but only over the Senses and Fancy;
it is certain that they work great and stupendous things without Man, not
immediately by the motion of generation and alteration, which is beyond their
power to effect, but only by local motion. So they can cause Thunder,
Lightning, raise the Wind and Storms, and mix the Elements together, but they
cannot imitate any thing that is peculiarly proper to God. Therefore they
cannot create new species, nor work real miracles, but those that are such in
show and appearance only, which are called lying signs, while they deceive the
eyes by their tricks, imposing upon the sight, and stirring up false species in
the fancy, or doing such things as are produced by natural causes, therefore
they cannot claim the name of Miracles. But pray were there any that before
Hippocrates his time raised the dead, by incorporeal Medicines only, or the
power of the Soul. Did Moses, Elias, Elisha, or any other of the Prophets work
Miracles? They did indeed raise the dead, the Elements obeyed them, but it was
not by any dexterity of art, not by their own power. There was no Magical
Impiety, no Cabalistical Vanity, no Fantastical Imaginations in these persons;
but the arm of God. Those things that are reported of Orpheus, or any other of
the Heathens, who preceeded or followed Hippocrates, were either false or
Diabolical, but almost all of them are fabulous. The Poets tell of Hypolitus,
that being dismembered, was brought back from Hell, and restored to Life by
Aesculapius; but this was either spoken Hyperbolically, or invented and feigned
by the Painters and Poets. To this we have Plato's testimony, who in his
Cratylus says this is a fiction. Philostratus relates that the Ghost of
Achilles, that is, rather the Devil, was raised by Apollonius, which the
Soothsayers at this time perform. But what are these but fabulous and monstrous
pretensions? Or if the Heathens did any thing in Ancient times, that caused
admiration they were lying signs.

2. Those things, that the Devil wrought by the Egyptian Magicians in Moses's
time, were either the effect of natural causes or mere trifling delusions. Of
this kind were what the Ancients admired in their Idols, Caves, and Groves,
amongst all of which there was nothing that could properly deserve the name of
a miracle. We read in the 20th Chap. Book 6. of Josephus, that Magic was never
more in vogue than in his time, and Pliny says, There were never more Magicians
than in Nero's time, and (he adds) never was their folly more known; to wit, at
that time, when Josephus and many others were astonished with wonder at the
miracles of Christ; then they say it was the Devil (if he had any) exercised
his utmost power, by the Magicians, that by his works he might eclipse the then
flourishing name of Christianity. But what was then done by his Emissaries,
that could even affect the minds of the vulgar? Julian as much as he could
cultivated Natural and Diabolical Magic, that he might imitate the works of
Christ's Disciples. But who did we hear he restored to life? When do the winds
obey him? When did he cure the blind? Is there any thing like this said to be
performed by the Modern Magicians, or the Jews, who are continually turning
over the Cabala; or by others, who to the disgrace of the Christian Religion,
are now maintained by great men? What besides mere vain pretensions, mock
impostures, childish trifles, deceits and cheats? Who therefore will believe
those that lived before Hippocrates his time wrought such miracles. All these
things were done either by the assistance and help of the Devil, or by natural
causes, and therefore not to be accounted Miracles, or proceeding from
incorporeal Physic, or any faculty of the Soul: for example, to turn Water in
to Ice, to produce Rain, Hail and Snow, or such like delusions. But to cure
Paralyticks, and other sick persons by a word, to raise the Dead, to create new
substances, to make the Earth transparent to the very Center, to change the
nature of Fire, is not the work of a Creature but the Creator, who is the Lord
of Nature, and is not confined by its Laws. Although Menecrates of old
successfully cured many of the Falling Sickness, and never appeared in public,
but like a Deity, clothed like Jove himself in Purple, with a Crown on his
head, carrying a Scepter in his hand, and honored like a God by those he had
cured, as one who if he pleased could remove even Jove himself from Heaven. Who
is ignorant what the Ghosts and such like follies of Simon Magus were? There
are so many Absurdities and Impieties in all these things, that they deserve
totally to be obliterated, to say no worse of them.

CHAP X.
Of the Jews Cabalistical way of Curing.
THe Jews Cabalistical Cure is not to be thought of without indignation, being
nothing but a pernicious superstition, which by collecting, dividing and
transferring Words, Names, and Letters, dispersed here and there in Scripture,
according to their own Fancy, and composing one out of another, they frame
members of Sentences, Inductions, and Parables. Thus they would adapt the
oracles of God to their own fictions, and by wrestled accounts of Words,
Syllables, Letters, and Numbers, they endeavor to bring forced proofs for
their own perfidiousness. And moreover, being pufft up with these trifles, they
brag, that they have found out, and know the ineffable mysteries of God, and
secrets beyond any things the Scripture has revealed, and blush not with the
greatest assurance to say, by these they can P'rophesy, heal, and work
miracles. What can a perfidious Jew utter more impious and blasphemous? These
are their wretched words, Moses received this Cabalistical Art from God in the
Mount, which has been successively dilivered down to posterity, only by word
of mouth, like the Pythagorean Philosophy, without any written remains. They
give out, that Moses by his knowledge herein performed all those miracles that
Scripture records of him, his turning the Rod into a Serpent, the Rivers into
Blood, and all those many calamities he brought upon the Egyptians, were
performed by help of this; by this art Joshua caused the Sun to stand still;
Elijah restored the blind to sight, and called down Fire from Heaven. But this
is nothing but a vain and impious fiction of men superstitiously desperate, for
they cannot attribute these, and the other wonderful works of God, to the Art
and Industry of Man, without manifest and apparent sacrilege. The Rabbis
pretend, that the Cabala was first communicated to Moses, and so continued to
the succeeding Jews, and was not only known to those Prophets, who are recorded
in holy writ; but also to a great many more. It is manifest, that neither
Moses, Elias, or any other of the Prophets wrought any miracles, but by the
particular command of God. What God did by them the Prophets themselves cannot
be said to have done, either of their own proper motion, or by any such Art;
nay, they were not so much as foreseen by them, as we have before noted. For
this cause Moses and the rest of the Prophets after him, so often repeat it,
that they attribute all these works to God. Thus says he: The Lord commanded
this: The word of the Lord came unto me, etc. Lastly, if the Power of the
Cabala be so great, as the Jews impudently lie concerning it, how comes it to
pass then in regard they have cultivated it so long, both in the present and
former ages, and are so very conversant in it, that by its, assistance they
have performed nothing that can raise admiration, even in Children? Especially
when Josephus lib. 20. Chap. 6. reports, that it was very common and familiar
in his time. But they never did any thing, that can have the least pretense to
a Miracle.

2. I conclude therefore with other learned men, that this whole matter is
nothing but a sort of Allegorical sport, that idle persons employing themselves
about particular Letters, Points, and Numbers (which the Hebrew Tongue very
much admits of invented according to their own pleasure. This wretched Jewish
progeny goes on further, and in regard the miracles of) Christ, were so
illustrious and manifest, that they cannot be denied, and yet they will not
acknowledge him for the Messiah, and the promised seed; they villanously
sometimes attribute them to Magic, sometimes to the Cabala, and utter such
horrid expressions against the Eternal Son, that their very remembrance forces
me to silence. By these things which we have touched on by the way, it is easy
to perceive that this vain Superstition of the Cabala was not abolished at the
coming of Christ, as a great many Authors assert, who have wrote on this
subject. But indeed those studies which now adays are nicely inquired into, and
as proudly bragged of not only by the Jews, but also by a great many nominal
Christians, prove that it is not extinct (as it is to be wished it were) but on
the contrary (with grief be it spoken) it was never more studied in any age.
Thus you see in short what is the Jews Cabala, which many that are greedy of
the Jewish impiety swallow down. This Cabalistical Art, as also Magic, chiefly
consists in words and characters. I acknowledge indeed, that anciently Magic
and the names of Magicians were held sacred. And I also know that this specious
name is now at this time given by some to those wicked arts, by which Satan
endeavors to darken the glory of God, and obstruct man's salvation. Not only
the thing it self, but also the name of this art ought to be an abomination to
every good man; because there can be no figure either in Wood or Stone, or
engraven in any other matter, which in it self has the power of acting in
regard, according to Aristotle and Aquinas, figure is nothing but a certain
situation, and order of parts, from whence the modification of quantity arises.
Therefore in regard quantity is not active by it self, nor figure likewise,
which is only the modus of quantity, by necessary consequence it cannot be the
principle of mation or action, nor can a Statue as such, produce another Statue
or quality. Whence then proceeds that power and efficacy that the Jews and
Magicians attribute to words and characters? If it is neither from God, Nature,
or Art, it must be from something else, to wit, the Devil; who by these sort of
stratagems endeavors to entice miserable mortals to pay devotion to him.
Therefore the practicers of such detestable arts are deservedly punished with
the utmost severity both by the Laws of God and Men. There was never any want
of Natural Remedies, but the fault lies generally in our gross ignorance. As
there are two sorts of Physicians, one who cures miraculously, the other who
cures naturally by Medicines; so there are two originals of distempers, one
Natural, the other from Heaven: The word of the Lord heals those from Heaven,
and Natural distempers are cured by Natural means.

CHAP. X.
Of the Power of Imagination in Sympathetical Cure.
1. THere are some who affirm, that Sympathetick Cure is imaginary, so that the
Fancy contributes very much upon this occasion. I indeed confess, that in
imaginary distempers, the fancy has a great power, I mean the fancy of the
sick person, not of the Physician. The reason is evident, because the remedies
ought to be proportionable to the Distempers, and if the malady, be imaginary
the remedy ought also to be so. But who can believe, that a Physician can cure
another distemper, whether it be Natural, or Imaginary, by his own Fancy? The
Imagination of a Woman, has no power beyond her own body: It is therefore
active in the place where it predominates. But if it be of any force, it is
most especially observable in the effects it has upon Infants, that Women are
big with, who by the power of a strong imagination, are affected with many
strange accidents, by being so closely united to their Mothers, with whom they
enjoy the same animal life; it is not to admired if they have a joint suffering
with them, and their tender bodies are affected with the same impressions which
their Mothers so strongly conceive, especially since the Imagination proceeds
from the Animal Faculty, which rules in the formation of the Foetus. Hence
proceeds the different figures, various Monsters, and for the most part the
affections that are in Infants, as Parents often tell us: for it is common to
all Animals in the heat of coition to imprint that image they strongly behold
upon their seed. Jacob well knew this when he so cunningly found out a way to
have his Sheep speckled. This is the occasion of those horrid worms which
sometimes make a noise in women's wombs as if they were big with child. Strong
Imagination also extremely alters the Body: So in Fear it contracts the Spirit,
and in Joy enlarges it. These and a great many other things are evident truths,
which it is not my purpose longer to insist on. How this comes to pass, Suarez
Metaph. Disp. 18. Sect. 8. Art. 25. tells us. Imagination moves the Body, at
which motion the humor and the vital Spirits which alter the Body, are
excited. Which cannot be said of any but the own proper body of the Animal,
which works by Imagination: for on the other side, it is impossible for any
body to be altered by the imagination of another, because there was never one
instance yet brought that could but in appearance seem to confirm it; as also
that it is not in the least consonant to Reason, which says that Imagination is
an immanent act. The foundation therefore of using these secret Medicines on
any body consists in this, that you take care to correct the humane blood very
well, either by increasing, or diminishing it; by that means you may perform
whatsoever you please, and free the body of the decumbent committed to your
care, from Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy; but by the assistance of what
Medicine this effect is to be wrought, I shall at some time discover. Galen
says that good hope and confidence are beyond Physic: For he cures most, whom
most repose trust in. The Philosophers have discovered curious and wonderful
things concerning the passions of the Soul, and the Physicians have done so
likewise.

2. What Medicine is there in the world that heats, removes love, and creates
discord more than Anger? what chills more than Fear? and comforts and refreshes
more than Joy? What feeds and nourishes more than good hopes? and what is more
killing than Despair? therefore there is a very great secret mystery contained
in the Passions of man. If you seriously consider the power of Imagination and
the constitution of the Soul, you will conclude that nothing is more curious,
more true, more pleasant and secure than the effects of a high exalted
Imagination: how great and how wonderful it is the light of Nature manifestly
shows, as well in Jacob's Rod, related by Moses, as in those that are pregnant,
who mark their Foetus with the thing they long for, as was said before. The
Imagination or Fancy of a man is a Loadstone, that will attract beyond
thousands of miles; nay, in its exaltation it attracts to it self whatsoever it
pleases out of the four Elements. But the Imagination has no efficacy unless
it first draw to it self the thing thought of by its attractive power, that it
may beget out of itself a Native Spirit, the Architect of the Imagination;
afterward the Imagination, as if it were big, makes an impression on it, which
tho like the wind it cannot be touched, yet it is corporeal. Moreover, the Fancy
or imaginative power of man, in respect of its own nature, is Magnetic, in
attracting the fancies of other men, as we see by those that yawn. A strong
Imagination not only changes its own body, but also that of another, by a
certain virtue which the similitude of the thing bears to that to be changed,
which a strong Imagination moves, as is apparent in the numness by gnashing of
the Teeth, or the rubbing of one piece of Iron against another, which nums the
Teeth. In like manner yawning provokes yawning. In these, and the
aforementioned things consist all the secret of Physic. And now Physician set
thy self about this matter, and be vigilant, because you have read that
Pythagoras told the Philosophers, Be so much the more attentive to his words,
by how much the Teacher is concise: for thereby he instructs you that you ought
to understand much of secret things, but to say, or write little. Some seem in
this to run beyond their bounds, when they imagine they can engrave the
description of the Stars upon Gems and Metals, but this is very vain.
Superstitious Quacking ought never to cohabit with true and solid Physic. For
it is nothing else but the Owl of the Devil, invented for the catching of
Souls; but Physic is truly the gift of the great and good God, for the comfort
of humane life, by which man is led to contemplate the goodness of his Creator,
and to observe the careful regard he takes of him, who by such great store of
Medicines has provided against the variety of calamities that are incident to
humane Nature.

3. Learned men are not ignorant, when they cure by Signets or Charms, that no
virtues flow from them, but only from the opinion of the Person. But that
opinion withdraws us from the contemplation of the works of God, and teaches us
to disdain virtues created by Almighty God, and ascribes Powers to things,
which they are not endued with, neither by the supreme Diety, Nature, or Art.
Wherefore the Author of lies here easily mixes his poison. I have read of an
old Woman, that was miserably afflicted with the Toothache, who earnestly
desired a Student in Physic, to give her a Medicinal Spell to hang about her;
he being ignorant what to do in this matter, to avoid the old Woman's
importunities, wrote in a small piece of Paper, which he folded up in a piece
of fine Linen, and hung it about her Neck: the pain immediately ceased.
Whenever she found her Teeth to ache again, she made use again of this Charm,
or salutiferous Paper, and never without success; at last meeting with a person
averse to these superstitions, he unfolded this mighty Charm, found this
Sentence wrote in it, The Devil break your Neck. What I pray could this
sentence successfully either act upon, or infuse into the Imagination or Body?
God would have Physic accompanied with Piety, and expects himself to be
acknowledged, and worshipped in the use of it. Nevertheless, many things lie
hid in the bosom of Nature, not to be apprehended by humane sense, which
although by reason of our ignorance they seem superstitious and irrational
(because their causes are unknown to us), yet are very far from being guilty of
that crime. We read of Q. Fabius Maximus, that he was cured of a Quartane Ague,
by a great slaughter of his Enemies. From whence many of Ancients
superstitiously imagined, that a Quartane Ague was curable only by Pollution.
Democritus was of this opinion. But this cure of Fabius certainly happened by a
surprise of joy, the squalid juice and Foeces of the Quartane being mollified
and dispersed, and not in the least from pollution. In the same manner I think
that a persuasion in it self, either by Faith or Credibility, cannot effect any
thing, but it causes a sudden motion of the Spirits and Minds, in very soft and
tender Natures, by which the blood is carried about by a various Flux, and at
once removes the Morbilick causes from the parts aggrieved, by which means the
distemper ceases. Here is no Superstition unless superstitious persons create
it, by attributing the effect to other causes. So very often there is a more
occult virtue in those Amulets that are hung about persons, which growing hot
by touching the body, send forth atoms, and little particles and effluviums,
when we perceive them not, and infuse into us efficacious Antidotes, which we
receive in at the mouth and through the skin. Learned Physicians made use of these
formerly out of choice, when the Distemper was proof against alteratives and
purgatives, for there is a congenite propriety of fellowship and discord
between some things, by which they alter themselves without any apparent touch,
as Amber attracts Straws, the Magnet Iron. Galen much commended the power of
Piony hung up, and the thread wherewith a Viper has been strangled: He writes
that Wolfs Dung hung up is a remedy that gives ease in the Cholick, he commends
the Jasper, Omphatites, etc. for the same virtue, so we use the liver of a
Wolf, the heart of a Hedgehog, the lungs of a Fox, the bone in the heart of a
Deer, Swallows, Frogs, the liver of a Goat, Man's Skull, the flesh of a Cuckoo,
the liver of a Kite, the ventricle of an Hen, the little Hedge-sparrow.
Trallianus recounts many more such like to cure the Falling Sickness, and ease
the pain of the Cholick: he gives ease in the Gout by such sort of Medicines;
by the same Art he cures Quotidian and Quartan Agues, and mitigates the raging
pain of the Stone.

4. I have by often experience observed, that the skin of Snakes being applied
to a woman's belly in hard labor causes her speedily to bring forth, (this is
to be understood when the Foetus is come to maturity, and in its natural
state.) These and many other things have a natural cause, and therefore may be
vindicated from Superstition. In ancient times they used Charms-against Hail
and against Scalding. Caesar used to secure himself a prosperous Journey by
thrice repeating a Charm. I do not deny that tricks of the Devil had formerly
some efficacy, but I believe they proceeded from a wicked Author. Our Savior
has taken away all that power from him, and restored us Captives to liberty.
There is something due to Verses, sweet Voices, and Tunes; the internal
commotions of the mind are appeased by them: and the blood which affects to run
out of its due channel very often, by this pleasant method is restrained from
its exorbitant motion, which is the cause of many dangerous diseases; as we
daily see happen to persons disturbed with passion. Therefore the Musician
Damon being where a Phrygian Piper was playing to some young men that were
drunk, and about to act some mad pranks, bid him play a Dorick tune, and they
immediately desisted from their rude enterprises, because that part of the
irrational Soul that is subject to the affections is incited and mitigated by
irrational motions. The Cure that is performed by Cunning is equivalent to all
Magic can do, for it is a kind of Stratagem in Physic. There was a certain
person that thought he was nothing but a Soul, and upon that account refused
all food, because, said he, Souls eat not. At last a faithful Physician got a
Table to be spread at midnight, and the provisions being brought in by naked
men that he knew not, they sat down with great silence. He asked them what they
were doing? One in a low murmuring voice answered they were eating. He
presently asked what Countrymen they were? answer was made, they were Souls.
But, says the sick man, Souls eat not: Another answers, we eat after our own
manner, not as men do; he leaping out of bed, said Pray let me partake of your
Banquet: This being said he sits down and eats, and was cured of his distemper.
Another that supposed he had so great a Nose that it was impossible for him to
go through any Gate, as he was asleep an ingenious Physician joins an Oxes gut
filled with blood to his Nose; when he awoke he made grievous complaints of the
largeness of his Nose; the Physician asked him whether he would permit him to
cut it off? extending both his hands, he earnestly begs him to do it: The
Physician cuts the gut, and squeezing it hard, squirts the blood into the sick
man's eyes, and so throws away the gut. He being struck with this false
imagination was freed from his distemper. One that imagined he lived without a
Head, was cured by putting Lead on his Head. A woman that fancied she had Frogs
in her Belly was cured by giving her a purge, and putting Frogs in her
excrement. And in this age some persuade melancholy men that they are
bewitched, and cure them by Holy Water, who being sprinkled therewith are
restored to their former health.

CHAP. XII.
Of some Observations and Examples in this Magnetic Cure.
1. BY what has been said before in this short Treatise, although it is not
accurately handled, you may see that those Battering Rams levelled against me
are not able to overthrow my design of Sympathetick Cure; but that in this way
of Cure I may still (make use of Medicines out of the three Kingdoms, but
particularly out of the Animal) with a safe Conscience, without breach of
Charity toward my Neighbor, infringing the Laws, or any imputation of
Superstition. That divine harmony of Parts, by which Parts and Members
industriously concur to the mutual assistance of each other when affected,
teach and persuade us to this: for like are pleased with, and preserved by
their like. Parts taken from Brute Animals are very often subservient to the
like parts of our bodies, and are more particular medicinally assisting in this
Magnetic Cure beyond all others. Thus the prepared brains of a Hare much
comfort and relieve our brains, when they are discomposed, and out of order.
The famous Sennertus amongst others. Lib. 1. prax. informs us, that the lungs
of a Fox or Calf are very sanative to those troubled with the Ptysick, or any
other distemper of the Lungs; even the very Women know that the Bone of a
Deersheart is a Sovereign Cordial, and that Cordial Waters are prepared from
it. The Dispensatories tell us, that the Ventricle of an Hen is a specific
against the weakness of the Ventricle. Practitioners say, the Liver of a Wolf
cures all distempers incident to the Liver. It is very well known that the
Pizzle of an Heart is a great assistant to those that have an imbecility in
generation. But we may expect better success from Medicines prepared from the
parts of humane body; in regard nothing can be more consentaneous and agreeable
to the parts afflicted. The great lights of Physic (those excellent friends to
Nature) understood this, and thought it neither sin nor shame to prepare such
sort of Medicines, and to administer them to the sick Sympathetically, or
Magnetically. I have followed these as my Guides, in regard a Medicine may be
had from a man's own body. They are not preparred from any part of the body but
what is the most contemptible part thereof; and these are either from a living
or dead body: Those taken from a living body, are either such as Nature
designed to be cut off, as the hair, beard and nails; or those which proceed
spontaneously from it, as Excrements, or else those which Nature drives out as
superfluous, as Spittle, Ear-Wax, Sweat, Milk, Women's monthly courses, the
Secundine, the Navel-string, the Cawl, Urine, and the Dung; to these may be
added, Lice and Worms; as also those things that may be taken away without any
hurt or prejudice, as the Seed, Blood and Stone. Those taken from a dead body
are, the Skull, the moss of the Skull to which some other things are put in to
compose this Sympathetical Unguent, the Skin, Fat, Bones and Flesh; out of
which the best Medicines in this Sympathetick Cure are compounded, which indeed
are very salutiferous and necessary.

I will discover some Sympathetical Medicines, which have often been
experienced. If a person be afflicted with a constant Fever, and his Life is
despaired of, where all other Medicines prove ineffectual, then use this
Magnetic cure. Take the morning Urine of the sick Person, and pour it into a
Brass or Iron Vessel, to this put the white and yolk of an Egg, which mixing
well together let them boil, this done put 'em into a pot, that you can
conveniently stop so close, that no air can get in; then put the Pot into an
Ants nest, digging the pit pretty deep. If the Distemper is mortal, the sick
man will soon end his days, but if otherwise, after a very severe fit, he will
immediately find himself perfectly recovered. In the most dangerous
Consumption, boil a new laid Egg in the persons Urine, and throw it into a
Fish Pond, where is plenty of Fish, and the Distemper will gradually decrease:
Or make Dough with Meal and the Urine like a Cake, bake it like Bread, and cast
it to the Fish and Dogs to be devoured, and the Distemper will daily decrease.
I have cured those, that have been intolerably afflicted with the Headache, by
putting them into a great Sweat by the Urine, without administering any Medicine
inwardly, although the persons have been many miles distant, and this I have
performed with good success, especially to persons of the best Quality. I have
cured many persons, that were absent of a raging toothache, by mixing my
Sympathetick liquor with some blood let out of their gums. I have cured some
that were troubled with the bleeding at the nose by the blood that fell from
their nostrils, sent to me in a glass or earthen vessel well stopped, and that
without opening a vein, or taking any Medicine inwardly. So I have healed up
wounds that have lain open a great while, by my Magnetic liquor, though the
medicine never touch the wound* This Recipe is especially to be observed* and
very worthy the taking notice of* Take Sulphur Vivum, Spirit of Wine rectified,
and tartarized, common Salt mix all these very well together, and put them upon
humane dung, the more new and hot the better, then sprinkl^ them with lighted
coals or ashes, it wi^^ work wonderful things; to wit, the posteriors of that
person whose ordure it was will be mightily inflamed, and no other part of his
body, and although he be many miles distant. This Experiment has undoubtedly a
great effect on the ordure of the person absent as well as present; why may not
sweat, vomiting, stool, etc. be caused in Man by certain Medicines applied to
the Urine? There is no body will question, that very great sweatings may be
raised sympathetical by the Urine. I am not the only person that asserts it. I
have the Famous Engelbertus of Engelen a Maestriecht Physician on my side, a
person most worthy to be believed, and most industriously studious, and
exquisitely knowing in Metals, whose singular art and dexterity in
transmutation all Alchymists admire and reverence; he has found out a Secret
never sufficiently to be admired; who, putting in Horse-shoe nails one half
into a liquor invented for that purpose, immediately turns them inro fine
Silver: And what is more to be observed, (he says) that those Nails that were
strait when they were put into this Philosophical liquor come out crooked. This
person, whose truth and reputation are both very great, extremely extols this
way of curing by Sympathy, because, being at Rotterdam, by the assistance of Mr
Reddeswitz (who communicated this relation to me) he had very great sweats
caused sympathetically by his urine; insomuch that this celebrated man, like
another Aeson, was restored to a new Nature.

3. But if I am asked, whether this way of Cure will succeed in all Patients? I
answer, as purges, vomits and sudorificks, internally applied, for the most
part operate, but sometime have no effect on several bodies, so experience
tells us, it sometimes happens in curing by Sympathy.

4. I might here offer a great many more things of this nature, but it is not
expedient to divulge all together; and if we should be more copious in
explaining and unfolding many more things of this kind, our little Book would
increase, and swell beyond what we designed.

5. Wherefore, Courteous Reader, be at present contented, and if I shall see
that these few are acceptable to you, I will communicate for your service and
advantage some wonderful Secrets, such as the World thinks incredible, hitherto
concealed either through Ignorance or Envy.

OF MADNESS.
1. AMongst other things, which render a Physician both famous and beloved, the
principal is, that being sent for to the sick, by prescribing Medicines
according to Art and Experience, he can accomplish his desired end; which is to
reduce the Patient to an healthful state, by expelling the Distemper. For this
reason, the best Physic is most absolutely necessary in the Cure of Madness,
for they that labor under this distemper are afflicted both in body and mind.
Nature instructs us, that one man should be subservient to another, whomsoever
he is, for this reason, only because he is a man. All things are made
remarkable by their excellency; the Vine for its fruitfulness; Wine for its
fine taste; the Heart for its swiftness. Is the question asked, Why laboring
Cattle have the strongest backs? Because the only proper use to be made of them
is to carry burdens. A quick scent is principally necessary for a Dog to track
his game, swiftness to follow them, and courage to seize and fasten on them. It
is the most commendable thing, for every one to consider for what he was born.
What is Man's particular excellency? REASON. It Is by this he excels all other
creatures, who are irrational, and consequently are ignorant of its excellent
use; by this he imitates God. Perfect Reason is therefore Man's Bonum Proprium,
all other things he holds in common with the Brutes. Musonius describing what
God was, says, Man only, of all creatures that inhabit the Earth, is the Image
of God, and adorned with Godlike Virtues: for there is nothing to be found even
amongst the Gods themselves more excellent than Prudence.

Of the word Mania.
2. The word had its original from the Mother of the Empusa's. Empusa,
otherwise a sort of Hobgoblin or Bugbear, dedicated to Hecate, going on one
foot, as its etymology tells us. See the Proverb, More changeable than Empusa.
Others derive Mania from the Manii, that is, Fairies or Mormons: or as the
Greek word anos, which signifies loose or soft, because it immoderately relaxes
the mind: or indeed because It pollutes and defiles, for Madmen are sordid and
deformed. This much for the name, the definition follows.

What is it.
Madness is a daily commotion of the mind, arising from the fiery heat of the
Spirits, attended with Audacity and Fierceness, but without a Fever, or madness
is when the function of the principal Faculties of the Brain is depraved,
accompanied with a raging passion, which is void of a Fever, and proceeds from
a fire that heats the brain. I call it depraved, because it divests a man of
the use of his understanding and reason, hurrying him on to vain thoughts, and
absurd discourse, and precipitating him to wicked actions. I also added Anger,
to discriminate it from Melancholy, which is attended with Fear, and all things
appear full of Sorrow; but here an ungovernable rage rules, and that not
without an angry restlesness. They err therefore that imagine all Melancholy to
be Madness, for they do not only differ in the bare symptoms, but in the very
essence. I subjoyned, that Madness proceeds from the fire that heats the
brains, for the very essence of this affection consists in heat, whose
offsprings are anger and tumultuous rage, as cold is the cause of fear and
sorrow. Lastly, without a Fever, by this it is distinguishable from a Phrensy.
This Aretaeus also testifies, who asserts it in the whole to be a diuturnal
alienation of the mind free of a Fever. For, says he, Wine inflames the mind,
and by Drunkenness makes men delirious, but this is soon raised and soon over,
but Rage is permanent. Although (says he) it may happen that Madness may be
attended with a Fever, but yet it is none of its symptom; that is, it does not
proceed from that particular distemper of the brain, but was some former Fever;
but in a Phrensy it is secondary, and a symptom of it: for the Fever follows
the inflammation from which the Phrensy arises.

The different Kinds of Madness.
3. By Madness, or Distraction, I would here be understood to mean every great
delirium that is not accompanied with a Fever; but without it, seizes on a man,
and turns him raving. But we every day see this happens after a different
manner: for some Mad men are fierce and bold, and fall upon every one they
meet, and are endued with a prodigious strength, and do a great deal of
mischief unless they are chained fast; which sort of Madness is properly termed
Mania. Others, on the contrary, are timorous and sorrowful, and shun the
company of men; which sort of Madness is distinguished by the name of
Melancholy. Others labor under a burning Fever, of which Madness is the
constant companion; their distemper the Greeks call Phrensy. For although at
the beginning of the distemper the persons affected may sometimes seem to
return to the right use of their senses, yet their minds are perplexed with
various thoughts. I intend to treat of each of these kinds very briefly. I have
before shown what Mania is: These are the signs to know it by.

The person thus distempered is fierce, unruly, of a cruel countenance, and
will tear all his own clothes, without, he is bound fast. He is more raging at
one time than another, according to to the increase or decrease of the Moon
that governs his brain.

Of Melancholy Madness.
4. Melancholy is a Delirium, without a Fever, attended with fear and sorrow.
In this Definition Delirium is the Genus; which is common to it with Phrensy
and Madness; but in the other parts it is distinguished from them, because
Phrensy has a fever, and Madness is without fear and sorrow. The part affected
is the brain, as is manifest by its imperfect actions. The imagination is many
ways depraved, yet nevertheless so, That the number of fools should be
infinite* Wherefore let the Physician consider, from what humor of the body
the Melancholy it self had its original: if from a sanguine humor, the signs
of it are such as these; redness in the face and eyes; heat appearing in the
parts near the head; largeness and fullness of the Veins; much laughter; which
is one of the principal signs, proving that Melancholy proceeds by the adustion
of the blood. But if none of these signs appear, or but remissly, show
themselves together with fury, fierceness and a raging confidence, then we must
conclude that this Melancholy proceeds from the adustion of the Choler. But if
neither of these are perceived, but rather that cold predominates in the whole
body, accompanied with fear and sorrow, the complaints of that patient will
soon discover, that his Melancholy arises from the adustion of the Natural
Melancholy. But it will not be useless, first to show the common signs, and
afterward descend to the particular. The common signs are, fear, sorrow,
hatred and aversion to humane society.

The Signs of Melancholy.
5. The conceits and imaginations of Melancholy persons are very various. Some
have imagined themselves to be earthen vessels; others that they were brute
Animals; others desire death, which they very often procure for themselves;
and, which is very much to be wondered at, at the same time are much terrified
at and afraid of it. Some, imitating of Democritus, always laugh; others, like
Heraclitus, are in perpetual mourning. There are those also that fancy
themselves divinely inspired, and believe they can predict things to come. But
it would be too tedious to recite all their wild fancies in this short
Treatise, and much more too long to show all their causes; this being a thing
of that nature that is accounted amongst impossibilities; but if any person
pleases to exercise himself in this contemplation, he shall have my free leave
for it; but on this condition, that he Philosophically explain himself: for
Example sake, let him demonstrate that Dryness was the cause that made the
person believe himself to be an earthen vessel, and that Levity was that which
induced another to believe that he had no head, to cure which an Hat of Lead
was made use of, the weight whereof soon made him understand that he was not
headless. But let us proceed to the particular marks: Those persons whose whole
constitutions are affected with Melancholy are attended with these symptoms:
they are slender, lean, have broad Veins, are hairy, nasty, rough, black,
sometimes red, but never yellow; then they appear melancholy in all
circumstances, either by reason of their own natural constitution, or on
account of want of sleep, cares, anger, sorrow, their former diet, which might
burn up the blood, and convert it to Melancholy. Hypocondriack Melancholy is
thus known; you will first observe all the symptoms of a bad stomach, Flatus,
gurgulations, crudities, acid belchings, a dryness of the belly, and a levity
perceived by the belching, and that the distempered person shall be
apprehensive of all the uneasinesses that attend the Hypocondriack. The reason
of this sorrow and fear is, the cloudiness of the Brain and Animal Spirits,
which of their own nature ought to be clear. I will demonstrate it by this
example; for if external darkness occasions fear and sorrow, will not that
which is internal more effectually cause them? But perhaps you will say, are
not fear and sorrow passions of the Heart, why then do you place their causes
in the Brain? I answer, The aforementioned passions have their original from
the opinion of evil; but when the spirit is dark and cloudy, it will deprave
the imagination, so as to raise in us an opinion of present and future evil,
and on this account it affects us with fear and sorrow.

The Cause of Madness.
6. As for what belongs to the finding out the Cause of these distractions,
there was never person yet that could please himself, much less any body else.
The Ancients were of opinion, that Madness did proceed from an Idiopathia, by
an immoderate heat, the Brain being burnt by the Summer Sun, or Medicines
burning with extraordinary heat being applied to the head, or by the excessive
use of Spices and strong Wines But this often arises from the depravity of the
Matter itself. And this Matter is hot: for it is either the Blood, Yellow
Choler, or burnt putrid Melancholy. Fernelius asserts, that Madness proceeds
from hot blood. Madness is said to proceed from Choler, and that for the most
part burnt. When heat without a Fever shall come to that immoderate height that
it shall burn the juice, by which means rapid flames are driven about; so, that
what is fluid in the juices, is converted into foul soot, and burns the rest
into black feces. Hence arise foul spirits, and according to the sierceness of
the flame, so is the raving more or less: for Choler, of what sort soever it
is, by its sharp power does inrage men. The provocations of yellow burnt Choler
are very sharp. Wherefore in regard Madness does arise from the vicious juices,
they can be no other than biting juices; and of this sort only are yellow and
black Choler. Neither can it come from Melancholy, unless it is defiled with
some putrid matter, or roasted by a sharpness, which gives it a malignant
acrimony. Therefore Phlegm is not any way accessory to it. Briefly then to run
over these matters, Madness owes its original, either from an intemperate heat
of the brain without matter, or from matter extremely burnt, that is, hot
Blood, yellow Choler roasted, or not duly boiled, or putrid or burnt
Melancholy. Hippocrates says that Madness rages most in Autumn, and seizes upon
a great many. It may be answered, that it is for this reason, that in Autumn
that sharp Choler is suppressed that grew in the Dog days; but it corrupts by
the power of colder weather: for sometimes it turns putrid without adustion, as
is most evident in a quartane Fever.

Phrenzy, Madness, and Melancholy differ, by reason they proceed from different
causes, as I have shown before. Thus they may be discriminated: A Phrensy is
attended with a vehement Fever, and soon destroys a man, but Madness is void of
a Fever, and may continue a long time. Melancholy is different from both, being
quiet, free from raving pride, tho oftentimes it may break out into Madness,
and turns fear into audacity. The matter of Melancholy is cold. I now proceed
to the common differences. It is indeed a very great malady, but yet not
incurable, though not without great hazard, the least degree of Madness being
very unsafe. Paracelsus and others attribute the chief cause of Madness and
Rage, to certain Spirits in Nature that wander about, which he calls Phantasms;
and says that they are neither celestial, nor infernal, yet invisible; and
follow men about like dogs, and insinuate themselves into the minds of men of
too copious fancies, and make them distracted. We shall pass by these notions,
in regard they exceed our apprehension, and would rather with others be content
to be ignorant of the real cause, than to run the hazard of being mad our
selves, by endeavoring after enquiries beyond our abilities. It is very
probable then, that something supernatural is the cause of Madness: for it is
impossible that by nature, an humane body, for the most part consisting of an
icy substance, should endure the most severe cold of the winter without being
frozen, or so much as growing torpid; but Mad men are not affected with any
such matter, but will lie along day and night naked upon the coldest Marble
without any harm, and if you touch them shall feel them warm; and yet we see
Animals that are accustomed to the cold, and fortified against it with thick
hairy Skins or close Feathers, cannot endure so much cold without prejudice,
but require warm Stables; Birds either hide themselves, or retire into warmer
Countries; the wild beasts hide themselves in Dens and Caves; Water freezes
into Ice, Bread, Eggs, Apples, and Flesh freeze so very hard that you cannot
cut them, and nothing hardly is proof against frost but igneous Spirits, as
Spirit of Wine, Nitre, Vitriol, Salt, Urine, etc. We also read in the
Evangelists of many distempers that proceeded from Spirits, as that Lunatic,
Mark 19. That was sorely afflicted, and falling often into the water and fire,
his distemper was occasioned by a Spirit within him, which our Savior calls a
dumb and deaf Spirit, and Luke 11. he cast a Spirit out of the dumb man; Luke
13. mention is made of a Woman that had a spirit of infirmity for eighteen
years, that had bowed her down that she could not stand straight. Why may not
diseases proceed from diverse Spirits now in our days, and so be partakers of
the same original. I now go on to the Signs of the Causes.

7. From an intemperate heat, void of matter; if this be the case, the
delirious person will be like one drunk and out of their wits, and the delirium
will be continual, without remission, and it will increase by little and
little, so that there will appear no evident cause that occasioned it. If it
proceed from yellow Choler not burnt, it seizes all on a sudden, attended with
mighty bragging, without sleep, and they ll be very studious to do mischief;
they are thoughtful and diligent: for the Choler is movable. There are many
afflicted with this sort of Madness. They are in a continual restlesness, by
reason of their variety of opinions, occasioned by the wandering images that are
in their minds, whence comes their rambling talk from the swelling juice. They
are watchful. The worst sort of Madness proceeds from yellow burnt Choler:
These are always prompt to cruel actions, full of Pride, making a great noise,
cruel and rash: But if it proceed from Melancholy defiled by putrid matter, not
burnt, they are angry, and break out into rage, with tears and silence. But if
from burnt Melancholy, then they are very angry, and will fall upon persons
silently with cruel rage, and when once they begin to talk, never leave off.
These are very mischievous, but not so raging as those whose distemper proceeds
from Choler. After we have by these signs discovered the Causes of Madness, let
us now show by what Remedies it may be relieved. And here indeed is occasion
for a Physician of sound judgment: for Remedies ought speedily to be applied to
these Madmen, lest the distemper grow too obstinate.

The particular Cure of Madness.
8. This is the true way to cure Madness. Give a Vomit, prepared especially out
of the Mineral Kingdom. Aqua Benedicta is commended, but its virtue in this
distemper is not very great. After the Vomit let the Patient for some days take
a decoction of Herbs that are attractive and comforting to the Brain, and let
it be made without any other addition. Let him by no means have Wine Capital
Lixiviums are very prejudicial because they close up the pores, and so increase
the internal heat beyond it^ just due. This being done, then bleed* In doing of
which, consider if the body be full every where: If so, open the common Vein,
and let out 5 ounces of blood After bleeding the Patient should take my
comforting Bolus, which by degrees will make him sweat. This evacuation being
done, let him rest three days without taking any Physic. The three days being
over, evacuating Medicines should be given for some days. Then I recommend my
incomparable Drink for Madmen; nay, indeed for all Deliriums, be they of what
sort soever. It ought diligently to be observed from the beginning of the cure,
that in regard the matter always rises upward, to apply reducing Medicines. The
Drink beforementioned is very necessary in all sorts of Melancholy; nay, in
the very Epilepsie; and in short, the whole cure, in all Deliriums, Melancholy
and Epilepsie, is performed by this Drink Practicers have many Remedies, as
well internal as external. Some, as the last refuge in this Distemper, when
other means fail, have recourse to applying a strong Caustic to the Head
between the Crown and Sagittary Sutures* leaving it on till it eat so deep that
it looks like an open mouth. Then open the Skull with a Trepan, and let the
place be open for a month. This being done, they say the Patient will be cured
of his Madness. After this close up and heal the wound according to art. But
this method of Cure looks more like an Executioner than an ingenious Physician.

9. By the Blessing of God I have cured above eleven persons of Madness in this
City of Culemburg, besides what I have done elsewhere. Anno 1694. in May, a
very honorable Matron of Culemburg, above fifty years of age, (whose name,
upon account of the modesty and prudence that ought to belong to a Physician, I
forbear) a person of extraordinary modesty and courtesy toward all, fell into
a desperate Jaundice, after into a Catharral Fever, and so at last was taken
mad; she raved day and night, and continued to roar so loud, that it was
impossible to procure her any sleep I administered some Narcotick Medicines
prepared of Opium, but without any effect. Afterward I gave her restoring
Medicines, evacuating Choler, and comforting the Brain, and those furious
spirits began to diminish; then she took my most successful Drink against
Madness for eight weeks. When she had drank all the Drink, her Choler being
purged, and her Body strengthened, she was entirely freed from any symptoms of
Madness, and continued all the days of her life in good health, and in her
right senses.

10 One S. L. a man of forty six years old, being of a sanguine melancholic^
temper, formerly an Assistant to the Judges of this City, handsome, of tall
stature, not observing rules of Diet, but rather indulging his Appetite; he
loved Meat partly hot, and such as increased Choler, partly windy; he drank a
great deal of Stale Beer, and abundance of Wine. From this he began to be
afflicted in his Brain, so that for some months he did not say any thing that
was rational. In tract of time he fell mad. He had for nine years in his own
family a person that was reputed infallible for the cure of Madness. Anno 94,
upon account of some ill affairs returning home he began to break every thing
that lay in his way, and look very terribly upon all those he met in the house;
they secured him, for if he could have got a Knife or Sword, he would have
murdered every body. His Wife asked my advice, what was requisite to be done in
this affair: I ordered him my Medicines, that have been often approved against
this distemper. After three months he began to be calm and composed. And though
he was not entirely restored to the perfect use of his Reason, yet he is now so
well recovered, that at this time he uses an Ax, Saw, a Knife, and other
instruments, without hurting himself or any body else.

11. Michael Dollo, a young man of twenty four years: Mad by name and omen,
being of a sanguine melancholic temperament, was a Servant to the most serene
Princess of Waldeck; he was delirious from his Childhood. At last, in June 96,
he imagined himself to be some great Nobleman, afterward a Prophet; then
followed a most deplorable Madness. When he was in these fits, he was forced to
be chained Hand and Foot, or else he had murdered himself and those about him.
By the command of the Princess I administered Medicines proper on this occasion.
After he had taken them for a Month in his common Drink, he was so well as to
be unchained. He lived very composed for a year, and then died very quietly.

12. The same year one D. T. a Citizen of fifty years old, living in the New
City of Culemburg, of a Melancholic Phlegmetick temper, a person otherwise
very honest and modest, was much troubled with the palpitation of the Heart,
afterward with a Syncope, and at last with Madness. I was sent for to him in
that sad condition, to relieve him from that misery. At first I gave him
Laxatives, because he was bound, then I gave him my other Medicines in order.
At last, after five weeks, he recovered, and lives very sedately, does his
business, but has not so good a judgment as he had before.

13. In the year 1697, Mary Bouters, of a Sanguine Phlegmetick temper,
otherwise a diligent and Industrious woman, falling very sick in May, at last
became Mad; other Physicians being made use of before, I also was sent for.
After I had used my means, at five weeks end she was very well, and enjoys the
right use of her reason as before, to this very time.

14. In March School, D. of E. a very worthy Gentlewoman in the County of
Waldeck, was* vehemently afflicted with Madness for some months, so that four
strong men could scarcely hold her. At the beginning of night I gave her my
resolving Tincture. After she had taken the Tincture she was very quiet; then I
administered the other Medicines according to order and prescription: in a
months time she took leave of Physic, and now is, and always continues free
from any sign of Madness.

15. The same year in June, ANNA CARLS, thirty six years old, had a most
excessive pain in her Head and Heartstrings, by reason of the retention of her
Menstruums; in a months time she fell melancholy, and that was followed by
Madness. The Magistrate of the place considered what was best to be done, and
in regard she was a poor woman, he sent for me to assist her. This Madness in a
short time by diligent care was cured; in two months time, by Gods blessing on
the Medicines she recovered, and now continues well in the right use of her
reason.

In August School, Mary N. of a Sanguine Phlegmetick temper, about twenty four
years old, coming off a Journey, had a continual Fever, the Fever ceasing, she
was troubled with a great pain in the head. She was mad for some days, and upon
that account endured severe tortures, day and night, she had a very stern
countenance, and was stark mad for four weeks. When I was sent for to her, I
gave her my common medicines against Madness. In a month she recovered, and is
now sound and strong, and every way in her right senses. I have omitted a great
many examples of the curing of Madness, that I might not seem long and tiresom
to my Readers. So, friendly Readers, enjoy these at present, and in a little
time expect more: So farewell.

Orandum est ut sit Men's in sana in corpore sano.

THE APPENDIX.
Whether a Cure may be performed by Sympathy.
IT would be time very ill spent to enquire into the causes of any thing,
whether intrinsecal or extrinsecal, before we can demonstrate that the thing
itself does really exist. Wherefore the Learned being to treat of any Art or
Science, before they explain what it is, and to what use it is subservient,
have always used first to examine into the reality or possibility of its
existence, so that the existence being proved, it may serve for a foundation
for the subsequent discourse. Which method we designing here to observe, do
first assert, that in regard Sympathy is a kind of common affection, by which
different things concur to the same action, and tend to accomplish the same
end, so that the patient does freely admit of the action of the Agent, and the
Agent by the proper impulse of its own Nature performs its action on a proper
Patient, there is no doubt but very many things come to pass in the world, by
the way of sympathy.

But to say nothing of the first, second, and other qualities of the Elements,
to wit, of those the most secret reason of whose actions is evident to our eyes
and understanding, and mutually act and re-act, suffer and re-suffer, in an
apparent manner, it is the common received opinion of almost all, that those
things are only said to act by sympathy or antipathy, which have a reciprocal
communication, for each others mutual preservation or destruction, by an occult
reason and quality far different from those that are elementary, which sort of
action was therefore commonly supposed to proceed from the whole substance, and
so to surpass human understanding. For the better treating of the Causes of
Sympathy and Antipathy, it will be necessary to say something of the first
qualities: and to avoid confusion in a matter of this difficulty, I will first
shortly and succinctly lay down the opinions of the most accurate Philosophers
upon this subject, that I may not longer detain my candid Reader. And, 1. They
say, to find out all qualities in due order and method, it will be necessary to
consider in mixed bodies, the Substance it self, the mode of the Substance, and
the Accidents. 2. They say, that Substance is twofold Total, the very Physical
Entity itself, Partial, that is, Matter and Form. 3. They say, Matter may be
considered as it is a pure power, simply indifferent to receive all Forms, or
as it is the first Elementary Matter, which is, Fiery, Airy, Watery, and Earthy.
4. They say, the Mode of Substance is twofold, one of the Substance of the
whole Physical Entity, as Subsistence, Existence and Union; the other, they
say, is the Mode of the Substance of the first Matter only, not as it is a pure
Power, but as it is stamped from the precise Elementary Form in it. 5. They say,
Accidents that arise from mixed Bodies, some are produced from the Form, as it
is mixed, others as it is living, others from the Form of it* neither as mixed or
living, but as it is the Form of it specifically such. 6. They say, those
things that are produced from the Form as it is mixed, are produced from it as
it contains the Elements virtually and eminently, as the four first qualities,
Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness; and the second qualities which proceed from
their intervention: Those that proceed from Heat, are the qualities of opening,
rarifying, attenuating, separation, etc. Those that proceed from Cold, are
thickning, repelling, condensing, etc. Those that proceed from Moisture,
softning, and relaxation; and from Dryness, hardening, etc. 7. Accidents that
are produced from the Form, as it is living, are the Faculties that operate
under some determinate degree of life, either vegetative, sensitive, or
rational. 8. Those that follow, and are produced from the Form, neither as it
is mixed or living, but as it is specifically such, are neither the first
qualities, nor those that proceed from their intervention, nor Powers contained
under any determinate degree of life, (otherwise every mixed and living thing
would possess them) as the Anti-epileptick power in the Piony, the attraction
of Iron in the Magnet, etc. But from the force and power of the Form, as it is
precisely such; for the particular Mode of a Substance, is specifically
determined by the Form to its due and fit qualities, so that although the Form
does give Form to the Matter according to other Modes of Substance, it does not
produce in it such a quality, as is evident in Rhubarb, whose smaller parts
have a laxative virtue, and the thicker are restringent. Mastick in one part is
solutive, so some Animals in one part carry Poison, in another an Antidote. It
is to be observed, that the affections that proceed from a faculty that arises
from the Form of a thing, as it is specifically such are accounted wonderful,
because their cause is not evident, as others are, and likewise because they
work no change on any external sense, as other affections are determined by the
whole Substance, because they proceed from a Form totally determined by the
Matter, as the Power of the Magnet, etc. are not called occult; as if we were
wholly ignorant of their nature, but because they are not perceived by the
external sense. These are indeed fine and specious words, but stand upon a weak
foundation, fabulous Peripateticism; and if a storm should attack them, they
would without doubt perish under their own Rubbish. And sirst, supposing all
Bodies to be mixed, and to be composed of a collection of the Elements, they
offer the greatest violence to experience and right reason, in regard Bodies,
which are supposed to be mixed, are only the product of water impregnated with
ferment, as I have plainly demonstrated before in the beginning of this
Treatise, by evident Examples. And in regard a Nonentity can have no passions,
how can qualities arise from the Form of a mixed that no where exists; but
admitting this, how will those qualities, which they call the first, come by
their original, to wit, Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness, which they produced
immediately, as it were out of the bosom of a mixed; for those qualities equally
belong to all things, and not only to the first Elements, as they pretend,
because all Bodies, and all Air, Water and Earth, are capable of receiving heat
or cold, etc. their Substance remaining unchanged; nay, even Fire itself may
have greater or lesser degrees of Heat, and the beams of the Sun are in
themselves wet and dry, and receive it not from Fire. But the reason of that
consequence is, say they, because mixts have those qualities as they contain
the Elements, either formally, as some assert, or virtually and eminently, as
others, which in mixts are reduced into act, by the advention of the form of
the mixed; and moreover, if those qualities were called the first, because they
exist in the first Bodies, the Elements; then also gravity and levity, which
are called moving qualities, would also be first qualities, because they are
also in the Elements. For gravity and levity are equally indifferent, with
respect to heat or cold, and many things are light or heavy, in which not even
potential heat or cold can be perceived, but if gravlty and levity did proceed
from heat or cold, etc. then those things would be lightest that participated
most of Fire, the contrary whereof is manifested in red hot Iron, heated
Stones, etc. because the fire does not make them in the least lighter, and so
the Earth should be heavier than Gold, Tin, Copper, etc. which according to
their suppositions, being mixed bodies, have more fire in them, as was said
before. Neither do gravity and levity proceed from them mediately, to wit, by
the mediation of rarity and density; for then Oil being thicker would not be
lighter than Water, and oily substances would not swim upon the Water, etc. And
if those first qualities (as they call them) do not rise from those things
which are commonly called the Elements, from whence will this suppositious
Offspring of theirs deduce its pedigree, that is, these second qualities,
which they will have to proceed from the intervention of the first, which is
impossible to prove, although we should grant that heat and cold, etc. were the
first qualities, and do primarily exist in the first bodies. For if they
proceeded from the first qualities, we could by them give an exact judgment of
those first qualities, which I will show to be simply impossible, by an
example. We can give no judgment concerning the first qualities from colors;
for almost all Herbs, tho very different in their own natures, are of a green
color. Whiteness is in the cold Snow and hot Arsenick, also in the Flower of a
white Poppy, and the Flower of Galangals, and there is a milky juice in hot
Wood-spurge and in cold Succory and Lettice. 2. Neither can we make any
judgment of the qualities from taste; for bitter Opium cools, and Camphire has
a taste like hot Pepper, the juice of Poppies, refrigerates Acids, as Vinegar,
Oil of Sulphur, of Vitriol, juice of Barberies, etc. heat, for they dissolve
Coral, Stones, Pearls, and Shells, and dissolution and penetration are the
Actions of Heat. 3. Nor can we make any better judgment of these first
qualities from Scents. For first, man of all Animals has the worst smell, and
many things that smell strong are cold, as Camphire, Opium, Hemlock, etc. and
many things that have scent are hot, as Arsenick, Mercury, Verdigrease,
Cantharides, etc. Lastly, no judgment can be given of the first qualities, from
thickness, softness, hardness, subtilty, dryness, lubricity, friability, and
roughness; for there is none of them that proceed more from cold than heat, as
is evident from experience; for many thick things are hot and many cold, and so
of the rest. But also the qualities of the third rank, which they call occult,
cannot proceed from the figuration of Matter, by the form from the mixture of
the Elements, although we should grant mixture, the figure of the form of fire
would only produce heat, of water moisture, etc. and so they cannot any way
produce occult qualities; for they themselves grant they do not proceed from
the first qualities; for example, The Anti-epileptical virtue is in the Piony,
because its form is pre-determined from the precise form of the Elements, that
is, either from the form of the Earth, Water, or Fire, etc. or from the mixture
of two, three, etc. But this cannot by no means be from the reason before laid
down, to wit, the power of opening in the thinner parts of Rhubarb, as it
consists^ of such parts, nor of binding in the thicker parts, and in Mastick:
for then all close and thick things would lay just claim to this propriety; and
on the other side the thinner, which is contrary to experience. And forasmuch
as they say, that qualities are not called occult, because they not
sufficiently are known to us, but because they are not perceived by the
external senses, as others are, either Sight is not an external sense as well
as Taste, or if it be, the curve attraction of the Iron by the Magnet, which
the sight clearly discerns, is more occult than moisture in the Water, or heat
in the Fire, and Sun which is perceived by the feeling. And in regard no body
yet was ever capable to demonstrate, why Fire is hot or Water moist, any more
than why the Magnet draws Iron, etc. then either all those qualities are
occult, or none. For if the first qualities, that are more intermediately
subject to our senses, are not more known than the occult, much less the second
that arise from them; besides, what things soever flow from one and the same
principle, one of them cannot be said to he more occult, and the other less,
but all those qualities proceed from one and the same principle, therefore,
etc. There is nothing in what is compounded, but Matter Form and Ferment; but
form is one and the same in all things (Man only excepted) therefore different
qualities cannot proceed from it: Matter is one and the same in all, (to wit)
Water, and for the same reason cannot be the root and fountain of so many
diverse qualities; therefore smells, tastes, colors, proportions, and
different figures proceed from ferment as from their original; so also,
attractive, repulsive, sympathetical and antipathetical power proceed from it,
or from nothing; for Water, before it was fermented, had neither taste, smell
or color, nor endued with so many different proportions, nor purgative,
deleterious, or antidotal, cephalic, splenetick, hepatick or arthritical, etc.
but according to the diversity of the ferments to which it is united it is
capable of receiving myriads of signatures; by this it becomes a Metal, in Gold
yellow, in Silver white, in Vermilion it is red, in Vitriol green or blue:
elsewhere it becomes a Plant, in Rue of a green color, with a sad colored
Flower* it is bitter, with a nauseous scent, and has a quality of expelling
poison, with an antipathy to Coleworts. Then it is an animal in the Tarantula,
of a dusky color, like a Spider, of an hurtful quality to man, etc. but
particularly to trace out how ferment by sporting is capable of producing so
many signatures and proprieties, is not my present design. These things
therefore being premised, let us proceed to the original of forms, which is so
obscure and unknown, that the whole doctrine of Sympathy and Antipathy has
hitherto remained quite uncultivated, but that truth may (if it be possible)
shine in these abstruse mysteries, I have thought convenient to examine all the
most celebrated opinions, and see which of them will best explain the
Phoenomena's of Nature, and at last to lay down my own opinion concerning
Forms. The first then is, the opinion of the Peripateticks, asserting, that
there is a substantial form in sensitives and vegetables, which, with Matter,
does make up the Compound. These Forms, they say, are immaterial and
incorporeal, and are not composed of Matter, as an essential part; yet, that
they are material in as much as they depend on Matter, in esse, fieri and
operari, but they do not understand what they say; for if they are material,
they cannot either be subject to generation or corruption; for Matter is
neither generated, etc. neither can they inform Matter, for then the same thing
would inform itself; if immaterial, then they will not be subject to
corruption, and consequently not to generation. Nothing can be produced from
nothing; but Forms have nothing but Matter or its accidents to arise from; but
(according to their own confession) they do not proceed from Matter a from an
essential part, therefore they must proceed from its accidents, or from
nothing; but it cannot be from its accidents, for then accidents would not only
produce a form but create it. Moreover, form would not be a principle, in
regard it was produced from something else. They say the form is produced from
nothing of its own, not nothing of its subject; but this distinction will not
remove the difficulty, in regard they will not allow it to be made from a
subject, that is, from Matter, as an essential part, therefore it is yet
essentially produced from nothing. If the form were produced out of the power
of the matter, it either would exist Matter, or not; not the latter, (because
as was said before) it is produced of nothing; if the former, its existence
will be either physical or metaphysical; not physical, because Matter is pure
power, and a physical existence is act: if it be only metaphysical, as they
distinguish, how would Form receive a physical existence from Matter, when no
body doubts that it itself has none. Another opinion is, that of the
Epicureans, who in regard they saw that Aristotle's opinion could not well be
defended, and substantial Forms seeming unaccountable to them, denied that
there were any such thing, and had recourse to Atoms for the constitution and
generation of a Natural Body, saying, that there were two principles of
concrete Bodies, Atoms and Vacuum, the existence of Atoms and the things
composed of them, considering how much was added every hour to those things
which grow slowly, and how much those things diminished which were in a
decaying state; as in the nourishment of Vegetables and Animals, and in
insensible decreasings; in the mean while not observing that Branches, Leaves,
Flowers, Fruits and Seeds every year become Trees, that if every thing were
exactly weighed, we must allow that every hour they require several ounces of
nutriment. The same thing also happens in the nourishment of Animals; if the
quantity of the meat and drink that is received in be compared with the
excrement; (and besides the trunk of Trees every year grows larger, besides
what leaves, etc. grow) those that are of opinion that they require indivisible
Atoms, and that the matter cannot be performed any other way, are confuted by
the testimony of the senses, in regard nothing, as was proved before, is
required to the nutrition of Vegetables besides water. Besides, they say those
Atoms are indivisible, and altogether of the same nature, on account of the
identity of their matter, whence there can be no disparity. Besides, they say,
they are endued with magnitude, figure, gravity, etc. and that one is greater
and heavier than another; and that they have different figures, to wit,
spherical, cubical, etc. this is a very difficult matter to be believed. But if
it be enquired, how this can be demonstrated, that they have different figures,
in regard Atoms cannot be felt, and that concrete bodies do receive figures and
proportions from the forms by ferment, as was said before, and not from those
Atoms that have no Existence. Lastly, they assert that Atoms, which cannot be
divided have no Vacuum in them, but that all concrete Bodies, as they are
harder or softer, have more or less of Vacuity. For they say, that Fire, Forms,
Spirit, the Souls of Brutes, the effluviums of the Magnet, of Amber, etc. are
made of the flower of Matter, of more subtle Atoms than other Bodies are
composed of. Hence it follows, that Bodies, by how much the more compact and
hard they are, and have more matter, by so much the more active they are:
Spirits, forms, etc. because they have much Vacuum are less active, because a
Vacuum is nothing, and nothing cannot be attractive; besides, the same thing
would give a form to itself, for rarity and density do make no specifical
difference, and if the animal spirits in Brutes should perceive all things (for
they do not distinguish them from the soul, and that from temperament) the like
would be perceived by it self, that is, the more subtle Atoms, which are the
Soul, would perceive other sensibles, and less subtle Atoms. Lastly, they say
that all things are generated by the conjunction of Atoms, and to be destroyed
and ruined by their separation; and that all the propreties of Nature have
their original, and are explained by the various ways of their agitation,
conjunction, separation and disposition, and are moved by their own innate
gravity, adscribing general proprieties to them, to wit, magnitude, figure,
identity of substance, gravity, and also specifical proprieties, as are the
different species of Figures, smoothness, sharpness, angularity, roughness,
bluntness, rotundity, and these they say are congenite proprieties, and exist
in their subjects as they are such. Then they adscribe to 'em proprieties that
inhere or may be separated from their subjects, and only inhere in 'em as they
concur to the generation or corruption of concrets, as concursion, position,
connection, order and number. In the first place, I ask if magnitude, figure,
and general and specifical proprieties, as are the species of Figures, round,
oblong, orbicular, etc. if they concur and are joined together will ever
generate any other qualities different from themselves? For Magnitude, Gravity,
different Figures, as plainness, Angularity, etc. do produce different
dimensions, according to longitude and latitude and profoundity, but will never
produce Smells, Tastes, Colors, or other qualities, either manifest or occult.
For qualities generate other qualities like themselves, and no other, as heat
in its own nature can only produce heat; so different pieces of Figures joined
or separated, produce diversity of Figures, and nothing else beside. This is
the Opinion of some Physicians, that in every Compound there is a Form, and
that it is distinguished according to the different degrees of things. In such
thick mists as this is, I ought (Candid Reader) to use philosophical liberty,
and deliver my opinion amongst the rest, for the confirmation of sympathetical
Cure, I must beg leave to repeat some things about Ferment, namely, that there
is something always coevous and concreated, that prepares Matter to receive its
last perfection by its union to the Form, and is not produced out of the power
or dispositions of the Matter, and is neither created anew, or can be
annihilated of its own accord. That I may not be without witness, I will
produce some Examples: The Spittle of a Mad Dog being forced into the Flesh by
biting, makes Men, Oxen, Sheep, Dogs, Horses, etc. run mad, and use the
actions, and have the qualities of Dogs, as biting, and fearing the Water. So
those that drink the Blood, or eat the Brains of a Cat will have their
qualities. The sting of the Tarantula will make both Men and Brutes like
Tarantula's, restless, and in constant motion. Those that drink the blood of
wild Beasts will be of a savage temper. The biting of an Asp, besides other bad
symptoms, will cause the a^sticulations of that creature, as frequent gaping,
the turning of the body and members, etc. The flesh of lascivious animals, as
Sparrows. Sthinci, etc. create letchery in those that eat them. These things
being laid down, I say first, When the sensitive soul of man (for this venom
does not affect the immortal and rational soul, at least not immediately) or a
brute that happens to be bit, wounded, or to eat, as is said before, has the
same operations as the mad Dog, Tarantula, Cat, Asp, Wolf, etc. and the vital
operations are not only changed, but the natural also, as may be seen in the
urine of those that are afraid of water; we must either own that they have two
forms, to wit, the form of a Dog, an Ox, etc. or else that it is the soul of a
Dog, etc. from whence these operations proceed, and so we must judge of the
rest, or else we must allow the operations of the mad Dog do not proceed from
his form, but may equally proceed from the form of the Ox, the Horse, the
Sheep, etc. We must also allow that the form of the mad Dog is not in his
spittle, nor by that can be transplanted: We must own also, that Oxen, Horses,
etc. that are bitten have their own form; and as the soul of the Dog is not in
his spittle, so neither is that of the Tarantula in its poison, etc. otherwise
there would be no need of seed, or diversity of sexes for generation, which is
absurd, although all things were Ex Traduce; the natural consequence then is
(in regard the operations that are in the Ox, Horse, etc. bit by the mad Dog
are altogether the same operations of the mad Dog himself, (and so of the other
examples) that the soul of the mad Dog, Tarantula, etc. is not capable of being
transplanted by biting or wounding; for if that were possible, then there would
be two souls together at once in every part of the body, and other absurdities;
that the souls of brutes are altogether the same, neither are they to be
distinguished specifically of themselves, and in their own nature; but all the
difference arises from the accession of different ferments. This is very
evident in Vegetatives, for wholesome herbs, if they grow near the holes of
Serpents, have the same power as the Serpents poison; so Wine will have a
laxative power from Mercury, and their forms shall remain entire and unchanged:
There may innumerable examples be produced for the distinction of ferments.
Therefore ferments make the form of things very ductile, and operations are
diversified according to the diversity of the ferment. Thus the Sun hardens
mud, and softens wax, and appears through a window painted of diverse colors,
sometimes red, then blue, yellow, green and black. But in regard in Animals,
Vegetables, and their effects, and in dry bones, in all things and in all
places in the world where ferment is, there is a form. For there is nothing so
dead which does not partake of some sense of life, and consequently of form:
nor there any place of the world where the operations of the soul are not
perceived, by vegetation, nutrition, evident or obscure sense. In regard then
that nothing which seems to be altogether dead acts, The Action does not wholly
proceed from the ferment, but from the form by ferment in matter. Whence it
follows, that there are as many degrees of participation of form as there are
degrees of things that receive form, not that form in it self has any degrees,
for it is no accident; but on account of the greater or lesser perfection of
things, as they are disposed by ferments, its operations appear sometimes more
bright, sometimes more obscure; for all things which for a long time are not
altogether destitute of their ferment, are in some measure capable of form, as
may be observed in some things which seem quite dead, yet they have real life,
and produce their like in specie, as Radishes cut in little pieces and put into
the ground will yield Radishes, etc. Also incontradictable experience tells us,
that those things have very strong sense and imagination which seem dead. And
in regard every thing loves it self, and every part affects to be joined to its
whole, that part of ferment received in the Philtre, etc. affects to be joined
with man; whence it comes to pass, that it carries away the soul of the
receiver (as it were) so that the soul of both operate the same way in two
bodies, by reason of one symbolizing ferment, and so have a joint feeling. So
the spirit of the blood of any living person put into a Glass hermetically
sealed, will show whether the person whole blood it was, is well or ill, though
he is very far distant, by the alteration of the color into dull, livid, clear
and red, in Fevers, Jaundice, Melancholy, etc. So will Vegetables and Minerals
situated in their own sphere, if their ferments are symbolical, and do neither
change or destroy each other. Antipathy or Aversion proceeds from the contrary,
and is found amongst those things whose ferments are Assymbolical, and will
bind up, change or destroy each other, or differ with respect to the places in
which they are made; or produce unlike effects. And although those things which
muttually destroy each other, and can have no sympathetical fellow feeling, or
affect one another in the whole species; yet individual particulars, which have
the greatest Antipathy, may be brought to agree together by long custom, as is
evident in administering purgatives to the brain of any person, for they will
cease to stir the humors, and become common food. So, many persons, by the
constant use of Poison, can take it without any prejudice; and Tigers, Bears
and Lions, by frequently lapping Woman's Milk, grow mild and tame. But this sort
of Sympathy ceases with that very individual, and is not further communicated
to the whole species; but it is very probable that the Sympathy and Antipathy
which belongs to all the individuals of a whole species, proceed from the
Ferments of places, continually penetrating and affecting each other before the
production of any individual. But let this suffice to be said concerning the
cause of Love and Hatred amongst those things which act by contraction of
Matter, or contraction of Virtue in a certain compass. We must make a further
inquiry into those things which act at a distance, the scrutiny whereof has
hither to puzzled the greatest Geniuses, calling it a Magnetic Virtue, from
its similitude to the power of the Loadstone. Some are of opinion, that it
proceeds from sound in a moment, equally penetrating close Bodies. Others by
the emission of Effluviums; others say it is a faculty influencing its proper
objects by irradiation; others by fancy* Extatically raised: And to conclude*
others from Atoms. I thought fit to set down here the most celebrated opinions,
that the truth may appear more evident, but because there has yet been no true
distinction made between Sympathy, Love and Hatred, and of both of them from
Magnetism, therefore I shall treat succinctly of them. It is evident from all
the examples of Sympathy and Antipathy in its different complications, they
that mutually act upon each other in different ways, whether it be by
assisting, corroborating, attracting, driving away, inclining, by aversion,
destroying, and changing; either have a determined sphere of their actions, or
have no boundary between the Poles of the World. Those, whose actions are
determined, either operate at a certain distance, as the Loadstone draws Iron,
Amber, and Mastick, Chaff, Straw and Paper, and these things that delight in
each others Society as the water Lilly and Butter flower Lizards and Men, or
are aversed to each other, as Coleworts and the Vine, and so of the rest of
that sort, or else operate by touching each other only, and those either
externally touch or else are internally applied, as Poison and Antidotes. Those
whose actions are not circumscribed by any bounds, either being afflicted
affects the other, as in the example of Spirit, or Salt of Blood, or of Wine
growing with that in the Vessel, etc. or one being affected the other is not,
as the Magnet and the Pole; so e contra, etc. Therefore all things that agree
or disagree, do not exert Sympathy or Antipathy properly so called, nor can
Sympathy be called Magnetism. For although the Magnet acts at a distance, both as
to its sphere and virtue of attraction, as Sympathy does, yet are neither the
Magnet or the Pole affected with each others affections, as was said before.
Therefore also when Sympathy and Antipathy are called by the names of Love and
Hatred, that is only a mistake, and not strictly and philosophically speaking.
And this is especially to be observed, that, that Sympathy which acts at the
greatest distance, is always between the Parts and the whole, Love and Hatred
are not always so. Lastly, briefly, to relate the difference between Magnetism
and Electricity, Love and Hatred, Sympathy and Antipathy, it is thus, Magnetism
agrees with Electricity, Love and Hatred, that it acts within a certain sphere
by drawing and repelling, and disagrees with Electricity in this, that
whatsoever it draws or repels, it communicates to it some of its own virtue,
but Electricity does not so. But those things that love or hate one another
amongst vegetables, etc. communicate their virtues to each other mutually,
either by embracing, inclining, or aversion; the power of the Magnet extends
itself only to Iron, and things composed of Iron, and to another Magnet.
Electrical Bodies want rubbing, to attract well, but the Magnet, and those
things that act by love or hatred do not. Electrical Bodies also will not
attract if any Bodies be interposed, nor will those Bodies that act by love or
hatred. Lastly, the Magnet has not only its orb of attraction by which it acts
within a certain sphere, but also its orb of virtue, turning itself constantly
toward the Pole, let the distance be what it will. Sympathy agrees with love
and hatred, specially so called in this, that they alter each other; and with
the Magnet, that they act at a distance, and equally penetrate close bodies;
neither are they tied to the laws of Dimensions. And, moreover, they have this
peculiar to themselves, that one of them being well or ill affected, by that
with which it agrees or disagrees, the other at a distance is affected after
the same nature. Let this at present suffice to have been said of Sympathy,
Love and Hatred, and Magnetism. We now come to examine the opinions concerning
acting at a distance. And, first, some to find the cause thereof, say, that in
the exterior part of Man, that is, in the Blood and Spirits, there is a
certain extatick power, and this not in Man only, but also in Brutes and
Vegetables, and their parts, that wants to be excited from death (in regard it
is sleepy) by an exalted imagination, a vehement desire, or some such like art,
as in the sympathetical unguent, or Powder an extatick virtue is excited in the
Blood spilt upon a stick by the unguent, which drives away whatever was hurtful
from the lips of the wound from whence the Blood proceeded, and that this may
be performed at a distance, they say, that there does lie concealed in the
Universe, a certain Spirit which they call the great Magnale, which is the
procurer, confederate, and assistant to the actions of Sympathy and Antipathy,
and by whose means, Magnetism, as in a vehicle, is conveyed to the distant
object, which they prove by the Magnetism of the strings of two Lutes, being
tuned unisones, that one being struck upon, the same string of the other at a
distance will vibrate, and the rest be unmoved. But to confute this opinion,
first, it is objected, that its Defenders suppose entities without any
necessity; for it is not necessary to the production of such operators, to
conceit such a Spirit different from Forms, which they call their great
Magnale, And, moreover, it does not agree with their principles; for they deny
that there is a Soul of the World, or an universal Form, in regard they say,
that all specifical distinction does immediately proceed from Forms. Also they
assert, that Forms are Lights, and differ in specie, and are new created in the
instant of Generation by the Father of Lights, and again annihilated by
accidents; and although it should be granted that there was such a Spirit, and
that it was the procurer of those actions, it would be impossible for
Vegetables, irrational Animals, and their parts, to send forth these
imaginations to so great a distance, although we should grant that all things
do live, and so consequently do participate of some sort of sense and fancy, in
regard those things which have a more apparent life, as Animals, and those that
have the use of reason, cannot extend the power of their fancy to so great a
distance: neither do they operate as such things can so operate; for those
things that are endued with the most noble fancy must needs be most operative,
as is evident in the example of the strings of an Instrument tuned unisones, if
this were performed by this Magnalian fancy, as they pretend, it would be
perceived at any distance, and wherever one was struck, the other unisone
string would move in any part of the world, which is contrary to manifest
reason and experience, for it is performed but within a certain distance; and
beyond that no motion is ever observed, but what is said of the fancy of
Animals and Vegetables, that convert our fancy to be like theirs, as a Mad-dog
the Tarantula, etc. does not infer any thing of the Magnatism of the fancy to
very distant places; for in all these things, is required either the
contraction of motion or virtue within a certain sphere, but in the mean time
it cannot be denied, that if a man's fancy be vehemently taken up about a thing
mightily desired, although the thing may be at a great distance, he shall have
a sort of view of it, as if it were present before him, and be (as it were)
transformed into the thing desired; but there is no person in his right wits
will believe, that a fancy extatically raised, shall be carried thousands of
leagues to the wished-for object. And if we should grant that an extatick fancy
should be carried to this distance, yet nevertheless it could not operate by
itself either on Friend or Foe, by causing so many different compassions as are
performed sympathetically, in regard all actions (besides those that are proper
to Souls) proceed from Ferments. I should have said more at this time, but that
it is almost the discourse of every one, that fancy of itself does transmute
all things, and upon this reason only I thought fit to say something briefly of
its actions. Others, to prove that there is this operation at a distance, say,
first, that all Bodies send forth Beams, in which the Soul acts by its own
presence, and communicates a power of acting to them, and that these rays are
corporeal, and contain in them a portion of vital spirits, and upon that
account live, and that their life is the same with that of the Animal whose
excrements they were; also that there is a kind of concatenation of those rays
at every distance though never so great; the like also is performed between the
blood and any other part of the body that is separated from it at never so
remote a distance. But first we answer, if granting these effluviums from
blood, urine, sweat and excrements, if they be corporeal, it is impossible that
they should have a concatenation at any distance; for if the greatest body was
rarified even to invisible Atoms, it would not be sufficient to supply
effluviums for a thousand Leagues, and if it was allowed that it would suffice,
in regard they allowed them no vehicle, they would certainly miss of the right
way, but if they say, this concatenation proceeds from a Soul, it must
necessarily follow, that there is a certain Soul which fills the whole space
from Pole to Pole; but admitting that there were a Soul that extended itself to
all places, those corporeal effluviums could not accompany it for the reason
before alleged. We also see that the Blood and Excrements in a Glass or Box,
are not diminished, which would of necessity be, if they were continually
sending forth corporeal* effluviums, to so great a distance. Again, when they
assert, that Excrements have life, this indeed is true; but what Naturalist
will be so impious to assert it has the same life with the Animal, to wit, that
of a man endued with a rational Soul. To demonstrate these effluviums, they
say, that Onions and Garlic will force tears from the Eyes at a good distance.
Helebore, Pepper, etc. make sneezing Powder; Saffron, Henbane, and Opium, will
cause sleep at a distance, and that a man himself becomes much lighter by the
effluviums that proceed from him in one night; and a great many instances of
this kind; but this is not general, for all these effluviums proceed in a
violent manner from Bodies that have actual heat, and those that abound with
watery moisture, caused by the heat of the Sun or Fire, etc. And as they
endeavor to prove, from Mercury and Antimony by infusion, always impregnate
their Menstruums, and losing nothing of their weight for many years; so
likewise Musk, Civet, Benzoin, the Magnet and others, send forth effluviums and
smells, but lose nothing of their weight. But if this were so, they would
certainly be lighter by the emission of these corpuscles, which is contrary to
experience; for by the accession of other Ferments their virtue is weakened, or
it decays by time; but because they lose nothing of their former quantities and
weight, it naturally follows, that those effluviums are not corporeal, unless
they are violently forced from them by internal or external heat. But that
ferments in their own places, or in whatsoever places they are, by their rays
do constitute a certain sphere, which sphere is as extensive as any of their
power can be perceived, which rays are clothed either with vapors violently
excited from them, by the internal heat in Animals, and in other things that
want heat by an external one, or with others vapors raised from the earth: but
in regard these rays proceed from other, which, from what has been said
before, do not in the least send forth any corporeal effluviums, as the
Lodestone, Amber, Garlic, etc. when they operate at a remote distance, it is
not in the least to be conceived to be by the emission of corpuscles, because
they are not diminished, etc. but only by the fermentation of watery vapors
raised in the air, and so of others of this nature; now in regard the emission
of vapors is a violent act, especially in those things which are without heat,
those that practice by Sympathy and Antipathy do observe that those effects do
not constantly proceed from them. Such effluviums cannot be raised from the
excrements that are already separated from the bodies of Animals, but by
external heat; therefore such a concatenation cannot be in the Winter. And yet
the Winter does not in the least hinder the operation of Sympatheticks. The
opinion of the Atomists ought to be considered; but in regard we have before
largely examined their principles, in our precedent discourse of forms, it will
not be needful to repeat it. We have also refuted their opinion, who hold that
this sympathetical power proceeds from the Stars and Sun in the beginning of
our Book; where we have shown that the matter does not in the least depend on
them, as they are endued with such and such virtues; for the Earth, before the
creation of the Sun, contained in it self the ferment of all Vegetables, and
consequently all powers. Seeing then that Sympathy is not caused in remote
places from the fancy of things extatically raised, nor from Atoms, nor from
the concatenation of corporeal effluviums, or from a soul operating out of its
own proper body, nor from that infinite spirit that lay over the waters, etc.
Therefore (with deference to others judgments) to find out a way how that
Sympathy or Compassion comes to pass, seeing by innumerable examples it is
evident that it really exists. From what has been said before it is very
manifest that every compound consists of Matter, Form and Ferment; from Matter
it has its quantity and consistence, to form it owes that it lives and is
sensible, more eminently or obscurely, as was proved before; and all other
actions of what nature soever proceed from ferment, and also all mutations for
good or bad. Hence therefore it appears that the blood and spirits in the veins
of a man, being affected with a Jaundice, or Melancholy ferment, the spirits of
blood in the Glass hermetically sealed, are also affected, changing the color
into livid, yellow, etc. (and so we must judge of other examples of this
nature) to wit, of Sweat, Excrements and Urine; that their spirits are in a
like manner affected by the blood as the ferment is, although at a great
distance. And in regard that ferment cannot cannot be produced of it self
within the Glass so closed, it must necessarily be carried thither, whence it
is manifest that Ferment penetrating the Glass hermetically sealed, is not tied
to the laws of dimensions, which is also apparent in the Magnets penetrating
Marble, Stones, Mountains, etc. It is evident by what is said before, that the
forms of things in themselves do not differ in specie, but in numero, (but that
all difference of things proceed from Ferments) and that they are as it were
the beams of the universal Form, which we have demonstrated. And those beams do
meet and are united in the center of the universal Form. From hence it is
manifest, that the beams of Forms, both of the whole and part that do
sympathize, do meet together, and are both alike affected, (whether it be whole
or part) for the Form of the one of itself can thus change the beams of the
other, in regard things do not alter themselves by a Soul, but only by it live
and are sensible. When the Ferment of one Form (it being spiritual) is carried
with the beams of another affected at a distance, that they may have private
and reciprocal intercourse, the one affects the other, either with good or
evil, the whole drawing to itself the sickness of the part, or the part that of
the whole, or communicating to it strength and health, that was before
communicated to the other by another friend present, although both be not present,
it is sufficient if it be applied either to the whole or part. The same must be
said of Diseases conveyed by one Enemy to another. but in regard nature herself
may be immediately cured of all Diseases, the Physician her Servant, (as
Hippocrates calls him) ought especially to be sollicitous to preserve her whole
in all respects, that is, he ought to have diligent regard, that those three
things which constitute innate Nature, to wit, that the Humidum radicali,
Spiritus insitus, and calor innatus, should agree together in a just union and
proportion, lest the fat moisture should grow desicient through heat, and the heat
should extravagantly waste its Pabulum, and so wrong the Spirits. Upon this
account the Egyptians, Arabian Philosophers, and all the Tribe of Caballists,
made such diligent search after, and so extolled that universal Medicine, which
by preserving the strength of Nature, drives away all distempered affections.
so the Wonderful Atoth of Paracelsus, the Lapis vivificus of Severinus Crollius
and others admirers of Chemistry. To these may be added the learned precepts of
the Lord Verulum, laid down in his Book of Life and Death. This makes it
clearly evident those are much mistaken, that heap in so many single Medicines
into the Sympahetical Ungent or powder, believing that such a virtue resides
only in those Simples so mixed together. For it is not upon the account of the
Ingredients that the sympathetical powder or unguent operates at a distance,
for a Medicine is not required, that of itself, or of its own proper virtue,
should operate at a distance, but it is sufficient if it be of a sanative
virtue, although it be not carried by its own wings. For a curing or
destructive virtue being applied to one or other of those that sympathize, it
is carried by the beams of the spiritual Forms, (as was said before) to its
friend, that he may participate of the joy or sorrow, but that such friends or
enemies have such perception with joy or sorrow is owing to the form, which
only endues things with sense (as we have proved) but the cure, destruction,
binding or transmutation, proceeds from the ferments carried with the form.
Thus in Fevers, Gout, Consumption, etc. if you mix a little of the sick persons
blood or urine with Dogs meat, the Dogs will not contract the distemper, nor
will it be conveyed to them (as some falsely imagine) for they are not capable
of having those distempers; but if the distemper be cured (as it very often
happens to be) because part of the morbifick ferment in the blood and
excrements is destroyed or bound, by their stronger ferments, and so those
little affected particles of the morbifick ferment being eat by the Dog, the
whole is affected, and so the sickness ceases. So also when any Vegetable, or
its seed that is particularly a friend to Man, or any member of him, and
opposite to his distemper is watered with the filth of the distemper, and put
into the ground to grow, there also part of the ferment is bound or destroyed,
by their ferments that overcome it, and so the rest of the distemper in the Man
is suppressed; but that this Herb so watered by a man's morbifick ferment, being
given to a Man, or other Animal, should infect them with the the distemper, is
not only untrue, but impossible, unless the morbific ferment, with which the
plant was watered, does change its ^^native nature in whole or part, into its
destructive nature, as happens to Sage infected by the breath of a Toad, and to
Plants that grow near Serpents holes but if this were so, the power of the
distemper would increase, which otherwise is expelled. The curious Reader may
find many more wonderful things resulting from transplantation: I could bring a
great many instances to prove the truth of this Sympathetick cure, but I have
long enough exercised the patience of my candid Reader, wherefore for the
present I shall omit them; nevertheless, if any person of this noble faculty
shall desire to be informed of them, I shall be always very ready to give him a
private account of them. I ought to have added to this Treatise a more clear
account of the method of Sympathetick Cure, but by the assistance of Almighty
God I shall have a further occasion of writing. I shall conclude my discourse,
by showing my worthy Readers that all this mystery proceeds from natural ways
and circumstances, although the matter is performed by the most subtle spirits.
My opinion delivered hereseems sufficiently to have shown, that we have no need
to admit of the action of a distant agent in this way of Cure or healing. I
have described to you the true way of each his communication, by which some
Medicines are corporeally mixed, with this or that distempered subject. It is
the sign of a mean spirit, and the effect of the ignorance of a dull
understanding, to imagine that there is any Magic or Charm in it, and to
confine all the Actions of Nature within the limits of our dull senses, before
we have sufficiently examined the cause and principles upon which our judgment
ought to depend. Neither will there be occasion to consult the Oracle, either
of an Angel or Demon to resolve this difficulty. You have here, friendly
Reader, my sentiments of sympathetick cure, forbear to caluminate, for it is the
sign of a Coward, and Effeminate person, to reproach one absent. If you have a
mind to confute me, set about it, and disprove this my sympathetical cure, by
candid Arguments, and not revile it with base Language. Pray answer me, that I
may wash off the stain, I shall esteem it an honor to be convinced by you, in
regard I am of an age as fit to learn in as to teach. I pretend to nothing
absolutely true, but probability. If I have not handled the subject so
accurately as I should, be pleased to consider that I endeavored both to
please and profit. There perhaps will be some one or other of a better Genius,
who may be pleased with what you ridicule, may extol what you despise, and will
cite this out of Horace in my Favor.

Nihil est ab omni part Beatam.
To prove the truth of this Sympathetick cure beyond all doubt and controversy,
we will here set down some of its wonderful effects, in the following cures,
performed here at London in the year 1699.

On the 25th of March, I undertook a Country Gentleman, one Mr N. W. about 26
years of age, of a Melancholic Sanguine temperament, he fell into a deep
Melancholy, and was so bad for 3 months together, that he voided his Excrements
without knowing it, by the help of God in 14 days I so far recovered him, that
he made water and went to stool as orderly as any man, at last he grew
perfectly well, by sympathetick cure, so that in a short time he returned home.

On the 24th of June, one Mr Smith an Upholsterer in St Martins-lane, of a
sanguine phlegmatic complexion, about 56 years old, came to me, being so very
bad of the Gout, that he had kept his Bed a long time; he had used all means
possible, and nothing proved effectual to ease his pain, or open his Body,
which was so costive, that he had been forced to purge twice a week. But as
soon as he entered into my method of sympathetick cure, he found great
mitigation of his pain by sweating, and went to stool every day without taking
any internal Medicine, having gone on in my method for a fortnight, he was so
well, not only to rise, but walk abroad about his Business, his Body continuing
open after the cure; and I do not hear he has felt any Gouty pains since.

On the third of June, I undertook Captain Brown of Golden Square, 63 years
old, of a sanguine phlegmetick temper, for many years he had been afflicted
with a shortness of breath, with sore pains, and much Phlegm, that was so deeply
fixed, that it could not be removed. He had also for 22 years together great
pains in his Reins, and made bloody water every day. He was under my cure for
eight weeks, but presently felt some abatement of the pain, and the tough Phlegm
began to loosen, and he began to fetch his breath with more ease, and before
being often obliged to take something to keep his Body open, he now has 2 or 3
stools a day, and so continues. His bloody Urine is likewise altered, and tho
he move about, little or no blood comes from him in his water, and the pain in
his Reins is quite gone, and God be thanked is well in all respects; his
appetite that was gone, increased every day, and his digestion is good.

On the 27th of June, Mr John Meyer, living in St. Katherines near the Tower,
came to me; he had so great a Rheumatism that he could not turn his head, and
had intolerable pains both in hands and feet; by my sympathetick cure in a
short time I so recovered him, that his pains much abated, and he could turn
his head; and whereas before he was not capable of ^^^ng abroad, now he is
capable of going about his business: and has been several times to visit me,
and to testify the Cure.

On the 8th of September, Colonel T. Bremer, aged about 40, of a melancholy
sanguine temper, was very much troubled with Ischiatick pains in both hips; he
had the advice of several learned Physicians, been at several Baths in England,
and drank all the waters, yet could find no ease. He was resolved to enter into
my sympathetick way of cure, and presently found some abatement of the pain. He
continced sweating sympathetically for three weeks, and, God be praised, is so
well recovered as to return to his Regiment in Holland.

On the 22d of August I undertook Brigadeer De Vilate, Lieutenant Colonel of
the Regiment of Dutch Guards, who had been 14 years troubled with a Rheumatism
and the Gout, which caused much weakness in his feet. He had followed the
advice of several Practitioners both in England and Holland, without any
effect; by my method of cure he soon found benefit, and continuing it for some
weeks, his strength began more and more to increase. This was performed by
sweating and purging him sympathetically.

On the 4th of September a Servan Maid of Sir John Hubant in Soho-square, who
had been much afflicted with such violent pains in her breast, that she could
not rest either night nor day, after I had sympathetically sweated, purged, and
sometimes vomited her for some weeks, her body was in good order again.

On the 7th of October I undertook one of the Domestics of the Lord Marquis of
Normanby, who was severely troubled with a Rheumatism; after he had been a
fortnight under my sympathetick cure, he recovered.

On the 9th of November, one Mrs Lagoe came to me; she had both the Rheumatism
and Scurvy, to such a degree, that shewas not able to stir without a stick in
one of her Legs she had sores, running with sharp humors. She was not only
sympathetically cured of her Diseases, but also of her sores without other
means.

On the 10th of November, Mr Henry Tailor, Brazier, at the corner of Princes
Street near Leicester Fields, came to me to be cured, being very weak in his
Stomach, and troubled with a Rheumatism for a long time; after a few weeks he
recovered.

On the 1st of December, I undertook the wife of Mr Williams, Dyer, at the
Queens-head and Star near Exeter Change, who had a Bloody Flux; she had made
use of the advice of several able Physicians, and finding no benefit, was cured
by sympathy, without purging, vomiting or sweating.

Several other cures might be added, but to avoid tedious prolixity, let these
suffice.

FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 71. l. 11. dele the bone of.

At the Kings Arms in Little Britain, London, may be had these following and
most other Chemical Books, viz.
SIr Geooge Ripleys Works complete, 80. The Works of the Arab. Philos. Gleber,
in 80.

Dickinsons du Quintiscentia Philoso phorum, 80.

A Philosophical Epitaph, with a Catalogue of Chemical Books, 80.

Secrets revealed.

Sir K. Digby's Chemical Secrets, 80.

Hartmanns Chemical Collections 80.

Auroforitina Chymica, or a Collection of 14 curious Tracts in Chemistry.

Otto Tachenius his Hippocrates Chymicus, in Quarto.

New light of Alchymy, 80.

Barbas Art of Metals, 80.

Simpsons, Sherleys, and Tompsons pieces in 80.

Magic of Kirani King of Persia.

Starkey, Valentine, Eugenes Philalethes, etc. their Works.

FINIS.

