Here follows a true RELATION OF Some of the Sufferings inflicted upon the
servrnts of the Lord, who are called QUAKERS, By this generation of Evildoers,
as will appear by the fruits of the Scholars and Proctors of the University of
Oxford, who from the very first appearance of the Lord amongst his people in
Oxford, until this time, has manifested their fruits, and of what stock and
generation they are, which fruits now are laid open, that all may see their
Wickedness, and may depart from them and their evil Works, least they partake
of their judgments.
WHen first the servants of the Lord was brought into this City of Oxford, to
warn people to repentance and amendment of life, this generation of Scholars
and Professors, unmoderate, untemperate, like bruit beasts, appeared in much
envy and rage, and showed it forth By cruel mockings and stonings; two of the
handmaids of the Lord, Elizabeth Fletcher, and Elizabeth Homes, were driven by
the Scholars into John's College, and there haled by them to the pump, and the
Scholars pumped water in their necks, and unto their mouths so long a time,
that they were almost stifled to death, and dr^^^ed and the same time, took one
of the maids, and bound her above the knees, and set her upon head, and said
they would pump the other end. This was the brutish Scholars, and here was
their immodesty and ill-behaviour, which shows their breeding, and which is a
shame to Chancellors, Proctors and Fellows: Is this your government? Is this
the fruit of your teaching, like a company of sporters? They should have been
patterns of soberness. And presently after this wicked act, they bound them
arm to arm, and drawed them up and down John's College, and dragged them into a
pool, and also a company of Scholars took one of the maids, Elizabeth
Fletcher, and threw her over a grave stone, and tumbled her into a grave, where
a corpse was to be laid, and with the violence of that thrust, over the
gravestone, she received a hurt in her side, which was not recovered till her
departure out of the body, in so much, that we heard her say several times, she
should carry it to her grave, since which time she is lately dead. Here Is
murder and blood lies upon them, mad people, the Scholars; which John's
College, and the Town ought to be fined for not taking hold on murderers, who
murder the innocent; here is the fruits of their fathers, who persecuted and
stoned Christ and the Apostles; and so not like to the Apostles nor Christ, who
said, Love your enemies; and show mercy, and be merciful, as your heavenly
Father is merciful: But like unto the Jews that persecuted and haled the
Apostles out of the Synagogues, that neither knew the Father nor the Son, Joh
16. and so continuing their cruelty upon all in Oxford, in whom the appearance
of God was found, that when friends have been moved of the Lord to go to their
Steeple Houses, they have been drawn out by the hair of the head, and beat, and
stoned, and some of the Scholars have cried, Never let them go home alive; and
said, Pump them, and stone them to death: And a Proctor, and a company of
Scholars (because friends would not go from their own meeting) haled out a
friend by the hair of the head, and forced others our of friends meetings,
which shows they neither regard the Law of God nor man, which is to protect
peaceable meeting, but contrary to the Law of the Nation these act: What would
their Proctor and Scholars have done, if they had been in Paul's days, who
preached in his own hired house? and Peter, who taught sometimes till midnight?

They came into a meeting in Oxford, and drew a friend out by the hair of the
head; the Proctor himself pulled out John Shakerly by the hair, and out of
doors, from Richard Betteris's house, and violently thrust out others, and
several times the Scholars have thrown stones and dirt at friends, and broke
the door to pieces, and broke the windows several times, and took away the key
of the door, and knocked tenter-hooks in the keyhole, and (pulled up part of
the portch: and this is the fruits of the young Ministers, the Scholars of
Oxford, which titles themselves Ministers of Christ; but are mad, unsavory,
brutish, who are like mad people, or like Bedlam's; and when friends have been
come into the meeting, or going forth, the Scholars have squeezed them in the
passage of the door, that some has been hurt, (like wild horses and colts)
and come into the meeting, and turned up the forms and seats which friends sit
upon, rid upon the backs of both men and women, like wild horses; and this is
the fruits of the Scholars (who are called young Ministers) in Oxford, against
the people of God, daily disturbing their meetings, like wild Savages, and
brought gunpowder, and squibs, and fired them, and set the room of a smoke;
and blown among peope under their clothes, like to set the house on fire, undo
undo people; and have shot bullets among friends, to knock out their eyes; and
this is their wickedness and unsobernesse. And the Scholars in Oxford came
into the meeting among the people of God, stamping wildly and rudely, like
Tavern fellows crying, Give us Beer and Tobacco; and this is the fruits of the
Scholars in Oxford, among the people of God, who met together to worship God
in the spirit and truth; and this is their carriage in the meeting, which they
have born and suffered a long time, which is shameless, and a grief, which
will make sober people even sick again; and this is their carriage amongst
them, when they are in the service and worship of God, O! their cruelty is hard
to be uttered, as you may read before mentioned, how they bound them with
cords, and drew them up and down, and abused them in their meeting, and the
Scholars have brought strong beer into the meetings, and drunk to friends, and
because they have refused to drink, have thrown it on their necks, and clothes,
and bands; these are a company of wasters and destroyers of the creation, like
a company of tiplers and drunkards. And thus the Scholars are bred up like a
company of Tavernfellows, which is a shame to the Nation that they should have
such a company to be their teachers, and such a Nursery, and such trees to bear
such fruits, which well may the Nation be amazed to see their fruits brought
forth, taking away their goods treble, and haling the people to prison, keeping
them in prison till death; these plants and trees come out of such a nursery,
and puddle, and bad stock, And the Scholars has come into the meetings amongst
the people of God, and called for Wenches, or Harlots, like fellows that hunt
bad houses: What would the world think, and the Magistrates think, if friends
should go into their steeple houses, and call for such things, which is a shame
to mention? And the Scholars came into the meetings of the people of God at
Oxford, and sung bawdy songs, and cursed, and swore, these were never like
Ministers of Christ. And the Scholars several times came into the meeting
blowing and puffing, with Tobacco-pipes in their mouths, cursing, swearing, and
stamping, making the house shake again, and saying, this would make them speak,
provoking them to answer to their wickedness, (but they meekly suffered all)
and proffered to put their hands under women's aprons, and asked whether the
spirit was not there; and this is their fruits in the meeting of the people of
God, which is a shame to the Nation that such bad, loose, idle fellows should
be maintained, who were like hawkers and hunters, riotous fellows, which are
bred up in pride and ungodliness, which is a grief to all sober people, to see
such a Cage of unclean spirits; And ye that are called wise men of the Nation,
and Governors, is it not a dishonor to you to suffer such things? And the
Scholars have come into the meeting to act Tobit and his dog and one of them
divided his filthy stuff into uses and points, after the manner of the Priests;
and another raised doctrines of a Tinker, and a cobbler, and many more wicked
actions, by mockings and scoffings, and filthy language, which would be too
tedious to relate, and a shame to modesty, and so loathsome and filthy, and also
a shame to lay open such things as have been by them uttered, just like a
company of Mountibanks and Stage Players: Are these a good savor of young
Ministers that must go out to be teachers in the Nations? O loathsome and
abominable! Such wicked fruits and acts which is hard to relate! These are like
unto the croaking frogs spoken of in the Revelation, and like unto the locusts
that came out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, bred there, which goes up and
down in swarms: And these Scholars has been so shameless that after the
meeting they have pressed in by violence, and took meat off from the table;
came into the house of a friend where the meeting was, and took the bread, and
the pottage out of the pot like greedy dogs, and sapping them up; and this is
the carriage of the Scholars among the people of God, which they have suffered
patiently, and this has been their shameless carriage; and stopped a friends
mouth like to have stragled him in the meeting, and threw down the woman of the
house, and this is the fruits of the Scholars: And have stolen or taken away
books out of the house and carried them away; And a friend going to the Proctor
to lay some of the practices of the Scholars before him, he denied them
Justice, not correcting them; the friend told him that the people were almost
spoiled; and he said he would have nothing to do with them, as much as to say,
he would tollerates the scholars: And an other scholar came into the meeting,
and cried out, blasphemy, ye wicked people of the Lord. And this is their
wickedness, which was never the like heard of, which they make but sport of,
yet these must have the name of young Ministers of the Gospel, and the
scholars bear the maid of the house where the meeting is, and have forced by
violence diverse times into the house, and said they would be there in spite of
her teeths which things have been done at other times out of the meeting; and
these ways, of the scholars are bad examples to people, they have carried
stool out of the house, broke down the wall, and carried the key of the door
away and brought in a dog in a meeting time, in derision to friends, and this
to disturb the people of God, and this was their cruelty; and bad the dog
speak, and punched him to make him howl; and another dog was brought in by the
Scholars, and threw up and down at friends in their meeting; and these are
their wicked fruits, like Hunts-men, Esau's brood and stock, and this has been
their actions like a company of bruits: And some have strived by their filthy
actions, (because friends would not answer their filthy wickedness) to make
friends speak, and seeing they would not, have by force tried open a friends
mouth, to know whether he had a tongue to speak: and others of the Scholars
have plucked a friend by the beard and nose; and have took a friend by the
hand, and shook her so much that they sprained her Arm, being rude, wicked,
and mad: And these scholars have been so rude and wicked, that when any
Minister of the Lord have been speaking, they have made such a noise in his
time of speaking, with whooting, yelling, and laughing, and filthy gestures, on
purpose to draw peoples minds forth into their image and likeness, who have
had desires to hear the truth, and have used wicked actions to keep their minds
from it.

One of the servants of the Lord going from a meeting to his own dweling, and
going by John's College, a great company of Scholars drew him into their
College, and forced him up into their Hall; and by main strength and much
violence thrust him into a Chair, and then used abominable and wicked words, to
have drawn the friends mind our of the fear of the Lord; but when they could
not prevail, they brought beer, and like slobering laughing beasts and swine,
proffered to pour it down his neck, and struck, and beat him with many grievous
blows, and pinched him, in so much as he was amazed, and natural sense taken
away, for a time, with their crulty; and this man about that time, had not
eaten a bit of bread in ten days time, being very weak, and they thrust pins
into his flesh, and pinehed him, and kept him in there with many wicked scoffs,
asking him whether the spirit did not move him now: (and thus did the Jews and
Priests to Christ, and then had him prophecy who smote him) these are the same
seed. And they had him preach or sing a song, or tell a tale, or let a fart;
and this is the sport of the Scholars, that they make of the servants of the
Lord, which is a shame to modesty and is this a good report of the young
Ministers which should go into the Nation? but the friend being kept from
fulfilling any of their wicked desires, sustained much wrong from them, and
then three or four of the chief of the College, came to the said friend, and
bad him be gone, and pulled him down from that company, but left him among as
bad a company of Scholars; and as the said friend was passing, to go our of
that wicked crew, he seeing some of the chief of the College, spoke a word to
them of their cruel actions, and one of the chief of them came and kicked him
with his foot, a bad him be gone. Oh merciless cruelty now in the fruits of
these, when the chief are so brutish, and uncivil, what shall be gathered of
the rest of them that are under them? And a company of scholars have come into
the meeting, walking stamping, stareing, when friends have been met together to
wait upon the Lord, on purpose to disturb them. Some of these things before
mentioned have been laid before the Rulers and Governors of several Colleges
in Oxford, to this end that they might see their fruits, and that for the time
to come they might be restrained from such evil courses; but as yet we can see
no end of their wickedness. So in obedience unto the Lord we have laid open
these things to the view of them that fears God, and moderate and sober people,
that they may see whether the carriage of such be fit to make Ministers of
Christ, knowing of a truth we must fill up the measure of his sufferings, who
is the captain of our salvation, (not rendering evil for evil) by such a
generation as these are, ungodly, illiterate in the truth; but the rather have
endured with patience these grievous mocking, scoffings and contradictions of
wicked and ungodly men, and beating, and abuses from time to time, that the
mouths of all gainsayers might be stopped, when the Lord our god shall come
forth to give righteous judgment on every one of them, for the work done in
the body. And these things we leave to the consideration of all moderate sober
men, to judge whether these actions be sober, comely, moderate, and of a good
report, that be before mentioned; and whether such actions of fruits, from such
as before mentioned, be fit for to make Ministers for Christ, who was far from
doing wrong, or hurting any creature, and these are far from his mind and the
Apostles, who wrestled not with flesh and blood; nor striking and abusing the
creatures, and how unlike to them these are that wrongs friends in their
meetings, and brings in their dogs and their drink, throwing it about upon
friends clothes, bands, necks, with tobaco-pipes in their mouths and making
plays, and stamping, and calling, give me drink, and tobacco, and wenches, and
Whores, and this is the fruits of the scholars of Oxford, raging about the
door, pulling down the porch, breaking the windows, like the Sodomites that
crucified the just. So their filthy brutish carriage is seen, which never was
heard the like, their tricks, jests, plays, sports with their beer,
tobacco-pips, stamping, leaping; and their striking of friends, as knowing that
friends will not lift up a hand against them. And the scholars comes into the
meeting of friends with all their gaudy attire, with ribbans and cuffs dressed
and daubed like fiddlers and stage players, which have not the garments of sober
men. And the said scholars that comes into the meetings, would turn up the
hats of women as they sat in the meeting, in their assemblies, and stare in
their faces to provoke them, with bad language. Now you may see how these
regards the word of the Lord, as their unsobernesse declares it.

Now are the people as they were in the days of Job, poison drinks up their
spirits. And now are the people as they were in the days of the Prophets,
which drink up iniquity as water and in that does rejoice: And now does the
people drink up scorning as water; for look in every Town, market and county,
you shall see a company of scorners, and people drink it up, and he that is the
aptest and the wittiest, that will please people best, that they drink up like
water, there is their joy: nay you shall see the young Ministers and Priests
scorn, and the other will drink up their scorn like water; so the one
scorneth, and the other drinks it up, and the other does iniquity, and the
other drinks that up as the Ox drinks water, and the poison thereof
drinks up their spirits; and how all people has, and does practice evil
works upon their beds, and when the daylight comes, does act it? Now these
scholars of Oxford are like unto the raging Sodomites, who rounded Lots house
in temporal Sodom, which God delivered them out of their hands, and in
spiritual Sodom and Egypt, that is, darkness and filthiness. Now the Elect,
and royal feed and Plants of the Lord God, has the spiritual Sodomites and the
spiritual Egyptians to deal with, which are spiritually blind, which crucifies
Christ. Now these spiritual Sodomites have the scriptures, the sheeps
clothing, but cannot deceive the Elect. Now the spiritual Sodomites and
Egyptians will tell the people that they have the Original, and Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin is the Original, and they are the Orthodox men that have it, and the
Pillars of the Church; but Moses will tell the spiritual Egyptians and
Sodomites, that all the World was of one language before Babel; and he that did
begin to build Babel, came out of Ham's stock, whom God confounded into many
languages: But they that are the royal and elect seed, will tell you In the
beginning was the word, before Babel was. And Luke the Evangelist will tell you
(spiritual Sodomites and Egyptians that tells the World Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin is the Original) that Pilate the murderer and persecutor set that upon
Christ, so there stands your original over the just, and he is your Orthodox
man and your pillar, and he knew not scripture, nor Christ the just; but
murdered him, he who had the original, who set it upon Christ when he had
murdered him, Luke 23.38 [mark] a superscription was written over Christ is:
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; here Pilate and the Jews had the Original (as you
call it) that killed the just (Can you hear this, Priests?) and he could not
open scriptures: did Luke say these were the Original that was set on top of
Christ? Now the Original is the Word which was in the beginning, but your many
languages is since the beginning, and there stands your Original. Mark, again
you Doctors and scholars, Christ said false prophets should come, And
Antichrist should come, they that were against Christ, that if it should be
possible should deceive the Elect, which false prophets should be inwardly
ravening, Mat. 7.24, chap. Christ said they should come to his disciples, and
in 1 John 2. chap. and 4. and. John said they were come, and went forth from
them into the world: and in the Revelation, all the World went after them; so
these inwardly ravening from the spirit of God, having the sheeps clothing,
having gotten a head, turned against the Saints that was in the spirit of God,
and killed them, and overcame them, and when they had overcome the Saints,
power was given to the beast over all Nations, Tongues, and Kindreds; mark, ye
Doctors, Ministers and young scholars; what, has the beast power over your
Tongues, Orthodox men, original? Yes, Why not the beast power over the Tongues,
as well as Pilate that killed the just? So the beast, over the Tongues, and
Orthodox men; ye Doctors and scholars whose Original is Tongues, so not the
spirit, [mark] Pilate your elder brother that set them on top of Christ; was
Pilate a preacher of the Gospel, that murderer, that had the Tongues, and set
them on top of Christ? Was the beast a preacher of the Gospel, that killed the
Saints, that had power over the Tongues? What over your Orthodox men? over our
original has the beast power? Yea, who turns against the Saints and kills them
that kept the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 13.7 and the beast, and his marks, and
his horns, and his Images which turns against the saints; and see how you
Orthodox men are raging about the doors of the Saints, which the beast has
power over, how you are raging about the doors of the Saints, like a cage of
unclean birds, a habitation of unclean spirits. Is not Babylon fallen, and become
a habitation of Devils, and the Whore she sits upon the beast, and all Nations
have drunk of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication with the Whore, and has corrupted the whole Earth, and the whore
sits upon the waters, and the waters are Nations, multitudes, and Tongues?
Mark Priests, is the Whore on the Tongues? what, our ministers? what, our
orthodox men? what our Original? is the whore on them? and are they waters?
Yes, John tells you they are waters, Rev 17. Come Priests let us reckon with
you; Have you not told people that false Prophets are come but now? and they
must come to Mat. 7. Mat. 24. And what has the beast power over you, and the
beast upon you, and the whore upon you, and are they come but now? Now Priest
you are discovered to be the false Prophets. what has the beast power over you,
and over your Tongues, and have you not told us that Christ would be with you
to the end of the world, and the beast and whore has power over you, as Pilate
had over the tongues? And so you have got the sheeps cloathings, and ravened
from the spirit of God; and the beast has killed the Saints and the Prophets,
and the man-child was caught up to God, and the woman fled into the
wilderness, and the whore has drunk the blood of the Saints, that has power
over the Tongues; Orthodox men, pillars of the Church, and there came up the
false Church, the whore, when the true woman fled into the wilderness; but the
judgment of the great whore shall come again, and the marriage of the Lamb
shall be known again, the bride and the Lambs wife: And John calls you waters,
as you may read, Rev. 13. and 17. chap. Which scriptures you can never get
over. Alack for you poor silly ones! has not the Church been in the wilderness
since the days of the Apostles? And has not the beast fought his honor? And
was not the cry again, Fear God, and give glory to him? and must not the beast
be taken, the false Prophet and the Whore, and cast alive into the Lake of
fire, and Babylon confounded, and the judgment of the great whore come? and
this is witnessed in these our days. So Babel is the beginning of Tongues, on
the top of Christ, Pilate he set them, the murderer and persecutor; and the
beast, the whore has power over them, and sits upon them. So hear is the path
of the Orthodox men, that they work in Babel, and Pilate, the beast, and the
whore, that murders and kills the Saints and Christ, who cries the tongues is
the Original, which wants the Original, the Word which was before Babel was,
and now Priests we shall teach you, the beast has power over tongues, and the
Whore, and Pilate that set them a-top of Christ; but Christ is risen that was
before Babel was, or Pilate* and is, when beast, and Whore, and Babel is not;
so he that was dead, is alive, and lives for evermore, and will stain your
glory and pride, who has told the world that Hedrew, Greek, and Latin was the
Original, but he is risen who will stain your glory, mar your pride, and deface
your beauty which you have had in your naturals, and the Gospel must be
preached again to all Nations, Tongues and kindreds, and all that dwell upon
the Earth, What, (say you Orthodox men) have we not had the Gospel before now?
Nay, you ravened from the spirit of God, you had the sheeps clothing, and so
set up that for your Original, that Pilate set on Christ's you ravened from the
spirit of God, who went our from the Apostles, and so went into the World, and
set up the Tongues to be the Original, which the beast has power over, which
killed the Saints; so you ravened from the power of God which is the Gospel,
Rom: 1. so the beast shall be taken, your Master, and the Whore, your mother,
and ye the false Prophets, and the old Dragon your Father, shall be taken
alive, with Babylon that you sheltered in, and all cast alive into the lake
that burns; and the everlasting Gospel shall be preached again to them that
dwell upon the Earth, which is the power of God; and now it is going forth
again, glory to the Lord in the highest for ever: And the Scholars of Oxford
are like Jews, the baser sort that made an uproar and assaulted the house of
Jason; lewd fellows, the bas^r sort, and brought Jason before the Rulers, and
said they turned the World upside down: Now see, the lambs and the sheep were
always sufferers; see who assaulted Lot's house, and who was it at Jason's
house, but the rude fellows, and who at Rich. Betetis's House in Oxford that
pulled up the porch, and broke the Windows, came in with dogs and Tobacco
pipes but rude scholars and who would have thought the scholars of Oxford
would have come to Rich Bete^is's house to ask for lasses, whores, wenche^?
surely they mist the house and this is the work and the actions of the b^ser
fellows in the nation who would think that these scholars should grow to such
a hight of lustfulnesse, fleshlinesse and ungodliness. And who would have
thought that the scholars of Oxford had been like such Tavern fellows, to come
into Rich. Beteris's house and cry give me some Ale, give me some tobacco,
stamping up and down? surely they ^^re more like Swine, with their noise in the
though, then like Minis^ (...) so hot in their lust of ungodliness, that they
tumble and lie do^^ the mire, and are said to call for Lasses; and whores, and
wenches among the people so God; s^rely they are worse then the common savage
beasts; and Doctor Owin who has spewed out some thing, and vomited up a
loathsome thing against the people of God called Quakers; which loathsome vomit
is enough to poison several people that is not in the wisdom what to eat,
which vomit is like unto the works of his fellows abovementioned? So see whose
steps you walk in; and what do you think* that they that are come into the
word of God, cannot see over the tongues and Pilate, and Babel, and these
scholars also, they do not know the word in the beginning which abides for
ever, the beast and the false prophet does not, but they that are come to the
word does, and are in that which does endure.

Jeremiah Haward. Abraham Allin. Thomas Ryland Henry Train, Lawrence Willyer.
Thomas Swan. Alex Green Abra Badger.


THE END.

