HERODIAN's HISTORY OF THE Roman Emperors, Containing Many Strange and
Wonderful Revolutions of State In Europe, Asia, and Africa. ALSO, Their most
Remarkable Embassies, Speeches, Antiquities, etc. Together with The most Solemn
Ceremonies used at the Deification of the Roman Emperors. With a Character of
the Ancient Britains.

Done from the Greek, By a Gentleman at Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for John Hartley, over against Gray's Inn in Holborn. School.

HERODIAN's HISTORY. BOOK I.
The PREFACE.
MOST Men that have spent their Time in Collecting Histories, and retrieving
the Memory of Things transacted long ago, have made it their chief Business to
transmit to future Ages the Fame of their own Learning, to distinguish them in
the Crowd of Authors. For which Reason they have not been so sollicitous about
the Truth of the Things delivered, as that they might be handed down to us with
all the Advantages of Eloquence and Language; persuading themselves, that although
in reporting Matters of great Antiquity, some Part of their Story should be
Fabulous, yet the Reader would be charmed with their Eloquence, nor would the
Truth of what they related be called in Question. Others again, out of a
private Pique and Hatred to Tyrants, or in flattering Princes, Private Persons,
or Communities, have stamped too great a Character upon mean and little Actions.

But as for my Part, I report Things not taken upon Trust from others, having
few Witnesses, and little Authority to support them, but such as are fresh in
the Memories of all Men, which I have collected with great Care and Fidelity in
the ensuing Memoirs, hoping that the Knowledge of those great and many
Occurrences which have happened within the Compass of a few Years, will not be
unwelcom to Posterity. For if we look back as far as the Reign of Augustus,
from whence we date the Roman Monarchy, and from thence down to the Times of
Marcus, which is about Two hundred Years, we shall not find so many Changes in
the Succession to the Empire, such various Events of Foreign and Civil Wars,
such Commotions of Nations, Reductions of Towns, both Roman and Barbarous, such
Earthquakes, Plagues, Lives of Princes so monstrously extravagant, that former
Ages are scarce able to furnish a Parallel. Some of these enjoyed the Empire a
long Time, but the Power of others was but short-lived: Nay, there are
Instances of those that were only just declared Emperors, and lost the Power
the same Day: For in Sixty Years there having been more Emperors of Rome than
can be allowed in common Computation for so short a Period of Time, many Things
happened which may deserve our Admiration. The more aged Emperors, being Men of
Experience in Affairs, governed both themselves and their Subjects with great
Caution and Diligence; but others coming young to the Crown, abandoned
themselves to Ease and Pleasure; and in these a Spirit of Innovation was very
prevalent; and from this Disparity in their Age and Measures of Government,
arose great Variety in their Actions and Manners. These Things I shall relate
in Order, having regard to the Time and Reign wherein they were done.

AN EPITOME OF THE First Book.
THE Emperor Marcus being taken with a Fit of Sickness, and fearing lest his
Son Commodus should degenerate from the Virtue of his Ancestors, as Princes
usually do, he commits him to the Care and Guardianship of his Friends and
Relations, and dies. Commodus succeeds him, and in the Beginning of his Reign
all things are duly and regularly administered; but afterward being corrupted
by Flatterers, he leaves the Pannonian War unfinished, and resolves for Rome,
notwithstanding the Disswasions of Pompeianus. At Rome he is received with
Public Rejoycings, and having visited the Temples, and returned Thanks to the
Senate, he goes back to his Palace. Then he appoints Perennius, a Man sordidly
Covetous, to the Management of Public Affairs, and abandons himself wholly to
his Pleasures. His Person was comely, his Diversions various, as Hunting,
Fencing, Chariot driving, etc. But at last he arrived at that Pitch of Madness,
that he commanded the People to call him Hercules the Son of Jupiter: And
having called the Months after his own Name, he ordered his Statues to be
erected in all the Parts of the City. Then he changed his Name a second time,
and took up the Name and Family of a certain Gladiator deceased. The Calamities
of those Times were looked upon as Judgments from Heaven, punishing the
Wickedness of the Prince in the Miseries of the People: Such as was a great
Plague, in which he himself retired to Laurentum; and a Famine, occasioned by
Cleander's buying up the Corn. His Sister Lucilla first formed a Design against
his Life, after her Perennius, then Maternus, and last of all his Concubine
Marcia, by whose Advice he was first poisoned, and afterward strangled, in the
Calends of January.

The First Book.
THE Emperor Marcus had a great many Daughters, but only two Sons; the one,
called Verissimus, died very young; he that survived was named Commodus: Him
his Father educated with all the Care imaginable, drawing together from the
most remote Parts, by the Offers of considerable Pensions, Men famous for their
Learning, that being always with his Son, they might instruct him in whatever
was proper for him to know. His Daughters, after they were of convenient Age,
he married to the most Considerable Men in the Senate, not so much regarding in
the Choice of a Son-in-Law, Ancientness of Family, or Largeness of Fortune, as
Probity of Manners, and Innocence of Life; looking upon the Endowments of the
Mind as the only true and lasting Blessings.

He lived in the constant Practice of all Sorts of Virtues; he was a great
Lover and successful Studier of Antiquity, insomuch that he surpassed most of
the Greeks and Romans of his Time; the Truth whereof is attested by those
Learned Remains which he left behind him, which are yet in being amongst us. As
to his Behavior, he was extremely civil and courteous to all Men; he shook
Hands familiarly with all that came to him, and commanded his Guards not to
deny any Man Access to him that desired it. He is the only Prince that was a
Philosopher, not in Notion and Speculation, but in his Conversation and
P^^ctice; and hence it was that that Age produc^d so many Wise Men; for
Subjects usually propose their Prince for their Imitation, and still Copy after
that Great Original.

Whatever therefore Marcus did, either at home or abroad, that may deserve the
Praise of Courage or Conduct, and how he behaved himself against the Northern
and Eastern Nations, is abundantly recorded in the learned Labors of others:
But as for all those Things which since the Death of Marcus, in the whole
Course of my Life I have heard or seen, some whereof I have had more particular
Experience of, as being in Public Employments at the Time, These I have
undertaken to deliver down to Posterity.

Marcus being now weakened with Age, and spent with the Cares and Fatigues of
Government, whilst he was in Pannonia was seized with a violent Fit of
Sickness, and perceiving himself to be past Hopes of Recovery, was very
sollicitous upon the Account of his Son, who was now entering upon the State of
Manhood, fearing lest in the Heat and Fervor of Youth, being freed from the
Influence a Father's Authority might have over him, and set at large from every
Thing that might restrain him, he should disdain all honest and sober
Discipline, and give himself over to Intemperance and Riot: For the Minds of
Youths are apt to fall from Sobriety and Virtue into the contrary Extremes.

Besides, being a Man of great Reading and Experience, he was the more
apprehensive, in regard of the many Miscarriages of Princes that came young to
the Crown; such as was Dionysius, a Man so wholly devoted to sensual Pleasures,
that he encouraged with great Rewards the Invention of all Things that tended
to the Improvement thereof. Such were the Successors of Alexander, whose Abuse
of their Power, and Oppression of their Subjects, reflected a lasting Infamy
upon his Empire; especially Ptolemy was so scandalously wicked, that contrary
to the known Laws of the Greeks and Macedonians, he committed Incest with his
Sister: And Antigonus, that he might represent Bacchus in all his
Extravagances, debased his Scepter into a Thyrse, and his Macedonian Diadem
into a Chaplet of Ivy.

His Fears were also increased by Examples of a later Date; as by that of Nero,
who with unheard of Impiety murdered his Mother, exposed himself publicly,
and turned Buffoon to make Sport for the People: As likewise by Domitian's, who
equaled the greatest Tyrants in Inhumanity and Cruelty. Having these Images of
Tyranny in his Mind, he was distracted between Hope and Fear: But the Germans,
a Neighboring Nation, which he had not entirely conquered, increased not a
little his Anxiety. Some of these had been persuaded to enter into a League
with him; others he had subdued by force of Arms: But some there were whom the
Terror of his Arms had dispersed only for the present; these he thought, taking
advantage of the Minority of the Prince, might renew the War: For it is the
Custom of the Barbarians to take up Arms upon every little Opportunity or
advantageous Conjuncture. Lying under this Distraction, he ordered such of his
Friends and Relations as were near his Person to be sent for, and after they
were come together in his Presence, he placed his Son before them, and raising
himself from his Bed, spoke to this effect.

I don't wonder, Gentlemen, that you seem concerned to see me in this
Condition; for Humane Nature is apt to be touched with other Men's Calamities,
those still affecting us the most sensibly to which we are Eyewitnesses. But
besides common Humanity, there are other Reasons for your Compassion at this
Time; that Love and Affection for you which I feel so plainly within my self,
makes me hope, nay challenge a Return of Kindness from you. And now, Gentlemen,
is the Time for me to see whether or no I have bestowed that Time in vain which
I have spent in honoring and serving you, and for you to make your
Acknowledgments, and show that you are not unmindful of the good Offices I have
done you. You see my Son, whom your selves have educated, entering upon the
Estate of Manhood, and standing in need of a Pilot to direct him (if I may so
call it) in the Ocean of Life, lest through Unexperience of Affairs, he be
betrayed into sinful and dishonest Courses. I entreat you therefore, instead of
one, be to him many Fathers, in instructing and advising whatever is requisite
for him to know or to do: For it is not in the Power of Riches to satisfy the
boundless Appetites of Tyrants; nor can Troops of Guards, how numerous soever,
stave off Dangers from a Prince, that has not gained the Love and Affections of
his People. Those only enjoy long and happy Reigns, that are rather beloved for
their Gentleness, than feared for their Cruelty: And those Men's Services only
that obey out of Choice, not Necessity, are free from the Suspicion of Artifice
and Design. These Men are Loyal at the bottom, and never depart from their Duty
unless they are provoked to it by some violent and contumelious Usage. But it is
hard for Men to set Bounds to their Passions, where there are none to their
Power. Sound therefore in his Ears the Precepts of Virtue and Goodness, and
remind him often of the Things he has heard this Day, and hereby you will make
your selves happy in a Prince, and at the same Time will do the greatest Honor
to my Memory, which by this Means you will make Immortal.

After he had spoke these Words, his Strength failed him, and being unable to
support himself in that Posture, he sunk gently into Bed. This affected the
Company so extremely, that some of them broke out into undecent Outcries. He
lived afterward a Day and a Night, and then died, to the unspeakable Grief and
Affliction of all Men, leaving behind him the Memory of his Virtues, which all
Ages will have in veneration. After he was dead, and the Report thereof was
spread abroad, the whole Soldiery and Commons were seized with a general
Sorrow, and a certain Air of Melancholy appeared in all the Parts of the
Empire, none receiving the fatal News without Tears. All Men bewailed the
Public Calamity, and, as they were variously influenced, lamented the Loss of
their Prince, under the different Characters of a Kind Father, a Valiant
General, a Gentle and Prudent Governor; and so many were the excellent
Qualities of this Emperor, that they justified all these Complaints.

After the Ceremonies of the Emperor's Interment were over, the young Prince's
Friends thought fit to bring him into the Camp, that he might Harangue the
Soldiers, and, as it is usual for Emperors upon their Accession to the Empire,
engage their Hearts to him by the Magnificence of a Donative. So public Notice
was given that they should assemble in the usual Place, at which Time Commodus
came, and having sacrificed to the Gods, ascended a Bench of State, erected for
that purpose in the middle of the Camp; and, his Father's Friends standing
around him, many of which were Persons of great Learning, he delivered himself
to the following Effect.

COMMODUS his SPEECH.
I Am persuaded, Gentlemen, you are as much affected as I can be with this
unhappy Accident. My Father loved us all equally, and while he was alive we all
stood upon a Level; and I remember he was always more pleased with calling me
Fellow-Soldier than Son, because this denoted only a Natural Relation, but that
a Communication of Virtue: And carrying me in his Arms when I was a Child,
would often put me into your Hands, and commit me as it were to your Faith and
Protection. For which Reasons I assure my self of your Good Will and
Affections, seeing by the Elder sort of you I have been educated, and to the
Younger I have been all along a Fellow-Scholar in Feats of Arms. For my Father
having an equal Kindness for us all, took the same Care of our Institution in
every Thing that was honest or praise worthy. Upon his Decease Chance has cast
the Sovereignty upon me, being no Stranger to the Imperial Line, nor Lording it
in a new-gotten Throne, as those have done that went before me. I am your only
Prince that have been born and bred up in the Imperial Court, untainted, as I
may say, with Private Education: The Royal Purple received me at my coming into
the World, and I commenced at the same time Man and Prince. Reflect upon these
Things, and love and honor your Emperor, who is not the Creature of a Faction,
but claims the Empire of the World by Blood and Birthright. My Father is taken
up into Heaven, and has taken his Place among the Gods. The Care and
Administration of Humane Affairs is left in my Hands, and the successful
Discharge of so important a Trust will depend entirely upon you. Now if we
prosecute with vigor the Remainder of the War, and enlarge the Roman Empire by
our Conquests, till it stretch it self to the Ocean, not only each Man will
have the Glory of his respective Achievements, but we shall all in some
measure honor the Memory of our Common Father, who hears and sees in his
exalted State all we say or do here below; and happy we, that have such a
Witness to our Actions! And know, Gentlemen, you have stronger Inducements to
be valiant now than ever; for in my Father's Life time the Glory of all Great
Actions was attributed to his Wisdom and Counsels: But under me, a young
unexperienced Prince, your Courage and Bravery will be the most conspicuous,
there being no Abatement to be made upon the score of a General. Besides, your
Valor at this time will have another good Effect, 'twill gain Authority to my
Youth, and make me formidable to the Barbarians, who, if vigorously repulsed in
the Beginning of my Reign, will not only be quieted for the present, but
restrained also from the like Attempts for the future.

Having thus spoke, he gave great Sums of Money to endear the Soldiery to him,
and returned to his Palace.

'Twas but a short time that the late Emperor's Friends had the Superintendency
of Public Affairs; during which Time, they were always with the young Prince,
giving him good Advices and Instructions, and allowing him no more Time for
Recreations than was thought requisite for his Health: But after a while, some
of the Courtiers insinuating themselves into his Acquaintance, endeavored to
debauch him. These were your Table-Flatterers, that make Sensual Pleasure the
Measure of Happiness. They would often take occasion to commend to him the Way
of Living in Rome, telling him of the Plays, Musick-meetings, and other
Diversions of the Town, and generally of the Plenty of all Things conducing to
the Pleasure or Convenience of Life. On the other Hand, they cried down at the
greatest Rate imaginable the Country about the Ister, as well for the Barenness
of the Soil, as the perpetual Rigor and Cloudiness of the Weather: and would
often be saying to him, How long will Your Majesty take up with frozen muddy
Water, whilst others enjoy the warm Baths and cool Streams, with the Air, and
refreshing Breezes so peculiar to Italy? With these and the like Suggestions
they raised unruly Appetites in the Youth: So he called his Friends together,
and gave them to understand, he had a great Inclination to visit his Native
Country; but was ashamed to discover the Reasons inducing him thereto, and
pretended violent Apprehensions of Danger from some of the Nobility, that might
seize the Imperial Palace, and drawing together a Body of Men, might as it were
from a well-fortified Castle attack the Empire; adding withal, That there
might be a sufficient Force raised out of the People for the effecting such an
Enterprise.

All Men were in perfect Amazement to hear him talk in this manner, but durst
not speak their Thoughts to him upon so tender a Point; till Pompeianus, the
eldest of the Company, and one that might challenge more Authority over him
than the rest, in regard of his Alliance to him, having married his eldest
Sister, spoke to him in these Words.

POMPEIANUS his SPEECH.
I Don't wonder, my Lord, that you desire so passionately to see your Native
Country: We our selves desire it as much as you; but cannot comply with our
Inclinations at this time, because Matters of a more pressing and important
Nature require our Stay. As for the Satisfaction of living at Home, you may
enjoy it more securely hereafter; though indeed every Place is Rome where the
Emperor has his Court. But to leave the War unprosecuted, will not only be a
Dishonor to our Empire, but may be also of dangerous Consequence: For it will
animate the Barbarians to new Attempts; who will think us rather influenced by
our Fears, than any Regards to our Country, in this sudden Removal. On the
other Hand, consider how Glorious it will be for you, after a total Defeat of
your Enemies, and Enlargement of your Empire as far as the Ocean, to return in
Triumph to your Country, pompously attended by Kings and Nobles in Chains?
These Things made the Ancient Romans so much Celebrated in all Ages. And as for
the Jealousy you have entertained of some of the Nobility, it is altogether
groundless, and you need apprehend nothing from that Side, for here are the
most Eminent Persons of the Senate, here is the Imperial Treasure, and the
whole Military Force of the Empire, bravely venturing Life and Fortune in
Defense of it. And besides, your Father's Memory has confirmed to you the Love
and Loyalty of all Men.

This Speech of Pompeianus diverted the young Prince, and shook his Resolutions
for the present. The Words of the Old Man weighed much with him, and at this
Time he had nothing to allege to justify his Intention. Therefore he
dismissed his Friends, and told them he would consider of it: But at last being
overcome by the Importunity of his Courtiers, he would no longer consult his
Friends, but immediately sent Letters to Rome, to signify his Resolution to
return; and having appointed such Persons as he thought fit, to guard the Banks
of the Ister, and restrain the Incursions of the Barbarians, gave Public
Orders to prepare for a March.

After his Departure, the Persons entrusted with the Affairs upon the Ister
were very vigilant in their respective Posts, and in a short Time conquered
vast Numbers of the Barbarians by Force of Arms; others by Offers of Money were
easily bribed into an Acceptance of Peace; for the Barbarians naturally love
Money, and despise Danger, and live by Inroads and Ravages upon the
neighboring Territory, or traffic Peace for Money. Which Commodus knowing,
and being both able and willing to purchase Security and Repose to himself at
any Rate, complied with them in all their Demands.

After the Proclamation was made, that they should march homewards, a sort of a
confused Joy ran through the whole Camp; every one being willing to change the
Toils and Fatigues of War in an Enemy's Country, for the Pleasures and Gaieties
of Peace at Rome. But after it was publicly known that the young Prince was
returning, the Romans were visibly transported with Joy, all Men expecting
great Things from the Presence of a Prince, who they thought would emulate his
Father's Virtues. His Journey he performed with great Expedition, being
entertained with great Splendour and Magnificence in the Towns he passed
through; and generally his Presence gave great Content and Satisfaction to all
Men.

But when he came near Rome, the whole Senate and Roman People went out in full
Body to meet him: They marched with great Formality, carrying Branches of
Laurel, and all sorts of Flowers that were proper for the Season. Every Man
strove to be foremost in this Ceremony, both to express his Affection, and
satisfy his Curiosity, in beholding the Greatest of Princes in the most
flourishing Scene of his Age. And the Truth is, the Romans had a real Affection
for him, in regard he was not only a Native of their Country, but had his whole
Education amongst them, and was of Noble and Imperial Blood for Three Descents;
for by his Father's Side he was descended from Persons of the most Eminent
Quality in the Senate: His Mother Faustina, the Empress, sprung out of the
Loins of Emperors, being Daughter to Antoninus Surnamed Pius, and
Granddaughter to Hadrian by the Mothers Side, and Great Granddaughter to
Trajan.

This is the Account of Commodus's Parentage. But beside the Advantages of
Youth, his Person was very agreeable; he had a Manly Beauty in his Face, with a
fine Shape and Figure of Body: His Eyes were languishing, and yet had a
peculiar sort of Luster: His Hair was curled, and yellow, resembling Flame,
when he walked in the Sun; which made some Men fancy he was powdered with Dust
of Gold. Others thought it a Testimony of his Divinity, looking upon these as
the Glories that adorned him at his Nativity. He had no Beard, but only Down
upon his Cheeks. This was the Figure the Prince made when the People received
him with Huzza's and Shouts of Joy, scattering Flowers and Garlands all the Way
as he passed.

After he had entered Rome, and visited the Temples, he rendered Thanks to the
Senate in full Assembly, and to the Soldiers that were left in Rome, for
continuing steadfast in their Duty and Allegiance during his Absence, and then
retired to his Palace. Thus for a few Years he paid all the Deference
imaginable to his Father's Friends, and transacted nothing without their
Counsel and Direction.

But after a while he took the Government upon himself, and constituted
Perennius an Italian, a Man of great Military Skill, Captain of the Praetorian
Establishment. This Perennius let the Prince live at large, allowed, nay
encouraged him in the greatest Riots and Excesses. By this Means he drew all
the Affairs of the Empire that require Diligence and Application to himself,
till at last he got the whole. Administration into his Hands. He was a Man
insatiably covetous, his Desires could never terminate in what he possessed,
but still grasped at something he had not. He constantly endeavored by
Calumnies and Misrepresentations to create a Jealousy in the Prince of his
Father's Friends, especially the most Rich and Noble amongst them, that the
Prince might be moved to cut them off, and he might enrich himself by their
Fall.

But however the Prince was restrained for a Time by the Memory of his Father,
and the Regard he had to his Friends; but an unlucky Accident happened, which
destroyed all the Remains of Virtue and Moderation which he yet retained, and
utterly perverted the Biass of his Mind. The Accident was this. Lucilla,
Commodus his eldest Sister, was formerly married to L. Verus the Emperor, whom
Marcus had made his Colleague with him in the Empire, thinking this Alliance
would be the strongest Bond of a lasting Amity between them. But it fell out,
that Verus died, and her Father married her to Pompeianus, and yet she retained
the Port and Grandeur of an Empress. So it was, after Commodus came to the
Crown, he suffered her to take the same State upon her, and she was in all
Respects honored as Empress. But now Commodus took a Wife named Crispina, and
Lucilla was obliged to give Place to her, which gave her great Regrets: For she
looked upon all Honors done to the Empress, as indirect Affronts to her self.
This put her upon Designs against the Government; but she knew her Husband's
Love of Commodus too well to communicate any thing of that Nature to him: So
she applied her self to Quadratus, a young rich Nobleman of Rome, (that lay
under a Suspicion of intriguing with this Lady) and after she had sounded how
he stood affected, made her Complaint to him, representing how she had been
injured and disgraced; till at last she persuaded him to enter into Counsels
fatal both to themselves and the whole Senate. For among other Senators that he
drew into this Combination, there was one Quintian, a Man of a dauntless
Spirit, and one that would undertake any Thing; him he persuaded to take a
Poniard under his Clothes, and observing Time and Place proper for the
Execution of his Design, to assassinate the Emperor; adding, That if that was
once done, what remained would easily be effected, by distributing Money among
the People.

In order to the doing this, Quintian posted himself in the Entrance of the
Amphitheatre; the Darkness of the Place he thought would help to conceal him,
and favor the Design. So when the Emperor came by, he boldly assaulted him
with his drawn Sword, crying aloud, The Senate has sent you this. As he was
repeating these Words, the Emperor's Guards laid hold of him, and made him pay
dear for his Madness, after he had rather discovered, than accomplished his
Design. This was the first Cause of the Emperor's Hatred of the Senate. That
Saying made deep Impression in him, and from that Time he looked upon all the
Senators as disaffected, still keeping in Mind the Words of this bold Assassine.

Perennius made good use of this Occasion to inflame the Emperor against them.
He had always advised him to cut off the Leading Men among them; and whoever
was crushed by his Displeasure, he still grew fat upon his Ruins, and by this
Means easily became the richest Man of those Times. And now he made Inquiry
into this Plot with great Rigor and Severity; and Lucilla, with the rest of
the Conspirators, and all such as were suspected to be concerned (how slight
soever the Ground of the Suspicion was) were put to Death without Mercy.

And now Perennius having taken out of the way all those that loved or were
reverenced by the Emperor, undertook himself the Care of his Person; and having
got an unlimited Authority into his Hands, began to aspire to the Empire. And
in order to the compassing his ambitious Ends, by his Interest with the
Emperor, he advanced his Sons to the Command of the Illyrian Army; and in his
Ministry at home, amassed a Treasure sufficient at any time to shake the
Loyalty of the Praetorian Soldiers, and bring them over to his Party. His Sons
in the mean time made secret Levies, that as soon as Perennius had assassinated
the Emperor, they might follow their Father's Blow, and seize the Empire.

This Plot took Air very strangely: It was the Time when the Sacred Games
instituted to the Honor of Jupiter Capitolinus were to be celebrated. This
drew together vast Multitudes of People, as is usual in Rome at the like
Solemnities. The Emperor presides at these Games, with the Priests in their
Turns. Commodus had seated himself in the Emperor's Box, to hear the most
celebrated Actors of that Age: But when the Theater was full, and every Man had
taken his Place according to his Rank, before the Action began, there stepped out
a Man in a Philosophers Habit, half naked, with a Staff in his Hand, and a
Satchel hanging from his Shoulder, into the middle of the Stage, and commanding
Silence, addressed himself to the Emperor, and told him, That this was not a
Time to quit the Cares of Empire, for the Diversions of Games and Public
Festivities; That Perennius his Sword was drawn against him, and if he did not
ward off the Blow which would suddenly be made at him, it would certainly be
fatal, and he would feel it before he was aware; That Perennius was raising
Forces and Money to be employed against him, and that his Sons by secret
Practices had solicited the Illyrian Army to revolt* and in conclusion, if he
did not take care in time to break their Measures, he was irrecoverably ruined.

Whether the Man was urged by Divine Impulse to utter these Words, or was moved
merely by the Prospect of Glory or Reward, I cannot determine; but the Adventure
so shocked the Emperor, that he was not able to speak for the present. As for
other Men, though they believed the Man might have Ground for what he said, yet
they pretended to give no Credit to him; and Perennius in great Rage commanded
him immediately to be apprehended and burnt for a Madman, and a Reporter of
Vain Stories. So the Philosopher suffered for his unseasonable Liberty.

However, those that pretended to be zealous for Commodus's Interest, made use
of this Occasion to let themselves into Invectives against Perennius, whom they
hated before for his intolerable Pride and Insolence of Behavior. And it
pleased the Gods that Commodus should escape, and that the Blow levelled
against him should return upon the Heads of Perennius and his Sons: For a short
time after some Soldiers came privately from the Illyrian Camp to Rome,
bringing along with them Pieces of Money stamped with the Image of Perennius;
and having without his Knowledge obtained Access to the Emperor,, (though he was
then Captain of his Lifeguard) they showed the Pieces to him, and made a large
Discovery of the whole Plot, with all the Circumstances of it, and were well
rewarded for so signal a Piece of Service.

Perennius was ignorant of the whole Course of this Business, and an
Executioner was sent by Night to take off his Head, when he expected nothing
less; which was done: And a Courier is dispatched into Illyria, and ordered to
make all possible haste, that he might prevent the Fame of what had happened at
Rome. By him the Emperor sent Letters to Perennius's Son, wherein he made great
Expressions of his Friendship, and Satisfaction in his Conduct, and told him,
he would reward his Services abroad with better Preferment at home. The Young
Man could not look thorough the Disguise, but thought the Emperor's Invitation
to return was sincere: For he heard nothing of the Disaster of his Family in
Rome, nor of any Thing that had happened there; and he was confirmed in his
Belief when the Courier told him, that it was also his Father's Pleasure that
he should return, and that he would have writ to him upon that Subject, had he
not known his entire Resignation to the Emperor's Will. He was extremely
regretted to leave his Designs unaccomplish'd, after he had made so great
Progress in them; nevertheless, in confidence of his Father's Interest at
Court, which he thought continued still, he set out for Rome. But when he came
into Italy, he was dispatched by the Emperor's Order. This was the End of these
Great Men.

And now Commodus constituted two Captains of the Praetorian Band. To entrust
so great Power with a single Man, he thought was dangerous; and the dividing of
it he knew would weaken it, and make it less fit to encourage Attempts against
the Government, than when it was united. But notwithstanding this Caution,
another Conspiracy was set on foot in a short time: The Account that is given
of it, is this.

Maternus, a Soldier that had committed diverse Outrages, about this time
thought fit to leave the Camp, and persuaded some other Soldiers to desert with
him: Out of these, and others that came in to him, he soon formed a Party of
Men of the like desperate Fortunes and Tempers with himself. With these he
first plundered Villages, and ravaged the Country around: But after he had
furnished himself with Money for greater Enterprises, and had drawn together a
formidable Body of Men, by Promise of Reward and a Share of the Booty, they
grew from a contemptible Band of Robbers, into a Just and Regular Army. And now
they attacked and stormed the greatest Towns, broke open the Prisons, and set
at large all the Prisoners, without distinction; most of which, out of hope of
Impunity or Reward, joined themselves to them. And now with their whole Force
they made an Inroad into Gaul and Spain, overran the whole Country, took the
most considerable Towns, burnt and pillaged them, and marched off with the
Booty.

When Commodus heard of the swift Advances of these Rebels, he wrote to the
Prefects of his Provinces in Terms of Anger and Indignation, accusing their
Conduct for not opposing the Growth of this Rebellion, and commanding them
instantly to levy a Force to suppress it. The Rebels had Intelligence of this,
and that an Army was raising against them, and therefore judged it most
advisable to leave the Country where they had committed their Ravages, and pass
over into Italy; which they did by short By-Roads, and in small Parties.

And here Maternus's Ambition began to fly high, and to have the Empire in
view. For he had found that all his Designs had hitherto succeeded beyond
expectation; and he knew that in this Juncture he had a desperate Game to play;
therefore he resolved to risque at all, and either seize the Empire, or die
with Glory in the Attempt.

But he knew the Emperor's Strength, and his own Weakness, too well to engage
with him upon equal Terms: For the Praetorian Soldiers, and generally the whole
Roman Commons, were thought well-affected to Commodus; which obliged him to
have recourse to Policy and Cunning: so he formed this Stratagem. In the
beginning of Spring, upon a Solemn Day, the Romans make a pompous Procession in
honor of Cybele, at which time the richest Furniture either Prince or Subject
is Master of, is carried before the Goddess with great Solemnity. This is a
licentious Time for all sorts of Frollicks and Gambols, which at this Time have
the Public Countenance; all Men are permitted to use what Disguise they
please, nor is any Magistrate's Habit so sacred, but every Person that has a
mind may take it upon him; so that during the Festival it is hard to distinguish
a true Magistrate from a Masquerader. This Maternus thought the fittest
Occasion for executing his treasonable Purposes; for he fansied if he could put
himself and his Men in the Habit and Equipage of the Emperor's Guards, he might
easily in that Huddle of Ceremony crowd in amongst them, and seeming Part of
the Emperor's Retinue, might without Danger of Discovery assault him, and so
accomplish his Design. But before the Day came for the Execution of this
Stratagem, he was betrayed by some of his Accomplices, that could not brook his
Advancement from a Fellow-Robber, to be their Lord and Sovereign. Whereupon
Maternus, and all those that were engaged in the same traitorous Designs, were
forthwith apprehended and put to Death.

Commodus, after public Thanksgiving and Sacrifice to the Gods, was present at
the Celebration of the Festival, which was performed by the People with
extraordinary Demonstrations of Joy, upon the Account of the Emperor's
Deliverance. The Reason why the Romans had this Goddess in such veneration, it
will not, I think, be impertinent to insert out of their own Histories, seeing it
is so little known amongst the Greeks.

They say her Image fell originally from Heaven; but out of what, or by whom it
was made, remains uncertain; though the Opinion has generally prevailed, that it
could not be made by Men. The Tradition runs, That it fell, and was first found
in Phrygia, in a Place called from thence Pessinuns; but I find this Matter
differently related from other Hands. According to these, there was heretofore
an Engagement here between Ilus the Phrygian and Tantalus the Lydian. The
Occasion is reported variously.

Some say, it was for taking away Ganymede by Force: Others, that it was only
upon a Dispute about a Way. Whatever was the Occasion, both Sides maintained
the Fight with great Obstinacy, without any apparent Advantage to either. The
Slaughter was great on both Sides, and from hence, say they, the Place took its
Name. And here it was that Ganymede was torn in Pieces by his Brother, in that
fatal Endeavor to rescue him from his Lover, and immediately disappeared;
which gave Occasion to the Report of Jupiter's carrying him into Heaven, and of
his Consecration consequent thereupon. Here also the Phrygians celebrated their
Orgia upon the Banks of the River Gallus; from whence the gelt Priests of this
Goddess received their Name. But when the Roman Power advanced toward its
Ascendant, and they had received Information from the Oracle, that the
Possession of the Pessinuntian Goddess* would conduce to the effectual
Establishment and Increase thereof, they were resolved to demand her Image of
the Phrygians, and immediately dispatched Ambassadors with Instructions to that
purpose, enforcing their Demand by Pretensions of Affinity, and a Descent from
a Common Ancestor, viz. Aeneas of Phrygia. In short, the Romans easily obtained
what they came for, and the Goddess embarked for Rome: But when she arrived at
the Mouth of the Tyber, which served the Romans then in stead of a Harbor, the
Vessel by Divine Appointment stood still, and the whole united Force of the
Romans could not haul it from the Place, till a Vestal Priestess performed what
the rest had attempted in vain. She had vowed perpetual Chastity, and now was
charged with a Violation of that Vow; and fearing the Execution of the Law upon
her, she offered to stand to the Award of the Goddess, whether or no she was
guilty of the Fact whereof she stood accused; which being accepted by the
Romans, she took off her Girdle, and prayed the Goddess, if she knew her to be
a spotless Virgin, and that the Calumny she lay under was undeserved, she would
command the Vessel to move; and immediately fastening her Girdle to it, she drew
it after her with great ease, to the wonder and amazement of the Spectators,
who looked upon it as an unquestionable Testimony of the Divinity of the
Goddess, and the Innocence of the Maid. Thus much I thought fit to insert about
the Pessinuntian Goddess, with more Exactness and Accuracy perhaps than the
Thing deserved: However I hope the Relation will not be unpleasant to those
that are unacquainted with the Roman Story.

But to return to Commodus: After he had escaped these traitorous Designs of
Maternus, he augmented his Guards, grew shie, and seldom appeared in Public,
lived for the most part in his Country-Houses which were most remote from the
City, gave over the Exercise of all Imperial Jurisdiction, and laid down in a
Manner the very Figure and Character of an Emperor.

At this Time all Italy was visited with a great Plague; but it raged the most
in Rome, in regard it was a Town very populous of it self, and of a vast resort
of Strangers from all Quarters; whereupon ensued a great Mortality of Men and
Beasts. The Emperor by the Advice of his Physicians retired to Laurentum, where
the Air was more cool and temperate, and the Groves of Laurel too frequent in
those Parts, as is imported by the Name of the Place, which it took from
thence, preserve the Country from Infection by the Fragrancy of their Smell,
and the Delightfulness of their Shade. And upon the same Reason the People in
the City, by the Prescription of their Doctors, filled their Noses and Ears
with sweet Ointments, and always carried Perfumes about them; for they fansied
these would close up the Pores by which the Infection was to enter, so that
either it should not enter at all, or, if it did, it might be expelled or
vanquished by a contrary Force. But notwithstanding this, the Plague grew more
outrageous, and Men and Beasts died in great Numbers.

At the same Time the Romans were afflicted by an Evil of a different Nature,
viz. a Famine and Dearth of all Things. The Occasion was this. There was a
certain Man called Cleander, a Phrygian, and one that had been publicly sold
by the Common Crier. His first Advance was to be the Emperor's Slave;
afterward he became his Favorite; till at last he arrived to so great a Sway
and Interest at Court, that he got to himself at once the honorable Charges of
Gentleman of the Emperor's Bedchamber, Captain of his Lifeguard, and General
of his Armies. And now his Wealth and Affluence of all Things put him upon
projecting how he might gain the Empire. Hereupon he engrossed prodigious
Quantities of Corn, and locked them up in his Granary, that when the Roman Army
and People should be reduced to Extremity for want of Sustenance, so seasonable
and surprising a Relief might win and endear them to him for ever. He built
also a famous Place of Exercise, and maintained a Public Bath at his own
Charge, thinking by these Popular Arts to please and cajole the Multitude.

But they hated him upon an old Score, for his insatiable Covetousness; and now
they looked upon him as the Author of their late Calamities, which inflamed
them to that degree, that they openly in the Theater vented their Spleen
against him in Satirical Touches and Reflections upon his Behavior, till at
last the whole Mobb went to the Emperor's Palace with full Cry against him; nor
could any thing appease their Clamours, besides the delivering up this Minister
to them.

While the People were in this Ferment, and the Court was filled with Noise and
Tumult, the Emperor lay in the inmost Rooms, dissolved in Pleasure, and, as
Matters were managed by Cleander, utterly ignorant of the present Posture of
Things: When upon a sudden, when no Man expected it, the Horse-Guards issued
out upon them by Cleander's Order, and bore down and trampled under Foot the
defenseless Multitude; for being without Horses and unarmed, they were unable
to sustain the Impression, but betook themselves immediately to their Heels,
and fled back to the City. Great Numbers were slain upon the Spot; not only
such as fell by the Hands of the Soldiers, or were trod to death by the Horses,
but a great many that were pressed to Death by the Crowd in the Hurry of the
Action. They pursued them to the Gates of the City without Resistance, and made
a very great Slaughter.

Those that were left in the City being advertised of the Misfortune of their
Friends, planted themselves upon the Tops of their Houses, and threw down
Stones and Tiles upon the Horsemen, and in a Moment the Scales were turned;
for here was no engaging near at Hand, but the whole Multitude securely and
advantageously posted, made a Battery upon them from above, till at last being
cruelly galled and wounded, they were forced to quit their Ground, and retire
with Precipitation. A great many were struck down dead with Stones, that were
played upon them continually with great Vigor, which afterward rolling down
into the Streets, extremely annoyed the Horses, and frequently occasioned the
Overthrowing both of Horse and Man. There were also some Foot-Soldiers
quartered in the Town, that out of a private Pique to the Horsemen, fell in
with and reinforced the Mobb.

While all things were thus embroiled by Civil Fury, Commodus was kept in
ignorance of all that happened; nor durst any Man acquaint him, for fear of
Cleander; till Fadilla, his eldest Sister, who had free Access to him upon all
Occasions, ran to him in great haste, with her Hair dishervell'd, flung her
self upon the Ground, and making indeed a very deplorable Figure, spoke to him
in these Words, delivered with all the Concern and Passion imaginable.

FADILLA'S SPEECH.
MY Lord, while you enjoy your Ease, and know nothing how Affairs are managed,
your Sacred Person is brought into imminent Danger. We that are of your Blood
and Family, are in danger of being extirpated and ruined, with the whole Roman
People in general, and a great Part of the Army. What we could not expect from
Barbarians, we suffer from your own Ministers. Those to whom you have been the
greatest Friend, are become your most inveterate Enemies. Cleander endeavors
to exasperate the Army and Populace against you, by the first of which he is
beloved and supported as much as he is hated and opposed by the other. They are
both in Arms, combating with great Fury and Outrage, and filling the Streets of
Rome with Blood and Slaughter. Whoever is vanquished, it is we and the Community
must suffer, unless you instantly execute Justice on this wicked Minister, who
has been the Cause of this Public Disorder, and, if he be not provented, will
certainly occasion some notable Disaster to the Imperial Family.

After she had spoke, she rent her Clothes; and this Boldness of the Princess
inspired others with Courage to come in and confirm what she had said: Which
gave the Emperor such terrible Apprehensions, that he thought the Storm did not
menace him from afar, but was that Moment breaking over his Head. So
immediately he summons Cleander to appear before him, who knew nothing
certainly of this Discovery beyond Conjecture and Suspicion; and after he was
come, commanded him instantly to be seized; and his Head struck off, was
afterward fixed on a Spear, and exposed to public View, to the unspeakable
Satisfaction of the People.

Thus this Storm was blown over, the Civil Fury was asswag'd, and all Sides
laid down their Arms. The Soldiers saw their Leader slain, and began to
apprehend the Emperor's Displeasure; for they perceived now that he had been
abused in the whole Course of this Affair, and that Cleander had acted without
his Authority or Commission. The Clamors of the People were appeased, they sat
down contentedly under their Miseries, after they had been revenged upon the
Author of them. But Cleander's Calamity involved all his Dependents, and his
two Sons; they were all butchered without Mercy, and their dead Bodies dragged
about the City, after which Indignities they were thrown into the Common
Sewers. This was the Period of Cleander's Greatness, and of all those that were
supported by his Interest: And I am apt to believe, Nature designed him for a
remarkable Instance of the Mutability of our Condition, and has showed in him
how Men may be lift up from the most abject State, to the very utmost Pitches
of Humane Greatness, and how easily they may be tumbled down again from this
Elevation, by a single Turn or Double of a capricious and inconstant Fortune.

And now Commodus, though he was violently afrai of an Insurrection of the
People, yet he was prevailed upon by his Friends to return to the City, where
he was received by a great Appearance of People, and loud Acclamations of Joy,
and then lodged himself in the Imperial Palace. But this Series of Dangers he
had encountered, had this bad Effect, that it created in him a Jealousy and
Distrust of all Men, which betrayed him to a merciless Disposition of Mind, and
made him inclinable to hearken to all manner of Calumnies and Accusations, tho
never so false: He would not let any Man have the least Share in his Favor,
that had the Reputation of Wisdom or Virtue. As for himself, he departed from
every Thing that was Honorable and Good, suffered his Animal Nature to get the
Ascendent over his Reason, which was sensibly impaired by his immoderate
indulging Sensual Pleasure. In conclusion, he banished all Men his Court, that
had the Fame of being moderately Learned or Virtuous, under the notion of being
Plotters and Conspirators; suffered himself to be led and managed by a Set of
Rascals and Buffoons; gave himself over to Chariotdriving, and Combating with
Wild Beasts, which he pursued with greater Application than was suitable to his
Dignity and Character; and from his Performances of this Kind it was, that his
Flatterers ascribed to him the Reputation of Valor.

At this Time there were Prodigies discovered in the Heavens, Stars appeared in
the Daytime, some of which of an oblong Figure, seemed to hang in the Air.
There were also a great many extravagant Births of various Sorts of Animals,
contrary to the ordinary Measures of Nature. In some of these, the whole Frame
and Structure of the Body was monstrous; in others, the Parts were strangely
disproportionate. But what gave the greatest Wound for the present, and filled
Men with the most dreadful Apprehensions for the future, was the Burning down
of the Temple of Peace, being the most beautiful and stately Fabric that was
in the City. Before this dismal Accident, there had been no Rain and few
Clouds, only the Earth was just perceived to tremble; and whether it happened by
Lightning in the Night, or by Fire which might burst out in that extraordinary
Movement of the Earth, is uncertain: But however it was, the richest Temple in
the City was burnt to the Ground, with all the Ornaments of Gold and Silver
with which it was beautified, far beyond any of the rest; for it was looked
upon as a very secure Place, and was at that time the universal Repository for
Things of Value; so that by this Nights Calamity several rich Men were reduced
to extreme Poverty, and all Men lamented the Public Loss, and each Man his own
Particular.

Besides this Temple, a great many other graceful and magnificent Buildings
perished in the Conflagration: Amongst these was the Temple of Vesta, insomuch
that the Image of Pallas was laid open to public View. To this the Romans pay
a singular Veneration, and secret it from the Eyes of the People. The Tradition
is, That it came originally from Troy, and this was the first Time it was seen
in public since it was brought into Italy; for no sooner was it arrived, but
the Vestal Virgins conveyed it privately along the Sacred Way, and lodged it in
the Imperial Palace. A great many other beautiful and well built Parts of the
Town were laid in Ashes: Nor could the Fury of the merciless Element be
checked, till it was done by a Shower from Heaven. And now the whole Business
was imputed to a Superintending Providence, and the People were generally
persuaded that the Fire began and ended by Divine Appointment; and it was a
common Remark, That this Burning the Temple of Peace portended Wars to ensue.
Nor was the Observation vain, as appeared by what happened afterward, as shall
be related in order.

This Series of Disasters and Misfortunes coming one upon the Neck of another,
extremely abated the Affection of the People to Commodus, to whose Cruelty and
enormous Way of Living they imputed all the Miseries they had labored under;
for they knew of all his Irregularities, nor did he endeavor to conceal them;
but what he was censured for acting in Private, he boldly owned and avowed in
Public; and at last arrived to that Degree of Madness and Folly, that he grew
ashamed of his own Name, and in stead of Commodus the Son of Marcus, commanded
the People to call him Hercules the Son of Jupiter. He laid aside too the Garb
and Ensigns of Roman Majesty, wrapped himself in a Lions Skin, carried a Club in
his Hand, and, what was most ridiculous, put on withal Purple Robes flowr'd
with Gold, insomuch that he became the Subject of the Public Scorn and
Derision, having attempted to join in the same Habit the Softness of a Woman
and the Manly Roughness of a Hero.

In this Equipage he appeared every Day; and now with a peculiar Strain of
Vanity he changed the Names of the Months, calling them after his own
Sur-names, most of which referred to Hercules, as being a Hero of the most
celebrated Valor. He likewise commanded his Statues to be erected in all the
Parts of the City; particularly, one was set up over against the Senate; the
Posture was drawing a Bow; for he affected that even the Air of his Statues
should carry something of Terror and Menace in it. This Statue was taken down
after his Death, by Order of the Senate, and the Vacancy supplied by another of
Liberty.

And now Commodus could not master his Vanity any longer; so he caused
Proclamation to be made, that he would entertain the People with a Public
Show, wherein he would encounter the Wild Beasts in Person, and kill them with
his own Hands; adding Defiances and Challenges to the Roman Youth, and
declaring that he would fight with any that durst appear in Single Combat.

The Fame of this Entertainment drew a vast Resort of People out of Italy and
the adjacent Countries, all Men being eager to see what they had not so much*
as heard of before: For 'twas reported that Commodus levelled a Dart with that
Dexterity and Address, that he seldom failed of hitting his Mark. He had
Parthians with him on purpose to instruct him in the Mystery of Arching, and
Numidians to teach him how to throw the Javelin; and he had made such
prodigious Improvement, that he surpassed them both in their respective Arts.

And now the Day was come for the Grand Entertainment, the Theater was
extremely crowded, and a Terrass was built for Commodus round the Place where
the Beasts were to be shown, from whence, without any Hazard to his Person, he
might dart upon them, to the infinitely greater Proof of his Skill than his
Courage. As for Bucks and Does, and other Horned Beasts, except Bulls, he gave
them Chase himself, and with the fatal Shaft o'ertook and slew them in their
Flight; but Lions and Panthers, with the more generous sort of Salvages, he
shot from the Terrass; and so great a Master was he of this Diversion, that
every Dart gave Wounds, and every Wound was mortal; for as soon as the Beast
was roused, and had put himself in posture to insult him, he immediately struck
him in the Heart or Head, which were the only Parts he aimed at, so that the
Beast infallibly died. And now we had an Opportunity of seeing what before we
had only admired in Picture; for whatever Beast of portentous Size or Form, the
South or the North, India or Aethiopia, could furnish, was shown and slain in
Public by the Emperor upon this Occasion; all the Spectators being in perfect
Amazement and Admiration of his matchless Skill. Sometimes he would take a Dart
the Point whereof was fashioned in the Shape of a Half Moon; with this he would
strike a Moresco Estridge, a Creature that by its Swiftness of Foot, and Wings
that serve it in stead of Sails, runs at a most prodigious rate, and would take
off its Head with that force, that the Bird would continue its Career a
considerable time after. And when a Panther with incredible Swiftness had
seized a Man within the Lists, and was about to tear him in pieces, the Emperor
came in seasonably to his Rescue with an Arrow, that struck the Beast dead, and
fav'd the Man from the Jaws of Death. He also killed a hundred Lions with the
like Number of Arrows, their Dead Bodies fell in such regular Order, that any
Person might number them with ease; nor was any single Shaft found that had not
done its designed Execution.

These Things, though they were unbecoming the Majesty of an Emperor, yet because
they had in them some Shadow and Resemblance of Skill and Bravery, were not
unpleasing to the Populace: But when he came naked into the Theater, and took
upon him the Figure of a Common Gladiator, this was an ungrateful Spectacle:
For how must it wound the Eyes of every true Roman, to see so Illustrious and
Highborn a Prince, and Emperor of Rome, after so many Triumphs of his Father
and Ancestors, not making War upon the Barbarous Nations, nor doing any thing
worthy of that Empire of which he was the Head, but debasing his Imperial
Dignity, by taking upon him a Habit so notoriously scandalous and infamous?
Notwithstanding this, Commodus went on with his Fencing, and easily baffled all
those that entered the Lists with him: But he did not proceed beyond Wounds,
all the Combatants submitting to him, and confessing the Power of a Weapon in
the Hand of a Prince, how mean soever his Skill was in using it. And now he was
so entirely given over to this extravagant Humor, or rather Madness, that he
designed to abandon his Imperial Palace, and to take his Apartment in the
Fencing-School. He thought fit likewise to lay down his Name of Hercules, and
to take up that of a certain Gladiator of famous Memory. He also took away the
Head of the Colossus, or the Statue of the Sun, for which the Romans have a
peculiar Veneration, and set up his own in the Room; and, rejecting the
ordinary Style of Roman Emperors, inscribed upon the Basis, The Vanquisher of a
thousand Gladiators; preferring this vain Character to all the Titles derived
to him from his Ancestors.

But now it was time a Stop should be put to the Follies and Madness of the
Emperor, and that Rome should be freed from his Tyranny. It was the New Year,
the First Day of the Year, at which Time the Romans celebrate a Festival to
Janus, the ancientest of the Italian Gods. This Janus is reported to have
entertained Saturn when he was forced out of his Kingdom, and lived here
incognito, for fear of the prevailing Power of his Son Jupiter: And from hence
the Country was called Latium, from a Word of Greek extraction, since become
Latin; and for this Reason the Romans to this Day celebrate the Saturnalia to
the Absconding God, immediately after the Feast of the New Year, according to
the ancient Usage of Italy. The Image of this Janus has two Faces, because in
him the Old Year ends, and the New one begins. During this Festival, Friends
visit and entertain one another in an extraordinary manner; Presents are sent,
and Invitations pass amongst Neighbors; and, in short, an Humor of
Generosity, Hospitality, and Freedom reigns all over the City: And at this Time
it is the Principal Magistrates appear the first time in their Formalities. In
the height of this Solemnity Commodus designed to begin his Procession, not
from the Imperial Palace, (as the Custom was) but from the Fencing-School; not
in the Imperial Robes, but in the Habit and Equipage of a Fencing-Master, with
a Train of Gladiators at his Heels; and thus attended, he designed to make his
Appearance in Public.

This Resolution he communicated to Marcia, one of his Concubines of the first
Rate; for he loved her far above all the rest, and paid her all the Regard and
Deference that is due to a Wife, allowing her all the Honors of an Empress,
except that of having Fire carried before her in State. She presently perceived
how ridiculous and extravagant his Intention was in all the Circumstances of
it, and essayed all the Ways imaginable to divert him from it, flung her self
at his Feet, and besought him with Tears, that he would not entrust his Person
with such a Set of desperate Bravo's, nor do a Thing so highly inconsistent
with the Dignity of the Roman Empire. But when she found he was inflexible, and
all her Prayers signified nothing, she departed with Tears in her Eyes.

After that he called to him Laetus the Captain of his Life Guard, and Electus
the Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and commanded them to furnish up an Apartment
for him in the Fencing-School, imparting to them his Intention of Marching from
thence the next Morning, to perform the Sacrifices customary upon this
Occasion, and of appearing before the People in Armor; at which they were
infinitely surpised, and besought, and used their utmost Endeavors to
dissuade him from doing a Thing so unworthy of his high Station and Character.

But this only served to incense him: Whereupon in great Rage he commanded them
to withdraw, and retired into his Bedchamber, as if he had designed to repose
himself, (as his Custom was about Noon) and there took his Table Book, and
wrote down the Names of those he had doomed and marked out that Night for
Destruction: The first of which was Marcia, and after her Laetus and Electus,
with a great many other eminent Personages of the Senate: For he designed to
remove all his Father's Friends, and especially those that were venerable for
their Age and Gravity, lest their Presence might give him some Check in those
infamous Liberties which he resolved to abandon himself to. Their Riches and
Effects he intended to distribute amongst the Soldiers and Gladiators, that the
first might protect, whilst the latter did divert him. This Table Book, after
he had wrote what he intended, he laid down upon his Pallet, not imagining that
any Person would enter his Chamber. Now there was about the Court one of that
sort of Boys that go naked, and are tricked up with Gold and Jewels, being kept
by Persons of Quality in Rome for their Diversion. This Boy was a Favorite of
the Emperor's, who doted upon him to that degree, that he frequently took him
to Bed with him, and called him Philo-Commodus, the very Name expressing his
peculiar Fondness of him. This Boy, when Commodus was Bathing, or engaged at
his Revels, being at Play, ran into the Emperor's Chamber, as he used to do,
and taking up the Tablebook, began to play with that, and running out of the
Chamber again with the Book in his Hand, accidentally encountered Marcia, who
had also a Kindness for the Lad; and now she took him in her Arms, and kissed
and caressed him, but took the Book away from him, for fear he should lose or
deface something that contained Matters of moment. She knew the Hand very well,
and her Curiosity tempted her to look what was wrote in it: But when she found
how fatal it was to her self, that she was to be the first Victime, and that
Laetus and Electus were to follow, and that there was a great Massacre to be of
other Men, she broke out into this Expostulation: Ah Commodus! are these then
the Returns you make me for my Kindness and Passion! Have I deserved this at
your Hands! Have I for this born your drunken Frollicks, and all the Affronts
and Indignities you have been pleased to put upon me for these many Years? And
must all this be tamely suffered? No, his Designs shall turn upon himself, and
he shall find how unequal a Match a drunken. Sot is for a sober designing
Woman. After this Menace, she sent for Electus, with whom she had the
Opportunity of frequent Conversations, as being Gentleman of the Bedchamber,
and was indeed suspected of Familiarities with him which were not very
Honorable. When he was come, she gave him the Book, and bid him look after
what manner they were like to celebrate this Festival. Electus, after he had
read it, was perfectly astonished: (He was by Nation an Egyptian, naturally
bold, and of a fiery Disposition.) He sent the Book sealed up immediately to
Laetus, by the Hands of a Servant in whom he could repose a more than ordinary
Confidence. The Adventure gave the same Disturbance to Laetus, it had done to
the rest; whereupon he came over to Marcia, under pretense of adjusting by her
Advice the Furniture of the Emperor's Apartment in the Fencing School. Under
this Color they held their Consult, wherein it was resolved, That this was no
Time for Delays; that they must instantly attempt something, or perish in the
Storm that threatened them.

After Debate about the Ways and Means, they resolved to poison Commodus. This
Marcia undertook to do with a great deal of Ease, because all his Liquors were
mixed and given to him by her Hand; for he drank any Thing with a peculiar
Relish that was prepared by that dear Creature. Pursuant to the Resolutions
taken, when he returned from the Bath, Marcia offered him Poison mixed with
Wine of a most excellent Flavor, which he drank without suspecting any thing;
for he had made himself extreme thirsty by the Diversions of Bathing and
Hunting. After the fatal Draught, he was seized with a sudden Drowsiness, which
threw him into a Slumber, and from thence into a Sleep. This People attributed
only to the Fatigue of the Day. Hereupon Marcia and Electus commanded all the
Company to repair to their respective Lodgings, for fear of disturbing him. And
less notice was taken of this Business, because he used to have these Sleeping
Fits, which at other Times were the Effect of some inordinate Debauch; for he
divided his Time so between Bathing and Banqueting, that he had set none apart
for his Rest, but was still running on in a Circle of Pleasures, to which he
was become so absolute a Slave, that he often pursued them even against his
Inclination. But after a short Repose, when the Poison began to work upon his
Stomach, he was suddenly seized with a Dizziness, and after that, vomited most
excessively. What the Reason was, is uncertain; whether he had gorged himself
with Meat beforehand, or the Wine; which he had drunk plentifully, combated
with, and expelled the Malignity of the Poison; or whether he had taken
something, as Princes usually do, by way of Antidote against it.

However it was, when they saw him disgorge at this rate, fearing lest he
should cast up all the Poison, and recover, and consequently put them all to
Death, they persuaded Narcissus, a young Desperado, to strangle him in his
Chamber; which h^ did, whilst he lay in that Condition, languishing under the
Malady which his late Debauch, and the Poison he had taken, had cast him into.
Thus died Commodus, after he had reigned Three Years from his Father's Death.
He was the Noblest Prince, and goodliest Person of his Age; and if we may admit
Valor to consist in Skill in Shooting, or Levelling at a Mark, no Man was more
eminently possessed of that Virtue; but the whole Tenor of his Life was made up
of base Actions, and dishonorable Practices, as is before related.

AN EPITOME OF THE Second Book.
COmmodus being slain, it is given out that he died of an Apoplexy, and
Pertinax is elected Emperor, as being the most worthy of that Honor. He
declines it, but is prevailed upon at last by the Instances of the People, and
accepts it. The Soldiery, Senate, and People of Rome proclaim him Emperor. He
makes a Speech, sacrifices, and then goes to his Palace. In his Government he
has a strict Regard to Equity and Justice for which Reason he is extremely
beloved by the People, both in Rome and the Provinces, and no less formidable
to his Enemies: But to the Soldiers he is insupportable, because they are
restrained from Rapine and Injury. So they form a Conspiracy against him, and
kill him, and then shut themselves up in the Camp, and make Proclamation that
the Empire is to be sold by Auction. Julian was the Purchaser, and administered
it as shamefully as he got it. Whereupon Niger, Prefect of Syria, is chosen,
and holds his Court in Antioch: But being not so active as his Affairs
required, Severus seizes the Empire, under color of Revenging Pertinax's
Death, and is proclaimed Emperor in Pannonia, from whence he marches directly
to Rome, where, upon his Arrival, the Senate confirm his Election, and order
Julian to be put to Death, who is executed accordingly by a Tribune appointed
for that purpose. Severus cashiers all the Soldiers concerned in the
Assassination of Pertinax: And having made Albinus, Prefect of Britain, his
Colleague in the Empire, advances against Niger with a mighty Army.

The Second Book.
COmmodus being slain, as we have related in the former Book, the Conspirators
had a mind to keep this Matter from taking Air; and for a Blind to the Guards
that were then upon Duty about the Court* they wrapped up his Body in a course
Blanket, and gave it to two Servants of known Fidelity, to carry it out of the
Palace, as if it had been some unnecessary Furniture, that only cumber'd the
Chamber. They did so, and passed the Guards without Difficulty, some of which
were drunk, others so sleepy they were scarce able to hold their Halberts, and
the rest were not at all inquisitive about a Matter which they thought did not
concern them. So the Emperor's Body was conveyed away privately, and carried
that Night by Coach to Aristeum.

And now Laetus, Electus, and Marcia were in deep Consult about what was to be
done in this critical Conjuncture. At last they fell upon this Resolution, That
it should be given out, that he died suddenly of an Apoplexy; for they thought
this Report would easily gain Credit, because of the Notoriety of his luxurious
and irregular Way of Living. The next Point that came under Debate, was about a
Successor; and they resolved to choose some grave old Man, that had a competent
Degree of Prudence and Experience to recommend him, under whose Government not
only they might live securely, but all Men might enjoy Repose and Quiet, which
they had been so long deprived of by a Tyrannical Administration; and after
long Deliberation about a Person, none was found so fit a Man, or so worthy of
the Empire, as Pertinax.

This Pertinax was by Nation an Italian, much renowned for his successful
Achievements in Time of War* and his prudent Ministry in Time of Peace. He had
signalized himself in his Expeditions against the Germans; and the Eastern
Nations, over whom he had obtained great Victories; and he was the only Person
surviving of those grave and wise Men whom Marcus honored with his Friendship
and Confidence. The Reason why he was spared, is uncertain: Whether Commodus
revered him for the Dignity and Gravity of his Deportment, or he had no Regards
of Interest to move him to cut him off: For this also is part of his
Panegyric, that though he had run through the greatest Charges and Employments
of any, yet he had made the smallest Improvement of his own Fortune.

To him Laetus and Electus, with some others of the Conspirators, came at
Midnight, when all Men were asleep; and finding his Gates locked, awakened the
Porter, who, as soon as he descried the Soldiers, and Laetus, Captain of the
Guard, among them, in great consternation he runs back to acquaint his Master.
Pertinax commanded him to conduct them to him, without any greater Emotion than
the saying, That now what he had so long expected, was come to pass. And he
maintained all the Time such a Sedateness and Constancy of Mind, that he did
not so much as move himself from the Bed, or alter the Air of his Face. And
when Laetus and Electus made their Approach, though he concluded they came to
kill him, yet he never changed Color, but spoke to them with a becoming
Boldness and Gravity of Countenance. I Have expected, says he, a long time that
this Period should be put to my Days, being the only Person remaining of the
Friends of the deceased Emperor; and I must confess, I have wondered why
Commodus has suspended the Blow so long. And as for you, Gentlemen, what do you
stay of? Why don't you execute your Warrant, and dispatch me out of this
wretched State of Anxiety and Misery? Laetus replied, Pray, Sir, forbear
speaking Things so unworthy your Character, and the former Course of your Life.
We come not hither to be your Executioners, but to complete the Preservation
and Deliverance of us, your self, and the Roman People, from Tyranny and
Slavery. The Tyrant is slain, and has received the Chastisement due to his
Extravagance and Folly. We have prevented him, and he has suffered that from
our Hands, which he designed we should undergo by his. And now we come to offer
the Empire to you, the Leading Man in the Senate, as well in regard of your
Authority and Age, as of the constant Moderation and Sobriety of your Manners.
We know also, that none maintains so great a Share as you in the Vogue and
Affections of the People, and for that Reason assure our selves, that by this
Action of ours we shall not only provide for our own Safety, but merit Esteem
and Applause from every true Roman.

Pertinax answered, Pray, Gentlemen, don't banter an old Man at this rate: I am
not sunk into such Meanness and Abjectness of Spirit, as that you should thus
abuse me before you kill me. Nay then, said Electus, if you will not take our
Word, pray read this Book, (you know and have been accustomed to the Emperor's
Hand) and you will perceive how great a Danger we have escaped, and that what we
say now, is not to ensnare, but to inform you of the true State of Things. And
now Pertinax began to overcome his Incredulity, and to believe what they said;
and understanding the whole Matter, told them, he was entirely at their
Disposal, and would pursue such Measures as they should direct. And they
thought it the most advisable in the first place to go to the Army, and sound
the Inclinations of the Soldiers; though Laetus assured them, he could influence
them to do what he pleased, in regard he was their Commander, and upon that
Score might pretend to a more than ordinary Authority over them. So they all
went immediately to the Army.

And now the Night was far spent, and the Day for the Celebration of the
Festival approached: But all Things were adjusted before Morning, and certain
Men were ordered to spread abroad the Report, that Commodus was dead, and that
Pertinax was to succeed him, and was gone to the Army, in order to his Election.

After this News was publicly known, the People were visibly transported into
strange Emotions and Ecstasies. A great many ran about the Streets, and handed
to their Friends the welcome Tidings, especially to those of the most
considerable Fortune or Quality; for they had the greatest Reason to rejoice
upon this Occasion, as being delivered from the most imminent Danger. Then they
ran to the Temples and Altars, to render Thanks to the Immortal Gods for this
signal Deliverance; some crying aloud, The Gladiator, others, The Tyrant is
dead. And some there were that broke out into far more bitter Reproaches; all
which, during the late Tyranny, were stifled, none daring even to whisper those
Things, which now they proclaimed with great freedom and liberty. After this,
great Numbers of the People went in a tumultuary manner to the Army, for fear
the Soldiers should oppose the Promotion of Pertinax; for he was a Man famous
for Temper and Moderation, and therefore they fansied might not be very
agreeable to the Soldiers, who had minister'd to the Lusts of Tyrants, and
under their Shelter and Countenance had committed the greatest Violences and
Rapines. The purpose therefore of their coming, was to force them to a
Compliance, in case they should endeavor any Opposition. After they were
assembled in the Camp, Laetus and Electus introduced Pertinax, and presented
him to them; and having called the Soldiers together, Laetus made this Harangue.

LAETUS his SPEECH.
I Am to acquaint you, Gentlemen, That Commodus your Emperor is dead of an
Apoplexy, occasioned by his own Intemperance; for he despised the wholesome and
sober Advices which we gave him, and living on at the Rate which you very well
know, was at last perfectly choked up with excessive Eating. This is,
Gentlemen, the Account of his Death. Indeed every Man has not the same Fate;
the Causes of Death are various almost as the Casualties of Life; and though we
must all die, yet we tread different Paths to that Common End. In his Room, we
and the Roman People propose to you a Man that has the Recommendations of Age,
Sobriety, great Military Experience. As to the last of these, I dare appeal to
the Testimony of all those that have been any considerable Time in the Army,
and assure my self, they cannot but speak honorably of his Conduct in all his
Expeditions. Nor have the rest of you less admired his Prudence and Moderation
in the whole Course of his Ministry at home, though he governed the Affairs of
the City, in the Capacity of Prefect, diverse Years; and now, by the Bounty of
Heaven, he is offered not to be only a Prince, but a Common Father to you all.
Besides, this Election will afford Matter of great Joy and Contentment, not
only to you that are here assembled, but to our Army also that lies encamped
upon the Ister, bravely guarding the Frontiers of our Empire, which cannot upon
this Occasion but make a comfortable Reflection upon those many great and
glorious Exploits of his to which themselves have been Witnesses. We shall need
no longer dishonourably to purchase a precarious Peace with the Barbarous
Nations; the Memory of his victorious Expeditions against them, will awe them
into Subjection; and the Experience of his Bravery in Times past, will restrain
them from provoking it for the future.

After Laetus had spoke, the People impatient of Delay, whilst the Soldiers
were debating and demurring upon the Proposal, without waiting the Result,
proclaimed him Emperor, and Father of his Country, with loud Acclamations of
Joy. The Soldiers did the same, but not with the same Cheerfulness and
Affection, but rather as if they had been constrained to it by an over-powering
Multitude (surrounding them on every Side) and had complied with a Thing which
was impossible to oppose; for, in regard it was a Festival, they were without
their Arms. However, they took the Oaths of Allegiance to him, and sacrificed
to the Gods; after which, the whole Army and People, carrying Branches of
Laurel, accompanied him to the Imperial Palace with great Solemnity.

And here his Cares and Fears gave him great Uneasiness; for though he had always
discovered great Constancy and Presence of Mind in all Emergencies, yet now he
was extremely shocked upon duly weighing the present Condition of Affairs: Not
on the Account of any Personal Dangers which he might apprehend to himself; for
he had contemned far greater at other times, than he had now any Reason to
fear. But he considered the sudden Change of Tyrannical Government; that his
Promotion might occasion great Resentments in some of the Nobility, who would
not brook, that a Man so meanly born, should succeed a Prince so nobly
descended as Commodus: For though he was much celebrated for his Moderation and
Civil Prudence, and had gained also great Renown by his Military Achievements,
yet a great many excelled him in the Nobility of their Lineage. Therefore in
the Morning he went to the Senate, but would not suffer Fire, nor any Ensign of
Imperial Dignity to be carried before him, till the Senate had declared
themselves in the Point of his Election.

After he had entered the Senate, by the unanimous Suffrage of the House he was
declared Emperor; but he declined the Honor, saying, it would draw too great a
Weight of Envy upon him; and earnestly entreated to be excused, alleging his
Inability for so great a Charge, upon the Account of his Age; and that there
were a great many of the Senators far more worthy of so great and honorable a
Trust; and taking out Glabrio, would have placed him on the Imperial Throne. He
was the most nobly descended of all the Senators, deducing his Pedigree from
Aeneas, the Son of Venus and Anchises, and had been twice Consul. But he
excused himself very handsomely, and told him, Since he was pleased to single
him out as the most worthy of the Empire, he did freely resign all his Title
and Interest to him, and with the concurring Voices of the whole Senate,
declared him Emperor. After which Pertinax, being unable to resist the violent
and pressing Instances of all Men, with a kind of Reluctance ascended the
Imperial Throne, and delivered himself in the following Words.

PERTINAX his SPEECH.
GEntlemen, this signal Honor which you do me, and that extraordinary Zeal and
Affection which you discover on this Occasion, by preferring me to so many
Noble Peers, does not only exclude all Suspicion of Flattery, but is a strong
Argument of your Good Will and sincere Intentions. Such Assurances of your
Favor would encourage another Man cheerfully to accept so great and gracious
an Offer, and make him conceive Hopes of an easy and a happy Reign, where he
should meet with such good Dispositions in the Subject. But these Things have a
contrary Effect upon me, and rather administer Matter of Wonder and Amazement,
and fill me with a Fear and Diffidence, when I consider the Difficulty of
making a Return suitable to so great a Merit. For in the Intercourse of Good
Offices, if the Requital be greater than the Benefit, it is not so much valued
for that, as for the Intention with which it is made. But in the Case of a
prior Obligation, if the Return be not proportionate to the Benefit received,
we presently fall under the Censure and Imputation of Ingratitude, and shall be
rather thought insensible of the Kindness, than unable to requite it. And now I
see what almost insuperable Difficulties I am to encounter, to make my future
Behavior worthy of the present Honor you have done me: For it is not Dignity
of Place, but of Manners, that gives a true Pre-eminence; and the more Men
detest the Vices of the past Age, the more they wish for a Reformation of this.
For Injuries make a lasting Impression; but the very Ideas of Benefits
received, are soon lost and defaced. Nor are Men so sensible of the Enjoyment
of Liberty, as of the Want of it: For where is the Obligation, say they, if we
have the free Use of what is our own? It Is only our Right. And few will be
found that will make any Acknowledgments upon that Score: But if their
Properties come to be invaded, and their Goods are taken away by Force, this
they can never forget. Another Thing is, few Private Persons have a due Regard
for the Public Good, or think their own Interest involved in that of the
Community: But if they be aggrieved in their own Particular, they presently
exclaim against the Government, and think they are hardly dealt with. On the
other hand, those that have been supported by the profuse Largesses of Tyrants,
if you consider the general want of Money, and thereupon retrench the Public
Expenses, will not commend your Prudence or Frugality in this Regulation; but will
presently accuse you of a sordid Meanness and Narrowness of Spirit; never
considering, that those extravagant Donatives cannot be furnished without
Extortion and Oppression of the Subject: Whereas he that proportions his
Rewards to the Merit of the Persons, is not only not injurious in this
Particular, but reads a Lecture of Frugality to the People. Think therefore,
Gentlemen, of these Things, and assist me in the Administration wherein your
selves are to have a Share; let us be as united in our Endeavors, as we are in
our Interests; and seeing you are not to live under Tyranny and Arbitrary
Power, but under the Freedom of an Oligarchy, you may not only hope for
Happiness your selves, but may also give Assurances of it to others.

This Declaration of Pertinax highly satisfied the Senate, after which he was
received with loud Acclamations of Joy, and the greatest Marks of Honor and
Respect; and having visited the Temples of Jupiter and the other Gods, and
sacrificed according to the Custom, he retired to the Imperial Palace. After
this Speech was made Public, and the People had read a Declaration of his that
was directed to them, they discovered great Signs of a general Contentment and
Satisfaction; for all Men were of Opinion that he would make a Prudent and a
Gentle Prince, and a Father rather than an Emperor: For he had already
commanded the Soldiers, under severe Penalties, not to offer any Rudeness to
the People, nor to affront any Person that passed by; and designed to reform
the whole Discipline, and restore all Things to their ancient Course and Order.

Whenever he appeared abroad, or sat in the Courts of Judicature, he still
discovered a Spirit of Mildness, Humanity, and Goodnature. And now the
Government began to be influenced by the same gentle Principles that were
observed by Marcus, whose Princely Virtues he emulated in all Things; which
gave him the general Esteem and Approbation of all the old Men that remembered
Marcus: Nor was he less dear to the rest, whom he easily won to him by that
happy Change which he had introduced in the Government, wherein every Subject
might enjoy Security and Repose, in stead of the Fears and Molestations they
were liable to under the late Tyranny. The Fame of these Things being carried
to distant Nations, excited the People as well as the Soldiery, and not only
our own, but those of our Allies, to decree him Divine Honors. And the
Barbarians, some of which were actually revolted, and others upon the point of
running into the same Disorders, were reduced to Terms of Obedience and
Submission, partly by the Fear of his Bravery, whereof they had had Experience
in the late Wars, and partly by the Fame of his Clemency, Honor, and Justice,
from which he was never known to have departed.

Ambassadors were also dispatched from all Parts to congratulate the Happiness
of the Romans in so incomparable an Emperor. But this gentle and well-ordered
Government, which gave such general Satisfaction to the People, as they
expressed both in Public and Private, bred a great deal of ill Blood among the
Soldiers that quartered in Rome, and guarded the Emperor's Person: For being
restrained from Rapine and Injury, and bound to their Good Behavior, and the
Rules of strict Discipline, they thought these Measures of gentle and regular
Government reflected a kind of Reproach and Disgrace upon them, and were a
manifest Encroachment upon their Privileges; and at last resolved, they were
insupportable, and not to be suffered. So at first they grew by degrees
insolent and mutinous, and would not render that Obedience to the Commands of
their Superiors which was expected from them; and before Two Months of his
Reign were completed, after the Dawn of a Prudent Government had displayed it
self in several discreet and wise Regulations which he made, and after the
Hopes and Expectations of all Men were raised to the utmost height, by one
Stroke of a cruel invidious Fortune, all was dashed and overthrown; and all
those admirable Designs which he had formed, which would have been of so
universal Advantage to the Public, were defeated before they were ripe for
Execution.

In the first place, he took care that all the Deserts and Waste Grounds in
Italy, and the Provinces, should be cultivated and improved: In order to this,
he gave all these Lands (without exception even of such as belonged to the
Crown) to the Occupiers, to every one so much as he should manure and
cultivate, vesting the Property of the Soil in him that was at the Charge of
the Improvement. And by way of Encouragement, he granted them an Immunity from
all Taxes for Ten Years, and freed them as long as they remained Proprietors
from all Molestations and Avocations whatsoever. Those Grounds that were
Crown Lands, he would not suffer to be called so, in regard they were not (as
he said) the Private Possessions of the Crown, but belonged to the Collective
Body of the Roman People. He remitted all Tolls and Imposts laid upon Banks of
Rivers, Harbors, and Public Ways, to raise Funds to support the Extravagances
of Tyrants, and restored them to their ancient Freedom; and had he lived
longer, would have done a great many other Things of the same Nature and
Quality.

He banished all Common Informers from Rome, commanding them to depart the City
under severe Penalties, that no Man might be in danger of false Accusations.
And now the Senators, and indeed all Orders and Degrees of Men, proposed to
themselves Great Happiness and Satisfaction under the Government of a Prince
that did not set himself proudly above his Subjects, and yet was so sollicitous
for their Welfare; for so exemplary was the Humility and Modesty of Pertinax,
even in his highest Exaltation, that he would never suffer his Son to approach
the Imperial Palace, but ordered him to remain at his Private House, from
whence he repaired, as he used to do, to the Schools and Places of Exercise, in
the Quality of a Private Person, conforming in all Points to the ordinary Rules
and Discipline, and was in all Respects and Circumstances as the Children of
Private Men, without the least Appearance of the State and Grandeur of a Prince.

Whilst all Men admired the wise and sober Conduct of Pertinax, the Praetorian
Soldiers were so much dissatisfied with the present Posture of Affairs, that
they began to wish for a Revolution, and that the same Tyranny might take
place, under which they had committed what Spoil and Violence they pleased,
without Control: And in the height of a Debauch they concerted to take
Pertinax out of the Way, as being a great Check and Curb to them, and to set up
one in his stead, that would restore them to, and maintain them in those
scandalous Privileges and Liberties which they usurped during the late Reign:
And accordingly, when all Things were in a profound Calm, they came down
suddenly to the Palace-Gates at High-Noon, breathing Fury and Revenge, in a
very tumultuous Manner, with their Spears mounted, and their Swords drawn, as
if they would have insulted the Imperial Palace. This sudden Uproar put those
that were of the Emperor's Household in great Consternation; but being few, and
without Arms, they durst not make Head against so numerous and well-appointed
Troops, but deserted every Man his Post, and made the best of their Way out of
the Palace, some one Way, and some another. Indeed those that had a more than
ordinary Affection for the Emperor, gave him notice of this Outrage of the
Soldiers, and advised him withal to consult his own Safety, by forsaking the
Palace, and demanding the Assistance of the People. He thought these Advices
pertinent enough in the present Exigent; however, he looked upon it as
dishonorable, and unworthy his former Life, and the Majesty of a Roman
Emperor, to fly or step behind the Screen at the aproach of Danger, and
immediately resolved to oppose himself to their Fury, hoping that if he went
out and spoke to them, he might allay their present Heats, and prevent any
further Consequence of so unnatural a Rage. Whereupon he left the Palace, and
boldly walked out, and demanded of them the Reason of this Concourse,
endeavoring to reclaim them to their Duty and Allegiance. And this he did with
all the Unconcern imaginable, composing his Countenance to a grave and
Majestic Air, without uttering any Thing that was mean, or in the Strain of a
timorous obnoxious Person, he spoke to them as follows.

PERTINAX his SPEECH.
GEntlemen, though you take away my Life, yet neither will you be any great
Gainers, nor shall I be any considerable Loser, having lived to this Age, and
arrived to these Honors: For there is a necessary Term and Period of Humane
Life. But for you, who are appointed to guard and protect your Prince against
the Attacks of others, to fall upon him your selves, to murder your own
Charge, and stain your Hands not only with the Blood of a Fellow-Citizen, but
your Leige-Lord, will not only be a Crime of a very heinous Nature for the
present, but may also prove very fatal to you in its Consequences. And as for
my part, I am not conscious that I have done you any Injury. If you lay to
Heart Commodus's Death, it is no strange Thing that a Man should die; and if
you suspect any Thing of Violence in his Death, I can plead Not Guilty to any
Arraignment for that Fact; and you your selves know, I was not so much as
suspected to have had any Hand in it, being as utterly ignorant of what was
done then, as you were. If you therefore think that there was Treason in that
Affair, you must transfer the Charge upon some other Person. However,
Gentlemen, though Commodus is dead, you may satisfy your selves, that you shall
want nothing that is reasonable or convenient, if you don't seek it by Violence
and Rapine.

This gentle Rebuke, together with his August Presence and Age, which exacted a
kind of Reverence from his Hearers, had its desired Effect upon some who began
to relent, and draw off in great Numbers, whilst others more remorseless
assaulted him in the middle of his Harangue, and killed him. After the
commission of this horrid Treason, fearing the Resentments of the People, which
they knew would be very high upon this Occasion, they resolved to withdraw
themselves from their Fury, and retired in great haste to the Camp, and kept
themselves within the Walls, disposing Soldiers upon the Ramparts, to repulse
the Mobb, if they should make any Attack upon the Wall. Thus died Pertinax,
after he had lived in great Reputation for his Integrity and Virtue, as is
before related.

After it was noised abroad that the Emperor was assassinated, all Places were
full of Sorrow and Confusion; the People in a strange Ferment ran about the
Streets, as if they had been seized by some sudden epidemical Madness, seeking
the Authors of this detestable Villainy, but in vain; for they could not find
them; and if they had, they were out of their Power. But the Senators were the
most sensibly affected; they saw how deep a Wound it had given to the Public,
and what a Loss they had sustained, not only of a gentle Prince, but of an
indulgent Father; and now they looked for a Re-establishment of Tyranny and
Arbitrary Power, which they knew would be grateful to the Soldiers.

But after two or three Days, the People took Counsel of their Fears, and were
disposed to be quiet. Those amongst them that were of eminent Quality, left the
City, and retreated to their Country-houses which were at the greatest distance
from it, to avoid all Inconveniences which their Presence might expose them to
in the next Reign. The Soldiers, after they found the Popular Rage abated, and
perceived that no Man would be so hardy as to revenge the Emperor's Death, kept
themselves within their Trenches, and appointed such as had the best Lungs to
make Proclamation upon the Walls, that the Empire was to be sold by Auction,
that he that offered the most should be the Purchaser, adding, that they would
invest him with the Imperial Dignity by Force of Arms, and conduct him in
Safety to the Palace. This Proclamation did not move any of the Senators that
were Men of Reputation and Authority, nor any of those few rich Men that had
survived the Tyranny of Commodus: none of these approached the Wall, but
scorned even the Empire of the World, where the Means to attain it were so
dishonorable.

The News of this Proclamation was brought to Julian, a Man of Consular
Dignity, and one that had the Reputation of great Possessions, when he was at
Supper, carowsing and regaling himself; for he was censured for being very
often guilty of these Excesses: Hereupon his Wife and Daughter, falling in with
a multitude of Parasites that were there, advised him with all speed to rise
from the Table, and inform himself of this Matter, persuading him all along as
he went, not to suffer the-Empire to lie exposed for want of a Purchaser, and
telling him, that he was able to give as good a Price as the best of them, if
any Person should dispute that Point with him. As soon as he came near the
Wall, he cried aloud, that he would give whatsoever they demanded, and withal
gave in a Particular of his Estate, and of the vast Treasures which he
possessed. Hither also repaired Sulpicianus, with the same Intention. He was
too a Consular Man, and had been Prefect of the City, and was Father-in-Law to
Pertinax; but they would not hearken to any Proposals of his, because of his
Alliance to Pertinax, which gave them a Jealousy that there was some Fraud or
Collusion at the Bottom, in order to revenge Pertinax's Death.

Hereupon they put down a Ladder, and took Julian up to the Top of the Wall,
but would not open the Gates till the Bargain was struck up, and the Sum
ascertained: After which having entered the Camp, he engaged his Faith and
Honor to them for the Restitution of the Memory, Honors, and Statues of
Commodus, which were taken down by Order of the Senate; as also for the
Restoring all those Privileges which they had enjoyed during his Reign. He gave
to every Soldier more than he did expect, or could have demanded; which he
promised to pay down in ready Cash, giving out that he had the Money in Bank.
These Things highly satisfied the Soldiers, and buoyed them up into mighty
Expectances; insomuch that they immediately proclaimed him Emperor, and
honored him with the Surname of Commodus; then flourishing their Ensigns, and
restoring the Images of Commodus, they prepared to conduct him to the Palace:
Whereupon he sacrificed according to the Custom, and marched out of the Camp
with a stronger Guard than ordinary; for having by Force, contrary to the
Inclinations of the People, by base Means, and shameful Condescentions,
obtained the Empire, he had too just Reason to fear the Insults of the Mobile.
Therefore the Soldiers put on their whole Armor, and formed themselves into a
Regular Body, that if Occasion should require, they might be in condition to
engage any that should oppose them. They received the Emperor into the Middle,
and bearing their Spears and Targets over their Heads, to shelter them from the
Stones which might be thrown upon them from the Houses, in this manner they
guarded him to the Palace, none appearing to make any Resistance. But the
People did not receive him with those Acclamations of Joy which are usual upon
the like Occasions; but standing at a distance, bestowed a great many Curses
and Execrations upon him, for shamefully trucking the Roman Empire for Gold
with those base Mercenaries. And from hence it is that we must date the total
Corruption of the Roman Soldiers, their sordid and insatiable Desires of Money,
with their Contempt of Sovereign Power; for no Body appearing to execute
Vengeance upon them for this barbarous Assassination of their Prince, or to
oppose this ignominious Auction of the Empire, from this Time they grew proud
and arrogant: Their Avarice with their Contempt of Princes, increased, even to
the offering Violence to their Persons.

Julian after he had obtained the Empire, fell into an eager Pursuit of sensual
unmanly Pleasures, became regardless of Public Concerns, and abandoned himself
to Luxury and Dissoluteness of Manners: He also disappointed the Soldiers,
being unable to perform his Promises; for he had not those vast Treasures which
he boasted himself to be Master of, and the Exchequer was exhausted by the late
Profusions of Commodus. The Soldiers were in great Wrath to be thus bubbl'd;
and the People understanding how they were affected, began also to slight and
despise him, insomuch that they would revile him as he passed along, and
upbraid him with his Debaucheries, and in the Public Cirque, where there is
the greatest Concourse of People, reproached him openly, and called upon Niger
to deliver the Roman Empire from so infamous a Governor, and to undertake the
Administration of it himself.

This Niger had been Consul heretofore, and was at this time Governor of Syria,
which is a Place of the greatest Trust and Honor in the Roman Empire; for the
Phoenicians and all the Country as far as Euphrates, is under his Government.
He was past the Meridian of his Age, and by his Conduct in several Actions and
Expeditions had gained the Reputation of Gentleness, and Dexterity in Affairs.
He was a great Imitator of Pertinax, whose Life he made the Standard of his
own: This made him a powerful Interest amongst the People, insomuch that in all
their Assemblies they repeated their Clamours and Demands of him to be their
Prince, loading Julian with Reproaches to his Face, and at the same time
extolling Niger, though he was absent, with the highest Demonstrations of
Good Will and Affection.

After Niger was advertised how violent the People were for him, which they had
declared by their constant Actings and Proceedings in their Assemblies, he
began to flatter himself that he had a very fair Prospect, and that it was in
his own Power to make the Issue answerable to it; especially when he considered
how Julian was slighted and disregarded by the Soldiers, whose Creature he was,
because he had not kept Touch in the Payment of the Money according to the
Contract; as also how much he was despised by the People, who esteemed him
unworthy of the Empire, which he had so dishonourably purchased. Upon these
Encouragements he began to entertain Hopes of advancing himself to the Empire.
And, in the first place, he sent for certain Tribunes, with other principal
Officers and Commanders of Note, with whom he discoursed this Matter, giving
them to understand in what Posture Affairs were at Rome, and afterward sent
them home one after another, with Design that these Rumors should by this
Means be dispersed far and near over all the Eastern Countries; for he thought
more Men would favor and adhere to him in this Enterprise, if they were
persuaded that he was not prompted by his Ambition to invade the Empire, but
was called by the Romans to their Aid and Assistance. Upon these Rumors the
People came in to him in great Numbers, importuning him with repeated
Solicitations to take the Sovereign Authority upon him: For the Syrians are a
capricious People, and naturally prone to Innovation and Change; and Niger was
a Man that was very Popular, in regard of that uniform Gentleness and Equity
with which he had governed them. He used also very often to exhibit Public
Shows for their Diversion, the Syrians being naturally very much delighted with
these kinds of Entertainments; and in Antioch, a great and flourishing City,
there are Games and Festivals celebrated almost every Day in the Year, either
in the City or the Suburbs. By this exhibiting Public Shows, by ruling them
with a gentle Hand, and allowing them Leisure and Liberty to pursue their
Recreations, he engaged the People entirely in his Interests, and was generally
beloved and respected by all Men. This Niger knew very well; and now he issued
out his Orders to the Soldiers to appear at a Day appointed, at which Time vast
Numbers of other People were assembled, to whom he spoke as follows, from a
Rostrum erected there for that purpose.

NIGER'S SPEECH.
I Suppose, Gentlemen, I need not inform you of the Gentleness of my Nature,
and of the Conduct and Caution which I have always used in undertaking Matters
of Importance. I should not have detained you with this Harangue, had I been
led by private Inclination, Ambition, or any vain imaginary Prospect: But now I
am called by the unanimous and incessant Clamours of the Roman People, to
assert the Public Honor, and not to suffer the Empire, which has been so
glorious from all Antiquity, to lie under such Infamy and Disgrace. Now,
Gentlemen, as it would be the highest Presumption and Rashness to attempt a
Thing of this Nature without an Occasion offered; so in my Case, to neglect the
Cries and Petitions of the People, would cast upon me the Imputation of
Cowardice and Treachery? And the true Motive of this Address is to know your
Sentiments, and concert with you what is proper to be done in this Conjuncture;
for it is your Counsels must be the Measure of my Proceedings in this Affair.
The Issue, if Fortunate, will have a good Influence upon our Common Interest,
and will redound to your Benefit, as well as mine. They are not slight Grounds
we go upon; we are invited by the Roman People, whom the Gods have empowered to
dispose and administer all Things below. The Succession remains unsettled, and
no Man is yet established in the Empire. There is no Hazard in this Enterprise,
as well by reason of the Zeal and Affection of our own Party, as that there are
none to oppose us: For all our Advices from Rome agree, that even those
Soldiers that advanced Julian to the Empire, are not firm to his Interests, in
regard he has not performed the Conditions of his Advancement. I desire you
therefore to declare your selves upon this Subject.

No sooner had he spoke these Words, but the whole Army and People that were
there assembled, in the height of their Zeal proclaimed him Emperor, and
immediately put Purple Robes upon him, with the other Ornaments of Majesty;
after which they conducted him to the Temples of Antioch, and from thence to
his House, carrying Fire before him all the way with great formality. His House
they did not look upon any longer as Private, but adorned it on the Outside
with all the Marks and Characters of Imperial Majesty.

Niger was much delighted with the Zeal and Affection which the People both at
Rome and Antioch testified for him, and began to think himself secure of the
Empire. After the Report thereof was spread abroad, all the Nations bordering
upon Europe came in, to tender him their Homage and Service; and Embassies were
sent from all Sides to Antioch, as to a Just and Lawful Emperor. The Nations
also that inhabit beyond Tygris and Euphrates dispatched their Envoys to him to
make the Congratulations usual upon the Occasion, and to promise him their
Succor and Assistance in case his Affairs should require it. He rewarded them
all very splendidly, and thanked them for the Zeal and Affection which they had
discovered for him, affirming, That as his Affairs then stood, he had no need
of their Succor, forasmuch as the Empire was assured to him; and added
withal, That he would take especial care that his Reign should not be defiled
with Blood.

This Security made him grow remiss and negligent, insomuch that he entertained
the People of Antioch with Shows and Public Games, and resigned himself wholly
to Ease and Pleasure, not marching directly to Rome, as it would have behooved
him in the first place to have done, nor certifying the Illyrian Army of what
had been transacted here; whereas it ought to have been his principal Effort to
gain so considerable a Party over to his Interest: But he supposed that they
would not dissent to what the Roman People and the Eastern Army had so
unanimously approved. Whilst he was lift up in this manner by groundless Hopes,
and false Estimates of Things, the Fame of what had happened reached Pannonia and
Illyria, and the Armies that lay encamped upon the Ister and the Rhine, to
restrain the Inroads of the Barbarians, and to cover the Frontiers of the Roman
Empire.

Severus was at this time General of the Pannonian Forces; for they were all
under one Commander. He was by Nation an African, a hot and violent Spirit,
that had been inured to Toils and Hardships, and was indefatigable in Labor,
quick too at inventing, and ready in executing what he had contrived. Upon
Intelligence that the Empire lay exposed to any Person that had Courage to
seize upon it, he contemned the Pretenders Julian and Niger, the one because he
had neither Power nor Strength to effect any thing; the other, because he did
not make use of what he had His Confidence was also heightened by Dreams,
Oracles, and Predictions, which are then the most believed when they are made
good by the Event. Most of these he has recorded in the History of his Life,
and preserved in Statuary Representations. The last, being that which made the
strongest Impressions upon him, and gave him the greatest Assurances, ought not
to be passed over in silence.

When the News came to Severus that Pertinax was elected Emperor, after he had
sacrificed, and taken the Oaths of Allegiance to him, he returned home, and
fell asleep, and was presented with this Visionary Scene; He saw a stately
Horse adorned with Imperial Accoutrements, bearing Pertinax on his Back through
the City, along the Sacred Way but when he came to the Entrance of the Forum,
where the Assemblies of the People were held whilst the Government continued
under the form of a Popular State, he began to flounce and caper till he had
thrown him to the Ground, and immediately making his Submission to Severus,
received him upon his Back, and carried him very quietly into the middle of the
Forum, where he stood aloft, and commanded the Eyes and Admiration of the
Multitude. This Vision is yet to be seen in the very same place, represented in
a large Statue of Brass.

Severus having his Hopes raised to this Pitch, and flattering himself into an
Opinion that the Gods had made choice of him to govern the Empire, resolved to
try the Inclinations of the Soldiers; and to this end called to him certain
Tribunes, and other Officers of principal Note, with these he entered into
Discourses concerning the present State of the Roman Empire, and represented to
them how the Sovereign Power was prostituted to all Persons that durst usurp
it, and that none appeared worthy or able to execute so high and important a
Trust: He would also take occasion to inveigh against the Praetorian Soldiers,
for the having violated their Military Oath, by spilling the Blood of their
Emperor; adding, That so heinous a Crime should be atoned for, and that
Pertinax's Death ought to be revenged: He knew very well they honored his
Memory, in regard of the many Victories they had obtained under his Command
against the Germans, in the Reign of Marcus; and when he was Governor of
Illyria, he had given many eminent Proofs of his Bravery and Conduct in several
Engagements, and had practiced an uniform Gentleness, Humanity, and Justice
toward his Subjects in the whole Tenor of his Public Actions in that Station;
for which Reasons they had a peculiar Veneration for his Memory, and resented
very highly that inhuman Butchery committed upon his Person. In short, he made
so good use of this Occasion, that he easily led and managed them as he
pleased, pretending still to move on a far different Spring from what he did;
that the Empire was what he neither thought of, ^or affected, and that the
utmost of his Ambition was to revenge the Death of so great a Prince. These
artificial Colors easily imposed on the People, for the Natives of this
Country as they are Tall of Stature, of a strong Make of Body, and fit for
Service and Action, so they are generally very Stupid, and slow of
Apprehension, which is the reason that they very rarely suspect any thing of
Collusion or Intrigue in any thing you either say or do. So when Severus
declared that his Intention was only to do Justice on the Murderers of
Pertinax, they all so unanimously espoused his Interest, that they instantly
proclaimed him Emperor, and put the Sovereign Power into his Hands.

Having thus discovered the Sentiments of the Pannonian Soldiers, he
immediately made his Court to the Neighboring Nations, and to the Praefects of
the Northern Provinces, whom he easily allured by fair Promises; for no^Man in
the World made professions of Kindness and Friendship with more Art and Address
than Severus: He was no^Man of nice Conscience, but would lie and falsify
without scruple to serve a Turn, and would even stretch an Oath if his Affairs
required it: His Words being always different, and often opposite to his
Intention. And now having secured to himself all Illyria, and the Praefects of
the neighboring Provinces, he raised vast numbers of Soldiers from all Parts,
and took upon himself the Name of Pertinax, which he thought would be
acceptable both to the Illyrians and the Romans, after which, having ordered
them to rendezvous in a certain place, he spoke to them as follows, from a
Throne there erected.

SEVERUS his SPEECH.
Gentlemen,
YOU have abundantly testified your Piety to the Gods, by whom you have sworn,
and your Reverence of Crowned Heads, by the Abhorrence you have expressed of this
barbarous and unnatural Treason committed by the Praetorian Soldiers, a Band of
Wretches corrupted by Peace, and unserviceable in War, and much fitter to adorn
a Triumph than to obtain a Victory; and so just are your Resentments on this
Occasion, that I cannot but comply with what you desire; nor do I doubt of
Success in an Enterprise which you all fall into with so much Zeal and
Cheerfulness, though before this time I never durst conceive a Hope of atchieving
so great a Work, There is none I believe amongst you, but will render a
Testimony to the Loyalty of my Principles; but at this time the Honor of the
Empire is concerned, which ought to be asserted from the Scandal and Infamy it
now lies under. Our Ancestors had always especial Care of the Administration,
that it might be free from all Abuses and Corruptions tending to its Dishonor,
and then we commanded Respect and Reverence from all the Nations around us,
even in the Reign of Commodus, though the Public might suffer through the
Inadvertencies of his Youth, yet the Memory of his Father, and his own high
Birth, gave a Coak and Varnish to those Errors, and upon Review of his Actions,
we shall find that they ought rather to move our Compassion than our Hatred;
for he is not to be esteemed the Author of what was done then, but his
Flatterers and Counselors that advised and assisted him in all his
unwarrantable Proceedings. And when Pertinax, whose Worth and Virtue you all
remember, was elected Emperor, they were still unquiet, grew insolent and
factious, nor would any thing satisfy them till they had removed that
excellent Prince by an inhumane Violence acted upon his Person. And now Julian,
that has purchased the Empire by an infamous Bargain and Sale, is hated (as you
hear) by the People, and not supported by the Soldiers, with whom he has
violated his Faith and Honor; and though they should adhere to him, yet neither
are they equal to us in Number, nor in the personal Bravery of their Men. You
are Veterane Soldiers, trained up in a Course of Military Actions; you have
repressed the Insults of Barbarous Enemies, are inured to the Hardships of War,
have born the Extremities of Heat and Cold, have marched over frozen Rivers,
drunk Puddle-Water, chased wild Beasts; and I must say this in your
Commendation, I don't believe that there are this Day in the World Soldiers
that are able to stand against you: For it is Labor is the Test of a good
Soldier, and not Pleasure, with which they are so softened and emasculated,
that even your Warlike Shouts will shock their Courages, and scare them into a
Submission. And as for the Syrian Faction, if any among you apprehend any thing
from that side, it is evident in how weak a Condition they are, and to what a low
Ebb their Hopes are sunk, because they keep themselves within their own
Country, and dare not so much as enter into Debate whether or no they shall
march to Rome, but content themselves to live at large during the Confusion and
License of an unsettled Government; and its well known, that it is the Talent of
the Syrians to rally with a bon grace, and that they are generally better
Drolls than Soldiers. Those that live in Antioch are they which appear the most
Zealous for Niger. The other Cities and Provinces do declare for him at
present, because no other Pretender appears that is worthy of the Empire, or is
able to Govern it with Prudence and Resolution: But if they be advertised that
the Illyrian Army have set up a Competitor, and shall hear my Name, which is
very well known amongst them since I governed in those Parts, believe me,
Gentlemen, they are too well acquainted with my Courage and Conduct to despise
either: Nor will they be willing to sustain the force of your Arms, or the
vigor of your Attacks, being so much inferior to you in Stature of Body, and
military Discipline. In fine, my Advice is to march directly to Rome, and
possess our selves of the City and Palace, and then we shall easily accomplish
what remains, having Human Force and Divine Prediction to support us in this
Affiance.

The Soldiers signified their Approbation of this Speech, in loud Acclamations
of Joy, calling Severus Sovereign and Pertinax, with all the Testimonies of an
extraordinary Forwardness and Zeal for him. Severus gave them not time for
their Affections to cool, but instantly commanded them to put themselves in
readiness, and to march directly to Rome, distributing Victuals to them, with
all other Provisions and Necessaries for a March. This Expedition he performed
with incredible Swiftness, not so much as halting at any Place, unless it was
to let the Soldiers take breath, that were fatigued with constant marching. He
himself shared the Toil of the Journey, lying always in an ordinary Tent, and
living upon the same course Fare that served the other Soldiers, without any
thing of the Luxury of Courts, or the Delicacy of Kings. This confirmed to him
the Benevolence of the Soldiers; for when they saw him undergo the same
Hardships, or rather greater than they underwent, they could not but reverence
him, and were upon the vie amongst themselves who should appear the most ready
to serve him.

After he had marched through Pannonia, and was come to the Mountains of Italy,
preventing all Intelligence of his Approach by the swiftness of his March, he
appeared in Italy before it was known that he was upon his Way. This sudden
descent of so puissant an Army, put the Cities of Italy into a terrible
Consternation; for the People of this Country having been long disused to the
Tumults and Alarms of War, had applied themselves to the Tillage of the Ground,
and other Arts of Peace. Indeed while the Roman Government remained under the
Form of a Democracy, and the Senate granted Commissions to their Generals, the
Italians were always in Arms, and having conquered the Greeks and Barbarians,
gained an entire Sovereignty of Land and Sea. Nor was there any Country or
Climate in Earth or Heaven, whither the Romans had not extended their
Conquests. But when Augustus became Emperor, he disarmed them, and put an End
to their Toils, and committed the Guard and Defense of the Empire to Mercenary
Forces, which he maintained in the nature of a Standing Army, to be a Wall and
Barrier to his Dominions, which were also naturally fortified by great Rivers,
deep Ditches, craggy Mountains, vast and unpassable Deserts.

For these Reasons the Approach of Severus with so formidable an Army, being a
thing so unusual, put the People into a terrible Confusion, for they were
unable to oppose or give him any Diversion, and therefore they went out to meet
him with Branches of Laurel, and received him with open Gates; he stayed no
longer with them than till he had sacrificed, and harangu'd the People, and
then proceeded on his March to Rome.

Julian was in great Consternation upon the Intelligence which he received of
the Progress of Severus, and of the Strength and Number of the Illyrian Army;
he knew that he was universally hated by the People, and could repose no great
Confidence in the Soldiers, with whom he had apparently broken his Promise:
however he amassed what Money he could, part whereof was his own, part he
borrowed of his Friends, besides what he had got by pillaging Temples, and
other Public Places; and distributed it among the Soldiers to retrieve his
Credit and Interest with them; but they, though they received very considerable
Sums, thought themselves under no Obligations to him, looking upon them not as
free Gifts, but as payments of just Debts.

Those that favored Julian, advised him to draw out his Army, and block up the
Streights of the Alps. These Alps are vastly high Mountains, the like to which
are none in these Parts, bounding Italy like a Wall, Nature having added to
those other Bounties which she has heaped upon this Country, that of an
impregnable Fortification, extending from the Northern to the Southern Seas;
but Julian durst not leave the City, but entreated the Soldiers to betake
themselves to their Arms and Military Exercises, whilst he provided Ammunition,
and put all things in readiness to give Severus Battle in the City. The
Elephants which were kept for State and Parade, he endeavored to manage, and
make fit for Service, supposing that the Illyrian Men and Horses would be
terrified by the monstrous Size, and uncouth Shape of these Beasts, the like to
which they had never seen; and all the City was busied in making Arms and
Engines of War.

While Julian's Soldiers were thus employed in making themselves ready for the
Battle, the News came that Severus was upon them; for he had detached a great
part of his Army, with orders to convey themselves into the City secretly in
small unobserved Parties, which they did at Night, entering by different Ways,
and concealing their Arms under the Habit of Country Peasants; and now the
Enemy was in the Heart of the City before Julian was aware, or knew any thing
of the Matter. Whereupon the People, fearing the Power of Severus, immediately
fell in with that Faction, and declared for him, vilifying and reproaching
Niger and Julian, the first for his Lazyness, and the latter for his Cowardice,
and extolling in the mean time Severus to the Skies, who was then advancing
toward the City.

Julian at this time being irresolute, and uncertain what Counsels to pursue,
called a Senate, and sent Letters to Severus, wherein he made Overtures of a
Treaty to him, and offered him a Partnership of the Empire. The Senate readily
concurred with him in this Proposal; but when they saw him reduced to this
height of Despair, made a general Defection to Severus; and within two or three
Days after, when the Report of his Arrival was confirmed, disowned his
Authority, and were convened by Order of the Consuls, to whom the
Administration of Affairs is committed while the Supreme Power is under
Contest. Being thus assembled, they entered into Debate about the Measures to
be taken in this Conjuncture. Julian still remaining in the Imperial Palace,
bewailing the present Catastrophe of his Fortune, and requesting that he might
renounce his Claim to the Empire, and render up his Power and Authority to
Severus.

But when the Senate understood that he was in this Consternation, and that his
Guards had all deserted him for fear of Severus, they determined to put him to
Death, and to declare Severus sole Emperor, and instantly ordered an Embassy to
Severus, composed of the Principal Magistrates, and such as were of the
greatest Consideration in the Senate, to make a Tender of the Imperial Honors
to him, and at the same time commissioned a certain Tribune to dispatch Julian,
(that miserable Wretch that by his Money had purchased his Ruin.) He found him
forsaken and abandoned by all Men, and executed his Warrant upon him; his
Deportment in this last Scene arguing the same Meanness of Spirit which he had
discovered in the whole Course of his former Life. After Severus was informed
of the Proceedings of the Senate, and of the Death of Julian, he began to have
greater Matters in view, and made use of this Stratagem to get all those into
his Power that were concerned in the Murder of Pertinax. He sent Letters to the
Tribunes, and other Principal Officers, importing, that they should persuade
the Praetorian Soldiers to a Submission to all his Commands; and promised them
great Rewards, provided they should effect what he had given them in Charge.
Afterward he put out an Edict, commanding the Soldiers to leave their Arms in
the Camp, and to march out attired (as they were wont to be when they attended
the Emperor at a Sacrifice or Festival) and to take the Oaths of Fidelity to
him, as if they were to have been continued in the Post they were then in. They
easily believed all this, and were prevailed upon by their Officers to leave
their Arms according to the Tenor of the Edict, and marched out with Branches
of Laurel, in the Habits which they appear in only at Public Solemnities.

After they were arrived at Severus's Camp, he commanded them to assemble in
the Field, as if he had designed only some Civilities to them upon the
Interview: They obeyed; and as soon as they saw him ascend the Bench of State,
they all broke out into Acclamations of Joy; and that very Moment the Signal
being given, were all made Prisoners. For Severus had ordered his Soldiers, as
soon as their Eyes were fixed upon him, and their Minds were in suspense and
amuzement, to surround them in Martial manner, but not to wound or strike any
of them, but only to keep them hemmed in, and mount their Spears and present
their Javelins to them, that being few, and without Arms, they might not
attempt any Opposition, for fear of being wounded. When they were thus
encompassed, in a loud Voice, and full of Wrath and Anger, he spoke to them as
follows.

SEVERUS his SPEECH.
GEntlemen, I suppose you find by Experience, that we are superior to you as
well in Conduct, as in the Strength and Number of our Forces. You are all
reduced here, and made our Prisoners, without striking a Blow. It Is in my Power
to do with you what I think fit, and, if I please, to sacrifice you to my
present Resentment. If I should endeavor to proportion a Reward to the
Greatness of your Villainy, 'twould be in vain; for your Crime exceeds all
Measures and Degrees of Punishment. You have basely murdered a good and
gracious Prince, whom you ought to have guarded and defended. And whereas our
Ancestors in the Choice of Emperors were chiefly moved by Highness of Birth,
and the excellent Qualities of the Pretenders, you have basely and infamously
bartered the Empire for Gold, as if it had been your own Property: And
moreover, when you had set up an Emperor, you durst not protect him, but by a
singular Instance of perfidious Cowardice betrayed and abandoned him. For these
Crimes you are worthy of a thousand Deaths, would I inflict a Punishment equal
to the Heinousness of your Guilt: This is what in Justice you ought to suffer.
I will pardon you so far, as not to imitate your own Cruelty; but it is neither
just nor fit that after you have thus manifestly broken your Oath, and defil^d
your Hands with the Blood of your Emperor and Fellow-Citizen; after you have
violated your Faith, and betrayed this your Trust, that you should yet guard
the Body of your Prince. Your Lives and Liberties you shall owe to my Clemency;
but I shall command these my Soldiers to strip you of all your Military
Equipage, and to send you away naked. And moreover, I command you all to depart
this City, and from henceforward do make it Capital for any of you to appear
within a hundred Miles of Rome.

As soon as these Orders were given, the Illyrians immediately flew upon them,
and plundered them of their Bagonets, which were curiously adorned with Gold
and Silver, and made only to be worn in Solemn Pomps and Processions; tore off
their Belts, Coats, etc. with all their other Military Equipage, and sent them
away naked. They were forced to submit, being caught and over-reached by this
Politic Fetch of Severus: For what could a few naked Men do against a numerous
and well appointed Army? They marched off bewailing their hard Fortune, but
were pleased however that they had escaped with their Lives, nothing regretting
them so much as that they should be thus shamefully decoyed and caught by
parting so easily with their Arms. Severus made use of another Stratagem; for
he was afraid that being thus stripped, they might grow desperate, and return
to their Camp, and so rally again. Therefore he detached some of the best of
his Troops, commanding them to march by secret Ways, and possess themselves of
their Camp, while it lay open and unguarded, and secure their Arms, that in
case they should attempt to re-enter, they might be able to repulse them. This
was the End of the Murderers of Pertinax.

Severus, with the Remainder of his Army ranged in Order of Battle, marched
directly to Rome. This struck Terror into the Roman People, when they
considered his bold and fortunate Exploits. The People and Senate went out to
meet him, with Branches of Laurel, being the first of Emperors or Men that had
accomplished so great a Work without shedding a Drop of Blood, or striking so
much as a Stroke. He had many excellent Qualities, which commanded Veneration
and Respect: Of this Number were his Sagacity, his indefatigable Industry, his
Assurance and Courage in embarking in great Adventures. After the People had
received him with Acclamations of Joy, and the Senate had complemented him at
the Gates of the City, he repaired to the Temple of Jupiter, where he
sacrificed, as he did also at the other Temples, in conformity to the Custom;
and from thence he retired to the Imperial Palace.

The next Day he appeared in the Senate, where he spoke to them with a great
deal of Mildness and Temper, giving them great Assurances of future Blessings.
He treated all Men in Public and Private with an obliging Respect, declaring,
that the Intent of his Coming was to revenge the Death of Pertinax, and
establish an Aristocracy; that no Man's Life should be taken away, nor any
Man's Goods confiscated, without Legal Trial; that he would not give Ear to
Informers; that he would make it his principal Study and Endeavor, that his
Subjects might be Happy under his Government; that he would govern by the same
Measures that Marcus had ruled by before him; that he would not only assume the
Name of Pertinax, but that he would also imitate his excellent Qualities. These
and the like Professions, won to him the Affections and Confidence of the
People: Indeed some of the Old Men that were acquainted with his Temper,
informed them secretly, that he was an old practiced Hypocrite, that he managed
all Things by Art and Intrigue, that he would lie, falsify, dissemble, do any
thing in the World to serve an Interest; all which they found to be true
afterward by Experience.

Severus made only a short Stay in Rome, during which he gave a large Dole to
the People, and Donatives to the Soldiers: Out of these he chose such as had
signalized their Bravery above the rest, to guard the Empire, in the Room of
those that had been cashiered; and then prepared for his Expedition into the
East; for Niger, thoughtless and undesigning, lay still in Antioch, dissolved
in Luxury and Pleasure; and Severus intended to surprise him, before he had
Intelligence of his Coming, or could put himself in Condition to oppose him. So
he issued out Orders to the Soldiers to be in a readiness to march upon the
shortest warning; he drew together his Army from all Parts, made new Levies in
Italy, and commanded that Part of the Illyrian Army which was left, to join him
in Thrace; he also equipped a Navy, and manned out all the Italian Ships that
were fit for Service; and these mighty Levies, as well for Sea as Land, were
completed in a short time: For he knew he should have Occasion for a very
formidable Force, to reduce all that Continent which lies opposite to Europe,
which universally adhered to Niger. These were the Preparations he made for the
War.

But being a Man of great Wisdom and Foresight, he was jealous of the British
Forces, which were very numerous, and consisted of gallant Men: They were under
the Command of Albinus, a Man nobly descended, and one that had lived from his
Youth in Pleasure and Plenty. Severus therefore resolved by a Strain of
Court-Skill to gain this Man over to him; for he feared lest having so many
Incentives to Ambition and Desire of Rule, (as his Wealth, his Birth, the
Strength of his Army, his Reputation with the Romans) he might be induced to
seize upon the Empire, and surprise Rome, which is not far from Britain, while
he was engaged in a War in the East. He thought the best Way to allure him, was
by a show of Honor and Deference; for he was at all times very weak and and
open to the Practices of designing Men, and now readily believed Severus's
Promises, which he enforced with Oaths, and all the Solemnity imaginable. He
therefore declared him his Colleague, anticipating his Ambition, by offering him
a Share in the Empire, and sent him Letters full of Professions of Friendship
and Amity, and entreated him to apply himself to the Administration of the
Empire; adding, that the Public Affairs required a Man that was nobly
descended, and in the Flower of his Age; that he was very old, and afflicted
with the Gout; that his Children were young, and unfit for Business, etc.
Albinus was easy of belief, and readily caught at the Proposal, being highly
satisfied to have attained the Ends of his Ambition without any Hazard or
Trouble in the attaining.

Severus acquainted the Senate with his Intention; and that he might satisfy
them and the World of his Sincerity, he commanded Moneys to be stamped with
Albinus's Image, and ordered his Statues to be erected, and all other Imperial
Honors to be paid to him: And after he had made all Things secure on that
Side, by his politic Management of Albinus, and had freed himself from the
Apprehensions of a Diversion from Britain, and the Illyrian Armies were united,
and he had ordered all Things at home as he thought most convenient in the
present Conjuncture, he advanced with his Army against Niger. Now, as for the
Halts he made in his March, his Speeches in the Towns which he passed through,
the Signs which appeared from Heaven, the Countries through which he marched,
his Engagements, the Number of the Slain on both Sides, these you will find
related with more accuracy by the Historians and Poets, who undertook only the
single Life of Severus. But I have taken upon me to report down to Posterity
all the remarkable Occurrences which have happened within my Memory and
Observation, under diverse Reigns, in the whole Course of 70 Years. The
principal therefore, and most memorable of Severus's Achievements, we shall
relate in the Prosecution of this History, not extolling any thing out of
favor or devotion to a Party, as the Writers of that Age have done; nor
omitting any thing that is worthy to be recorded.

AN EPITOME OF THE Third Book.
NIger being advertised that Severus had seized the Empire, and was advancing
against him, makes all the Preparations he can to oppose him. Severus enters
Asia, defeats Niger's Army at Cyzicum, and afterward in Bithynia, and takes
Cappadocia by Siege: Then forcing his Way through the Fortifications of the
Taurus, he marches through Cilicia, and in the Bay of Issicum engages Niger,
and after a sharp Dispute, routs him, and puts him to flight: He escapes to
Antioch, and is there killed. Afterward Animosities breaking out between
Severus and Albinus, occasion a War between them. Lions is the Scene of Action;
where after an obstinate Fight, Severus vanquishes his Enemies, and takes the
Town, and cutting off Albinus's Head, sends it to Rome. Then Severus makes War
again in Asia, invades Armenia and Arabia the Happy, and entering the Country of
the Atrenians, sits down before Atrae, and besieges it a long time, without
effect; but being forced in his Return upon the Coasts of Parthia, obtains a
Victory which he little thought of, and returns to Rome in Triumph. At Rome he
applies himself to Business both Public and Private; marries his Son Antoninus
to a Daughter of Plautian's, who enters into Conspiracy against him, and is
discovered by Saturninus a Tribune, and put to Death. His last Expedition is
into Britain, where the War lasting longer than he expected, he dies before
it is ended. The Empire descends upon Antoninus and Geta, who leave Britain, and
return with their Father's Ashes to Rome.

The Third Book.
THe Account of the violent Deaths of Pertinax and Julian, with Severus his
March to Rome, and his Expedition against Niger, is finished in the former
Book. But when Niger heard the unexpected News, that Severus had surpised
Rome, and was declared Emperor by the Senate, and that he was advancing against
him with the whole Illyrian Army, and with other mighty Forces, both by Sea and
Land, he was in a terrible Consternation, and immediately issued out Orders to
the Praefects of the Provinces, to take all possible Precautions for the
blocking up all the Ports and Approaches, and sent to the Kings of Parthia and
Armenia, and to the King of the Atrenians, to demand Succors. The Armenians
returned Answer, that they would not espouse any Party, but would content
themselves to defend their own Territories. The Parthian promised to give out
Commissions to his Peers to levy Forces, which is their Method, when the
Necessity of their Affairs oblige them to raise an Army; for they don't
maintain any Standing Force in constant Pay. The Atrenians sent some Companies
of Archers to their Assistance, by order of their King Barsemius. The rest of
his Army was composed of the Soldiers that were under his Command, and of the
Citizens of Antioch, great Numbers of which being pushed on by their natural
Levity, and Zeal for Niger, listed themselves in his Service, rather rashly,
than upon due Consideration of the present Juncture of Affairs.

Niger also commanded the Streights of the Taurus to be blocked up with a
strong Wall and Fortification, supposing that the impassable Cragginess of this
Mountain would be an impregnable Screen and Bulwark to the Eastern Countries.
This Taurus lies between Cilicia and Cappadocia, and divides the Northern from
the Eastern Nations. He detached also part of his Army to take in Byzantium,
the greatest and most flourishing City of Thrace, by reason of the Wealth as
well as Number of its Inhabitants: It is situated upon the narrowest Fret of
the Propontis, and has considerable Revenues from the Sea, arising out of
Imposts, and the Fishing Trade: Her Possessions also at Land are of large
extent, and fertile Soil; so, in short, both Elements pay her Tribute, and
conspire to make her rich. This City Niger had a great mind to be Master of, in
regard it was the strongest Town in those Parts, and he supposed would give him
an absolute Command of the Narrow Sea through which all Ships pass out of
Europe into Asia. This City is encompassed with a strong Wall, built of square
Milesian Stones, so closely cemented, that it might easily impose upon a Man
for a solid entire Rock: And if at this Day you survey ^e Ruins of this Wall,
you cannot ^ut admire the incomparable Skill of (...) that first built it, and
the puissant Force of those that afterward demolished it. These were the
Precautions which Niger took, very wisely and providently, as he thought.

In the mean time Severus with hasty Marches advanced with his Army, without
halting or resting; and hearing that the Enemies had possessed themselves of
Byzantium, and knowing that that City was strongly fortified, he marched to
Cyzicum; of which Aemilian being advertised, whom Niger had entrusted with the
highest Command, and in truth with the whole Conduct of the War, he marched
also to Cyzicum with his whole Army, composed of his own Levies, and the
Soldiers which Niger had sent him. When they were come together, after diverse
sharp Engagements, Severus obtained an entire Victory, Niger's Army being
routed and put to Flight. By this Success the Illyrians were flushed and took
Courage; but the Hopes of Niger's Army began sensibly to sink and abate.

But some say Niger was betrayed by Aemilian from the beginning, and assign two
Reasons for this his Treachery: The first, That Niger was malign'd by Aemilian
upon his Promotion to the Empire, in regard he had been his Successor in the
Government of Syria, who was now to be his Lord and Sovereign. Others say, he
was moved to it by the Prayers of his Children, beseeching him by Letters to
have regard to their Safety. These Children were arrested in Rome, and then
held in Custody by Severus, which was a very useful Project, and a piece of
Policy that had been practiced by Commodus, who used always to retain the
Children of such Men as were sent to govern in distant Provinces, as Hostages
for their Father's Loyalty. Severus knew this very well, and as soon as he was
proclaimed Emperor, while Julian was yet alive, he sent certain Persons to
steal his Children out of Rome, to prevent their falling into other Hands; and
as soon as he entered Rome, seized upon all the Children of such Men as had
Commands or were in Authority in the East, or in Asia, and at that time
detained them in Custody, hoping that the Ties of Nature would cancel those of
Loyalty, and that their Tenderness to their Issue would make them Traitors to
their Prince; or, in case they should persist in the Interests they had
espoused, he might have it in his Power to punish the Obstinacy of the Fathers,
by his Cruelty to their Children.

After the Defeat at Cyzicum, Niger's Soldiers fled in great haste, some to the
Mountains of Armenia, others through Asia and Galatia, to the Mountain Taurus,
to get within the Fortifications. Severus's Army marched through the Territory
of Cyzicum, into Bithynia, and the adjacent Countries.

After the Report of Severus's Victory was spread abroad, presently in these
Parts Feuds and intestine Divisions broke out in diverse Cities; not so much out
of Hatred or Affection to either of the Parties engaged in the War, as out of a
Spirit of Envy, Animosity, and Contention, then very powerful amongst them.
This was the old Distemper of the Greeks, who were always torn into jarring
Factions, and still levelling at that Head, that had arrived to any uncommon
Eminency amongst them; and by this Means they utterly unhinged and destroyed
the Grecian Government. And being thus inveterate and embittered one against
the other, they first lost their Liberty to the Macedonians, and afterward
became Vassals to the Romans. This Disease of Strife and Envy has already
seized some of our most flourishing Cities. After the Battle of Cyzicum, the
Nicomedians revolted to Severus, and sent an Embassy to him, to let him know,
that they were ready to receive his Soldiers, and afford him what Assistance
they could. The Niceans, out of an implacable. Enmity to the Nicomedians,
adhered stiffly to the contrary Side, and received Niger's Soldiers, as well
such as fled thither, as those that were sent for the Defense of Bithynia: And
soon after these Soldiers, sallying out of both these Cities, as if they had
issued out of Regular Camps, began a fierce Engagement, which was maintained on
both Sides with great Vigor and Obstinacy; but at last Severus had manifestly
the better, and such Soldiers of Niger as survived the Battle, fled with great
precipitation to the Streights of the Taurus, contenting themselves to be upon
the Defensive, and to guard the Fortification. And Niger leaving such a
Garrison as he thought sufficient for the defense of the Place, went to
Antioch, to raise Recruits of Men and Supplies of Money.

Severus's army marching through Bithynia and Galatia, came into Cappadocia,
and sitting down before the Fortification, began to assail it. Here he
struggled with great Difficulties, the Way being narrow and rugged; and
besides, he was incommoded in his Ascent by Stones which were thrown down upon
him, and by the gallant Resistance which the Defendents made from the Ramparts;
for upon that Advantage of Ground, a few Men might easily repulse the Attacks
of whole Battalions, the Way being narrow, and the one Side defended by a high
Mountain, and the other full of Water continually rolling from a vast
Precipice. Besides, Niger had blocked up all the Avenues, and obstructed the
Approaches of his Army on all Sides.

This was the Posture of Affairs in Cappadocia, when the Cities of Tire and
Laodicea, (the first in Phoenicia, the latter in Syria) fell desperately at
variance with the People of Antioch and the Berythians, being urged forward by
an inveterate Rancour and Envy; insomuch that the two former, upon a settled
Aversion to the latter, understanding that Niger was fled, defaced all the
Marks of Public Honor that had been done him, and declared for Severus. Niger
who was then in Antioch, being advertised of this Procedure, though at other
Times a Man of incomparable Temper and Mildness, was highly exasperated, and
sent immediately his Moorish Darters, with a Band of Archers, to the two Cities
beforementioned, with peremptory Orders to put all to the Sword, and to sack
and burn the Towns.

These Moors are naturally cruel, and inured by frequent Use to despise the
Encounters of Death and Danger; and now falling upon the Laodiceans before they
apprehended any such Matter, made an entire Destruction of the City and People;
and marching from thence to Tire, burnt and plundered the Town, and made a
great Slaughter of the Inhabitants.

While these Things were doing in Syria, and Niger was raising an Army, Severus
had invested and was making his Attacks upon the Fortification, his Soldiers
being very much disheartened, and despairing of Success, in regard the
Fortification was not only very Strong, and almost impregnable of it self, but
was also defended by a high Precipice. The Besieged, in the mean time, thinking
themselves secure and out of danger: When suddenly in the Night there fell a
prodigious Quantity of Rain and Snow, (for the Winters in Cappadocia are very
severe, especially upon the Taurus) the Consequence whereof was a sudden
Torrent of Water, which broke out with great Rage and Fury, which was increased
by the Fortifications, that checked its Course, and made it still more violent
and outrageous; till at last Nature grew too powerful for Art, and the Cement
being dissolved, the Walls were unable any longer to resist the Shocks of the
raging Element, which easily forced it self a Passage, making a wide Breach for
the Enemy to enter at; which was the more easily done, because the
Fortification was Irregular, and thrown together without Care or Contrivance.
As soon as the Besieged saw this, fearing lest they should be surrounded, and
so made Prisoners by the Enemy, as soon as the Waters were fordable, they all
abandoned the Place, and shifted for themselves. This extraordinary Piece of
Fortune put new Life into Severus's Soldiers, and buoyed them up into a
Confidence, that all they acted was under the immediate Direction and Conduct
of Heaven; and understanding that the Enemy had forsaken the Place and were
fled, they easily passed the Taurus, there being none to oppose them, and made
an Impression into Cilicia.

Niger, upon Advice of what had happened, levied a mighty Army, but without
Experience, and undisciplined, and with hasty Marches advanced at the Head of
this Multitude, which was very numerous, by reason the Youth of Antioch had
almost universally listed themselves in his Service, and were ready to hazard
all Things for him, and even equaled the Illyrians in Forwardness and
Disposition of Mind, but were by no Means comparable to them in Personal
Bravery and Military Skill. Both the Armies met in a Place called The Bay of
Issicum, which is a spacious Plain, bounded on all Sides with a Chain of Hills,
in the Form of a Theater. The Shore along the Sea is stretched a great way up
into the Continent, as if Nature in the first Contrivance had designed it for a
Scene of Action. Here, they say, the great decisive Battle was fought between
Alexander and Darius, wherein the latter was defeated and made Prisoner, and
the Men of the East routed by those of the North. Here remains yet the City of
Alexandria, situate upon the Eminence, and Alexander's Statue of Brass, as
Monuments of this memorable Victory. And as the Place of the Battle was the
same, so was the Event also. In the Evening the Armies were embattell'd one
against the other, and spent that whole Night amidst the Agonies and Disquiets
of a sollicitous Fear. In the Morning, as soon as the Sun rose, each General
exhorted and animated his Soldiers, representing to them, That this was to be
the decisive Battle, that upon the Issue hereof all their Hopes depended, that
the Fortune of this Day would determine the Fate of the Empire. But in short,
after they had fought a long time with great Courage and Resolution on both
Sides, and great Numbers were slain, insomuch that the Rivers were not slightly
tinctured, but seemed to carry a greater quantity of Blood than Water, Niger's
Soldiers turned their Backs, and fled in disorder. The Illyrians pursuing,
drove some of them into the Sea, others they chased to the Tops of the Hills,
where they killed them, together with great Numbers of Peasants that were drawn
together out of the adjacent Cities and Villages, and had posted themselves
there, as in a secure Place, from whence they might survey the Armies, and be
Spectators of the Engagement.

Niger being mounted upon a swift Horse, fled with a small Party to Antioch,
where he found a very melancholy Face of Affairs: That Remnant of the People
which was left, were about to abandon the Place; nothing was to be heard but an
universal Grief, Parents lamenting their Children, and Sisters their Brothers.
Besides, Niger himself was in the utmost Despair and Confusion; in which
Condition he fled from Antioch, and concealed himself in a Country House not
far from the City, where he was found by certain Horsemen that pursued him, and
beheaded.

This was the Fate of Niger, which he drew upon himself by his Slowness and
Inactivity, though otherwise his Deportment, both in his Public and Private
Capacities, was always spoken of with Honor.

Severus having thus dispatched Niger, cut off all his Friends and Adherents
without Mercy or Distinction, not regarding whether they were such by Choice or
Necessity. But those Soldiers that (he heard) had passed the Tygris, and were
going over to the Barbarians, he endeavored to bring back by Promises of
Pardon and Indemnity. However, great Numbers went over to them, which was the
true Reason why they became more able from henceforward to combat with the
Romans in a Set Battle; for formerly they never wore complete Armor, seldom
used Sword or Spear in the Fight, were lightly and loosly habited, and fought
with Bows and Arrows on Horseback, and most commonly in their Flight, shooting
back upon the Enemy that pursued them: But now they were instructed by these
Roman Refugees, amongst which were a great many Artizans, who chose to spend
the Remainder of their Days amongst them, not only to use Arms, but also to
make them.

Severus having settled his Affairs in the East as he thought most advisable in
the present Conjuncture, intended to have made a Descent upon Parthia, and the
Territories of the Atrenians, both which he charged with the Supporting Niger
against him: However he relinquished this Design for the present, and began in
the first place to consider of Ways and Means to settle and entail the Roman
Empire upon himself and his Family. Niger being removed, he thought Albinus was
useless to him, and embarrass'd him in the Prosecution of his Designs; and he
had heard that the Name of Caesar had inspired him with proud and haughty
Images, and that a great many of the most eminent Men in the Senate had
secretly by Letter solicited him to come to Rome, when Severus was absent and
employed abroad. And, in truth, the whole Nobility favored him more than they
did Severus, because he was sprung from Illustrious Ancestors, and had gained
the Reputation of Gentleness and Temper. Severus had Intelligence of these
things, but would not fall openly at variance with him, nor proclaim a War
against him, being destitute of a Pretext to justify such a Proceeding; but
resolved to attempt his Life by the secret Ways of Fraud and Stratagem; and
sent immediately certain Imperial Couriers, in whom he could repose the last
Confidence, with secret Orders as soon as they should be brought into his
Presence, to deliver the Letters to him in Public, and withal to entreat him
to withdraw with them, for that they had something to impart to him in private;
and as soon as they had drawn him from his Guards, they should fall upon him
suddenly, and dispatch him. He gave them also certain poisonous Drugs, and
commanded them to try if his Cooks or Butlers could be engaged in an Attempt to
poison him. Albinus his Friends had already entertained a Jealousy of Severus,
and advised him to beware of his Frauds and Stratagems. His unjustifiable
Deportment toward Niger's Captains, had cast a Blemish upon his Reputation;
for having persuaded them, by means of their Children, as is before related, to
betray their Master's Counsels, after he had abused their Service, and
compassed his Ends, he put them all to Death, both Fathers and Children; the
various Folds and Windings of his Temper displaying themselves still in his
Actions.

These Advices made Albinus increase the Number of his Guards; and from this
Time he would not suffer any Man that was sent to him from Severus, to approach
his Person, unless he first put off his Sword, and was searched, for fear he
should conceal some secret Weapon under his Clothes.

As soon as the Couriers arrived at Albinus's Court, they delivered their
Letters to him in Public, and, in pursuance of their Orders, desired him to
retire from the Company, because they had something to communicate to him in
private. He presently suspected their Intention, and commanded them all to be
apprehended, and upon Examination of the Matter, discovered the whole Scheme
and Course of the Design. The Couriers received condign Punishment. And now he
prepared against Severus, as against a declared Enemy. Severus upon Advice of
this Discovery, being naturally hot and violent, and apt to be transported with
Anger, could not disguise his Thirst of Revenge; but calling his Army together,
spoke to them to this purpose.

SEVERUS his SPEECH against ALBINUS.
Gentlemen,
LET no Man, when he reflects upon my former Actions, accuse me of Levity, or
of Ingratitude and Treachery, to one whom I have treated as a Friend. I have
punctually discharged all the Duties of Friendship on my part, even to the
inviting him to a Partnership of my Empire, after I had established it; which
few Men are willing to share even with their own Brothers. That Power which you
lodged solely in me, I was content to hold in common with him. And after all
these signal Obligations laid upon him, consider, Gentlemen, what ungrateful
Returns he makes. He levies an Armed Force against us, contemns the Fame of
your Bravery, neglects the Ties of Faith and Justice with respect to me, and
being pushed forward by wild Ambition, chooses rather to engross the whole
Power with Toil and Hazard, than to enjoy his Share in Safety and Quiet;
neither reverencing the Gods, by whom he has so often and solemnly sworn; nor
sparing you, after you have fought and fatigued your selves with so much
Courage and Reputation for our joint Interest: For he, as well as I, has a
Share in the Honor and Benefit accruing from your Victories, which had been
greater, had he not thus openly departed from the Principles of Faith and
Honor. Now, Gentlemen, as it is unjust to offer the first Injury, so it is
beneath a Man of Honor to sit tamely under an Injury received, without
requiring Satisfaction. The Reasons of our War upon Niger, were not so specious
as they were necessary in that critical Juncture: He did not invade a Power
whereof we were actually possessed; but the Empire lying between us, and our
Pretensions to it being the same, we both strove to gain it to our selves with
an equally warrantable Ambition. But Albinus has broke through Oaths and
A^liances; and though he has obtained by my free Gift, what other Persons only
bestow on the Issue of their own Bodies, yet, after all, he chooses Hostility
before Friendship, and the Name of an Enemy before that of an Acquaintance. How
ought I then to resent this Behavior? As I have heretofore studied to serve
and honor him, so now Ill chastise his Perfidy and Cowardice with the Sword.
His few undisciplined Men will not pretend to oppose the Force of your Arms:
For, can any Man imagine that an Army that has reduced all the Kingdoms of the
East, flushed by a Course of so many Victories, and reinforced by almost the
whole Power of the Roman Empire, will not easily vanquish a Band of Men
commanded by a dissolute and a cowardly General? For who is a Stranger to the
Fame of Albinus's Luxury, and his Way of Living, more resembling the
Brutishness of a Hog, than the Life of a Soldier? In conclusion, let us advance
against him with our wonted Alacrity and Courage, relying upon the Gods, whom
he has offended by his Perjuries, and remembering the Trophies which we have so
often raised, and he thinks fit to despise.

After he had spoke, his Soldiers unanimously declared Albinus an Enemy; and
applauding Severus, expressed the Zeal of their Minds in the Alacrity of their
Acclamations. This infused new Courage into Severus, and afforded him good
Ground of Confidence. He dealt a magnificent Donative amongst his Soldiers, and
then took his March against Albinus, having before detached a Party to reduce
Byzantium. This Place was held by Niger's Soldiers that fled thither, and was
afterward taken by Famine, and totally demolished, with all its Theaters,
Baths, and all the Beauties and Ornaments of the City. It was reduced into the
Form of a Village, and given to the Perinthians, as Antioch was to the
Laodiceans. He also sent Money to rebuild the Cities which Niger's Soldiers had
destroyed, while he marched on with his Army without Intermission, equally
regardless of the Celebration of Festivals, and the Toils of the March; of the
most parching Heats, and the most rigorous Cold. He would often march bare over
the highest Mountains, in the midst of Snow, in the coldest Season of the Year,
to excite his Soldiers to Alacrity and Patience by his own Personal Deportment,
that they might be moved to surmount all Difficulties, not so much by fear of
Authority, as by an Ambition to imitate the Behavior of their General. He sent
out also a strong Body to possess the Streights of the Alps, and secure that
important Inlet into Italy.

Albinus, who had resigned himself over to Pleasure and Repose, was exceedingly
alarmed when he heard that Severus was ready to invade him; and immediately
leaving Britain, embarked his Army for Gaul, where he encamped, and issued out
Orders to the Praefects of the neighboring Provinces to send in Contributions
of Money, and other Provisions for his Army. Some obeyed the Orders, and their
Compliance proved fatal to them afterward. Others refused, rather by good
Fortune, than upon any Politic Reasons, and hereby escaped the Storm that
ensued; the Issue of the War discovering whose Conduct was the more advisable
in this Affair.

After Severus had entered Gaul with his Army, several slight Skirmishes passed
between them; but the decisive Action was near Lions, a great and flourishing
City, where Albinus had shut up himself, and sent out his Army to give Severus
Battle. The Engagement lasted a long time, both Armies disputing the Point with
great Obstinacy, without any apparent Advantage to either. The British Soldiers
were no way inferior to the Illyrians in Force or Courage, or Thirst of Blood;
so both being gallant Armies, it was no easy Matter to put either of them to
the Rout. Though the Historians of that Age, that made a true Report of the
Matter of Fact, without Favor or Partiality, do affirm, that Albinus had much
the better of that Part of Severus's Army where he commanded in Person;
insomuch that he fairly fled, and falling from his Horse, was forced to throw
off his Imperial Cloak, and owe his Safety to a Disguise.

While the Britains were pursuing and triumphing over their Enemies, as if they
had gained a complete Victory, Laetus, Severus's General, appeared with a fresh
Army; for 'twas thought that he affected the Empire, and for that Reason
commanded his Soldiers to march slowly, that he might preserve them in their
full Strength and Vigor, till he saw what would be the Issue of the Battle,
not so much as offering to come up till he heard that Severus was slain: And it
appeared afterward, that this was no ill-founded Suspicion, inasmuch as
Severus, after he had put all Things in good Order* and established the Peace
and Quiet of his Empire, very nobly rewarded all his other Captains, but put
Laetus to death; having respect, as was thought, to the Treason intended this
Day.

But these Things happened long after. Laetus at this time appearing with so
considerable a Reinforcement, retrieved the declining Vigor of Severus's Men.
Severus re-mounted, and put on again his Imperial Cloak. Albinus's Soldiers
supposed they had entirely defeated the Enemy, and being in great disorder,
were unable to sustain the Attacks of these fresh Forces, which fell upon them
with incredible Fury, and after a short Resistance put them to a precipitate
Flight. Severus's Army pursued them, making a great Slaughter of them, even to
the Gates of the City. The Number of those that were killed and taken on both
Sides in this Engagement, is variously related by the Historians of those Times.

After the Victory, Severus's Soldiers burnt and plundered Lions, and having
taken Albinus, cut off his Head, and presented it to Severus.

thus he erected two mighty Trophies, the one in the East, the other in the
North; and I doubt whether any Thing we meet with in Story will bear a
Comparison with his Victories and Battles, whether you consider the Puissance
of his Armies, the Commotions of Nations, the Number of his Engagements, or the
Length and Swiftness of his Marches. The Battles between Caesar and Pompey,
between Augustus and Antony, or Pompey's Sons, were great and memorable
Actions; as also were the Achievements of Sylla and Marius in Civil and
Foreign Wars: But for one Man to cut a Passage to the Empire through three
Emperors actually invested in the Sovereign Dignity, to overcome the Praetorian
Soldiers by reach of Policy, to murder an Emperor in his own Palace, to
vanquish another in the East, where he had sat at the Helm diverse Years after
he was proclaimed in Rome; to make a third his Prisoner, that was in actual
Possession of the Empire, is still more wonderful and extraordinary; and you will
scarce find any Thing upon Record that is able to parallel the Greatness of the
Adventure, or the Course of prosperous Fortunes by which it was achieved.

Thus fell Albinus, after he had enjoyed his fatal Dignity for a short time;
and Severus soon poured out the Fury of his Revenge upon his Adherents in Rome,
and sent the Head of Albinus to be nailed publicly upon a Gibbet. He sent also
Letters giving an Account of his Victory, and adding by way of Postscript, That
he sent that Head to be fixed upon a Gibbet, and exposed to public View, that
it might be a Token of his displeasure, and signify how highly he was enraged
against them. And having put all Things in order in Britain, he constituted two
Governors to take care of that Island, and leaving the Affairs of Gaul in such
a Posture as he thought most convenient, he put to death all those that had
espoused Albinus's Interest, not regarding whether they had done it by Choice,
or were determined to it by Necessity; and confiscating their Estates, he took
his March for Rome, drawing with him his whole Army, that his Appearance might
be the more terrible.

He performed his March with his usual Speed, and made his Entry into Rome, his
Breast still glowing with a malignant Heat against the Remainder of Albinus's
Faction. The People bearing Branches of Laurel, received him with Acclamations
of Joy, and all the Marks of Honor and Respect. The Senate too complemented
him on this Occasion, though most of her Members expected nothing at his Hands
but Death and Destruction. They knew the implacable Cruelty of his Nature, and
upon what slight Occasions he would proceed to the most injurious Rigours, though
now he had plausible Reasons to justify his Indignation. Severus after he had
paid a Visit to Jupiter's Temples, and performed the Sacrifices customary on
the Occasion, retired to his Palace, threw a Largess amongst his Soldiers, and
gave a Dole to the People on the Account of his Victory. To the first of these
he granted diverse Privileges, out of his mere Grace and Bounty, being such as
they had never before enjoyed; he increased their Allowances of Corn,
authorized them to wear Rings of Gold, and permitted Women to live with them.
These Things were heretofore judged inconsistent with the Rules of Military
Discipline, and that unincumber'd Freedom and Readiness for Action which is
required in a Soldier. He was the first that altered their course and wholesome
Diet, the Consequence whereof was a sensible Decay of Force and Vigor, and
utterly destroying the ancient Discipline and Authority of Generals. He engaged
them in dissolute Courses, and taught them to love Money.

After he had made these Alterations, he came into the Senate, and ascending
the Imperial Throne, broke out into a vehement Impeachment of Albinus's
Friends, some of whose secret Letters he produced and laid before them, which
were those he found in Albinus's Cabinet; others he upbraided with the curious
Presents which they had made him; others again he taxed with the having
favored the Eastern Faction: So that upon the whole Matter, he put to death
all the most eminent Men in the Senate, with all such as were most considerable
for Wealth or Family in the Provinces. He pretended to act in this Affair by
the Dictates of Revenge, tho the truth is, he was urged on by a more prevailing
Passion, which he had for Money, to which none of the Emperors was ever so
totally enslaved: For as in Strength of Body, Vigor of Mind, and Conduct of
Military Affairs, he equaled the most renowned Generals; so he was excessively
covetous, insomuch that he sought Money by all, even the most unwarrantable
Means, as by Injury, Oppression, Murder, etc. He was rather feared than
beloved by his Subjects, though it was the principal Study and Endeavor of his
Life to be Popular: To this end he frequently exhibited Public Shows, which
were both various and magnificent: In these a hundred Wild Beasts were often
slain at a time, which he procured from all Parts of the World. He made
frequent and noble Largesses to the People, and entertained them with Public
Games, wherein Wrestlers, Stage Players, etc. were drawn from all Parts to
contend for the Prize: And I have seen in his Time Shows of all sorts
represented in all the Theaters in Rome, with sacred Rites and Ceremonies
solemnized after the manner of the Mysteries of Ceres. These were the Ludi
Seculares, which are never renewed till three Ages be complete from the last
Celebration; at which time Cryers go through Rome and Italy, to make
Proclamation, that the People may come and behold what they had never seen
before, nor could ever see again: Which is a plain Intimation, that the
Distance of Time between the former and the ensuing Celebration, exceeds the
utmost Limits of humane Age.

Having staid some time at Rome, he assumed his Sons into a Partnership of the
Empire; and being willing that some Foreign Achievements should contribute to
the Glory of his Arms, which had hitherto been employed in a Civil War, from
whence he declined an Occasion of Triumph, he led his Army into the East,
giving out, that the Cause of this Invasion was to punish Barsemius the King of
the Atrenians, for sending Succors to Niger, to be made use of against him:
And being on the Frontiers of Armenia, he was about to ravage that Country; but
was prevented by the King of the Place, who voluntarily sent Hostages, with
Money, and other rich Presents to him, and entreated him to establish a
Friendship and good Understanding between them. Severus finding all Things
succeed according to his Wishes in Armenia, bent his Course toward the Country
of the Atrenians; and here his Strength was increased by the Repair of Augarus
King of the Osrhoeni, who delivered up his Children by way of Hostage for their
Father's Fidelity, and joined him with a considerable Force of Archers.

Severus crossing Mesopotamia, and the Country of the Adiabeni, overran Arabia
called the Happy, by reason of the Fertility of the Soil, which produces in
great Abundance those sweet Herbs which we use in our Perfumes. He pillaged a
great many Cities and Villages, and wasting all the Country, marched forward
into the Territories of the Atrenians, and sat down before Atrae. This City is
founded upon the Eminence of a Rock, and fortified with a high and regular
Wall. The Garrison was numerous and brave, and consisted for the most part of
Archers. This City Severus invested with his whole Army, and assailed it with
his utmost Fury: Engines of War of all sorts were drawn to the Wall, and
nothing omitted that is of importance in the Storming of Towns. The Atrenians
made a brave Defense, and throwing Stones and shooting Arrows at the
Assailants, extremely incommoded Severus his Army. They filled also Earthen
Vessels with small winged Insects and other venomous Creatures, and threw them
upon the Enemy; these fastening upon their Eyes, or any other Part that was
naked, and secretly crawling up and down, extremely galled and wounded them.
They could not bear the Heat of the Climate, the Air was too soultry, and the
Sun burnt them excessively, and threw them into diverse and desperate Maladies,
insomuch that Severus lost more Men by these Casualties, than by the Sword of
his Enemies.

Severus seeing his Soldiers disheartened and tired with the Siege, which was
carried on with more Loss than Advantage to the Besiegers, took care to draw
off his Army before it was totally destroyed, without effecting what he
purposed. The Issue of this Attempt coming so far short of his Expectations,
gave him great Regrets. Not to vanquish, was in effect to be vanquished, to him
who had always been accustomed to Victory. But a prosperous Gale of Fortune,
which soon after happened, easily blew this Damp off his Spirits, and made this
Expedition so far from being fruitless, that it crowned it with greater
Successes than he at first expected; for putting to Sea with his whole Army,
composing a strong Naval Force, he was driven from the Roman, and forced in a
rough Sea upon the Coast of Parthia, but a few Days Journey from Ctesiphon,
where the King keeps his Court: At this time he lived in perfect Tranquillity,
undisturbed by War, or the fears of it, not imagining that Severus's Expedition
against the Atreni did any ways concern him, nor apprehending any Attempt to be
made upon him in this Juncture. But Severus being thus driven by Stress of
Weather upon his Coasts, landed his Men, and ravaged the Country, carrying off
all the Cattle he met with, that he might be secure of Provisions; and burning
the Villages that fell in his way, he advanced into the Country, till he
reached the City Ctesiphon, where the great Artabanus held his Residence, and
falling by surprise upon the Barbarous People, who were unprepared, killed all
the Men they found, and made the Women and Children Prisoners, the King only
escaping, with a few Horsemen. But the Romans possessed themselves of his
Treasure, and Royal Furniture and Ornaments, and returned with them to their
Ships. Thus Severus achieved his Parthian Victory, rather by good Fortune than
Conduct.

This Enterprise being thus fortunately accomplished, he immediately dispatched
an Express to Rome, giving an Account of his Success, and magnifying the
Exploit. He set up also public Pageants, wherein his Engagements and Victories
were represented. The Senate upon this Occasion decreed him all the Honors
imaginable, and gave him Surnames from the Nations which he had conquered.

Severus, after he had settled his Affairs in the East, hastened to Rome,
bringing along with him his Sons, who were now good big Youths; and having put
the Affairs of the Provinces in a right Course, and reviewed the Mysian and
Pannonian Forces, he entered Rome in Triumph, being received by the People with
loud Acclamations, and the highest Testimonies of Honor and Respect. After his
Entrance, and some Time spent in sacrificing and celebrating Festivals, and
exhibiting public Shows and Games, he distributed a magnificent Donative among
the People, and made certain Public Entertainments on the particular Account
of his Victories. After this he staid a great many Years at Rome, administering
Justice, and applying himself wholly to the Care of the Civil Government, and
the institution of his Children in Virtue and Good Manners: But they were
vigorous and young, and falling in with the Humor of the Town in their
delicate and refined Way of Living, and pursuing with too great eagerness the
Diversions of Balls, Plays, Chariot-driving, etc. were early debauched. The
Brothers began to jar and interfere, first out of a Childish Humor or
Ambition, at Quail-fights, Cock-fights, or the Wrestlings of Boys, where they
would frequently wrangle and fall out. If any thing was spoke or represented
upon the Stage, they always varied in Opinion, and never favored the same
Actor; but whatever pleased one, infallibly distasted the other. Their
Flatterers and Ministers made it their Business to cherish and foment these
Quarrels, saying any thing that would please the young Princes at that Age, and
give them Credit and Interest with them. Severus being informed of these
Things, employed his utmost Endeavors to accommodate all Differences between
them, and to make them Friends. His eldest Son (whose Name was Bassian,
afterward changed into Antonine, Marcus's Surname, upon his Alliance to the
Imperial Line) he married, upon a Notion that it would tame him, to a Daughter
of Plautian's, who was Captain of the Praetorian Band. This Plautian, they say,
was originally of a mean Fortune, and had in his Youth been convicted of
Seditious Practices, and diverse other Misdemeanors, for which he was banished;
nevertheless, being by Nation an African, and Fellow-Citizen, and, as some say,
a Relation to Severus, (though others tax him with the having prostituted his
Body to him in the Flower of his Age) Severus from a low and mean Condition,
promoted him to great Wealth and Honor, conferring upon him the Estates of
such Persons as were put to Death, sharing every thing with him except his
Empire: But he abused this Power and Dignity, not abstaining from the highest
Acts of Oppression and Violence, in the advancing his own Interests or Designs,
out-doing all the Princes that went before him in Barbarity and Cruelty. With
his Daughter Severus matched his Son, by this Alliance uniting the two Families.

Antoninus was very much dissatisfied with the Match, which was made up rather
by Concert amongst Friends, than by Consent of Parties, and conceived a mortal
Aversion both to the Lady and her Father; insomuch that he would neither lie in
the same Bed, nor live in the same House with her; but thundered out repeated
Menaces against them both, which he threatened to execute as soon as he should
get the Sovereign Power into his Hands. The Lady told all these Things to her
Father, remonstrating to him how implacable his Hatred was against her, which
put the old Man into a mighty Rage; how seeing that Severus was old, and
weakened by a long Indisposition, and knowing the natural Fierceness and
Impetuosity of Antoninus, began to fear lest he should some Day fulfill his
Threats: Whereupon he resolved to be beforehand with him, esteeming it better
to be upon the offensive, than tamely to expect the Accomplishment of these
Menaces. He had a great many Motives to spur on his Ambition to an Affectation
of the Empire: His Estate was greater than ever any Private Man possessed, the
Soldiery was entirely at his Beck, the whole Roman People paid a singular
Honor and Deference to him; he always appeared in the Senatorian Robes,
embroidered with large Studs of Gold, and was always ranked with Men of
principal Note, and such as had been twice Consuls: When he came abroad, he was
attended with all the Circumstances that might increase the Terror or Grandeur
of his Appearance; he had a Sword by his Side, with all the Ensigns of
Sovereign Dignity: No Man was suffered to approach his Person; and if any
encountered him by accident, he was obliged to retire. Certain Gentlemen of his
Retinue always marched before him to make Proclamation, that no Man should
presume to draw near or look upon him, but that they should all turn out of the
Way, and fix their Eyes on the Ground.

Plautian by this Deportment incurred the high Displeasure of Severus, and
became odious and insupportable to him; insomuch that he retrenched his
Authority, and exhorted him to abate something of his Pride and Arrogance:
Which incensed him to that Degree, that he resolved to attempt the Empire by
Policy and Intrigue; and in order to it, formed this Design: There was a
certain Tribune of Plautian's, by Name Saturninus, who had abandoned himself to
an implicit Obedience to the Will and Pleasure of his General, which in truth
all the rest had done as well as he; yet he by a show of an extraordinary
Veneration for him above the rest, had insinuated himself the most intimately
into his Affections. This Man he thought the most fit to be trusted with, and
the most proper to execute his secret Orders, and commanded him to attend him
in the Evening, after all other Persons were withdrawn; and when he was come,
told him, That this was the Time for him to give the last Proof of his Zeal and
Devotion to his Interest, and for him to make a Requital proportionable to so
great a Merit; That it was in his Choice whether he would succeed him in the
Post he was now in, and be such a Man as he saw he was at that time, or die
instantly, and receive the Rewards of his Contumacy and Disobedience; That he
ought not to be staggered with the Greatness of the Enterprise, or startle at
the Name of Emperor, in regard of the free Entrance which he should have alone
into the Imperial Bedchamber, when his Turn should come to be upon the
Night-Guard, at which time he might easily effect what he proposed to him,
without Opposition or Discovery; That he should not expect any further Orders
from him, but should go immediately to the Imperial Palace, as if he brought
Advices of Importance and Secrecy from Plautian, and so should fall upon the
Old Man and his Son, and kill them; adding, That the Matter was very feasible
to a Man that would acquit himself with Bravery; and assuring him, That as he
had a Share in the Hazard, so he should also have in the Honor and Dignity to
which this Enterprise would make way.

The Tribune was infinitely surpised with the Proposal, but not so much as to
lose his Understanding in that Juncture; but, like a Man that had his Senses
about him, (for he was a Syrian, and it is observed that the Eastern Countries
produce generally very clear Heads) considering the Violence of his Rage,
together with the Extent of his Power, thought not fit to oppose him in any
Circumstance of what he opened to him, for fear of being sacrificed instantly
to his Displeasure; but hearing the whole Proposal with seeming Joy and
Rapture, as if he was ambitious to be an Instrument in the Execution, and
adoring him as if he had been already Emperor, desired of him a Copy of his
Commission; for it is the Custom of Tyrants, when they command any Man to be cut
off without Legal Process, to give their Orders in Writing, that some Footsteps
might remain of the Authority by which the Party was put to Death. Plautian,
blinded with Ambition, gave him a Commission under his Hand, and dispatched him
away instantly to execute it, strictly charging him to send for him as soon as
the Business was done, and before it was noised abroad, that he might appear in
the Palace before it was known that he had invaded the Empire. Matters being
thus concerted between them, the Tribune left him, and walked through all the
Rooms of the Palace, as he used to do, without Control: But considering that
it was absolutely impracticable for one Man to assassinate two Emperors that
were lodged in different Apartments, he went directly to Severus, and calling
to the Guards of the Imperial Bedchamber, desired Admittance to the Emperor's
Presence, in regard he had something to impart to him that nearly concerned the
Safety of his Person. They immediately informed the Emperor hereof, and by his
Command the Tribune was brought before him: After he was introduced, addressing
himself to Severus, he accosted him with this surprising Relation. May it
please your Majesty, I don't come here as a Traitor to assassinate your Person,
as he that sent me imagines; but according to my own Hopes and Desires, to be
your Preserver and Deliverer. Plautian seeking by Intrigue and Policy to gain
the Empire, has Commissioned me to murder you and your Son, and that not only
by Word of Mouth, but by Warrant in Writing; [Then he laid the Commission
before them,] which I readily undertook, lest if I should decline it, he might
meet with some other Person forward enough to engage in the Enterprise; and now
I am here ready to make Discovery of what I know, and to bring to light his
Secret Designs. This he spoke with Tears in his Eyes, and a mighty appearance
of Concern. Nevertheless, Severus gave but slow Credit to him; he loved
Plautian most passionately, and suspected Forgery and Subornation in the whole
Business; he fansied his Son, out of an inveterate Malice to Plautian and his
Daughter, had invented this artful Calumny to take away his Life; and sending
for him, charged him home with it, reproving him most severely for these
unwarrantable Practices against the Life of his Friend and Domestic. Antoninus
at first protested he was ignorant of the whole Matter; but when the Tribune
pressed his Depositions, showing forth his Commission, Antoninus spurred him
on, and animated him to impeach him of the Fact, and be Evidence against him.
And the Tribune seeing into what imminent Danger he had brought himself, and
fearing the overweening Kindness of Severus to Plautian, and being satisfied if
the Plot was not fairly discovered, and the Criminal convicted, that he should
undergo the most exquisite Torments, said to them, I beseech you, my Lords,
what clearer Proof or stronger Evidence can you desire? Permit me only to go
out of the Palace, and by some trusty Friend of mine let him know that the
Business he gave me in Charge is accomplished, and he will speedily be here,
expecting to find the Palace abandoned; and then you your selves may judge of
the Truth of what I have deposed. Only command Silence in the Palace, for fear
he should have Intelligence of what has passed, and so defeat the Design.

All this being agreed to, he sent a particular Friend of his to Plautian, to
tell him, That he should make all the haste he could; that both the Emperors
were dispatched; that it would behove him to be in the Palace before the Thing
had taken Air; that having made himself Master of the Citadel, and established
his Empire, he might constrain the People to render Obedience to him, as to an
actual Sovereign. Plautian easily believed all this, and full of Hope, in the
Evening put on a Coat of Mail for the Defense of his Body, and throwing his
other Robes over it, drove with all speed to the Palace, accompanied only by a
few Servants, who fansied he went upon a Summons from Court, about Affairs of
Importance.

He entered the Palace without any Difficulty, the Guards knowing nothing of
what had happened. Here the Tribune met him, and designing to trepan him,
accosted him by the Title of Emperor; and taking him familiarly by the Hand,
told him he would conduct him into the Chamber where the dead Bodies of the
Emperors were bestowed. Here Severus had ordered certain of his Guards to stand
ready to lay Hands upon him, as soon as he should come in. So Plautian, to his
unexpressible disappointment, saw both the Emperors standing in the Room; and
being seized upon by the Guards, and infinitely astonished with the Encounter,
began to beg and entreat, and to vindicate himself, protesting, That it was all
a Lie, a mere Forgery and Contrivance devised against him. Severus upbraided
him with his good Offices, and the Honors he had conferred upon him. Plautian,
on the other Hand, reminded him of his Faith, Loyalty, and the good Services he
had rendered him; till at length Severus inclined to credit what he said, until
an unlucky Rent in his Garment discovered the* Coat of Mail that was under it:
Whereupon Antonine, a fiery audacious Youth, and naturally very inveterate
against the Man, demanded of him what Answer he would give to these two Points,
Why he came to Court at that Time without Orders; and, What was the meaning of
that Coat of Mail. Is it usual, says he, for any Man to come armed to a
Collation? At which Words he commanded the Tribune, and the other Soldiers that
were present, instantly to draw their Swords, and cut him in Pieces for an
avowed Enemy. They presently obeyed his Orders, and killing him, flung out his
dead Body into the public Street, there to lie open to the View of all Men,
and exposed to the Indignities of those that hated him. Thus the ambitious
Plautian ran his Period, being betrayed by him who made the greatest
Professions of Friendship and Devotion to him.

Severus from henceforth created two Captains of the Praetorian Band, and spent
the Remainder of his Days for the most part in his Country Houses that were
near the City, or on the Seacoasts of Campania, distributing Justice, and
regulating the Affairs of State. He was extremely desirous that his Children
should have the Benefit of a virtuous Education. He saw they pursued the vain
Amusements of Shows and Games, with greater Eagerness than was suitable to
their Character. He saw too, that about these they constantly thwarted and
opposed one another with great Zeal and Warmth, which bred ill Blood amongst
them, and afforded Incentives to Fewds and Animosities: Especially Antonine
became insupportable after Plautian was removed, (though the Reverence of his
Father restrained him from Actions that were of a very flagitious Nature) he
endeavored to kill his Wife, and left nothing unattempted to effect it:
Whereupon Severus sent her away with her Brother into Sicily, and allowed them
a large and honorable Maintenance; imitating herein Augustus, who took the
same Course with Anthony's Sons after he was declared an Enemy.

Severus endeavored as much as in him lay to compose all these Quarrels, and
to create a Friendship and good Understanding between them; and in order to
this, frequently put them in mind of the old Tragedies and Fables, wherein
private Animosities between Brothers jointly invested in Supreme Power, were
generally the Source of all their Miseries; and represented to them, that the
Exchequer and Temples were very full of Money; that no Foreign Potentate would
have Force or Treasure enough to attack them from without; that their Funds at
home would abundantly supply them with Donatives to distribute amongst the
Soldiers, as often and in what Quantities they pleased; that the Praetorian
Band was four times as strong as it was at his Accession to the Empire; that
the Army that was posted before the City, was of that Strength, that no Foreign
Force was equal or comparable to it, whether you consider the Plenty of Money,
or the Strength, Stature, or Number of Men; remonstrating to them upon the
whole Matter, that all this would signify nothing, as long as there were Civil
Feuds and Intestine Divisions among them. These Admonitions he often repeated,
sometimes mildly entreating, at other times as sharply rebuking them, leaving
no way unessay'd to allay these unnatural Heats, and make a firm and sincere
Reconciliation between them. But they, regardless of all his Counsels, lived in
open defiance of him and his Authority, making still more desperate Advances in
Sin and Vice; the Heat and Fire of Youth, the Licentiousness of Princes, the
fairest Opportunities, and the most powerful Incentives to Pleasure, all
concurring to push them forward to the greatest Extravagancies. Besides these,
they were led by Buffoons and Sycophants, who by inveagling Arts endeavored to
allure and win them to themselves, not stopping at a servile Compliance with
their most dishonest Actions or Appetites, but still inventing something in
favor of the Prince they followed, which could not delight him more than it
regretted his Brother. Severus took some of these Men, and punished them
severely for these servile Compliances.

While Severus was thus concerned for the lewd Courses of his Sons, and that
indecent Application with which they had followed Plays and Games, the Governor
of Britain notified to him by Letter, That the Britains were in open Rebellion,
that they had ravaged and laid waste the Country, that he must either send him
a strong Reinforcement, or come in Person to reduce the Place. These Advices
were very agreeable to Severus, who was naturally very desirous of Glory, but
had a peculiar Ambition to crown his Victories in the East and North, and his
Titles of Honor merited by his Successes in those Parts, by erecting new
Trophies in Britain. This Expedition also offered him an Occasion which he
extremely wished for, of drawing his Sons from Rome, that being removed from
the Luxury and Gaieties of the Town, and making a Campaign in Britain, they
might be accustomed in their Youth to a temperate Course of Life, as that which
is most proper for a Soldier. Soon after he caused Proclamation to be made of
his designed Expedition into Britain. He was old, and much afflicted with the
Gout; but the Faculties of his Mind were active and vigorous, far excelling all
the Young Men. He traveled for the most part in a Calash, making no
considerable Halts in his March; and having reached the End of his Journey by
Land, he crossed the Seas sooner than he could have expected, and landed his
Men in Britain, and appointing a general Rendezvous for his Forces, drew
together a formidable Army, and made all necessary Preparations for the War.

The Britains were exceedingly alarmed at the sudden Arrival of Severus; and
understanding what a mighty Power was raised against them, they immediately
sent Ambassadors to make Overtures of Peace, and to excuse their late
Miscarriages: But Severus was inflexible; he was ambitious of a Victory over
the Britains, and enflamed with the Surname of Britannicus, and was loath to
return to Rome without atchieving the one, and deserving the other: So he
contrived Delays and Difficulties, to gain Time, and detain the Ambassadors in
suspense; but dismissed them at length, after a final Rejection of their
Proposals, and put all things in posture and readiness for a Battle. It was his
principal Care to build Bridges over the Morasses, that his Men might run over
them with ease, and fight upon a solid Bottom. Of these there are great Numbers
in this Island, covering vast Extents of Land, occasioned by the frequent
Inundations of the Sea. The Natives often swim or wade into them up to the
Waste, in Water and Mud, which they don't regard, the greatest part of their
Bodies being naked. They are not acquainted with the Use of Clothes, but wear
Iron about their Necks and Wastes, which they esteem an Ornament, and a Sign of
Riches, as the other Barbarous Nations do Gold. They paint their Bodies with an
agreeable Variety, drawing upon them all Sorts of Creatures; which is the
Reason they wear no Clothes, their Vanity not permitting them to draw a Veil
over so much Beauty. They are a very warlike and a bloody People. Their Arms
are only a narrow Shield and a Lance, with a Sword that hangs at their naked
Side. They know nothing of the Use of a Breast Plate or Helmet, looking upon
them as an useless Luggage, which would only hinder them in passing the Bogs,
out of which continually ascend thick Vapors, by reason whereof the Face of the
Heavens seems always overcast.

Severus in this Interval made Provision of such Things as would the most annoy
the Enemy, and be of the greatest Use to his own Men. And now all Things
seeming in good State and Condition for the War, he left Geta to administer
Justice in that part of the Island which was not revolted, and to make such
Regulations as the Civil Government should require, appointing him a Council
composed of the most aged, and the most experienced of his Friends: And taking
Antonine along with him, he advanced against the Rebels; and having passed his
Army over the Rivers and Fortifications which divided the Roman Frontier from
that of the Enemy, there happened diverse Rencounters between them, wherein the
Britains always had the worse; but having the advantage of being thoroughly
acquainted with the Country, they could retreat at pleasure out of Danger, into
the Fastnesses of the Woods and Bogs; all which being against the Romans,
retarded the Prosecution of the War.

About this time Severus being arrived to a great Age, was seized with a
lingering Illness, which constrained him to stay at home; by which means the
Character of General devolved upon Antonine, whom his Father sent to prosecute
the War: But he being not very sollicitous how Matters were carried on against
the Rebels, used his utmost Endeavors to ingratiate with the Soldiery, and to
exclude all others from any Share in their Affections and Esteem, affecting
immoderately to be sole Monarch. In order hereto, he loaded his Brother with
Calumnies and Reproaches: But the long Indisposition of his Father, and the
slow Approaches of Death, afflicted the Spirit of the Young Man, insomuch that
at length he grew impatient, and fell to Practices with his Servants and
Physicians to shorten his Life; till at last Severus died, rather through
Anguish of Mind, than Indisposition of Body, after he had run a glorious
Course, far transcending all his Predecessors in the Glory of Military
Achievements, none of which were Victorious in so many and so great
Engagements both in Civil and Foreign Wars. He reigned Eighteen Years, and was
succeeded by his own Sons. He left behind a greater Treasure than ever any
Prince did before him, with an Army of that Puissance, that no Force was able
to encounter it.

Antonine had no sooner got the Supreme Power into his Hands, upon his Father's
Decease, but he began a most bloody Massacre, putting to Death all the
Physicians that refused to comply with the Proposal he made to them of taking
off his Father, as also all those Persons that had the Conduct of his own and
his Brother's Education, because they earnestly endeavored to mediate a
Reconciliation between them. Nor did any of those Ministers weather this Storm,
whom his Father in his Lifetime had honored with his Esteem and Confidence.
The Chief Officers in the Army he endeavored to engage in his Interests by
great Gifts and greater Promises, to the end they should influence the Army to
declare him sole Emperor, setting a foot all manner of Practices to destroy his
Brother. But he could not overruled the Soldiers in this Point; they remembered
how equally Severus had deported himself toward his Sons while he was alive,
keeping them both upon a Level in the whole Course of their Education, and
therefore thought themselves obliged to render an equal Loyalty and Deference
to them both.

Antonine finding that his Project did not take in the Army, concluded a Peace,
and taking Hostages for the Observance of it, left the Enemies Country, and
advanced with all speed toward his Mother and Brother. After they came to an
Interview, their Mother employed her utmost Efforts to reconcile them; all the
Men of most eminent Dignity, and such as had been of his Father's Council,
joining with her in an Endeavor so important to the Public Quiet. So Antonine
seeing all things conspire to thwart the Bent of his Humor, agreed at last,
rather by Necessity than Choice, to the outward Forms of a Reconciliation, though
there was little Sincerity at the bottom. After this they administered the
Government jointly; and parting from Britain, set Sail for Rome, and carried
along with them their Father's Ashes, which, mixed with Perfumes, they put into
an Urn of Alabaster, and conveyed to Rome, that it might be placed amongst the
Sacred Monuments of the Roman Emperors. And embarking their Army as Conquerors
of Britain, crossed the Sea, and arrived in Gaul. Thus we have given Account in
this Book, how Severus died, and how his Sons succeeded him in the Empire.

AN EPITOME OF THE Fourth Book.
SEverus his Ashes are brought from Britain to Rome, where they are buried, and
he is Deified. Antonine and Geta undertake the Government, and fall into such
Quarrels and Jealousies, that they were once about dividing the Empire, and
stating the Limits of their Territories, had not Julia dissuaded them. But
after a while, their Animosities flaming more and more; Antonine kills Geta
upon the Breast of his Mother, and flies to the Camp, where the Soldiers,
corrupted by a Largess, declare him sole Emperor. He exercises great Cruelties
toward the People and Senate: Afterward he makes several Progresses, one to
the Banks of the Ister, where he follows the Fashions of the Germans; a second
into Macedon, where he personates Alexander; and a third into Asia, where he
imitates Achilles. Then going to Alexandria, by a singular Instance of
Treachery and Barbarity, he cuts to Pieces all the Citizens; and afterward
entering Parthia, under color of a Marriage to be solemnized there, surprises
the Parthians, and breaking the League, makes a great Slaughter of them, the
King escaping with great Difficulty. At last he is assassinated by a Soldier,
whose Brother he had put to Death, at Carrae in Mesopotamia; and his Ashes are
sent to Antioch to his Mother Julia. Then Macrinus is chosen Emperor, and gives
Battle to Artabanus King of Parthia, which continues for three whole Days,
neither Side obtaining any Victory. Afterward he makes a League with him, and
the Parthian returns home, and he marches with his Forces to Antioch.

The Fourth Book.
WHat Severus did in those Eighteen Years in which he was Emperor, is related
in the foregoing Book. His Sons, who were now young Men, hastened to Rome with
their Mother; but there arose such Bickerings and Quarrels between them upon
the Road, that they would neither eat at the same Table, nor lodge in the same
Apartment; and so powerful was the Spirit of Jealousy, that they apprehended
Poison in all their Meats and Drinks, either from the Hands of one another, or
from Servants corrupted to that purpose: For which Reason they made the more
haste to Rome, where they expected to live in greater Security, by reason of
the Largeness of the Palace, which consisted of a vast Range of stately
Buildings, exceeding the rest of the City in its Extent. This being divided
between them, they thought they might hold their Courts asunder, and live at
Pleasure.

When they arrived at Rome, the People received them with the Solemnity of
carrying Branches of Laurel, the Senate complimented them in full Body, and at
the Head of this glorious Train they marched in their Robes of Purple: The
Consuls followed, bearing the Urn wherein the Ashes of Severus were laid; and
complimenting the new Emperors, passed by them, and worshipped the Urn, which,
attended with all the Pomp and Ceremony imaginable, was by them placed in the
Temple, where the Sacred Monuments of Marcus and his Predecessors are to be
seen.

After the young Emperors had performed the Sacrifices customary upon the
Accession of new Princes to the Empire, they retired to the Palace, which was
divided into distinct Courts, and with mighty Caution shut up all the By-ways
and Passages, suffering only the great Court-gates to be made use of in common.
Each of them had his respective Life guard, and rarely came together, unless it
was for a short time, when they appeared in Public. Their first Care was to
pay the Honors due to their deceased Father; it being a Custom amongst the
Romans to deifie those Emperors that die in the Life of their Sons and
Successors. This Honor they term an Apotheosis. During the Solemnity there is
a various Face of Things, resulting from a Combination of Joy and Sorrow in the
City: For the dead Body of the Emperor is interred with great magnificence,
according to the Funeral Rites here on Earth. His Effigies, wrought in Wax, as
like the Original as the most exquisite Art can make it, is laid upon a high
and stately Couch of Ivory, placed before the Entrance of the Palace, and
covered with Cloth of Gold. The Effigies looks pale, and has the ghastly Air of
a sick Person. On the left Side stand all the Senators in Mourning; on the
right, Matrons of the most eminent Quality by Birth or Marriage, divested of
their Neck-laces, Jewels, and all the Gaieties of Dress, and attired in narrow
white Manteaus, appearing like so many Mourners. This Ceremony is repeated for
seven Days successively. The Doctors come in every Day, and approaching the
Couch of State, view the Patient, and make the Report still that the Malady
increases. When it is given out that he is dead, certain Gentlemen and Noblemen
of Rome are chosen out of the most Illustrious Families, to support the Couch;
these carry it along the Sacred Way with solemn Pace, till they bring it into
the Old Forum, where the Magistrates of Rome take their Oaths, upon quitting
their Offices. Here are Steps raised on both Sides in the Form of Stairs; on
the one Side stands a Chorus of Noble Patrician Youths, opposite to these are
Ladies of Condition, both which sing in honor of the Dead Hymns and Songs set
to doleful and majestic Airs, which are favored by the Cadence of the Verse.
After this, they take up the Couch again, and carry it out of the City, into
the middle of the Campus Martius, where there was a Pile erected of
Quadrangular Figure, all the Sides being equal, and the Materials only vast
Pieces of Timber, fastened together into the Form of an House. The Inside is
filled with dry combustible Matter; the Outside is adorned with Cloth of Gold,
Statues of Ivory, and curious Painting. Below this stood another, exactly of
the same Model, and beautified as the former, with its Gates open; and so a
third, and a fourth; every one being somewhat less than that which is next
above it; and so on till you came to the last, which is the lowest of all. The
Model of these Piles was not unlike the Towers that are built over Harbors, to
direct Mariners by Lights set out, where they may put in and lie securely. The
Couch was placed upon the second Pile, after which sweet Gums and all sorts of
Perfumes, with Fruits and Flowers of the most fragrant Scent, were heaped upon
it in great abundance: For there is no Nation, City, nor Private Person of any
considerable Quality or Note, but is very zealous upon this Occasion to
testify his Respect to his Prince by these last Presents. After the Place was
filled with these Spices and Gums pil'd up to a vast Height, all the Gentlemen
of Rome, gallantly mounted, pranc'd and curvetted about the Pile in a kind of
Figure and Order, according to the Measures of the Pyrrhick Dance. The Chariots
also went the same Round, observing the like Decorum and Order. The
Charioteers, clad in Purple Robes, represented the Persons of the greatest
Generals and Emperors of Rome. Then he that is to succeed in the Empire, takes
a Flambeau, and puts it to the Pile; after which the Multitude set Fire to it
on all Sides, and in an instant the whole is in a bright Flame, by reason of
the infinite Quantity of Spices, Gums, and other combustible Matter: And
immediately after, from the lowest and least Pile, as from a Turret, an Eagle
is let go, and towering with the Flame, takes his Flight toward Heaven,
carrying along with him, as the Romans persuade themselves, the Soul of the
Deified Emperor; and from this time they pay Adoration to him, as to one of
their Gods.

As soon as the Apotheosis was finished, the young Emperors returned to the
Palace, and from that time were perpetually clashing and jarring, and managing
Practices one against the other. Each sought by all Means to destroy his
Colleague, and lodge the Supreme Power solely in himself: The People also that
bore any Dignity or Employment in the City, were torn into different Factions;
both the Emperors by secret Solicitations and Promises seeking to draw them to
their separate Interests. But Geta's Party was far the stronger; he discovered
at least a Dawn and Semblance of Honor and Virtue, was courteous and affable
to all that came to him; his Studies were generous, he entertained and
encouraged Learned Men, pursued Wrestling and other Gentleman-like Diversions;
and his Conversation was always extremely easy and agreeable: By these Means
he became Popular, his Reputation and good Fame gaining him the Love and Esteem
of the People. On the other Hand, Antonine was rough and violent in his whole
Deportment, utterly averse to all the aforementioned Qualities, a pretended
Admirer of a Military Life, and the Hardships of a Campaign. He did every thing
in Wrath, more by Menaces than Persuasions, rather affrighting than alluring
Men to his Friendship.

The Mother had long endeavored to reconcile her two Sons, that were thus
constantly interfering even about the most trivial Matters: But all her Efforts
proved ineffectual. They had once determined to make Partition of the Empire,
to the End they might be less exposed to the Attempts of one another, than when
both lived in Rome: And assembling their Father's Friends, this Point was
debated in the Presence of their Mother; and they came at last to this
Resolution, That Europe should be allotted to Antonine, and Asia to Geta; these
Continents being as it were by Divine Providence disterminated by the
Propontis. It was also agreed upon, That Antonine 's Army should lie encamped
at Byzantium, and Geta 's at Chalcedon in Bithvnia; that lying opposite one to
the other, they might guard their several Frontiers, and hinder any Descent
which might be made upon them. A third Article was, That such Senators as were
Europeans should remain at Rome; that the rest should repair to Geta 's Court,
which he designed to keep in Antioch or Alexandria, looking upon those Cities
as little inferior to Rome in bigness. Of the African Provinces Antonine was to
have the Moors and Numidians, and the bordering Nations; and Geta the rest, as
far as the East.

While this Matter was in agitation, the whole Assembly seemed mightily
concerned, and fixed their Eyes upon the Ground; but Julia broke out into this
tender Expostulation: O my Sons, says she, you have found out Means to divide
the Lands and Seas, and the Propontis, you say, will separate your Territories;
but how will you divide your Mother? how shall wretched I be apportion'd and
carved between you? First kill me and cut me to Pieces; then take each of you a
Part, and bury it with you; so I shall be shared between you, as well as the
Land and the Sea. This she spoke with all the Affection and Concern imaginable,
shedding Tears all the Time; and as soon as she had done, flinging her Arms
about them, and embracing them with all the Endearment and Tenderness of a fond
Mother, essayed all possible Ways to make them Friends. This stirred up
Compassion in all that were present, and immediately the Council was dissolved,
and the Proposal rejected, both the Emperors returning to their Palaces.

But these Heats and Quarrels were more and more inflamed every Day: Whether an
Employment Civil or Military was to be elected into, each stickled for the
Promotion of his own Creature. If they were upon the Bench doing Justice, they
always disagreed in Opinion, to the no small prejudice of the Parties in the
Suit depending before them; their Decrees being always more influenced by their
own Passions than by any Regard to what was Equitable and Just. At Public
Games they constantly espoused different Sides, and set all Engines at work
against one another Life, even to the corrupting their Cooks and Butlers to
poison their several Masters: But when these Designs did not succeed so
fortunately as they could have wished, in regard both the Emperors were
extremely cautious what they eat or drank, Antonine grew impatient, and being
driven forward by an irresistible Desire of Ruling alone, fell into bloody and
dangerous Designs; and finding that his secret Machinations failed of bringing
about his Ends, he judged it necessary to betake himself to Counsels that were
more hazardous and desperate, by reason of his Mothers extreme Fondness of
Geta, and Geta's Designs upon him. This Resolve being formed, he rushed into
Geta's Chambers, and gave him his mortal Wound upon the Breast of his Mother,
who was all besmeared with his Blood.

Antonine, after the Commission of this horrid Murder, ran through the Court,
crying aloud, That he had with great difficulty escaped an imminent danger; and
commanded the Soldiers that guarded the Palace instantly to conduct him to his
Army, affirming, That he should infallibly be killed if he staid in the Palace.
The Guards believed him, not knowing what had happened, and ran along with him;
the People being infinitely surpised to see the Emperor run through the City
in the Evening in that Confusion. As soon as he reached the Camp, he went
directly to the Place where the Statues and Gods of the Army are kept, and
falling down before them, rendered Thanks, and sacrificed to them, as for some
signal Deliverance.

As soon as the Report of this Adventure was spread about the Camp, the
Soldiers, some whereof were in the Baths, others in their Beds, ran all to the
Place in great astonishment. Here the Emperor came out to them, but did not
presently discover the Truth of the Matter, but cried aloud, That he had
avoided a Danger; that he had escaped the Attempts of an Enemy, (meaning his
Brother) that after a long Dispute, his Adversaries were vanquished; that both
of them had been in manifest Peril, but Fortune had at last declared him sole
Emperor. Thus giving indirect Hints of what had happened, and willing rather that
they should suspect what was done, than that he should inform them.

And now for the Security of his Person, and the Establishment of his Empire,
he promised every Soldier 2500 Attick Drams by way of Donative, and
augmented their Allowance of Corn by an Addition of half as much as they
usually received; commanding them to march to the Temples and Exchequers, and
be their own Paymasters; thus squandring in one Day all the Treasure which
Severus had amassed in Eighteen Years, by the Ruin and Oppression of his
Subjects. The Lure of so considerable a Sum easily tempted the Soldiers, who
understanding the Truth of the Matter from the Reports of those that fled out
of the Palace, and took care to publish an Account of the Murder, proclaimed
him sole Emperor, declaring Geta a Traitor. Antonine remained that Night in the
Temple of the Army; but the next Day, trusting to the Efficacy of his Largess
upon the Soldiers, he adventured to go to the Senate, attended by his whole
Army, somewhat better appointed than is usual upon the like Occasions. After he
had entered the Senate, and Sacrificed, ascending the Imperial Throne, he spoke
to the following effect.

ANTONINE'S SPEECH.
GEntlemen, I am not ignorant that at first sight Men look upon the Murder of a
Domestic with Abhorrence and Detestation: The very Name, upon the first
mention, is apt to draw the severest Censure on those that are guilty of the
Crime. Envy does not oftener pursue the Victor, than Compassion attends the
Vanquished: These always seem to be injured, and those are still the
Wrong-doers. But if a Man would impartially consider, and without Prejudice in
favor of him that is dead, weigh the Matter of Fact, with the Occasion and
Design of it, he will find, that it is both rational and necessary to
anticipate a Mischief we have just Reason to apprehend, by a timely Revenge,
rather than tamely to attend till it fall upon us. In this Case, the Misery of
the Wretch that suffers, is aggravated by the Reproach of Cowardice: Whereas,
on the other hand, the Reputation of Valor which accrues to the Conqueror,
enhances the Benefit of his Deliverance. Now, Gentlemen, what Attempts he has
made against my Life by Poison, and what other Plots he has formed against me,
you may examine, by putting his Servants to the Question, whom for that Reason
I have commanded to give their Attendances in this Place, that you might be
thoroughly informed of the Truth. Some of them have been tortured already, whose
Confessions you may order to be read. But at last, in the Presence of my Mother
he set upon me, being seconded by several Ruffians with drawn Swords, who were
prepared to commit this Villainy. I had indeed, by my extraordinary Caution and
Sagacity, discovered his Traitorous Intentions, and treated him as a professed
Enemy, after he had renounced all that Affection and Kindness that is due from
a Brother, and acted very unsuitably to that Relation. To chastise an unlawful
Aggressor, is not only just, but what is approved by the general Practice of
Mankind. An Instance of this we have in Romulus the Founder of this City, who
could not put up the Affront of his Brother, that only reflected upon what he
had built. I pass over Germanicus, Brother to Nero; and Titus, Brother to
Domitian. Marcus himself, though a Man of great Wisdom and Temper, resented the
Indignity put upon him by Lucius his Son in-Law so highly, that nothing less
than his Ruin could atone for it, which he afterward contrived. But I, justly
alarmed by the manifest Danger I was in from the Poison and Sword that
threatened me, have executed Vengeance upon an Enemy, his Behavior having
pronounced him such. It Is your Duty, on this Occasion, to return Thanks to the
Immortal Gods, for the preserving one of your Emperors, to suppress the Spirit
of Faction and Division reigning amongst you; and having only one Prince,
unanimously to support his Interests, and enjoy the common Benefit of Repose
and Security. As Jove alone has all the Power above, so it is his Pleasure
there should be one only Potentate on Earth.

Having thus spoke in a loud Voice and great Rage, frowning all the time upon
his Brother's Friends, he returned in haste to his Palace, leaving most of the
Senators under great Terrors and Apprehensions, and instantly massacred all his
Brother's Adherents, Ministers, and Menial Servants, that were in or about his
Palace, without any respect to Age, his Cruelty extending even to Infants.
Their dead Bodies were contemptuously thrown into Carts, and hurried out of the
City, where they were burnt in Heaps, without the Decency of common Ceremonies.
No Man escaped that had the least Acquaintance with Geta. All Wrestlers,
Charioteers, Players, Buffoons, Singers, Dancers, that had any way contributed
to his Diversion, were all sacrificed to his present Fury. Men that were of the
highest Consideration in the Senate for Quality and Estate, he put to Death for
slight or no Reasons, upon any trivial Information exhibited against them,
under the Notion of Geta's Adherents. He also put to death Commodus's Sister,
an aged Lady, to whom the other Emperors had paid a singular Deference, in
regard of her near Alliance to Marcus, whose Daughter she was. Her Crime was,
the condoling with his Mother upon the Murder of her Son Geta. Besides these,
he caused to be murdered Plautian's Daughter his late Wife, who was at that
time in Sicily, his own Cousin-german Severus, together with Pertinax's Son,
and the Son of Lucilla Commodus's Sister; and, in short, utterly extirpated and
extinguished the Imperial Line, with the whole Patrician Nobility. From hence
his Fury passed over into the Provinces, where, by his Orders, were dispatched
all the Prefects and Procurators, whom he charged with the having been in
Geta's Interests. Whole Nights were spent in the executing his cruel Decrees.
He buried the Vestal Virgins alive for pretended Breaches of their Vow of
Chastity, which he arraigned them of. Lastly, (which was a Cruelty absolutely
without Precedent) at the Circensian Games, where he was present in Person,
when some of the Mob threw out some Words to the disadvantage of a Charioteer
that he favored, considering this as a Contempt offered to himself, he poured
his whole Army upon them, with positive Order to cut in pieces all those that
had presumed to say any thing against his Charioteer. The Soldiers having thus
a Power put into their Hands to slay and pillage the People with Authority, and
it being impossible to distinguish the Innocent from the Guilty, in so great a
Multitude, where none would confess the Fact, they murdered all without Mercy
or Distinction, or took what they had from them by way of Ransom, and then
suffered them to escape, though with great Difficulty.

Antonine, upon review of these Actions, felt great Remorses of Conscience, and
his Stay in the City became irksom and uneasy to him; insomuch that he
determined to leave it for some time, which he did under pretense of regulating
Affairs relating to the Army, and of visiting the Provinces. So he parted from
Italy, and came to the Banks of the Ister, and the Northern Parts of the
Empire, where he exercised himself in Chariot-driving, and Combating with all
sorts of Wild Beasts. He seldom sat in the Courts of Justice; and when he did,
his Judgments were hasty, often passing Sentence before he had heard the Merits
of the Cause. He won the Hearts of all the Germans, and made a strict League
and Friendship with them; he made them also his Confederates in his Wars, and
chose the goodliest and strongest amongst them to be of his Lifeguard. He often
put off his Roman Habit, and dressed himself after the Fashion of the Germans,
frequently appeared in a German Cloak, curiously flowered with Silver,
according to the Mode of that Country: He likewise wore Yellow Hair, which had
also the German Cut. These Condescensions gained wonderfully upon the Germans,
and made the Emperor the Darling of that Barbarous People. Nor was he less dear
to his own Soldiers, whose Affections he gained chiefly by the profuse
Largesses which he dealt amongst them, and by his reducing himself to a Level
with the rest of his Soldiers: For if a Trench was to be made, or Bridge to be
built, or Rampart to be cast up, or any thing to be done that required Bodily
Labor, he was still the first Man that set the rest an Example. He eat at a
very mean Table; the Cups and Dishes he was served in were made of Wood; his
Bread was course ordinary Cakes; his Custom was to grind as much Corn with his
own Hand as was sufficient for one Man, and to knead it into a Cake, and bake
it upon the Coals. He abstained from all sorts of Delicacies, and confined
himself to as course a Fare as serves the poorest Common Soldier. He always
appeared more pleased when they called him Fellow Soldier, than when he was
accosted by the Title of Emperor. For the most part he traveled on Foot, very
rarely rid on Horseback or in his Coach, carried his own Arms, and sometimes
the Standard, which was adorned with Bosses of Gold, and was so heavy, that
'twas a Load for the strongest Soldier in the Army. For these and the like
Reasons he was extremely beloved and admired by his Army, as a brave Man, and a
good Soldier; and 'twas almost a Miracle that so small a Body as his was should
endure such mighty Hardships.

After he had reviewed his Army on the Ister, he passed over into Thrace that
borders upon Macedon. Here he commenced an Alexander Redivivus, and endeavored
by all Means to renew the Memory of that Prince. He commanded his Images and
Statues to be erected in all the Cities; Rome it self, the Capitol, and all the
Temples were filled with them. These Honors were paid him in consideration of
an Alliance to him which the Emperor pretended to. I have seen very ridiculous
Pictures, with one entire Body and Head, and two Half-Faces, the one
representing Alexander, the other Antonine. He appeared abroad in a Macedonian
Habit, with a Turban on his Head, and Slippers fastened to his Feet. He had a
Regiment composed of the Flower of his Army, which he called the Macedonian
Phalanx, and commanded the Officers to take upon them the Names of Alexander's
Captains. He also sent for Young Men to Sparta, and called them the Laconick
and Pitanite Bands.

After he had done this, and put all Things in the Cities in as good a Method
as they were capable of, he took his way for Pergamus, a City of Asia, in order
to have the Benefit of Aesculapius's healing Influence. After he was arrived
here, and had followed his own Caprichio's as long as he thought fit, he set
out toward Ilium: Here he surveyed the Ruins of that Place, and visitted
Achilles's Tomb, which he adorned most curiously with Chaplets and Flowers of
all sorts. Here he set up for a second Achilles, and being at a loss for a
Patroclus, supplied the Want by this Shift. Festus, his Favorite Freed-man,
and Remembrancer-general, died while he was at Ilium; some say indeed he was
poisoned, to the end he might be interred in the same manner that Patroclus had
been; yet others say he died naturally. His dead Body was ordered to be brought
out, and a Funeral Pile to be raised of Wood; the Corpse was laid upon the
middle of the Pile, and Beasts of all Kinds were slain; after which the Emperor
set Fire to the Pile, and holding a Vial in his Hand, sacrificed Wine, and
prayed to the Winds. His Hair was extremely thin, and it was very ridiculous to
see the Emperor cut it off and cast it into the Fire, and very much diverted
those that looked on. He extolled the Roman Sylla, and African Hannibal, above
all the Generals of all Ages; and to demonstrate his high Opinion of them,
commanded their Statues to be erected.

Departing from Ilium, he passed through Asia and Bithynia, and the other
Provinces; and taking such Measures as were necessary for the Settlement of
Affairs in those Parts, he arrived at Antioch. Here he was received very
splendidly; and having staid some time, took his Journey for Alexandria,
pretending a mighty Desire of visiting that City, of which Alexander was the
Founder, and of consulting a Deity, to which the Inhabitants pay so singular a
Veneration. These were the Colors he gave to this Expedition. And to the end
it might give no Jealousy to the People, he ordered Provision to be made of
Hecatombs and all manner of Sacrifices. The Alexandrians, upon notice of the
Visit which the Emperor designed them, being naturally light, and apt to be
moved by every Breath of Air, were perfectly ecstasy'd, especially when they
understood what Zeal and Affection the Emperor had testified for them. And now
Preparations were making for his Reception, which they had resolved should be
more magnificent than ever had been made for any Prince. In order to this,
Masters of Music were disposed in all Parts of the City, with Instruments of
differing Kinds; and from this Variety of Sounds resulted a most delightful
Harmony. The Air was sweetened with Perfumes and sweet Gums in all the Entrances
into the Town. Flowers were strewn, and Flambeau's were carried before him. He
made his Entry with his whole Army, and went in the first place to the Temple,
where he sacrificed great Numbers of Victims, and heaped Incense upon the
Altars. From hence he went to the Tomb of Alexander, where he offered up his
Purple Robes, and Belt, and Rings set with Stones of great Price, and whatever
else he had about him that was of extraordinary Value, and laid them upon the
Tomb. The People seeing this, were overjoyed, and dedicated their whole Time to
Revelling and Jollity, little suspecting the secret Intentions of the Emperor.

But all this was only a Varnish to disguise his hidden Purposes, which were
utterly to destroy all the Inhabitants. The Cause of his secret Hatred to them
was this. He had been informed while he was in Rome, that both before and after
his Brothers Death, they had often jested very irreverently upon him. They are
a People naturally addicted to drolling, and making Satirical Touches on Things
and Men, not sparing even the most eminent. They look upon it only as pleasant
Raillery; but it galls those to the quick who are made the Subjects of it,
especially if it have some Ground of Truth; for those Jests still make the
deepest Wounds, that touch upon a real Guilt. They had frequently made very
scurrilous Reflections upon him, not waving even the Subject of his Brother's
Murder. His Mother they called in contempt Jocasta, and ridiculed him for
pretending to personate Achilles and Alexander, the mightiest and most valorous
Hero's of Antiquity, himself coming so far short of the ordinary Proportion of
Men. These things were highly disobliging to him, and incensed him to that
degree, being naturally choleric and sanguinary, that he resolved to contrive
their Destruction.

After the Festival Jollity was over, the Town being very full of People which
resorted thither from all Quarters, he put out an Edict, commanding all the
Young Men in the City to rendezvous on a certain Plain, setting forth his
Intention of constituting a Phalanx in Honor of Alexander, that as he had a
Spartan and a Macedonian Phalanx, so he would have another which should bear
the Name of that Hero. He ordered them also to marshal themselves into Ranks,
and to stand at a convenient Distance one from another, that he might the
better take a View of them, and upon consideration of their Age, Stature, and
Make of Body, judge which would be the fittest for his Service. The Alexandrian
Youth easily believed him, and conceived mighty Hopes, as they might do upon
very good Grounds, by reason of that extraordinary Respect which he had shown
the City; and assembled in great Numbers at the Place appointed, together with
their Fathers and Brothers, very much rejoicing at their fair Prospects. When
they were ranged, the Emperor walked in amongst them, laying his Hand upon them
as he passed by, and commending one thing in one Man, and another thing in
another, till they were all enclosed by his Army before they were aware of any
such Design. As soon as the Emperor perceived that his Army had encompassed
them, and that they were all enclosed as it were in a Net, he withdrew from
amongst them with the Guard that attended him, and giving the Signal to his
Soldiers, they instantly fell upon them, being without Arms, and surrounded and
cut them all to pieces, with all the other Multitude that were there assembled.
Some of the Soldiers carried on the Tragedy of the Day, others dragged the dead
Bodies into the Pits that they had dug for that purpose; after which they
raised over them a great Tumulus of Earth. Some that were hurried into these
Pits, were but half dead; others were not so much as wounded. Great Numbers of
the Soldiers also perished; for those that had any Remains of Life and Force,
fastened upon those that pushed them into the Pits, and pulled them down along
with them. The Slaughter was so great, that all the Plain was floated with
Blood, which discharging it self into the Sea and the Nile, discolored the
Mouth of that mighty River, and all the Neighboring Shore.

After the Emperor had thus executed his Revenge on the Alexandrians, he left
that City, and returned to Antioch; and soon after extremely affecting the
Surname of Parthicus, and the Glory of Conquering the Eastern Barbarians, in
the profoundest Tranquillity he framed this Project. He sent Ambassadors with
Letters and rich Presents to Artabanus King of Parthia; in his Letters he
demanded his Daughter in Marriage, and set forth at large, That he was an
Emperor, and the Son of an Emperor; that he could not marry the Daughter of a
Private Person; that his Station in the World obliged him to match with some
Queen or Princess of high Birth; that the Roman and Parthian Empires were the
greatest in the World; that if the two Crowns were united and cemented by this
Alliance into one Empire, without any Rivers or Boundaries to divide them, as
heretofore, the whole World beside would not be able to balance their Powers in
Conjunction; that the Barbarous Nations that are subject to both Empires would
be easily kept within the Bounds of their Duty, provided they were suffered to
enjoy their own Governors and Constitutions; that the Roman Infantry and
Pike-men were the best in the World for a close Engagement; that the Parthians
excelled all other Nations in the Force of their Cavalry, and the Dexterity of
their Archers; that these Things concurring with a Provision of all Warlike
Stores, would put them in a Capacity of establishing and maintaining with ease
an Universal Monarchy; that whereas heretofore the Parthian Spices and Silks,
and the Metals and curious Manufactures of the Romans, were only imported by
Merchants, and that very rarely, and by stealth, that after this Union there
should be a free and open Use and Intercourse of all Things whatsoever between
the two Nations.

Upon receipt of the Letters, the Parthian at first refused to accord him his
Demands, and remonstrated to him the Inconveniences of a Match between a Roman
and one that was Barbarous; That it would be impossible for them to agree, each
being an utter Stranger to the others Language, and their Diet and Habit so
vastly different; that he had Noble men in Rome whose Daughters he might take
to Wife, as he had his Arsacidae; that it was not convenient their Blood should
be corrupted by any Foreign Mixture. These were the Reasons he alleged for the
rejecting his Proposal. But Antonine making fresh Instances to him, and
enforcing them with rich Presents, and repeated Protestations of his great
Kindness and Passion for the Princess, the Parthian was at last prevailed upon,
and promised to give him his Daughter, and began already to call him his
Son-in-Law. The News whereof being carried up and down, the Barbarous People
were putting all Things in Posture for the Reception of the Roman Emperor, and
beheld with Joy the near Prospect of an everlasting Peace. Antonine passed the
Rivers without Impeachment, and entered the Parthian Territories, which he
looked upon as his own; the People all along sacrificing, and offering Incense
upon crowned Altars, with which Civility he appeared extremely satisfied, and
advanced up into the Country, till he drew near to the Parthian Court; at which
time Artabanus marched out into a spacious Plain that lies before the City, to
receive his Son-in-Law. Here were great Numbers of Parthians, adorned with
Chaplets of Flowers of their own growth, and Gowns of Silk flowered with
Silver, and curiously died. They were celebrating a Festival, and dancing with
artful Motion, and due Observance of Time, to the Music of Flutes, Pipes, etc.
which is an Entertainment they are extremely delighted with, especially when
they are enflamed with Wine.

The Multitude were no sooner drawn together upon the Plain, but they forsook
their Horses, threw aside their Bows and Quivers, and abandoned themselves to
Revellings and Festival Gaieties. The Concourse of People was very great, and,
as Luck would have it, they stood very disorderly, without the least Jealousy
or Apprehension, every Man pressing forward to get a Sight of the new
Bridegroom. The Opportunity being thus favorable, Antonine gave the Signal to
his Men to begin the Massacre, having before given positive Orders to put all
to the Sword. The Barbarians amazed with the unexpected Encounter, soon turned
their Backs, and the Romans gave them chase, killing many, and wounding more.
Artabanus was born off by his Guards, and being set upon a Horse, made his
Escape, with a small Party, and great Difficulty; all the rest were cut to
pieces. They wanted their Horses, which are of the greatest Service to them in
a Battle; for they were dismounted before, and had turned them to graze: Nor
could they betake themselves to their Heels, which were entangled in the loose
Garments that came down to their Feet. Bows and Arrows they had none, nor was
there any Occasion for them at the Celebration of a Marriage. Antonine, after
he had made a great Slaughter, returned with great Numbers of Prisoners, and a
vast Booty, without any Opposition, burning the Cities and Villages to the
Ground, and giving all up to the Plunder and Ravage of his Soldiers. Such was
the Calamity which befell the Parthians, in an Hour when they least expected it.
Antonine, after he had spoiled and harrass'd all the Country, and his Soldiers
were tired with ravaging and killing, returned into Mesopotamia, from whence he
sent an Express to the Senate and People of Rome, with the News, that he had
made an entire Conquest of the East, and reduced all those Kingdoms under his
Dominion. The Senate, though they had had true Accounts of the whole Progress of
this Expedition, (for it is impossible for the Actions of Princes to be
concealed) yet out of Fear or Flattery they decreed him all the Honors of
victorious Generals. After this, he staid some time in Mesopotamia, following
the Diversions of Hunting and Chariot-driving.

Antonine had two Generals, Audentius and Macrinus; the first was an old Man,
reputed an excellent Captain, but utterly unacquainted with Civil Business; the
latter was a good Lawyer, and an able Pleader. The Emperor would often upbraid
him publicly with want of Courage and Military Conduct, proceeding sometimes
to the bitterest Reproaches. He had been informed, that Macrinus kept a good
Table, and esteemed himself above a course and common Diet; which the Emperor,
out of a Martial Humor, was extremely delighted with. He heard also, that he
wore a Cloak, and dressed after the City-fashion, which gave occasion to the
Imputations he threw upon him, of Softness and Effeminacy, and to his
threatening to kill him. Which Things touched Macrinus so sensibly, that he was
not able any longer to bear them.

About this time it happened, that Antonine, being naturally very curious, and
considering that he must die sooner or later, was very desirous to enlarge the
View of his Understanding beyond the Bounds of Humane Knowledge, and to dive
into the Secrets of Gods and Demons. He fansied every Body had a Design upon
his Life, consulted all the Oracles, and summoned all Pretenders to the Mystery
of Astrology and Fortune-telling, to rendezvous at his Court; and herein he was
so diligent, that not one of that Kind of Impostors escaped him. But suspecting
that they did not tell him what was most probable, but what they imagined would
please him most, he sent to Maternian in Rome, where he sat at the Helm of
Public Affairs, being the Emperor's greatest Favorite, and the only Man whom
he used with an universal Confidence. Him he ordered to call a Council of the
most eminent of the Magi, and by Necromantick Art to enquire about the End of
his Life, and whether any Designs were a-foot against the Government. Maternian
readily executed his Orders, and whether the Spirits that were raised made any
such Discovery to him, or he did it out of a private Pique to Macrinus, remains
uncertain; but he gave the Emperor to understand by Letter, that Macrinus was
in an Intrigue to gain the Crown, and that it would behove him speedily to cut
him off. The Letter he sealed, and gave it amongst other Letters, as he used to
do, to the Post, who knew nothing of the Contents, but performed his Journey
with his usual Expedition, and came to the Emperor when he was in his driving
Equipage, and just ready to mount his Chariot; he delivered the whole Packet to
him, and amongst the rest was the Letter which concerned Macrinus. The Emperor
was so set upon his Sport, that he commanded Macrinus to take the Letters, and
to withdraw from the Company, and peruse them, and if there was any thing of
moment, to acquaint him with it; if not, to do the Duties of his Office as
Captain of his Lifeguard; which was an Admonition he frequently repeated.
After he had given these Orders, he fell to his Sports.

Macrinus withdrew and loosed the Letters, and lighting upon that which was of
fatal importance to himself, saw how imminent the Danger was, and knowing the
Emperor's Violence and Cruelty on these Occasions, especially when he had any
Pretense for it, wisely suppressed the Letter, and gave him an Account, as he
used to do, of what was material in the rest: But apprehending a second Letter
from Maternian upon the same Subject, he thought it better to be active than
passive in a Case of this Nature, and laid this Plot. There was one Martial, a
Centurion of the Emperor's Lifeguard, that always attended him, his Brother
had been put to death by the Emperor, upon an Information against him, without
any Conviction. The Emperor had also reviled Martial himself, calling him
Cowardly Rascal, and Macrinus his Tool. So Macrinus sent for him, being in
great Affliction, as well for his Brother's Death, as his own ill Treatment,
not doubting but he would be fit for his Purpose, because he was under great
Obligations to him, and had always been very ready to serve him. He imparted to
him his Design of taking off Antonine, and desired him to give the Blow as soon
as a favorable Opportunity should offer it self: Which was no sooner proposed
than undertaken by Martial, Macrinus's Promises, his Brother's Murder, and his
own Resentments, all conspiring to push him forward to the Attempt.

It fell out, that soon after this Assassination was projected, the Emperor
being then at Carrae a City of Mesopotamia, resolved to visit the Temple of the
Moon, which is held in extraordinary esteem by the Natives. This Temple stands
at a great distance from the City, so the Emperor only took a few Horsemen with
him, that he might not harrass his whole Army, designing to return as soon as
he had sacrificed to the Deity of the Place. In the middle of the Journey he
had a Motion to Stool, and ordered all his Retinue to withdraw, and went aside
to ease Nature, attended only by one Servant, all the rest retiring, and
standing at a great distance, out of respect. Martial, that warily observed all
his Motions, seeing him alone, ran to him in great haste, as if he had beckoned
to him to hear or see somewhat, and watching his Opportunity, when he stood with
his Back to him, and was busied in pulling down his Breeches, stabbed him with
a Poniard which he had secretly about him, of which he instantly died. Thus
Antonine received the fatal Stroke, when he was the least aware of it, none of
his Guards being near enough to defend him.

Martial, as soon as the Business was done, leaped upon his Horse, and
attempted to make his Escape; but the German Horsemen, whom the Emperor held in
great Esteem, and had appointed to be of his Guard, being the nearest his
Person, and the first that discovered what was done, instantly pursued him, and
levelling at him with their Javelins, struck him dead. The rest of the
Soldiers, as soon as they heard of it, ran together in great Disorder; nor was
any Man's Sorrow more remarkable upon this Occasion than Macrinus's; no Man
seemed more affected, or shed more Tears over the dead Body. The Disaster
extremely afflicted the whole Army; they considered in him the Loss of a
Companion and Fellow-Soldier, more than that of a Prince. But no Suspicion was
entertained of Macrinus, no Man doubting but Martial was led by a private
Resentment to the Commission of this Murder, and so every Man returned to his
own Tent. Macrinus burnt the Body, and depositing the Ashes in an Urn, sent
them to his Mother in Antioch to be buried. These Misfortunes of the Children
were laid so to Heart by the Mother, that she offered Violence to her self; but
whether voluntarily, or by compulsion, remains uncertain. Thus fell Antonine
and his Mother Julia, after they had lived as is before related. He reigned Six
Years after the Death of his Father and Brother.

After the Death of Antonine, the Army was in great irresolution and
uncertainty what to do: So there was an Inter-regnum for two Days, which were
spent in Debates and Deliberations about a Successor. They had received Advice,
that Artabanus was advancing against them with a mighty Force, being resolved
to pursue his Revenge, and to sacrifice them to the Ghosts of his Subjects,
whom they had treacherously murdered in a Time of Peace and Festival Solemnity.
The Choice fell upon Audentius, who was reckoned upon as a Man of great
Courage, and Experience in the Art of War; but he excused himself, alleging
his Incapacity for so important a Charge, by reason of his great Age. Then they
chose Macrinus. This Election was very much influenced by the Tribunes, in
favor of Macrinus, who were after his Death looked upon as his Accomplices, and
privy to his Designs against Antonine, as will appear in the Sequel of this
History. So Macrinus succeeded; the Army in this Election being determined
rather by the Necessity of the Conjuncture, than by any Esteem or Confidence
they had in the Person elected.

While these Things were in agitation, Artabanus approached with a great Army,
composed of a great Force of Cavalry and Archers, and Cuirassiers that rode
upon Camels, and fought with long Spears. Whereupon Macrinus called his
Soldiers together, and harangu'd them to the following Effect.

MACRINUS his SPEECH to the ARMY.
I Don't wonder, Gentlemen, that you are all so deeply afflicted with the Loss
of such a Prince, or rather of a Fellow-Soldier: But it is the Part of a Wise
Man to bear all the Traverses of Fortune with Steadiness and Moderation. His
Memory shall for ever be preserved in our Breasts, and handed down to
Posterity, with the Immortal Glory of his Great and Noble Achievements; nor
shall we ever forget his singular Love of you, which he testified in so unusual
a Condescension, even by stooping to the common Duties of the meanest Soldier.
But now that we have paid the Honors due to his Memory, and discharged all
Debts of that Nature, it concerns us to consult our own Welfare and Security.
Artabanus is advanced against us with the whole Power of the East, and seems to
have just Grounds of Quarrel against us. We were the Aggressors; we infringed
the Treaty, and made War upon him in the profoundest Tranquillity. And now,
Gentlemen, the whole Roman Empire relies upon your Courage and Fidelity. The
Point in dispute is not about Rivers or Boundaries. Our whole Fortunes lie at
Stake. A mighty Potentate comes against us, to execute Revenge for the Murder
of his Children and Relations, who, he says, were unjustly massacred, and in
manifest violation of the most solemn Leagues. My Advice is, that you stand to
your Arms, and be careful to keep your Ranks according to the Roman Discipline.
The Barbarians are an unformed, irregular Multitude; their very Numbers will be
an hindrance to them; whilst your Order and Military Skill will not only
preserve you from Danger, but give you great Advantages over the Enemy. Take
Heart therefore, and behave your selves as Romans ought to do, and you have
done hitherto. If you vanquish, you will not only reap the Glory which this
Action deserves, but this will be the most effectual Method of convincing Rome,
and the World, that your former Victory over them was not gained by Treachery
and Surprise, but by true Valor and Force of Arms.

After he had spoke, the Soldiers seeing the Necessity of the present Juncture
of Affairs, ranged themselves in Battel-array, and stood to their Arms. As soon
as the Sun rose, Artabanus came in sight with a vast Army; and the Barbarians,
after they had worshipped the Sun with the usual Ceremonies of those Countries,
made the Onset with terrible Shouts. The Cavalry begun the Charge with a Volley
of Arrows. The Romans were marshalled with great Caution, and stood in very
good Order. The Moorish Cavalry was placed in both the Wings; in the Lanes
between the Ranks were posted Light-Horsemen, that were ready to sally out upon
Occasion. Thus imbattell'd, they supported with great firmness the Charge of
the Barbarians, who galled them extremely with the Multitude of their Arrows,
and the long Spears which the Cuirassiers fought with from their Horses and
Camels. On the other Hand, whenever they came to close Combat, the Romans had
still the better: But when they found themselves pressed by the Enemies Horse
and Camels, which were very numerous, they feigned a Flight, and so decoyed the
Barbarians amongst sharp Iron Stakes, and other Engines that were prepared
beforehand. These Stakes were covered with Sand, so well, that they were not
discovered; which made this Stratagem prove very fatal to the Enemies Horse:
For as soon as they rode amongst them, their Horses, but especially their
Camels, that have very tender Hoofs, began to halt, and throw their Riders to
the Ground. Now the Parthians as long as they are on Horseback behave
themselves very manfully; but whenever they come to dismount or fall from their
Horses, they are easily taken, and are not able to bear the Shock of a close
Engagement. Beside, they are so encumbered by a loose Garment about their Legs,
that they can neither fly nor pursue. The Engagement lasted two whole Days,
from Sun rise to Sunset, till the Night coming on put an end to it; at which
time they returned to their respective Camps, each esteeming the Advantage to
be on his own Side. The third Day both Sides drew their Armies out into the
Field, and the Parthians, who were far the most numerous, endeavored to
surround the Romans; but they disappointed them, by enlarging the Front of
their Army to a great breadth, without any considerable depth. The Numbers of
the Men and Beasts that were slain was so great, that they filled the Field.
The dead Bodies were pil'd up to a vast height, especially the Camels, that
fell one upon another in great numbers, which cut off all possibility of
engaging; for the Armies could neither see nor come at one another, by reason
of a vast and almost unsurmountable Heap of dead Bodies that lay between them.
So both retired to their several Camps.

And now Macrinus understanding that the Reason why Artabanus fought with so
much Fury and Obstinacy, was because he thought Antonine was his Enemy, [it
being generally observed, that the Barbarians are soon discouraged, and sink as
it were under the Fatigue, if they don't meet with fortunate Success in their
first Rencounters; but now they stood it out, and were resolved to renew the
Battle as soon as the dead Bodies were removed and burnt, not knowing that the
Author of all this Quarrel was dead,] he sent Ambassadors to him with Letters,
wherein he gave him to understand, That the Emperor who had violated his Oath
and League with him, was killed, and had received the Punishment due to his
Offense; that the Romans, to whom the Empire of right belonged, had put the
Sovereign Power into his Hands; that he disapproved the late Proceedings of his
Predecessor, and therefore would restore all the Prisoners that were alive,
with the whole Booty that he had brought away, and would enter into a strict
League and Amity with him, which should be ratified by Oaths and Sacrifices.

Artabanus read the Letter, and receiving a particular Account from the
Ambassadors of the Assassination of Antonine, thought he had paid dear enough
for the Infraction of a League; and being well satisfied with the Restitution
of the Prisoners and Booty, without any farther Bloodshed, concluded a Peace,
and returned home; and Macrinus leaving Mesopotamia, marched with his Army to
Antioch.

AN EPITOME OF THE Fifth Book.
OPilius Macrinus gives an Account by Letter to the Senate of the Course and
Conduct of Affairs, and is declared Emperor by that Assembly, to the great
Satisfaction of all Men. He remains in Antioch, where his Effeminacy renders
him Odious to the Soldiers: So a Commotion being raised, they betray him, and
he is killed in Chalcedon a City of Bithynia, being vanquished by Bassian the
Priest of the Sun, who is brought into the Camp, and being supposed the Son of
Antonine, is called after him, and proclaimed Emperor. In the very beginning of
his Reign be abandons himself to the most profligate Courses, exposing both
himself and the Roman Religion to Calumny and Contempt. He worships his God
Heliogabulus, and in his Behavior both Public and Private, in Matters Sacred
as well as Profane, is guilty of the greatest Folly and Madness. So he falls
under the Displeasure of the Soldiers, and is killed by them; and Alexander,
who was lately declared Caesar, is set up in his Room, and proclaimed Emperor.

The Fifth Book.
THe Account of Antonine' s Reign and Death, of the Plot that was laid against
him, and of the Establishment of the Succession upon his Decease, is delivered
in the former Book. Macrinus remained still in Antioch, from whence he sent
Letters, directed to the Senate and People of Rome, the Substance whereof was,
That he thought it needless to use many Words to them, who were so well
acquainted with the Principles on which he had all along acted, with his
natural Disposition to Gentleness, and with his constant Moderation in the
whole Course of his late Ministry, wherein his Authority was little inferior to
that of the Emperor, whose Person was committed to his Faith and Protection, as
Captain of the Lifeguard. They knew very well his Dislike of the Emperor's
Proceedings, and that he had often interposed on their behalf, with no small
Hazard to himself, when the Emperor by false Suggestions, which he very much
hearkened to, was urged on to violent Counsels: That he had often cast
Aspersions upon him, and had publicly reproached him on the score of his
Mildness and Love of the People, and had therefore accused him of Laziness and
Dissoluteness of Manners: That he always entertained Flatterers, and such as
inflamed him by their Calumnies, and spurred him on to Cruelty, looking upon
them as his truest Friends, and the warmest Zealots for his Interests: That for
his own part, he always approved gentle Methods; that therefore he had put an
end to the War with the Parthians, which had made the whole Empire tremble:
That in the Action of the War they came no way short of the Enemy in Prowess
and Gallantry: That by the Peace which he had concluded, a formidable Enemy,
that was advanced against them with a puissant Force, was become their Friend
and Allie: That as long as he should be their Prince, a stop should be put to
Effusions of Blood, and Alarms of War; the Prerogative should be lowered, and
the Privileges of the Subject advanced, and Arbitrary Power should sink into an
Aristocracy: That there was no Reason why they should esteem him unworthy of
the Empire, or judge it the Error of a blind Chance, by which he was exalted
from a Private Gentleman of Rome, to this high Station: That there was no
Advantage in high Birth, unless it was accompanied with Moderation and
Clemency: That the Gifts of Fortune were often cast on those that did not
deserve them; but the Virtues of the Mind stamped a real Value and Dignity on
all that possessed them: That Estate, Luster of Family, etc. might make a Man
happy, but were not good Topics of Commendation, because they are derived from
others; but Gentleness and Humanity are not only admired by all Men, but
redound to the real Praise of those whom they adorn: That the Public had
received no Benefit from the Noble Parentage of Commodus, nor from Antonine's
succeeding his Father: That these Princes take the Empire as it were by Right
of Inheritance, and abuse it as their own Patrimony; but those that received it
from the free Gift of the People, will always remain sensible of the infinite
Obligation, and will still be meditating Returns proportionable to so great a
Merit. Besides, this Nobility disposed them to Arrogance, and a Contempt of
their Subjects, as their Inferiors; whereas those that advanced through
inferior Employments to this high Dignity, would endeavor to defend it as the
Reward of their Industry, and will pay the same Respect and Deference which
they used to do to those who were their Superiors before this Elevation. As for
his part, he would do nothing without their Approbation; they should be his
Counselors, and have a Share in the Conduct of all Public Affairs, and should
enjoy their ancient Liberty and Repose, which their Highborn Princes had
deprived them of, and which Marcus, and after him Pertinax, both Men of mean
Extraction, had endeavored to restore: Concluding, That it was better to be
the first of a Noble Family, than to debase that Nobility which was transmitted
from Glorious Ancestors, by declining from the generous Paths in which they
trod.

As soon as the Letter was read, all the Senators broke out into Acclamations
of Joy, and unanimously decreed him Imperial Honors: But they were more
overjoyed that Antonine was dead, than that Macrinus succeeded him; which was
expressed by Public Rejoycings made on that Occasion. All common Informers,
and Servants that had accused their Masters, were publicly Gibbeted; and what
by Proscriptions, what by Capital Punishments inflicted on profligate Villains,
the City, and indeed the whole Empire was pretty well purged. Those that lay
concealed, were quiet, for fear of the Justice of the Government. So the People
lived in Security, and enjoyed at least an Appearance, and as it were a first
Dawn of Liberty, during that one Year in which Macrinus reigned.

Macrinus commitred a great Soloecism in not disbanding and dispersing the
Soldiers, and in that he did not hasten to Rome, where his Presence was greatly
desired, and whither he was invited by the daily repeated Clamours of the
People: But he staid in Antioch, where he began to affect a long Beard and slow
Gate. He would scarce vouchsafe to speak to those that came to him; and when he
did, he often spoke so low, it was a hard matter to tell what he said. In these
Particulars he copied after Marcus, and they were the only Actions of that
Prince which he imitated; for he abandoned himself to dissolute Courses, became
a great frequenter of Plays and Musick-meetings, neglected Public Affairs, and
appeared always in Public with Buttons, and a Belt curiously embroidered with
Gold and Precious Stones. This Luxury was by no means pleasing to the Army,
that looked upon it as an unmanly Softness, better becoming a Woman, or the
Barbarous Nations, than the Emperor of Rome. These things, I say, gave great
disgusts to the Soldiers; they disliked his Course of Life, as too effeminate;
and calling to mind Antonine's Way of Living, which was such as became a
Soldier and a Man of Business, they condemned Macrinus's Luxury. Besides, they
murmured extremely that they were not permitted to return home, but were
constrained to live in a Camp in a Foreign Country, where sometimes they wanted
necessary Provisions, and that too after a Peace was concluded. They observed
too at the same time, how softly and delicately the Emperor lived. So, in
short, things tended to a Rebellion. They began to speak disrespectfully of
him, and only sought for some sort of Pretense to remove this Author of their
Grievances. Thus it pleased the Fates that Macrinus having revell'd it in
Imperial Dignity for the space of one Year, should lose his Life and Empire
together; Fortune soon affording a slight Occasion to the Soldiers for the
effecting what they desired.

There was a certain Lady called Maesa, born in Phoenicia, in the City Emesa.
She was Sister to Julia, Severus's Wife, and Mother to Antonine, and had lived
many Years in the Emperor's Court in her Sisters Time, both in the Reign of
Severus and Antonine; but after her Sisters Death, and the Murder of Antonine,
was commanded by Macrinus to depart into her own Country with her Effects,
which were very considerable, by reason of her living at Court so many Years.
Maesa obeyed the Orders, and returned into Phoenicia. This old Lady had two
Daughters, the elder Soaemis, and Mammaea the younger: Each of these had a Son;
Soaemis called hers Bassian, Mammaea's was named Alexian: Both the Youths were
bred up under the Care of their Mother and Grandmother. Bassian was about
Fourteen Years old, Alexian had just entered his Tenth Year. They were both
Priests of the Sun, which is the God of the Phoenicians, and in their Language
is called Heliogabulus. They have a magnificent Temple built for him, adorned
with Gold and Silver and Precious Stones. Nor do the Natives only worship this
God, but all the neighboring Princes and Potentates send rich Presents to him
every Year. They have no Statue made with Hands in the likeness of the God, as
is usual amongst the Greeks and Romans, but only a huge Stone, that is round at
the bottom, and grows sharper by degrees toward the top. The Color of it is
Black, and the Figure Conical. The Tradition is, that it fell from Heaven. It
has some little Rudenesses and Marks upon it. They say it is the Image of the
Sun, not made by any mortal Artificer, and esteem it as such. Bassian was
ordained his Priest, and performed the Functions of the Priests Office, as
being the Elder, appearing publicly in his barbarous Formalities, which were a
Gown of Purple Silk flowered with Gold, that came down to his Feet and Hands,
all his Legs being covered with Under-Vestments of the same Silk. Upon his Head
he wore a Crown, richly adorned with Precious Stones of several Colors.
Besides, he was then in the flower of his Age, and the goodliest Youth of his
Time. So Youth and Native Beauty being set off with all the Advantages of a
soft and charming Dress, might well give occasion to his Admirers to compare
him with the beautiful Images of Bacchus.

While he was sacrificing and dancing about the Altars, according to the
barbarous Rites of the Country, with Flutes, Pipes, and all sorts of Musical
Instruments, all the People, but especially the Soldiers, took a stricter View
of him than ordinary, either because they knew he was of the Imperial Line, or
the Charms of his Beauty drew the Eyes of all Men upon him. There was at that
time a great Army near the Town, that lay there to cover Phoenicia, but was
afterward commanded away, as shall be related in due time. The Soldiers came
every day to Town, and to the Temple for the sake of Divine Worship, and were
wonderfully pleased with seeing the Lad. Some of these were Maesa's
Acquaintance, that were fled from Rome, amongst whom she whispered, when she
perceived how much they admired the Youth, That he was Antonine' s Natural Son,
though he was reputed another Man's: That when she lived at Court in her Sisters
Time, the said Emperor had Intrigues with her Daughters, that were then young
and handsome. Whether this was true, or only an Artifice, remains uncertain; but
however it was, as soon as they got hold of this Report, they handed it from
one Soldier to another, till it was published through the whole Army. It was
also given out, That Maesa had a prodigious Fond of Money, and that she would
freely distribute it amongst them, provided they would re-establish her Family
in the Empire. Hereupon it was concerted, That if she would come privately by
Night to the Camp with her Family, they would receive her, and proclaim the Son
of Antonine Emperor. Which was no sooner proposed to the old Lady, but she
determined instantly to put her self into their Hands, being resolved to run
any Risque, rather than live privately, and be thus neglected. Pursuant to
these Counsels, she got out of the City privately with her Daughters and
Grandchildren, and was conducted by the said Soldiers of her Acquaintance that
were fled from Rome, to the Fortifications of the Camp, where she easily gained
Admittance; and the Question being put, the Soldiers were all unanimous, that
their young Emperor should be called Antonine: After which, they put upon him
Purple Robes. Then they laid in Provisions, and took in their Wives and
Children, and all their Effects that were in the adjacent Country or Villages,
and shutting up their Gates, began to put themselves into a Posture of Defense,
so as to endure a formal Siege, if Occasion should require.

Macrinus received Advertisement hereof when he was in Antioch; and the News
was carried to all the other Armies, that a Son was found to Antonine, and that
Julia's Sister distributed Money to the Soldiers. They took Things upon trust,
and thought every Thing true that was related to them for such, and were in
great uncertainty of Mind. Their Disaffection to Macrinus, and a kind of
Compassion which they had for the Memory of Antonine, were of some force to
make them desire a Revolution; but the Hopes of Gain had the greatest weight,
and influenced great Numbers to fly over to the new Antonine.

Macrinus looked upon all this as a Childish Enterprise, and retaining his
usual gaiety of Temper, staid at home, and sent Julian, one of his Generals,
with a sufficient Force, as he thought, to reduce the Rebels; who no sooner
approached their Walls, but they showed their young Emperor upon the Turrets
and Ramparts, and shouted aloud, Behold the Son of Antonine! They also held up
Bags full of Money, well understanding, that nothing was a more effectual Bait
to tempt Traitors. And so it happened; for Julian's Soldiers easily believed he
was Antonine's Son, and persuading themselves that he extremely resembled him,
cut off Julian's Head, and sent it to Macrinus, and were received with open
Gates into the Camp. After this Reinforcement, the Rebels were in Condition not
only to hold out a Siege, but to engage in a pitched Battle: Their Numbers also
increased every Day, by Deserters that came over to them.

As soon as Macrinus received Advice of this Disaster, he appointed a general
Muster of his Forces, and advanced with his whole Army against the Rebels,
resolving to force their Trenches. Antonine found that his Soldiers would not
stay to be attacked in their Camp, but were ready to march out against
Macrinus, and give him Battle: So he drew his whole Force out into the Field.
The Engagement was in the Confines of Syria and Phoenicia. Antonine's Soldiers
were alarmed by the Fears of Punishment for their traitorous Practices, in case
they should be vanquished, and therefore they exerted their utmost Vigor; but
Macrinus's Men fought more lazily, great Numbers deserting, and going over to
the Rebels; insomuch that Macrinus fearing lest they should all abandon him,
and he should be made Prisoner by the Rebels, and apprehending that his Usage
would not be the best if he should fall into their Hands, when it was almost
Night, and his Soldiers yet maintained the Fight, he threw off his Imperial
Cloak, and all the other Badges of Majesty, and fled, being accompanied only by
a few Captains, whom he esteemed the most faithful to his Interests. He shaved
his Beard, that he might not be discovered, and putting himself in traveling
Equipage, he posted both Night and Day with his Head covered, preventing even
the Fame of his bad Fortune. The Captains were very diligent in pressing the
Coaches, as if Macrinus had still been Emperor, and they had been sent on some
important Dispatches.

Thus Macrinus escaped: The Engagement continued; the Praetorian Band, which is
a select Number of the tallest Men, chosen out of the whole Army to guard the
Emperor's Person, maintained their Ground, and sustained the Fury of all the
Enemies Forces; the rest were all for Antonine. But when Macrinus had not been
seen of a long time, nor any Ensigns of Imperial Majesty could be descried, and
his Men knew not what was become of him, whether he was slain or fled, they
were in great uncertainty what Measures to take, but resolved at last to hazard
themselves no longer for a Man that was no where to be found; and yet they were
afraid to render themselves, and be cast on the Faith of the Enemy. As soon as
Antonine understood by Deferters that Macrinus was fled, he sent Heralds to
signify to his Men, That it was in vain to fight for a Coward and a Fugitive;
and offered them a Pardon and Oblivion of what was past, and swore he would
observe it, and constituted them his Lifeguard. They accepted the Terms, and
submitted: Whereupon Antonine sent out a Detachment to pursue Macrinus, who was
got a considerable way before them. They found him at Chalcedon, a City of
Bithynia, extremely indisposed by the Fatigue of so long a Journey, and took
him in his Concealment in a Countryhouse-near the City, and beheaded him. 'Twas
said, he was making what haste he could to Rome, in confidence of the Zeal and
Affections of the Populace; but as he was passing over the Propontis into
Europe, he was forced back by contrary Gusts when he was near Byzantium, even
the Winds conspiring to draw him back to his Destruction. So near he was
escaping his Pursuers. He died most infamously. He would have gone to Rome now,
when it was too late; whereas he ought to have done it as soon as he was
declared Emperor. Thus fell Macrinus, both his Fortunes and his Counsels
failing him, together with his Son Diadumenianus, whom he had made Caesar.

After this, the whole Army came over to Antonine, and owned him Emperor: So he
took upon him the Supreme Authority, and his Grandmother, with the Assistance
of her Friends, made such Regulations in the East as the State of Affairs did
most require, (for the Emperor was very young, and unskilful in Business and
Letters) after which the Army was presently commanded to march, Maesa being
impatient to visit the Roman Court, where she had lived so long.

As soon as these Things were notified to the Roman People and Senate, they
were by no means satisfied; but the Necessity of Affairs determined them to a
Submission to what the Army had been pleased to ordain. Nevertheless, all Men
condemned Macrinus's Remisness, and his loose and dissolute Manners, and looked
upon him as the sole Author of his own Miseries.

Antonine marched out of Syria, and the Season of the Year obliged him to
Winter in Nicomedia. Here he ran into the most prodigious Riots and Excesses,
turned the Worship of his God into a Scene of Buffoonry, was beyond measure
luxurious in his Clothes, wore Purple Silks flowered with Gold, and was always
nicely decked with Jewels, Bracelets, and Coronets made in the Fashion of a
Turban, and embelish'd with Gold and great Variety of Precious Stones. His
Habit was between the Sacred Robe of the Phoenicians, and the soft Apparel of
the Medes. He scorned the Attire of the Greeks and Romans, because it was made
of Cloth, which he used to term a vile Manufacture. Nothing would please him
but Syrian Silks, in which he often appeared abroad with a Consort of Flutes
and Pipes, to celebrate the Orgies of his God.

This Conduct of his did not please Maesa by any Means; she laid out her utmost
Efforts to reconcile him to the Roman Habit, and remonstrated to him, if he
should enter the City and Senate in that Garb, how offensive it would be to the
Romans, who are not accustomed to these Fopperies, esteeming them unworthy of a
Man, and tolerable only in the weaker Sex. But he took little notice of what
she said, nor would hearken to any Lectures that were read to him upon that
Subject by any body else: For he admitted none into any degree of Intimacy but
Flatterers, and Men of his own Morals, that would make no scruple to extol even
the worst of his Vices. Moreover he resolved to use the Senate and People of
Rome to the Sight of his Garb, and try how they would bear it, before he came
amongst them; and to this end caused his Picture to be taken at length in all
his Formalities, in which he appeared in Public, or when he sacrificed. His
God was represented in the same Piece, and he was drawn sacrificing to him.
This Draught he sent to Rome, and ordered it to be placed in the middle of the
Senate, above the Image of Victory, in the highest part of the House, that when
the Senators were assembled, they might offer Incense and sacrifice Wine to it.
He also gave out Injunctions, that all the Roman Magistrates, and such as
performed Public Sacrifices, should invoke their new God Heliogabulus, before
any other God ordinarily mentioned at those Solemnities.

When he arrived at Rome, the People were not much startled at the Original,
having been so well used to the Copy. Here he threw a Largess amongst the
People, as is ordinary for Emperors upon their Accession to the Crown, and
exhibited Shows of all sorts with great Magnificence. Then he built a large and
beautiful Temple for his God, and commanded a great many Altars to be raised
about it, on which he sacrificed every Day Hecatombs of Bulls, and great
Numbers of Sheep. He heaped Spices upon them, and poured out many Casks of the
oldest and best Wine, insomuch that Streams of Wine mixed with Blood ran all
over the Temple. After this he fell to dancing about the Altars, to a Consort
of all sort of Musical Instruments, and the Phoenician Women fell in with him,
and tript it about with Cymbals and Timbrels in their Hands. During this
Solemnity, the Senators and Gentry of Rome stood about him in the form of a
Theater. The Intrails of the Victims, and the Spices, were carried in Vessels
of Gold, upon the Heads, not of Servants, or Men of mean Condition, but of his
Generals, and of Persons in the most honorable Employments, that were habited
after the Phoenician Fashion, in Robes that came down to their Hands and Feet,
and wore Linen Shoes, in imitation of the Prophets of those Countries. He
thought he conferred a signal Honor on those whom he permitted to assist at
those Solemnities.

Though the Emperor seemed thus entirely devoted to a Humor of Dancing and
Sacrificing, yet he put to death several rich and eminent Men, who, as he was
informed, disliked his Course of Life, and had presumed to make him the Subject
of their Raillery. He took to Wife a Lady of the most Illustrious Quality
amongst the Romans, but divorced her soon after, divested her of all Imperial
Honors, and confined her to a private Sphere. Afterward, that his Actions
might have something of the Man in them, pretending to be mightily in love with
a Vestal Priestess, that by the Sacred Constitutions of the Romans is obliged
to perpetual Chastity, he took her by force out of the Temple, and married her:
But that it might be done with as good a Grace as the Thing would bear, he
wrote to the Senate, to extenuate the Guilt of an Action which was in it self
so Criminal: The Substance of his Apology was, That Humane Frailty had betrayed
him into the Sin; that his Passion for the Maid was extreme; however, no Match
could be more congruous or sacred, than that of a Priest with a Priestess. Not
long after he divorced this Wife also, and married for his third a Lady of
Commodus's Family.

Nor did he only play at Fast and Loose with Humane Matrimonies, but was now
seeking out for a Wife to his God. So he removed the Image of Pallas, (which
the Romans worship, but are not allowed to see) into his Bedchamber. It had
never been moved since it was brought from Troy, but once when the Temple was
in a Flame, till now it was fetched into the Imperial Palace in order to be
married. But afterward the Emperor reported, That his God had no great
Affection for such an armed Virago; and therefore he sent for the Image of
Urania, which is held in great Veneration by the Carthaginians, and all the
Nations of Africa. It is supposed to be erected by the Phoenician Dido, when
she founded Carthage on the Ground which she encompassed with the Bulls Hide.
The Africans call it Urania, and the Phoenicians, Astroarch, or the Moon:
Whereupon the Emperor remarked, That the Match would be very suitable between
the Sun and Moon; and commanded the Image to be brought to Rome, with all the
rich Ornaments of the Temple, and a very considerable Treasure, which he
ordered to be given with the Goddess as her Portion. Upon her arrival she was
placed at a small Distance from the God, and the Emperor issued out Orders to
the People in Rome and Italy, to celebrate a Festival, with all the
Demonstrations of Joy, public and private, for the Marriage of the Gods. He
built also a large and magnificent Temple near the City, whither he made an
Anniversary Procession with his God about Midsummer. He exhibited all sorts of
Public Entertainments, as Stage Plays, Chariot-races, Banquets, etc. which he
thought were of a popular Nature, and served to amuse the Multitude. The
Procession was in this manner. The God was seated in a Chariot richly adorned
with Gold and Precious Stones; in this he was carried out of the City, with
great Solemnity, to the Temple. The Chariot was drawn by Six white Horses, that
were above the ordinary Proportion, and richly accouter'd: The God held the
Reins. No Mortal ever sat in the Chariot, but all stood around and attended the
Divine Charioteer. The Emperor held the Bridle, and ran all the way backward,
keeping his Eyes fixed upon the Image. The Way was strow'd with Filings of
Gold, and he was supported by Soldiers on both Sides, to prevent his falling or
stumbling, his Eyes being so engaged, that he could not see his Way. The People
ran on each Side with Torches, Flowers, and Garlands. Then came the Images of
all the Gods, with all the Ensigns of Imperial Majesty, and the richest
Furniture of the Palace, and the most magnificent Ornaments of the Temple. All
the Gentry of Rome, and the whole Army, marched before the God with solemn
Pace, and conducted him to the Temple, where when he was placed, and the
Sacrifices and Solemnities whereof we have before made mention were performed,
the Emperor from vastly high Turrets, erected there by his Direction,
scattered, by way of Largess amongst the Multitude, Tickets for Goblets of Gold
and Silver, for Clothes and Linen of all sorts, for all Kinds of Beasts, wild
and tame, except Hogs, from which he abstained in conformity to the Phoenician
Customs. Great Numbers perished in the scrambling for these Tickets, being trod
to death in the Crowd, or pushed upon the Spears of the Soldiers; so that it
proved a fatal Festival to many. He often danced and drove in Public,
disdained to cloak his Follies, and appeared abroad with his Eyes and Cheeks
painted, disfiguring that Beauty which Nature had bestowed upon him, by an
uncomely Varnish.

Maesa in this interim observed how much the Soldiers were disgusted with the
Extravagances of their Prince; and fearing, if any thing should befall him,
that she should be forced to relapse into her private Condition, she persuaded
the light headed Youth to adopt Mammaea's Son, that was his Cousin-german, and
her Grandson, and declare him Caesar. To compass which, she accosted him with a
cajolling Harangue, wherein she represented to him, how suitable it would be to
his Character to attend Religious Rites and Ceremonies, to perform the
Functions of his Office, and assist at the Worship and Adoration of his God;
that in the mean time some Person should be empowered to take care of the Civil
Government, to take from him the Burden of a Crown, and free him from the
Avocations which the Affairs of the Empire might otherwise give him; and that
this Trust ought rather to be committed to an Ally and a Relation, than to a
Stranger. Hereupon Alexian was altered into Alexander, the Name of that
renowned Macedonian who was so highly esteemed and honored by Antonine, the
supposed Father of both these Princes: For both Maesa and her Daughters, with a
sort of Pride and Vanity, published their unlawful Amors with him, to inflame
the Affections of the Soldiers to their Sons. So Alexander was declared Caesar,
and joined with Antonine in the Consulate, after which he entered into the
Senate, and this Matter was ratified by the Authority of that Assembly. The
Point was carried without any Opposition, all Men concurring in the Decree,
though nothing could be more ridiculous and absurd, Antonine, who was only
Sixteen Years old, being made Father to Alexander, who was then in his Twelfth
Year, by virtue thereof.

No sooner was he declared Caesar, but Antonine had a mind to train him up in
his own Method: He would have him dance, and bear a Share in the Priest's
Office, wear the same Habit, and do the same Thing that he did: But his Mother
had an Eye upon him, and restrained him from all Indecencies that might ill
beseem a Man in his Station, sent privately for Masters in all Sorts of
Learning, infused into him honest and sober Notions and Principles, accustomed
him to Wrestling, and other manly Exercises, and instructed him in the Greek
and Latin Learning.

These Things highly offended Antonine, insomuch that he repented that he had
adopted him, and made him his Colleague. He commanded all his Masters instantly
to depart the Court, some of the most eminent he put to death, others he
banished, ridiculously alleging for Reasons to justify these Severities, That
they corrupted his Son, that they would not suffer him to dance and revel, that
they tied him up to Modesty of Behavior, and instructed him in Manly Duties.
Yea, his Infatuation ran so high, that he advanced Stage Players and common
Actors to the highest Dignities in the Empire. He gave the Command of the
Praetorian Band to one that had danced publicly on the Theater; he took
another from the Stage to superintend the Education of Youth, and to approve
and admit such as were elected into the Order of Gentlemen or Senators. He
committed to Chariot-drivers, Comedians, and Buffoons, the Execution of the
most important Trusts in the Government, and gave the Lieutenancy of Provinces
to such of his Slaves and Freed-men as had the greatest Vices to recommend
them. These Things bred Discontents and ill Humors in the People, but
especially the Soldiers; they despised him for his Niceness in adjusting the
Air of his Face, which was such as a Woman could not be guilty of, without
forfeiting her Claim to Modesty. He wore Necklaces of Gold; his Clothes and
Garniture were wonderfully effeminate; and thus attired, he danced frequently
in Public. So the Army and People were alienated from him, and biased
strongly in favor of Alexander. They conceived greater Hopes in a Youth that
was soberly and virtuously educated, and guarded him with great diligence, to
defeat the Practices set afoot by his Brother against his Life. His Mother
Mammaea would not suffer him to eat or drink any thing that was sent to him
from that Hand. He did not make use of the Cooks and Butlers that ordinarily
served the Court, but of such as his Mother made choice of, after manifold
Proofs of their Fidelity. She also sent Money to be distributed privately
amongst the Soldiers, to minister Fuel to their present Zeal for Alexander, and
to link them to his Interests by Money, the Spring which gives Life to their
most vigorous Motions.

Antonine had Intimations of all these Things, and left no Stone unturned to
accomplish the Ruin of Alexander and his Mother; but Maesa managed Matters
with that Dexterity, that he miscarried in all his Designs against them. She
was a Woman of a subtle Brain, and had lived many Years at Court with her
Sister Julia, Wife to Severus, and was now let into all Antonine's Intrigues,
who was naturally shallow, and still discovering himself, and betraying his own
Counsels.

When he found that all his Projects to ruin his Brother fell to the Ground
without effect, he resolved to take from him the Title and Dignity of Caesar,
and would not suffer him to be complimented, nor permit any Respect to be paid
him in Public. The Soldiers inquired diligently after him, and murmured
extremely at his Disgrace. So Antonine spread a Report that he lay at the point
of Death, to try how the Army would take it; which gave a deep Wound to them,
especially when he was no where to be found, and put them in so violent a Rage,
that they refused to send the ordinary Guards to the Emperor, but shut
themselves up in the Camp, and sent their Demands to Court, requiring a View of
Alexander in the Temple. This infinitely alarmed Antonine, so that without
delay he took his Brother with him in his Imperial Chariot, that was richly
adorned with Gold and Precious Stones, and drove with great haste to the Camp.
The Soldiers received them both with open Gates, and conducted them to the
Temple in the Camp; and Alexander was extravagantly caressed by the whole Army,
and received with Shouts of Joy; but Antonine was treated with Coldness and
Neglect. This struck him to the Heart; so lodging that Night in the Temple of
the Camp, and being not able to brook the Indignity, he commanded the Men who
had been the most forward in bestowing their Applauses upon Alexander to be
seized upon, as the Authors of a Sedition and a Riot, in order to be brought to
condign Punishment. This begot a general Resentment in the Army; they hated
Antonine on a Foreign Score, and had long wished that an end could be put to
his infamous Deportment; they also thought themselves bound in Honor to rescue
their Companions that were under Arrest; and at this time they seemed to have
just Grounds, and a favorable Opportunity to effect what they desired. So they
killed Antonine and his Mother, who was there present, by reason of her
Character and Alliance to the Emperor, and massacred all the Tools and
Instruments of his Villainies, that were then assembled in the Camp. The dead
Bodies of Antonine and his Mother were delivered over to the Scorn and
Indignities of the Mob, who after they had mangled and dragged them
contemptuously about the City, threw them into the Common Sewers that discharge
themselves into the Tyber.

Thus fell Antonine, after he had reigned Six Years, and lived as we have
related. Then the Army proceeded to proclaim Alexander Emperor, and conducted
him to the Imperial Palace, being very young, and remaining as yet under the
Care and Tuition of his Mother and Grandmother.

AN EPITOME OF THE Sixth Book.
SEverus Alexander remains under the Care of his Mother and Grandmother, and
administers the Empire with great Moderation. He has a Council appointed of
grave Men, chosen out of the Senate, by whose Advice and Assistance all Things
as well Sacred as Profane, are restored to their former State and Condition.
Then he marries a Lady of Noble Birth, and divorces her soon after, being
influenced in this Proceeding by his Mother, whom in all Things he obeyed.
Afterward Artabanus King of Persia stirs up a Quarrel, and Embassies are sent
to and fro, but without Effect. So he marches an Army into Asia, and dividing
his Forces into Three Parties, enters the Enemies Country; and after great
Losses and Misfortunes, returns to Antioch: From whence he is called back
suddenly to oppose the Germans, who had passed the Rhine and Danube, and were
entering in Hostile manner the Roman Territory; but meeting here with the like
ill Fortune, he is killed by the Soldiers, and Maximine, a Man of great
Military Skill, who then commanded the New Levies, is elected in his Room.

The Sixth Book.
THe Account of Antonine's Death is delivered in the former Book: After which
Alexander assumed the Title of Emperor, and appeared in the Imperial Robes; but
the Regency and Conduct of Public Affairs was in the Hands of the Women. They
endeavored a Reformation of all Abuses, and to put all Things in a more
prudent and regular Course than they had been in the late Reign. And to this
end, in the first place, they made choice of Sixteen of the most aged Men in
the Senate, and such as were in the greatest Reputation for Integrity and
Probity of Manners, who were to compose the young Emperor's Privy Council, and
nothing was said or done without their Concurrence and Approbation. This Change
in the Form of Government gave general Satisfaction to the Army, Populace, and
Senate, a sort of Aristocracy being introduced in the room of Tyranny and
Arbitrary Power. Then they restored the Images of the Gods, that had been
removed by Antonine, to their respective Temples and Fanes: And all those that
had in the late Reign been advanced undeservedly, or upon the bare
Recommendations of their Vices, to Honors and Dignities, were turned out, and
ordered to betake themselves to their former Mysteries and Vocations. All Civil
Offices, and Employments appertaining to the Law, were filled with Men famous
for their Learning and Eminency in that Knowledge; and Offices Military were
bestowed on Captains of the greatest Experience in the Art of War.

Thus was the Empire administered for a long time, when Maesa having arrived to
a great Age departed this Life. Her Funeral was solemnized with Imperial
Ceremonies, and she was Deified according to the Roman Custom.

Mammaea seeing the sole Guardianship of her Son devolved upon her self,
endeavored to bear the same Sway, and govern him still by the same Measures:
But now he had the Authority of the Government in his Hand, she was afraid lest
being then in the Heat of Youth, and conscious of his own unlimited Power, he
might be pushed on to some Vices and Irregularities incident to his Blood and
Family, and therefore set a strong Guard about the Court, and would not permit
any Person to come near him that was censured for any Immorality in his
Conversation, for fear they should debauch his native Innocence, and spur on
Nature, now he was vegete and young, to dishonest Passions and Appetites. She
advised him to attend principally the Administration of Justice, and to set
apart the best Portion of his Time for the Discharge of that Trust, that being
employed about greater Affairs, and more important to the Public Welfare, he
might not have leisure to pursue vain and sinful Amusements.

Alexander had a mild and benign Nature, disposing him always to Humanity and
Compassion, which was manifested in the ensuing Course of his Life. His
Government was so gentle, that in Fourteen Years not one Man was put to death,
though many were convicted of Crimes of the highest Nature. He would never
proceed to Capital Punishments; a Clemency so exemplary, that never any Prince
since Marcus came up to it; and I Am confident no Man can affirm, that in the
whole Course of his Reign (though it continued many Years) any Man suffered Death
without a fair and legal Trial.

He censured his Mother extremely, and was highly offended at her unmeasurable
Covetousness, and indecent Zeal in heaping up Money; for she pretended to act
in this Matter with a different View from what she did, ( viz.) that the
Emperor might never find his Exchequer unfurnished, whenever he had an Occasion
to distribute Munificences amongst the Soldiers; whereas she was laying in a
private Fund for her self at home. This cast a great Blemish upon his
Government, that a Woman should presume to pillage the Subject, and make
Invasions on their Property, notwithstanding the Emperor disapproved, and in
his own Judgment opposed it.

About this time Mammaea married her Son to a Roman Lady of high Birth, whom
she afterward by insupportable Usage constrained to leave the Court, though she
was passionately beloved by the Emperor. She affected the Title of Sole
Empress, and envied her a Share in that Honor, and proceeded at length to
those Outrages, that the Father of the young Empress, who was then in great
Esteem and Credit with the Emperor, impatient of the Injuries with which she
loaded both himself and his Daughter, retired from the Court to the Camp, where
he made public Acknowledgments of the great Respect which had been always paid
him by the Emperor, but complained of the insolent Deportment of Mammaea; which
exasperated her to that degree, that she instantly gave out Orders to put him
to death, commanded his Daughter to depart the Court, and banished her into
Africa. Alexander acted in this Affair by Compulsion, contrary to his own
Judgment and Inclination; for so arbitrary was Mammaea, and so absolute and
Ascendant had she over him, that he rendered an universal Obedience to all her
Commands.

This Easiness and Obsequiousness to his Mother, even to a Crime, in Things
which he manifestly disliked, was the only Thing for which this Prince could
justly be blamed.

Having thus for Thirteen Years (as to what respected himself) administered the
Empire so as not to afford Subject of Complaint, in the Fourteenth Year of his
Reign there came Letters from the Praefects of Syria and Mesopotamia, with the
following Advices, viz. That Artaxerxes King of Persia having conquered
Parthia, and subdued the Kingdoms of the East, and killed the Great King
Artabanus, (who was the first that had bore that Title, and wore a double
Diadem) had reduced under his Dominion all the Barbarous Nations on that Side,
and made them Tributary; and not being content with his Acquisitions on the
other Side the Tigris, had passed the River, made an Impression upon the Roman
Frontiers, overrun Mesopotamia, threatened Syria, and all the Continent that
lies opposite to Europe, which is called Asia, and is bounded by the Propontis
and the Aegean; pretending, that these vast Tracts were the Possessions of his
Ancestors, and as such he would reunite them to the Persian Empire: And
farther setting forth, That from the Reign of Cyrus, who first translated the
Empire from the Medes to the Persians, to the Times of Darius, who was
vanquished and deposed by the Macedonian Arms, all those Countries as far as
Ionia and Caria were governed by Persian Viceroys; and that he esteemed
himself in Honor bound to cause Restitution to be made of all the ancient
Dependences of the Persian Empire.

This unexpected News extremely alarmed Alexander, who had been bred up in the
Softness and Luxury of Rome, and had enjoyed hitherto an uninterrupted Calm:
However, his Council was convened, and he communicated to them his
Intelligence; whereupon it was resolved, that Ambassadors should be dispatched
with Letters, which 'twas believed would check the Hopes and Attempts of these
Barbarous Invaders.

In pursuance of these Resolutions, Letters were sent, purporting, That they
ought to content themselves with their own Territories, and not endeavor to
enlarge them by new Conquests; that they should not suffer themselves to be
lift up by vain Hopes, to engage in a War with a powerful Enemy; that they
could not expect the like fortunate Issue of their Combats with the Romans,
which they had found against their Barbarous Neighbors; and reminded them
withal of the Victories heretofore obtained over them by Augustus, Trajan,
Lucius, and Severus. These Letters the Emperor thought would either persuade or
terrify the Barbarian into a Disposition to be quiet; but they made no
Impression upon him. Axtaxerxes thought it was not Words but the Sword must do
his Business, and therefore he pushed on the War with greater vigor, spoiling
and wasting all the Roman Territory. Mesopotamia he ravaged both with his Foot
and Cavalry, and began to carry off the Plunder, attacked the Roman Camps which
were pitched on the Banks of the Rivers, to cover the Frontiers of the Empire;
and being naturally arrogant, and at this time elevated by his late unexpected
Successes, he thought easily to surmount all Opposition. Many and weighty
Motives conspired to make him desire an Elargement of his Empire: He was the
first that had dared to make a War on the Parthians, and had after a long
Interval retrieved the Persian Monarchy: For after the Overthrow of Darius by
the Arms of Macedon, the Macedonians, and those that succeeded Alexander for a
long Series of Time, shared Asia and the Kingdoms of the East among themselves,
exercising Regal Authority in their respective Territories, until Arsaces the
Parthian, taking advantage of their Animosities and frequent Wars, by which the
Macedonian Force was considerably weakened, persuaded the Barbarians on that
Side to a general Revolt, and was elected their Ruler by the unanimous Consent
of Parthia and the adjoining Countries; and accordingly he reigned over them,
and his Empire continued in his Family for several Ages, descending in an
uninterrupted Course of Succession, till it devolved on Artabanus, who lived in
our Times: So Artaxerxes having slain this Artabanus, and re-established the
Persian Monarchy, and subdued all his Barbarous Neighbors, had opened an easy
Passage for his Forces to assail the Roman Empire.

Alexander being in Rome, was advertised of the Hostilities committed by the
Barbarians, and their Insolence, which was now insupportable even in his own
Judgment; and being pressed by the Instances of his Generals in those Parts,
began to put all Things in readiness for an Expedition against them, though with
some Reluctance, and after much struggling with his natural Aversions to a War.
Accordingly he proceeded to make his Levies in Italy, and all the Provinces of
the Empire, requiring all Men whom Age or Habit of Body had not rendered
incapable, to enter into his Service. So Musters were made with great Vigor
and Application throughout the whole Empire, to raise an Army sufficient to
cope with the Barbarian Force; and Alexander having given out Orders for the
Praetorian Soldiers to assemble in the Field, delivered himself to them in the
following Speech, from a Throne there erected.

ALEXANDER'S SPEECH.
I Could wish, Gentlemen, that what I Am going to say to you might produce the
same happy Effects which my Speeches have hitherto done, that it might redound
to the Reputation of the Speaker, and give universal Satisfaction to those that
hear me. It Is possible that after so long a Peace, you may be startled at the
News of an unexpected War: But it is the Part of Wise and Valiant Men to wish
for the best, but to bear what happens, and acquiesce under all the
Dispensations of Heaven. Pleasure is sweet in the Enjoyment, but Glory's the
Reward of Virtue. As he that offers an Injury, must needs be sensible of it,
and feel Remorses within himself; so he that repels an unlawful Aggressor, is
animated by his Conscience, and the Goodness of his Cause gives him the
strongest Assurance of Success. Artaxerxes having murdered Artabanus, his Royal
Lord and Master, contemns the Terror of our Arms, and the Glory of our Empire,
and openly spoils and ravages our Provinces. I first essayed by Reasoning and
Debate to divert him from this insatiate Madness, and exhorted him to be
content with his own Possessions, for which end I sent Letters to him; but he,
out of the abundance of his barbarous Arrogance, disdains to stay within his
own Territories, but defies us, and provokes us to a Battle. It Is my Opinion
clearly, that we advance against them with all possible speed. To the Veterans
among you my Advice is, That you reflect upon the Conquests you have gained
over them under the Conduct of Severus and my Father Antonine: And you that are
in the Flower of your Youth, cherish, I exhort you, the generous Thirst of Fame
and Glory, and make it apparent to the World, that you can be as brave Soldiers
in the Action of War, as you have been good Subjects in the Leisures of Peace.
The Courage of the Barbarians increases and declines in proportion to the
Cowardice and Bravery of their Enemies. If these fly, they pursue; but never
support the Shocks of a gallant Army, that attacks them with vigor; for they
dare not hope for Success in a Pitched Battle, but make sudden Inroads and
Ravages, and content themselves to carry off the Plunder of the Countries they
invade: And we have the Advantage of them, not only in Order and Discipline of
our Armies, but in that we have been trained up in a constant Course of
Victories over them.

When he had concluded his Harangue, all the Soldiers expressed their forward
Dispositions to the War, by their Acclamations, which were very unanimous on
this Occasion. Then he distributed a magnificent Donative amongst them, and
commanded all Things to be put in posture for a March. After that, he went into
the Senate, and made a Speech, much the same in Substance with what he had
spoke before, and signified his Pleasure as to the Day when he would begin his
March. When the Day was come, he performed the Sacrifices customary upon the
undertaking any Expedition, and parted from Rome, being accompanied by the
Senate and People of Rome in full Body. He often looked back upon the City with
Tears in his Eyes; nor was there any of his Subjects but was in grief upon his
Departure: For he was universally beloved by the Populace, in regard he had
been educated among them, and had governed so many Years with so much
Gentleness.

Having performed his March, which he did with incredible Diligence, he
reviewed the Illyrian Army and Country; after which he raised a considerable
Force in those Parts, and retired to Antioch, where he made Provision of all
Things necessary for a War, exercising his Soldiers, and discharging all the
Duties of a General. However, he thought it advisable to send a second Embassy
to the Persian, to make Overtures of an Accommodation. He imagined the Terror
of his Presence would influence him to close with his Offers. But Artaxerxes
would hearken to no Proposals that were made: So the Roman Ambassadors returned
to their Camp; and Artaxerxes made choice of Four hundred of the tallest Men in
his Army, whom he dispatched to Alexander with the Character of his Envoys.
They were richly and splendidly attired, well mounted, and armed with Bows and
Arrows, to the end the Romans might be terrified by the Garb and August
Presence of the Persians. Their Instructions were, to require the Roman Emperor
and People, in the Name of the Great Artaxerxes, from thenceforth to renounce
all Claim and Title to Syria, and that Part of Asia which lies opposite to
Europe, and to suffer the Persians quietly and peaceably to exercise Dominion
as far as Ionia and Caria, and over all the Countries that are divided by the
Aegean and Pontick Seas, being the ancient Possessions of the Crown of Persia.

After the Ambassadors had made their Demands, Alexander commanded them all to
be arrested, and divesting them of their Splendour, sent them away into Phrygia,
where he assigned them Houses to inhabit, and Lands to manure; for he would not
inflict any farther Penalty than the prohibiting them to return home, looking
upon it as a manifest Breach of the Laws of Honor and Natural Justice, to put
them to death, being no Prisoners of War, and having done nothing but in
Execution of their Royal Master's Injunctions.

These Measures being taken, Alexander prepared to pass the River, and carry
the War into the Enemies Country; at which time some Egyptian Soldiers
revolted, and a Plot was set on foot in Syria, that threatened a Revolution in
the Empire; but was happily defeated, and the Conspirators punished: After
which he detached several strong Parties into other Countries, to restrain the
Incursions of the Barbarians in those Parts.

Things being in this Posture, and the Roman Army very numerous, and not
inferior to the Enemies, the Emperor called a Council of War, and the Result
was, That the Army should be divided into Three Parties: The First was
commanded to march to the Northward, through Armenia, which Country was in
League with the Romans, and to make a Descent upon Media on that Side. The
Second was also commanded Northward; but they were ordered to direct their
March through the Enemies Country where Tygris and Euphrates meet, and are
swallowed up in vast Pools and Lakes, which gives occasion to an Opinion
obtaining in the World, That it is unknown where those Rivers discharge
themselves. The Third, and strongest of the Three, he undertook to lead in
Person against the Enemy, and took the middle Road.

By this means he thought to amuse the Enemy, and surprise them before they
were aware of, or had provided against any such Attempt. He thought too, the
Persians receiving so many powerful Diversions from different Quarters, would
be weaker and more irregular than if they advanced in an entire Body: For the
Barbarians have no Stipendiary Force, or Standing Army, that is kept in
constant Pay, and practiced in the Art of War; but all their Men, and, if the
Occasion's more extraordinary, the Women too, upon the King's signifying his
Pleasure to them, repair to a general Rendezvous. After the War they return
home, receive no Pay, but content themselves with a Share in the Spoil of the
Countries they invade. They use Bows and Horses, not only in Time of War, as
the Romans do, but are bred up to it from their Childhood, and live by Hunting,
and very seldom ungird their Quivers, or alight from their Horses, but make
constant use of them either against their Enemies, or the Wild Beasts of the
Country.

Alexander's Measures seeming now so wisely laid, as to promise almost certain
Success, Fortune interposed to baffle Humane Policies. The Army that was
ordered to march through Armenia passed with great difficulty the steep and
rocky Mountains of the Country, (though they were favored by the Season of the
Year) and made an Inroad into Media, where they burnt diverse Villages, and laid
waste the Country; whereof Artaxerxes being advertised, advanced against them
with all his Strength, but could not drive them out of the Country, which being
rough and mountainous, afforded firm Footing and easy Passage to the Infantry,
but gave great Inconveniences to the Barbarians Horse.

About this time an Express arrived at Artaxerxes's Camp, with Advice that
another Roman Army had invaded Parthia toward the East. This gave him great
Jealousy, that as soon as they had ravaged Parthia, which they might easily
do, they would make an Impression into Persia. Therefore leaving a Force
sufficient, as he thought, to cover Media, he hastened with the gross of his
Army to the Eastward.

The Romans finding no Opposition, and no Enemy appearing, were not so careful
in their March as they might have been; they supposed that Alexander had fallen
upon the Barbarians with his Army, which was the strongest and most numerous of
the Three, and therefore thought there was no Occasion for hasty Marches, and
looked upon themselves as out of danger, not doubting but all the Armies were
advancing to the general Rendezvous, where by Concert they were to re unite,
and bring all the Booty and Prisoners they had taken in this Expedition. But
Alexander disappointed them, and neither came in Person, as 'twas concerted,
nor sent the Army. It Is uncertain whether his own natural Cowardice made him so
unwilling to venture his Life in Defense of the Empire, or he was overruled in
this Affair by Mammaea. The Timorousness of a Woman, and the Fondness of a
Mother, might influence her to do it; and it is well known she always
endeavored to repress all generous Impulses in her Son, and still persuaded
him rather to let others hazard themselves for him, than to expose his Sacred
Person to the Chance of War. However it was, it occasioned the total Overthrow
of the Roman Army that had entered the Enemies Country: For Artaxerxes, with
the whole Power of his Kingdom, fell upon them by Surprise, and surrounded
them, and galling them with Arrows from all Quarters, obtained an entire
Victory: For he overpowered them with his Numbers; it was all they could do to
cover the naked Parts of their Bodies against the Enemies Arrows. So they
contented themselves to be upon the defensive, and rather to preserve
themselves than annoy the Enemy: But after they had defended themselves for a
short space, by joining their Targets together, being attacked on all Sides,
like a beleaguered Town, at last, after a gallant Resistance, they were all cut
to Pieces.

This was a fatal Stroke to the Romans, perhaps scarce paralleled in Story; a
gallant Army, not inferior to any of the most celebrated in former Ages, for
Fidelity and Courage, cut off entirely, and as it were at one Blow. But the
fortunate Event of so considerable an Enterprise, animated the Barbarians to
undertake greater.

The News of this Overthrow was brought to the Emperor when he was very ill,
either through some Disease of Mind, or Indisposition of Body, occasioned by
the Climate, to which he was not accustomed. It gave him great Mortification,
and exasperated the whole Army against him, insomuch that they declared openly,
that his Personal Miscarriage in not coming up with his Army, pursuant to the
Determination of the Council, had drawn this Calamity upon them. But Alexander,
finding he could not any longer struggle with his Malady, which increased upon
him in that sultry Climate, and the greatest part of his Army being sick,
especially the Illyrians, who dropped away in great Numbers, in regard they
feed plentifully, and are used to a colder foggy Air, resolved to march back to
Antioch; and Orders were sent to the Army in Media to return: But the greatest
part perished in re-passing the Mountains, or were frozen to death by the
Rigor of the Climate. Alexander led back the Remnant of his Army to Antioch;
for he also had lost great Numbers of his Men. The Success of this Expedition
bred great Discontents among the Soldiers, and sunk the Emperor's Reputation
extremely in the Opinion of the World: He was baffled in all his Designs, and
returned home ingloriously, after he had lost the best part of three Armies by
Cold, Sickness, or the Sword.

After he arrived at Antioch, the change of Air soon restored his Health, and
the cool Springs frequent in this City refreshed him after the parching Heats
of Mesopotamia. Here he gave a magnificent Largess to the Soldiers, to buoy up
their Spirits under their present Affliction: For this he esteemed the only
Specific to re-inflame their dying Zeal and Affection for his Interests. After
this, he applied himself to the making new Levies, as if he intended a second
Expedition against the Persians, in case they should give him any Disturbance:
But News came that Artaxerxes had disbanded his Army, and commanded the
Soldiers to repair to their respective Homes. And though in the Issue of the War
the Persians seemed to have the Advantage, yet their Forces were very much
diminished by several Rencounters in Parthia; and of those Soldiers that
survived, many were wounded, and others extremely harrass'd and broken: For the
Romans behaved themselves very bravely, and made often great Slaughters of the
Enemy, and had vanquished them, had they not been overpowered by their
Numbers. Neither can the Persians pretend to have excelled them in Personal
Valor, the Number of the Slain on both Sides being very near equal: And their
being so quiet for three or four Years after this Victory, amounts to a
Demonstration, that their Losses were very considerable.

This News delivered the Emperor from his Fears, and he began to display a new
Gaiety of Temper, threw aside the Cares of War, and abandoned himself to the
Pleasures and Luxury of the Town. He thought the Persians would not again
disturb his Repose, or at least it would be a long time before their disbanded
Forces could re assemble into an Army, in regard they don't consist of regular
disciplined Troops, nor can they properly be termed an Army, but are rather a
disorderly Multitude; they have no Provisions, but what every Man carries from
home, for his own Occasions; and besides, they are very unwilling to leave
their Wives, Children, and Native Country. But while he was thinking of the
Persians, there suddenly arrived a Courier from the Prefects of Illyria, with
Letters for him, which put him into a greater Consternation. These brought
advice, That the Germans had passed the Rhine and Danube, and entered the Roman
Territories in Hostile manner, had assailed the Roman Camp upon the Danube,
sacked and plundered all the Cities and Villages in those Parts, whereby
Illyria ( that borders upon Italy) was in imminent Danger; concluding, That in
this Exigency of Affairs it would be requisite that he came in Person, with the
whole Power of his Empire.

These Advices exceedingly alarmed the Emperor, and afforded Matter of great
Regret and Grief to the Illyrian Soldiers. This was a second Calamity coming
upon the Neck of a former. They had lost great Numbers of Men in the Expedition
against the Persians, and now the Germans over ran their Native Country. These
Things put them into a violent Rage against the Emperor; for they charged the
bad Success of the Persian Expedition wholly upon his ill Conduct, or his Fear;
and now they accused his Slackness in succouring the Illyrians, as proceeding
from the same base Passion. The Emperor and his Council began to apprehend that
Italy was in danger. The German Invasion seemed to be of far more dangerous
Consequence to the Empire, than the Persian; for in distant Regions of the
East, which are disjoined by a vast Tract of Land and Sea, the Name of Italy is
seldom heard; but Germany is only parted from Italy by Illyria, which contains
but a small Spot of Ground, subject to the Illyrians. Therefore with great
reluctance the Emperor proclaimed his March, being driven to it by the
Extremity of his Affairs; and leaving a Force sufficient for the Defense of the
Roman Frontiers on that Side, he viewed the Camp and fortified Towns, repaired
their Fortifications, and put strong Garrisons into them out of his Army, and
then advanced with the Remainder of his Forces against the Germans.

He performed his March with great Expedition, and encamped on the Banks of the
Rhine, where he made Preparations for the War. He built a Bridge of Boats over
the Rhine, for the more easy passing his Army over that River. This River and
the Danube are the greatest Rivers in the North. The Rhine runs through
Germany, and the Danube through Hungary. They are very deep and broad, and in
the Summer navigable; in the Winter, by reason of the extremity of the Cold,
they are frozen so hard, that the People ride over them, as if they were part
of the Terra firma. The Ice is so firm, that it not only bears Men and Horses,
but those that come for Water don't bring Pails, or other Vessels, but Spades
and Axes, with which they hew out the Water, and carry it away like a piece of
a solid Rock. This is the Nature of those Rivers.

Alexander had great Numbers of Moors and Archers in his Service, which he
brought with him out of the East; they consisted mostly of the Osrhoeni, and
Parthian Deserters, and such as were tempted to come over to them by hopes of
Gain. These Men annoyed the Germans the most of any. The Moors throw their
Darts a prodigious way, and charge and retire with wonderful agility. The
Archers would level at the naked Heads and Bodies of the over grown Germans,
and seldom failed of hitting their Mark. Sometimes they came to a Pitched
Battle, wherein the Romans could seldom get any Advantage. Things being in this
Posture, Alexander sent Ambassadors to the Enemy to treat of a Peace, and to
let them know, that the Emperor was willing to furnish them with whatever they
wanted, and to supply them with Money, than which nothing has a more powerful
Influence over the Germans, provided they would lay down their Arms, which they
are always ready to do upon the Terms now propounded to them. So Alexander
entered into a Negotiation with them, thinking it more prudential to purchase
Peace with his Money, than expose his Person to the Hazards of War.

The Roman Soldiers were much offended that they spent so much Time to so
little purpose, without having any Opportunity of signalizing themselves by
some brave Action. While the Emperor gave himself up to his Pleasures, and to
the driving of Chariots; whereas he ought to have pursued his Revenge, and
chastised the late Insolence of the Germans. There was at this time in the Army
one Maximine, a Man half-barbarous, born in the Heart of Thrace, and in his
Youth he was a Shepherd; but when he came to Man's Estate, for his Strength and
extraordinary Stature he was made a Trooper, and from thence was led by the
Hand of Fortune through all the inferior Posts and Offices, to the Government
of Provinces, and the Command of Armies. To him, being a Man well practiced in
the Art of War, Alexander gave the Command of his New Levies, to train and fit
them for his Service. He was very industrious in the Discharge of this Trust,
which won him the general Love of all the Soldiers. He not only directed them
what to do, but observed himself those Directions in his own Personal
Deportment, to the end they might learn their Duty, not only by obeying his
Orders, but by following his Example: And that he might join them more firmly
to his Interests, he omitted no Opportunity of honoring and rewarding them;
and he gained his Point: For all the young Soldiers (being for the most part
Pannonians) became great Admirers of his Bravery, and took all Occasions of
vilifying Alexander, often saying of him in contempt, That he was led by the
Nose by his Mother, and submitted the Conduct of Public Affairs to the
Direction of a Woman. They reflected upon his Sloth and Cowardice in Military
Matters, began to talk again very hotly of the memorable Overthrow in the East,
attributing it to be chiefly occasioned by his Laziness, which was also the
Reason that as yet nothing had been done in effect against the Germans.
Besides, they are naturally desirous of Revolutions and Changes: This was a
long Reign, and they grew weary of it; they could not expect to get any thing
under the present Government, in regard the Emperor was not so sollicitous to
procure their Favor, as he was in the first Years of his Reign; and they might
reasonably hope for greater Honors and Advantages under a Prince that was
advanced to the Throne solely by their Interest, having no Grounds himself to
expect such Promotion.

These Motives put together, made them resolve the Death of Alexander, and the
Advancement of Maximine, who was their Fellow-Soldier and Companion, and was
the fittest Man that could be pitched upon to prosecute the War against the
Germans, by reason of his Personal Valor and Military Experience.

In pursuance of these Resolutions, they assembled in the Field armed, and
Maximine at the Head of them, making as if he would only direct them in their
ordinary Exercises. Some say he was privy to their Designs, and others affirm
the contrary: However that was, they proclaimed him Emperor, and invested him
with the Imperial Robes. He at first declined and rejected the Purple; but when
the Soldiers drew their Swords, and threatened to kill him if he did not comply,
he chose rather to run a future Hazard, than expose himself to a present
Danger, and so accepted the Honor, and declared that he had had frequent
Intimations by Dreams and Oracles, That he should one Day sit at the Helm of
the Empire. He protested also to them, That his Compliance in this Particular
was much against his Will; but he could not resist their Importunity: And
advised them, seeing they would needs have it so* instantly to stand to their
Arms, and establish what they had done, by surprising Alexander before the News
of what had happened had reached his Ears, and putting his Guards and Soldiers in
Consternation, by which Means they might either be persuaded to join with them
in pushing on the Revolution, or they might easily be forced to a Submission,
being unprovided of all Things for making a Resistance.

Maximine was very careful to cherish that Affection which they had expressed
for him, by doubling their Allowance of Corn, by promising large Donatives, and
granting a general Pardon of all Crimes of what Nature soever: After which he
led on his Men to the Emperor's Pavilion, which was not far off.

This sudden and surprising Turn of Affairs extremely alarmed Alexander,
insomuch that he abandoned his Tent, and flew out like a Madman, crying and
trembling, and upbraiding Maximine with Perfidiousness and Ingratitude. He ran
out into a long Enumeration of the Favors he had conferred upon him, and
reproved his Adherents for rashly engaging in traitorous Designs, contrary to
the Duty of their Allegiance. Nevertheless, he promised to grant all their
Demands, and redress all their Grievances, provided they would lay down their
Arms. The Soldiers that were about him encouraged him in this Exigency by their
cheerful Acclamations, and promised to stand by him with their Lives and
Fortunes. But as soon as that Night was over, and the News came in the Morning,
that Maximine was advancing against them, and a Cloud of Dust was descried afar
off, and a Noise as it were of a great Multitude was heard, Alexander came out
again into the Field, and called his Soldiers together, and exhorted them to be
firm to him, to protect their Prince who had been brought up among them, and
had governed for Fourteen Years with so much Gentleness and Equity, that not
one Subject had so much as Cause of Complaint given him. So all Men seeming
moved with Compassion, he bid them stand to their Arms, and put themselves in
posture to receive the Enemy: Which they promised to do, but fell away by
degrees, and deserted him. Some there were that imputed this Defection to the
Practices of the Captain of the Praetorian Band, and of some of the Emperor's
Confidents, and would have impeached them of that Fact: Others laid the Blame
on his Mother, whose covetous Temper and extreme Parsimony in giving out
Munificences to the Soldiers, had rendered her Son odious. They staid for some
time, debating the Point to and fro, till Maximine came in sight, and bid them
abandon a wretched Woman, and that easy dis-spirited Boy, who could truckle so
tamely to a Mothers Tyranny, and join themselves to a Man of Courage and
Conduct, who had been their Companion in Arms, and was an old and experienced
Captain. Hereupon they all revolted from Alexander, and unanimously proclaimed
Maximine Emperor. Alexander in great Fear and Distraction made a shift to
return to his Tent, though with great difficulty; and embracing his Mother, he
bewailed his Misfortune, and (as some say) accused her as the procuring Cause
of it, expecting every Moment the Messenger of Death.

Maximine, as soon as he was proclaimed Emperor by the Army, ordered a Tribune
and certain Centurions to dispatch Alexander and his Mother, and all such as
pretended to make any Opposition. They forthwith executed their Warrant,
rushing into the Emperor's Tent, and killing him and his Mother, and all those
that seemed to be honored and esteemed by him, except such as fled and
absconded for the present; all which were afterward apprehended by Maximine,
and put to death.

This was the End of Alexander and his Mother, after he had reigned Fourteen
Years without spilling any Blood, or giving the Subject any just Ground of
Complaint. He abhorred all cruel and tyrannical Methods, and never put any Man
to death without Legal Process. He was naturally inclined to Gentleness and
Beneficence; and the whole Tenor of his Government had been without Reproach or
Blemish, had not the sordid Avarice of his Mother thrown some Scandal upon it.

AN EPITOME OF THE Seventh Book.
MAximine, a Thracian, of prodigious Size, and most bloody in his Nature, opens
his Reign with great Cruelties, being moved to it by the Conscience of his own
mean Birth, and exasperated by a Combination of the Tribunes against him, and
by the Defection of the Soldiers. He attacks the Germans within their Woods and
Morasses, defeats and puts them to flight. He is cruel to his Enemies, but
infinitely more tyrannical to his own Subjects, whose Estates he makes no
scruple to seize, without any Color or Pretense of Right. He is universally
hated. A Commotion is raised in Africa, where the Procurator is killed, and
Gordian Proconsul of Africa is chosen Emperor; and having used Means to
dispatch Vitalian Captain of the Praetorian Band in Rome, his Election is
ratified by the Senate. Soon after Cappellian marches against him, and quells
the Commotion, and he is slain in Africa, together with his Son. Maximine
leaves Pannonia, and takes his march toward Rome with his whole Army. Maximus
and Balbinus are elected Emperors, and Gordian's Nephew created Caesar. A Civil
War breaks out in Rome between the Populace and the Praetorian Soldiers, of
which Gallicanus was the Author.

The Seventh Book.
THe Account of Alexander's Life and Death, after he had reigned Fourteen
Years, is declared in the former Book. Maximine succeeded him; whereupon great
Changes ensued. He exercised great Severities toward his Subjects,
endeavoring by this Means to render himself Formidable. So the Government
began to be influenced by new Principles, and from Mild and Gentle, became
Cruel and Tyrannical. He knew he was generally distasteful to the People, in
regard he was the first that from the obscurest Condition had ascended to the
highest of Dignities. He was Barbarous as well in Manners as Extraction. His
Nature was Cruel, agreeing with the Thracian Genius. So he pursued violent
Measures, thinking thereby most effectually to establish his Empire. He was
afraid that the Senate and People of Rome would despise him, that they would
look back upon the Meanness of his Birth, and not consider him in his present
Exaltation. It was commonly known and talked of, that he had been a Shepherd in
Thrace, and being a tall brawny Youth was listed a Soldier to serve among his
Countrymen, and from thence was conducted by the Hand of Fortune to the Roman
Empire. He removed all Alexander's Ministers and Counselors that were
appointed by the Senate. Some he sent to Rome, others he displaced for
Malversation in their Offices. His Design herein was, that there might be no
Person in the Army of Nobler Extraction than himself; that being as it were a
strong Fortress, and having none about him to whom he owed the least Deference,
he might give himself over to a Tyrannical Administration. He turned out all
the Servants that belonged to the Court in the late Reign, and put most of them
to death, pretending Apprehensions of a Conspiracy formed against him by them;
for which he had little Ground, beside their Sorrow for the Death of the late
Emperor. About this time an Accident happened, which served to increase his Rage,
and made him more forward to drive Things to Extremities. A Discovery was made
of a Combination formed against him by the whole Senate, together with diverse
Centurions. Magnus, a Nobleman of Rome, of Consular Dignity, was accused for
endeavoring to raise a Rebellion, and practicing with the Soldiers to make him
Emperor. The Plot was laid thus. Maximine had built a Bridge, over which he
designed to pass his Army against the Germans: For he had a mind to signalize
the Beginning of his Reign by some memorable Action, well understanding, that
his podigious Stature and Strength of Body, together with his Military Skill
and Experience, had chiefly recommended him to the Soldiers in the late
Election; and therefore he was willing to establish his Reputation, and confirm
the Opinion the Army had conceived of him, by some Exploit answerable to it;
and by the same it would be apparent to the World, that Alexander's Fear, and
Slackness in pushing on the War, was not blamed without just Reason. He was
very diligent in exercising his Soldiers, appeared often in his Army, and
exhorted his Men with great vehemence to behave themselves valiantly. But when
the Bridge was finished, and he designed to pass over his Army, and advance
against the Germans, Information was made, that Magnus had corrupted some of
his Soldiers, not many in number, but chosen Men, especially those who were
appointed to guard the Bridge, which he had persuaded them to break down as
soon as Maximine was got to the other Side, and so he should have been betrayed
into the Hands of his Enemies, all possibility of re-passing being cut off, by
reason of the Depth and Broadness of the River, there being no Transport
Vessels on the other Side. This is the Substa^^^ of what was discovered.
Whether it was true, or was only a Forgery of Maximine's, is uncertain: I cannot
say any thing positively, because it was never inquired into; for none of the
Conspirators were brought to Trial, or allowed to make their Defense; but all
that were suspected were instantly apprehended, and executed without Mercy.

Soon after the Osrhoene Archers revolted: The Death of Alexander touched them
sensibly; so meeting accidentally with Quartinus, a Consular Man, who had been
deeply in the late Emperor's Interests, and was discarded by Maximine, they
constrained him to Head them, which he did with great reluctance. Then they
carried Fire before him in State, and put upon him the Imperial Robes,
(Ornaments which afterward proved fatal to him) and advanced him to the
Empire, which was an Honor he was very far from aspiring to: But soon after he
was assassinated in his Tent, when he was asleep, by an intimate Acquaintance,
and one whom he esteemed his Friend. His Name was Macedon; he was Commander in
Chief of the Osrhoeni, and 'twas by his Instigation that they revolted. There
was no Ground of Distaste, nor so much as a Misunderstanding between them, to
stir him up to the commission of this Barbarity on one whom he had compelled to
take upon him the Empire; but he thought the Merit of this Action would entitle
him to a great Share of the Emperor's Favor: So he cut off Quartinus his Head,
and presented it to Maximine. Maximine approved the Treachery better than he
liked the Traitor; hereby he had one Enemy less than he had before: But he
ordered Macedon to be put to death amidst his high Expectances for so signal a
Piece of Service, as an Arch-Rebel to his Prince, and a Traitor to his Friend,
whom by his pernicious Counsel he had misled.

These Things exasperated Maximine, and served to increase the standing Cruelty
of his Nature. His Aspect was very terrible, and his Body so vastly big, that
none of the Greek or Barbarous Champions were comparable to him. His Affairs
being thus ordered, he boldly led all his Forces over the Bridge, and carried
the War into Germany. His Army was very numerous; he had with him almost the
whole Power of the Roman Empire, together with great Numbers of Moorish
Darters, and Osrhoene and Armenian Archers, whereof the former are subject to
the Romans, the latter are their Confederates. He had also a great Force of
Parthians, consisting of Deserters, and such as fought merely for Pay, together
with Prisoners of War, that were then in the Roman Service. This Army was
raised by Alexander, and was considerably reinforced, and disciplined by
Maximine. The Darters and Archers are the most serviceable against the Germans;
they fall upon them by surprise, and retreat again with wonderful expedition.
Maximine met with no Opposition for a long time. The Germans were fled: So he
ravaged the Country without control, though it was then the middle of Harvest.
The Villages he burnt, and gave them up to the Plunder of his Army. All their
Cities and Buildings are soon consumed with Fire; for they very rarely use
Brick or Stone, but their Houses are a sort of Sheds made only of Boards fitted
and fastened together.

Thus Maximine for a long time spoiled and wasted the Country, giving all the
Cattle that was taken among his Soldiers: But still no Enemy appeared; for the
Germans had retired out of the plain open Country, into the Fastnesses of the
Woods and Fens, to the end they might decoy the Romans thither, where they
might fall upon them among thick Woods, which would shelter them from the
Enemies Darts and Arrows, and render them unserviceable, and where too the
Deepness of the Bogs would be dangerous to them, in regard they were
unacquainted with the Country; whereas they had the Advantage of knowing which
of them were passable, and which not, and run into them every Day up to the
Knees. The Germans also are excellent Swimmers, having no Baths beside the
common Rivers.

Notwithstanding these Disadvantages, the Romans gave them Battle. The Emperor
with extraordinary Gallantry made the Onset in Person; for the Germans had
retreated into a deep Morass, whither the Romans were afraid to pursue them; so
Maximine set Spurs to his Horse, and plunged in up to the Belly, making havoc
of all that pretended to oppose him. This Bravery of the General had its due
influence on the Soldiers; they were ashamed to betray their Emperor, that
hazarded himself so generously for them: So they all readily followed him. The
Number of the Slain was very great on both Sides; but the Romans had the
better, the German Army being almost entirely cut off. Maximine acquitted
himself very valiantly, insomuch that the whole Morass, filled up with dead
Bodies, and discolored all with Blood, seemed to afford a just Representation
of an Engagement at Sea.

Maximine took care not only to send Accounts of this Engagement, and his own
Behavior in it, to the Roman Senate and People, but caused it to be
represented in a large Pageant, and hung up before the Senate House, to the end
the Peoples Eyes, as well as their Ears, might be duly affected with the
Greatness of his Exploits. This Pageant was afterward taken down by an Order
of the Senate, which abolished all his Public Honors. He had several other
Rencounters with the Germans, wherein his Personal Deportment always deserved
great Commendations; but the Summer being far advanced, he returned into
Pannonia with many Prisoners and a rich Booty. He Wintered in Sirmium, which is
the greatest City in those Parts, and prepared there for a second Expedition in
the Spring; and he was often heard to threaten, (and he seemed to be in
earnest) that he would utterly destroy and subdue all the Barbarous Nations of
Germany, as far as the Ocean.

Thus much for his Military Virtues. And he had certainly been a Glorious
Prince, had not his Cruelty at home cast a Blemish upon his Achievements
abroad: For, what signified the Slaughter of Enemies abroad, if greater was
made of the Subjects at home? What did all the Booty and Prisoners of War
avail, if the Subject was despoiled of all he had by Injury and Oppression?
Common Informers were not only licensed, but countenanced and encouraged by the
Government, to circumvent honest Men, and, if Occasion required, to rake into
secret Crimes, that had been committed in former Reigns, and had lain
undiscovered till these Times. And so partial were the Courts of Justice, that
if any Man was impeached by a Court-Sycophant, he was certainly found guilty,
and his Estates declared forfeit; by which Means it often happened, that he that
relieved his Neighbor to day, was constrained himself to ask Relief the Day
following. Thus were the Subjects squeezed under a griping Tyrant, that still
acted under a Pretext of supplying himself with Money to distribute among the
Soldiers. His Ears were open to all sorts of Calumnies, against whomsoever
vented, without any respect to Age or Quality. Several Men of eminent
Condition, that were entrusted with the Government of Provinces, and the
Command of Armies, after Consular and Triumphal Honors, were suddenly arrested
upon slight Accusations, and by Order of the Emperor thrust into a Coach, and
constrained to travel Night and Day, without any Attendants, from the East or
West, or perhaps from the South, into Pannonia, where the Emperor at that time
held his Residence. Upon their arrival they were disgraced and degraded, and
then either put to death or banished.

While these Storms fell only upon single Persons, and bounded themselves
within private Families, the Public did not seem much concerned. The Fall of
Great Men is not only little regarded by the Multitude, but some Persons that
envy the Happiness of those that are above them, by a particular Malignity of
Nature, rejoice at their Misfortunes.

Thus the Tyrant reduced several Noble Families from great Wealth to extreme
Poverty. And yet all this was too little for him, his Appetite was still
craving; so he began his Rapines upon the Public, and seized at once all the
Treasure of the City, to whatsoever Uses designed, whether it was to be
distributed among the People, or was to furnish the Public Granaries, or was
to defray the Expense of Games and Shows exhibited at the Cities Charge. Then
he commanded all the Ornaments of Churches and the other Public Buildings, all
the Statues of Gods and Images of Heroes, and, in short, whatever might be
converted into Coin, to be melted down. These Things gave general Discontent,
and afforded Matter of an universal Grief: The City, without any War or Foreign
Hostility, appeared like a Town besieged; insomuch that there arose some
generous Patriots, who resolved to stem these Oppressions, and to guard the
Temples, and rather to be sacrificed upon the Altars, than behold the Ruin and
Desolation of their Country. The ill Humor of the People both in the City and
Provinces began to appear more manifestly than ever. The Soldiers themselves
could not approve what he did, being often reproached by their Friends as the
Instruments of all his illegal Proceedings. So he drew, as well he might, a
popular Odium upon himself: But no Man dared as yet to do any thing; they only
prayed to and invoked the injured Gods, until he had reigned Three Years
completely, at which time the Africans, upon a slight Occasion, (such are the
Slips of Tyrants) took up Arms and rebelled. The Occasion was this.

The Procurator of Carthage was very rigid and cruel in his Government:
Prosecutions were carried very violently against the Subject, and he extorted
great Sums of Money from them; and all this was done to the end he might merit
Maximine's Approbation, who always made choice of such Tools as he knew were
the fittest for his own Purposes. The Officers of the Exchequer, though they were
really honest Men, (which very rarely happens) considering the insatiate
Avarice of the Emperor, followed the Example of the other Ministers, though much
against their will, well knowing the great Hazard they were to run if they did
not. This Procurator among his other Oppressions* proceeded with great violence
against certain young Men of rich and noble Families, and obtained Judgment to
be pronounced against them, intending to squeeze great Sums of Money from them,
and to deprive them of the Estates and Inheritances of their Ancestors. These
things highly exasperated the young Nobles; however, they promised to pay the
Money, only they desired him to respite the Payment for Three Days: In which
time they formed an Association, and drew into it all those who had been
oppressed by the Government already, or had reason to apprehend the like Usage;
and prevailed with the Boors and Peasants to come down in the Night with Clubs
and Axes, which they did accordingly, entering the City before the Morning, and
hiding their Arms under their Clothes, which were such as they could be
furnished with upon so sudden an Insurrection. Their Number was very great; for
Africa is very populous, and great Numbers of Peasants are employed in
cultivating the Land. In the Morning the young Nobles commanded these Boors to
follow them in a Body, as part of the Mob; but charged them strictly not to
discover their Arms, till they were assaulted by the Soldiers or People for
what they were about to do. Then they went to the Procurator, and made as if
they would have treated with him about the Payment of the Money
afore-mentioned; but then they suddenly fell upon him, and killed him before he
was aware of any such Design; at which the Soldiers began to draw their Swords,
as if they would have revenged his Death: But they were soon dispersed by the
Boors, that came on very resolutely with their Clubs and Axes. After this Fact,
so openly and so audaciously committed, the Youths grew desperate; and having
succeeded so well in their first Enterprise, thought the only way to be safe,
was to attempt greater, and therefore resolved to make the Governor of the
Province embarque in the Adventure, and then persuaded the People to a general
Revolt, which had been long wished for by all Men, by reason of the general
Hatred of Maximine, though their Fears had hindered the putting of it in
practice: So they led the Mob at Noonday to the Proconsul's House; his Name
was Gordian, he was Eighty Years of age when he was made Proconsul, and had run
through great Employments, and superintended diverse Provinces; for which
Reasons they thought he would not dislike the Proposal they were about to make
to him. The Empire would come now very seasonably to crown his other Dignities.
They thought also the Senate and People of Rome would be satisfied with their
Choice, in regard he was not only sprung from Illustious Ancestors, but had
advanced as it were gradually through inferior Trusts and Honors, to this
Supreme Dignity.

This Business happened at a Time when Gordian lived at his private House, in the
enjoyment of a Retreat from the Fatigues and Ceremonies of his Public
Character. The Youths who headed the Mob, as soon as they came to the House
seized the Porters, and rushed violently into the House with their Swords
drawn, where they found Gordian reposing himself upon a Couch, and instantly
put Robes of Purple upon him, and declared him Emperor with the usual
Solemnity. So surprising an Accident infinitely amazed him; he presently
thought 'twas some Design against his Life: So he flung himself from his Couch
upon the Ground, and besought them to spare an old Man, who had done them no
Injury, and advised them to be cautious how they violated their Faith and
Loyalty to their Prince. And when they importuned him, and held up their naked
Swords, so great was his present Fright, and so utterly ignorant was he of the
whole Matter, that he could not apprehend what they meant, nor divine the
Reasons of the Tumult. So one of the Youths, that was sprung from a nobler
Stock than the rest, and was the most powerful Orator among them, commanded
Silence, and laying his Hand upon his Sword, delivered himself to him in the
following Words.

SIR, You must take your Choice of two Dangers; the one present and certain,
the other future and contingent. We leave it to your Discretion, whether you will
be saved with us, and lay hold on this favorable Conjuncture, to which we have
all trusted, or be instantly murdered by those Hands that make you this Tender
of Safety. If you choose the former, you have many and rational Grounds of
Encouragement. Maximine is universally hated; and by taking him off you will
rescue us from the cruel Administration of a Barbarous Tyrant, and will
increase the Luster of your former Actions by a considerable Accession of
Glory, the just Reward of so generous an Undertaking. You will receive also
eminent Acknowledgments for the same, and immortal Honors from the Roman
Senate and People. But if you refuse to concur with us, we will cut you in
Pieces this Day, and sacrifice our selves (if need be) in the Quarrel. We have
done that which we cannot imagine will ever be pardoned: We have murdered the
Procurator, that Tool of Villainy, and he has received that Reward from our
Hands which his Cruelty has long cried aloud for. In short, Sir, if you will
engage in this Enterprise, and run the Risque that it may expose us to, we will
set you upon the Imperial Throne; and so far shall this Action of ours be from
being condemned, that the whole World shall applaud it.

In the middle of this Harangue the Mob grew impatient, and with the
Concurrence of the Citizens, who were all drawn hither by the News of this Days
Action, proclaimed Gordian Emperor. He excused himself at first, and pretended
his great Age had rendered him unable to execute so important a Trust; yet he
accepted it with all his Heart; for he was naturally very desirous of Glory,
and of the two Dangers was willing to choose that which only threatened him at a
distance: Nay, he was content even to die, so he might fall with the Scepter in
his Hands, and signalize the last Scenes of his Life. Then followed a
formidable Rising; all Africa was in Arms, and Maximine's Images were
demolished, and Gordian's set up in all the Towns and Cities. They also
honored him with the Surname of Africanus, the Southern Lybians being called
Afri, or Africani, by the Romans.

While these Things were doing, Gordian was at Thystrum, where he staid two or
three Days after he had taken upon him the Habit and Character of Emperor: Then
he marched to Carthage, a rich and populous City, where he might in all Points
maintain a Port and Grandeur equal to the Emperors in Rome. This City for
Largeness, Wealth, and Number of Inhabitants, disputes the Precedence with
Alexandria of Egypt, and is inferior only to Rome. There followed him all the
Pageantry of a Crown. The Soldiers and tallest of the Citizens went after him,
in imitation of the Emperor's Lifeguard. Rods of Laurel also, and Fire, Marks
of Honor distinguishing Princes from Private Persons, were born before him in
State; insomuch that Carthage for a short time represented the Imperial City of
Rome.

Gordian sent Letters to the Chief Men in Rome, and to the most eminent of the
Senators, the greatest part whereof were engaged to him by Friendships and
Alliances: He published also Declarations directed to the Senate and People of
Rome, setting forth the unanimous Consent of the Africans in his Election, and
the barbarous Cruelties of the present Emperor, which he knew were universally
abhorred. Then he gave all the Assurances that could be of a gentle and benign
Government, banished all common Informers, reversed unjust Judgments, and
allowed the Parties aggrieved the Benefit of a new Defense. Those that were
exiled he restored to their Native Countries, and promised a Dole to the
People, and a Largess to the Soldiers, greater than had ever been given before.
He also laid a Train to destroy Vitalian the Captain of the Praetorian Band,
who was a cruel and a bloody Man, and a firm Friend to Maximine and his
Interests, to which he was entirely devoted: For he foresaw that he would
vigorously oppose his Designs, and affright other People from stirring in his
behalf: So he sent the Quaestor of the Province, a bold brawny Youth, that was
in the flower of his Age, and ready to run any Hazard in his Service, and
ordered certain Centurions and Soldiers to accompany him, and gave him Letters
sealed with two Seals, in which secret Intelligences are wont to be imparted to
the Emperor. They were instructed to enter the City in the Night, and go
directly to Vitalian in his Office where he used to take and examine all secret
Informations and Discoveries which any way concerned the Emperor's Safety. As
soon as they came to him, they were to acquaint him, That they had Letters for
Maximine that contained secret Advices, and that they were sent upon Business
that nearly concerned the Safety of his Person: After which they were to desire
a private Conference, wherein they might lay before him their Instructions in
the Affair they were sent about; and while he was viewing the Seals, they might
pretend to speak to him, and so fall upon him with their Ponyards and kill him:
All which succeeded as he desired. They came to him before it was light, about
which time he was commonly stirring, and found him unattended and almost alone:
Some were not yet come, others had been at his Levy, and were gone again. He
was at leisure, so they were easily admitted, and acquainted him with their
Business, and delivered the Letters; and while he was poring over the Seals,
they assaulted and killed him; and when they had done, bolted forth with their
naked Ponyards, and escaped; the People that were before the Door of his Office
retiring in astonishment, and giving them way; for they supposed that all had
been done by the Emperor's Order, who had often rewarded the Services of his
greatest Favorites in the same manner. Then they came into the Sacred Way, and
dispersed Gordian's Declaration, that was directed to the People, and delivered
the Letters to the Consuls and the rest, and spread abroad Rumors that Maximine
was slain: Upon which the People ran about, as if they had been seized with
some sudden Frenzy; for the Mobile in all Countries is the same, fickle,
inconstant, Lovers of Changes and Revolutions; yet of all Nations under the
Sun, the Romans are certainly the most capricious, in regard they are
compounded of so many differing and Foreign Mixtures.

In this sudden Tumult all Maximine's Statues were pulled down, all Men flung
off the Masque, now they were delivered from the Fears which had obliged them
to wear it, and discovered their Hatred and Detestation of the Tyrant. The
Senate, without examining the Grounds of the Report concerning his Death,
conjecturing only from the present Stream of Affairs, proclaimed Gordian and
his Son Emperors, and abrogated all the Honors that had been heaped upon
Maximine. All common Informers and Court-Sycophants either fled, or were cut to
Pieces by those whom they had injured: The Procurators and Judges, those Tools
and Instruments of Tyranny, were dragged by the People into the Common Shore.
Beside these, many innocent Men were sacrificed during this Public Disorder;
Debtors killed their Creditors; and if any Man had an Adversary in a Suit then
depending, or the least Ground of private Resentment against a Person, he
boldly rushed in upon him, and with Force and Arms rifled the House, and flew
the Master. Thus, under pretext of Liberty and Peace, was the Empire thrown
into Convulsions, and felt the Effects of a Civil War: And when Sabinus, a
Consular Man, and Prefect of the City, endeavored to repress these
Insolences, he had his Scull split by a Blow which he received on his Head
with a Club: So great were the Outrages committed at this time by the People.
The Senate too had proceeded so far, that they durst not retreat for fear of
Maximine: So they set all Engines at work to make the Provinces revolt: They
sent Ambassadors to the Praefects Men chosen out of the Senate and Gentry of
Rome, and gave them Letters declaring the Sense of the Roman People and Senate
in relation to the present Juncture of Affairs, and exhorting them to join with
them in asserting the Liberty of their Country, and of the Great Council of the
Empire, and in persuading the Provinces to persevere in their Duty and
Obedience to the People of Rome, in whom the Empire of the World had been
lodged for diverse Ages, and to cultivate that Amity which had been so happily
begun and maintained by their Ancestors. The Ambassadors met with a kind
Reception in most Places, and found a general Disaffection in the Provinces to
the present Government, which they improved into an actual and open Rebellion.
Such Magistrates as adhered to Maximine were killed, and the rest fell in with
the Faction in Rome. Some few indeed there were that killed those that were
sent to them, or sent them away with a strong Guard to Maximine, who put them
to exquisite Torments. These were the Dispositions of the People in Rome.

Maximine upon receiving the News hereof was much troubled in Mind, but would
not reveal his secret Agonies to the World, but pretended to despise all these
Things as the harmless Efforts of impotent Men: Nevertheless, he staid at home
all the first and second Day after the News came, and advised with his Council
about the Measures to be taken in the present Exigency. The Army and People in
those Parts knew very well the whole Rise and Progress of this Rebellion, and
were astonished at so bold an Attempt; but they held their Tongues, and
pretended Ignorance of the whole Business; for so great were the Jealousies of
the Emperor, that he set Spies to observe not only the Words but even the Nods
and Motions of the People. On the third Day he commanded the Army to assemble
before the Gates of the City, where he read a short Speech to them, which his
Friends had composed for him, in the following Words.

MAXIMINE'S SPEECH to the ARMY.
Gentlemen,
I Have something to impart to you which is very strange, and almost
incredible; though truly, in my opinion, it deserves rather to be laughed than
wondered at. It Is not the Germans, whom you have so often vanquished, that
contemn the Reputation of your Valor, and have taken up Arms against us; nor
the Sarmatians, who make such constant Applications to this Court for Peace;
nor the Persians, who some Years ago overran Mesopotamia, but are now glad to
possess what they have in quiet: The Glory of your Arms, and their Experience
of our Courage, when we commanded the Army upon the River, has effectually
deterred them from attempting any thing against us: But (that I may say no
worse) an Epidemical Madness has seized the Carthaginians, and they have,
either by Persuasion or Force, set up an old Wretch, that is ready to drop into
the Grave, to act as it were the King in a Play. For what Army can they have to
support his Pretensions, who are forced to make Lictors execute the Commission
of Proconsul? Or, admitting they had Men, what would that avail without Arms?
And it is well known they have none, besides the Half-Pikes which they use in
hunting Wild Beasts. And for Martial Discipline, there is no such thing amongst
them; but in stead thereof, Songs, Dances, and loose Raillery.

Nor would I have any of you disheartened by the Advices which we receive from
Rome. Vitalian is treacherously murdered, and you are all acquainted with the
Levity and Inconstancy of the Roman People, and know very well how much their
Words are more formidable than their Actions. Three or four armed Men would put
them all in disorder; and while every Man shifted for himself, they would all
abandon the Common Cause. As for the Proceedings of the Senate, it is no wonder
that my Temperance has been distasteful, and that his Luxury is more agreeable
to them, as suiting better with the vicious Humor prevailing amongst them.
There is nothing done worthy of a Man or a Prince, but they brand it with the
black Epithets of Cruel and Tyrannical; and, on the other Hand, the most
scandalous Immoralities are cried up under the popular Names of Gentleness and
Clemency. And this is the Reason that they dislike the present Government, it is
too regular and uniform for them; and it is on the same score that they extol
Gordian, to whose Infamy, I suppose, none of you are Strangers. These are the
Men with whom we are to wage War, if it may deserve that Name; though truly I and
most Men are of Opinion, that as soon as we set Foot in Italy, they will all
cast themselves at our Feet with their Children, and with Olivebranches in
their Hands, entreat for Mercy; except such whose Fears will not suffer them to do
even that. Their Estates will fall into my Hands, and I shall take care to
distribute them amongst those whose Services shall best deserve them.

After he had delivered himself to this effect, and had by the way thrown many
Reproaches upon the Senate and People of Rome, menacing with his Hands and
Countenance, which was as full of Indignation as if the Persons that had thus
inflamed him had been present, he proclaimed his Expedition for Italy, and
distributed great Sums of Money among the Soldiers. The second Day after he
began his March, with a numerous Army, and the whole Military Force of the
Roman Empire. There followed him also several German Regiments, consisting of
such as he had either subdued by Force, or prevailed upon by Persuasion to
embrace his Friendship and Alliance. He carried with him also all the Engines
of War which he intended to make use of against the Germans. He marched the
more slowly, because he was obliged to take up Carriages and other Necessaries
by the way: For the Expedition being sudden, due Care had not been taken in
providing Things for the Use and Necessities of the Soldiers; the Preparations,
such as they were, being made in haste and confusion. So he judged it advisable
to send out a strong Detachment to surprise Italy, before the Gross of his Army
should arrive. For this important Piece of Service he pitched upon the
Pannonian Cohorts, being those in which he most confided, because they were the
first that proclaimed him Emperor, and had on all Occasions declared their
Forwardness to venture all they had in his Service.

While Maximine was upon his March, the Designs of the Carthaginian Faction
went not on so prosperously as was expected. Capellian, a Noble Senator, was at
this time Governor of Mauritania, which by the Romans is called Numidia, and
had considerable Forces under his Command, which are maintained for the defense
of the Province against the Insults of Barbarous Enemies.

There was, and had been for diverse Years, a Misunderstanding between Gordian
and this Capellian, occasioned at first by a Suit in Law: So when Gordian was
declared Emperor, he nominated a Person to succeed him, and commanded him to
depart out of the Province. Netled with this Indignity, and being besides a
great Stickler for Maximine, (for 'twas he that raised him to this Dignity) he
called his Soldiers together, and exhorted them to preserve inviolate their
Faith and Allegiance to Maximine, and marched directly to Carthage with a
gallant Army, composed of brave Men, in the flower of their Age, well appointed
and disciplined, and by reason of their frequent Rencounters with the
Barbarians, forward enough to give the Enemy Battle.

As soon as Gordian was advertised of the Approach of this Army, he was in
great Consternation. The Carthaginians were also alarmed, and relying more on
the Number, than the Order and Disposition of their Forces, marched all out to
meet Capellian.

Some say, that Gordian, as soon as he arrived at Carthage, considering the
great Strength of Maximine, and that there was no Force in Africa able to
oppose him, strangled himself; but the Citizens concealing his Death, made
choice of his Son to head them, and coming to an Engagement, the Carthaginians
were superior to the Enemy in Number, but without Order, and undisciplined.
They had lived a long time in an uninterrupted Tranquillity, and were enervated
by Ease and Pleasure, to which they had resigned themselves. Besides, they were
unprovided of Arms, and all sort of Ammunition; only each Man brought with him
from home an Ax, or a Dagger, or a Hunting Lance, or a Stake burnt and sharpened
at the end, for the Defense of his Body. On the other Hand, the Numidians were
expert Archers, and excellent Horsemen, insomuch that they ride without
Bridles, with a Switch only in their Hand, with which they could manage and
command their Horses as they thought fit: So they easily put the Carthaginians
to flight, who did not expect till the Charge was given, but flung away their
Arms, and fled with such precipitation, that more of their Men were killed by
their own Party, that trampled upon and ran over them in the Disorder of the
Flight, than by the Sword of their Enemies.

Gordian's Son was killed in this Action, with all those that were near his
Person; and so great was the Number of the Slain, that several Persons of Note,
and amongst the rest Gordian's Son, could not be found to receive Funeral
Honors. Of those that fled, such only escaped as got into Carthage, and put
themselves into a Concealment in that large and populous City; but their Number
was but small. As for the rest, while every Man pressed forward, and
endeavored to enter the Town, they stopped and hindered one another, and were
all cut in Pieces by the Soldiers that pursued them, before the Faces of their
Wives and Children, who expressed all the Degrees of Grief that such a Tragedy
might justly occasion.

Others report, that as soon as Gordian, who by reason of his Age staid at
home, received an Account of the unfortunate Issue of this Engagement, and that
Capellian had entered Carthage, considering his Condition as desperate, he
withdrew into his Bedchamber alone, as if he would lie down upon his Couch,
and there strangled himself in his Girdle.

This was the End of Gordian, who after a long Course of prosperous Fortune,
died in an imaginary Empire.

Capellian, immediately after his Entrance into the City, put to death all the
Men of principal Consideration that survived the Battle, and seized into his
Hands all the Treasure both Public and Private, not sparing even the Temples.
He dealt also in the like manner with the other Cities that had demolished
Maximine's Statues, putting to death the leading Men, and banishing the rest,
giving up all the Country to the Plunder and Ravage of his Soldiers. This he
did under pretext of punishing them for their Defection from Maximine; though in
truth his Design was to ingratiate with the Soldiers, that if any thing should
happen to Maximine, he might have at his beck a Force sufficient to establish
him upon his Throne. This was the State of Affairs in Africa.

Upon the News of Gordian's Death, the Senate and People of Rome were in great
Consternation. He was the Man they chiefly relied upon; and they knew very well
that Maximine would never forgive them. He always hated them in his Heart, and
now he had just Reason to proceed against them as his professed Enemies. So a
Consult was resolved upon, wherein they were to debate about the Measures to be
taken in this hazardous Conjuncture. The Result was, That there should be a
general Insurrection; that two Emperors should be chosen, in whose Hands the
Supreme Power should be lodged, that their Constitution might not a second time
be endangered by Tyranny. The Assembly was not held in the Senate House, but in
the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, to which the Romans pay singular Veneration,
as if nothing was to be done but in the Presence and with the Approbation and
Concurrence of the God. Then some of the eldest and most Noble of the Senators
were made choice of to be proposed to the Assembly; after which they proceeded
to vote, and the Majority being found for Maximus and Balbinus, they were
declared Emperors.

Maximus had commanded several Armies, had been Prefect of the City, and
acquitted himself very honorably in that Trust; by which means he established
the Character of a Good Man and a Prudent Governor. Albinus was of a Noble
Family, and had been twice Consul. He had governed diverse Provinces without
Blame or Censure, and in his Conversation was an open plaindealing Man. After
their Election, they were proclaimed, and invested in the Imperial Dignity by
Decree of the Senate.

While these Things were transacting in the Capitol, the People came to
understand what was in agitation, either by some Rumors that were spread
abroad, or by some Intimation which they received from Gordian's Party. So they
went up in a tumultuary manner with Stones and Clubs to the Gates, and
possessed all the Avenues to the Capitol with a numerous Mob, and endeavored
to oppose the Proceedings of the Senate. They excepted chiefly against Maximus,
as being too severe and rigid for them. He had been very active in executing
the Laws upon bad Men, so they were apprehensive of his Government, and
declared their Dislike of him aloud, with their Clamours mixing Menaces to kill
them both as soon as they came out. They demanded a Prince of the Race of
Gordian, that the Empire might remain in that Name and Line. Maximus and
Balbinus, with a Guard composed of the City-Troops, and some Gentlemen of Rome,
attempted to force their Way out of the Capitol, but were beat back with Stones
and Clubs, till at last somebody found a Way to impose upon the People.

There was a young Lad, Son to Gordian's Daughter, who was called after his
Grandfather: Him they ordered to be brought to them, and sent certain Persons
to fetch him, who found him at home, and at play; and setting him upon their
Shoulders, carried him through the middle of the Mob, showing him to the People
as they went along, and crying aloud, Behold Gordian 's Grandson! and calling
him often by his Name. The People all the time expressed their Affections to
him in Shouts of Joy, and as a farther Token thereof, scattered Flowers upon
him as he passed through them. The Senate declared him Caesar, in regard the
Tenderness of his Age made him unfit to have the Regency in his Hands; and the
Mob being appeased, the Emperors Elect were suffered to go quietly to their
Palace.

About this time an Accident happened of very fatal Consequence to the City of
Rome, occasioned by the Rashness of two Senators. The Senate met to consider of
the State of the Empire, and some of Maximine's Soldiers, that by reason of
their Age were excused from any further Service in the Wars, and were left in
the Camp, being desirous to inform themselves of the Matters then under Debate,
came without their Arms to the Door of the Senate, and mixing with the other
Crowd, staid there to listen; and two or three at the most, that were more
curious than the rest, pressed in, till they were got beyond the Altar of
Victory: Whereupon Gallicanus, a Carthaginian, who had lately been Consul, and
was then Senator of Rome, together with Moecenas, who had been Praetor, making
up to them, stabbed them to the Heart with Ponyards which they carried
privately about them, before they could pluck their Hands from under their
Cloaks; so sudden was the Assault, and so little were they aware of it. For
about that time all the Senators wore Swords, and had worn them ever since the
late Tumult, either publicly or privately, for the Defense of themselves
against any Attempt which might be made upon them by their Enemies. The
Soldiers that were stabbed fell down dead before the Altar, and the rest were
so terrified with the Misfortune that befell their Friends, and so apprehensive
of the Rage of the People, especially at a time when they were without their
Arms, that they betook themselves instantly to their Heels.

Gallicanus rushed out of the Senate into the middle of the Crowd, and held up
his Hand and Sword all covered with Blood, so as all the People might see it,
and then exhorted them to pursue and put to the Sword all Maximine' s Creatures
and Adherents, as Enemies and Traitors to the Senate and Commonwealth. The Mob
was easily inflamed, and applauding Gallicanus, pursued the Soldiers as far as
they could, with great eagerness, pelting them all the way with Stones: But
they were too nimble, and got into the Camp before them, and shutting the
Gates, resolved to defend themselves as well as they could; for they were but
few in Number, and the most of those too wounded.

Gallicanus, after this unparalleled Boldness, was very industrious to embroil
the Empire in a Civil War, which proved very mischievous to the Public Weal:
For he commanded the Public Armories to be broke open, and ordered every Man
to take out Arms for himself, though they were altogether unfit for Service, and
intended only for Show. The Fencing Schools were likewise opened, and the
Gladiators ordered to march out in their proper Armor. Nor was there any
Sword, Spear, Ax, etc. in any Shop or Private House, but was seized upon, and
carried away by Force: And so high ran the Popular Fury at this time, that
every Thing they laid Hand upon, if it was possible, was presently converted
into some sort of Weapon. After they were armed, they marched in a Body to the
Camp, and invested it, as if it had been a Town which they purposed to besiege;
but the Defendants were old experienced Soldiers, and made such use of their
Targets, and of the Shelter which their Ramparts afforded them, that the
Assailants could not annoy them; but, on the contrary, they galled them with
their Arrows, and pushed them from the Walls with long Pikes, which they
repeated as often as the Enemy had Courage to renew their Attacks, till at last
the People grew weary, and the greatest part of the Gladiators being wounded,
and the Night coming on, all were willing to return into the City: Which the
Soldiers in the Camp perceiving, and observing how disorderly and unguarded
their Retreat was, (for they did not imagine that so small a Number of Men
durst sally out upon so great a Multitude) they poured out their whole Force
upon them, and cut off the Gladiators entirely, with great Numbers of the
Common People, which perished in the Hurry of this Action. After this Success
the Soldiers did not think fit to pursue their Blow, but retired to their Camp,
and kept themselves within their Walls.

This Defeat served only to exasperate the Senate and People of Rome: So their
Captains proceeded to the making their Levies, and a general Rendezvous was
appointed, where all the Youth of Italy met, and were armed as well as the
suddenness of the Occasion would permit. The greatest part of them were led by
Maximus against Maximine: The rest were left at home for the Defense of the
City.

In this Interval Assaults were every Day made upon the Camp, but without
Success; the Place was still defended, and the Assailants always shamefully
repulsed by the Soldiers, who gave them very warm Reception from the Walls.

'Twas too about this time that Balbinus, who staid in the City, put out an
Edict, wherein he exhorted the People to an Accommodation with the Soldiers,
and promised the Soldiers an Oblivion of all that was past; but both Parties
were inflexible, the People being ready to burst with Indignation, that such a
Multitude should be thus out-brav'd by a Handful of Men; and, on the other
Hand, the Soldiers resenting as heinously the Treatment which they received
from the People, being more inhumane than they could expect even at the Hands
of Barbarous Enemies.

In conclusion, after many fruitless Attacks made upon the Walls of the Camp,
it was resolved in a Council of War, that all Supplies of Water should be cut
off from the Camp, by which Means the Soldiers would be reduced to such
Extremities for want thereof, as would oblige them to surrender. In order
hereunto, all the Rivers that supplied the Camp were choked up, and their
Water drawn into new Channels: But the Soldiers apprehending what Danger they
were in, and growing thereupon desperate, opened their Gates, and sallied out
in a Body, and after a sharp Dispute, put the Multitude to flight, and pursued
them into the City.

The People now perceived they were much inferior to the Soldiers in a Pitched
Battle; so they fled into their Houses, and threw down upon them Stones and
Tiles; the Soldiers not daring to follow them, because they were unacquainted
with the Houses. The Shops too, as well as the Houses, were shut upon them; so
they set Fire to the Doors, and to the wooden Porches, whereof there are great
numbers in this City, and by reason of the Closeness of the Streets, and the
great Quantity of Timber in the Buildings, easily laid the best part of the
City in Ashes.

A great many rich Men lost in this Fire all their Precious Movables, and
indeed their whole Estates, and were reduced to Beggary. Great numbers of Men
too perished in the Fire, their Houses being in a Flame about their Ears, and
all the Ways to escape possessed by the merciless Element. There was scarce any
rich Man's House that was not miserably pillaged during this Public Confusion;
for all the poor Scoundrels, and profligate Wretches about Town, fell in with
the Soldiers, in hopes to make their Fortune by the Plunder: And, in short,
there were as many Houses consumed by this Fire, as would make a very large
City.

While these Things were doing in Rome, Maximine arrived in Italy, and having
sacrificed upon the Frontiers, proceeded upon his Journey, after he had ordered
his Men to keep their Ranks, and march in their Arms. Thus we have given a
summary Relation of the African Rebellion, of the Civil War in Rome, and of
Maximine's Achievements and Expeditions. The rest we reserve for the following
Book.

AN EPITOME OF THE Eighth Book.
MAximine having passed the Alps, sits down before Aquileia; but before he can
make himself Master of the Town, is killed by his own Soldiers, together with
his Son. Their Heads are sent to Rome. Maximus, one of the Emperors, disbands
Maximine's Army at Aquileia, and returns to Rome with his own Forces. He and
Balbinus administer the Empire till they are both slain by the Praetorian
Soldiers. After their Death, Gordian Caesar is made Emperor.

The Eighth Book.
AN Account of what Maximine did after the Death of Gordian, together with his
Expedition into Italy, and the Revolt of Africa, as likewise a Relation of the
Heats and Animosities that happened between the Soldiers and People in Rome, is
delivered in the former Book.

Maximine was now with his Army on the Frontiers of Italy, and sent out his
Scouts before him, for fear of an Ambuscade, which might be lodged in the thick
Woods on the Alps, or in the vast Inequalities of those Mountains. Then he led
his Army into the Plain, and drew up his Legions into a Square Body, not
regarding in what Depth they were ranged, but taking care to extend his Front,
that they might take up the more Ground. All the Baggage, Beasts, and Carriages
were taken into the middle; then followed Maximine with his Guards to cover the
Rear. The Wings consisted of Horsemen in complete Armor, with whom were ranged
the Eastern Archers, and the Moorish Darters. There were also diverse Auxiliary
Regiments of German Horse, which Maximine always opposed to the first Shocks of
the Enemy, because they are very hot, and discharge their whole Fury in the
Beginning of an Engagement, and that the Danger, if any were, might fall upon
the Barbarians, who might the best be spared. Thus ranged, he marched over all
that Champagne Country, till he came to the first City of Italy, which is
called by the Natives Ema; it is situated at the Roots of the Alps, on the
utmost Point of the Level. Here the Scouts returned to Maximine with
Intelligence that the Town was abandoned, and that the Inhabitants were fled,
after they had burnt all the Doors of the Houses and Temples, and carried away
or destroyed all they had in the City or Country adjoining, and left neither
Provision nor Forage for Man or Beast.

Maximine was glad to find the People under so great a Terror, and hoped to
meet with the same Dispositions in the rest, and that none would be so hardy as
to abide his Coming: But his Soldiers were differently affected; they thought
it very hard that they should be obliged in this manner to conflict with a
Famine in the beginning of an Expedition. Part of the Army lay that Night in
the City, in the open Houses, the rest took up their Quarters in the Fields,
and in the Morning, as soon as the Sun arose, they began their Approaches to
the Alps.

These Alps are a Chain of Hills raised by Nature to be a Wall and a Bulwark to
Italy: They are so high, that they seem to surmount the very Clouds; and so
extended in length, that they run across the whole Country, stretching on the
Left Hand to the Tyrrhene, and on the Right to the Ionian Sea. They are all
covered with thick Woods, and are almost impassable, by reason of the narrow
Paths, craggy Rocks, and steep Precipices. Some Tracks indeed there are hewn
out by the indefatigable Labor of the old Italians. Here the Army was under
great Apprehensions, that the Tops of the Mountains were possessed, and all the
Ways blocked up by the Enemy, to impeach their Passage; and not without just
Reason, as will appear to any Man that considers the Nature of the Place: But
after they had passed the Alps without any Difficulty, and encamped on the
other side, they soon recovered their wonted Courage, and began to triumph as
if they had already vanquished; and Maximine did not doubt of Success now in
whatever he should undertake, seeing the Italians durst not use the Advantages
which the Difficulties of the Place afforded them, of laying Ambuscades, and
annoying the Enemy without any Hazard to themselves, and of engaging them from
above with the Benefit of a higher Ground.

No sooner had they passed the Alps, but the Scouts returned with Advice, that
Aquileia, the greatest City of Italy, had shut her Gates, and that the
Pannonian Regiments that were sent before, had made several vigorous Attacks
upon her Walls, but were always repulsed with Stones. Spears, and Arrows, which
the Besieged shot at them without Intermission; and that now being sore
fatigued and harrass'd, they had raised the Siege. Hereupon Maximine conceived
great Indignation against the Pannonian Soldiers, for their Behavior in this
late Action, and hastened with his whole Army to the Siege, thinking to carry
the Place without any Difficulty.

Aquileia is a City populous and large, and as it were the Mart-Town of Italy,
situate on the Seacoast, upon the Frontiers of Illyria. She supplies all the
Vessels that sail that way with Provisions and other Merchandise from the
Continent, which are brought down thither both by Land and Water; and sends up
also from the Sea into the Continent such Commodities as will not grow in the
midland Country, by reason of the severe Winters.

Her Staple Commodity is Wine, whereof the Product is so confiderable in this
Country, that all the neighboring Provinces, that have not so much as a
Vineyard amongst them, are supplied from hence: For which Reasons not only the
Citizens are very numerous, but the Resort of Strangers and Merchants is very
considerable: And at this time their Numbers were vastly increased by the
prodigious Confluence of Boors and Peasants, who abandoned all the adjacent
Villages, and retired thither, trusting to the Largeness of the Town, and the
Strength of its Fortifications, which in truth were old and ruinous, and for
the most part demolished: For the Cities of Italy, after the Establishment of
the Roman Empire, had no Occasion for Arms or Fortifications, but enjoyed for
diverse Years an uninterrupted Tranquillity, and were combined into one Body
Politic with the Capital City of the Empire: But in this Extremity of Affairs
they fell to repairing the Walls, raised new Towers and Bastions, and
encompassed the City with a Fortification, which the People guarded Night and
Day with that Skill and Bravery, that they utterly baffled all the Efforts of
the Enemy.

On this Occasion Crispinus and Menephilus, two Consular Men, were made choice
of by the Senate, and had the Supreme Authority put into their Hands. They took
all imaginable Care to lay in Provisions for a long Siege; and as for Water,
they could have Plenty out of the Pits, whereof were great Numbers within the
Walls, and out of the River that ran by the Town, affording not only Supplies
of Water, but the Protection of a Trench to the Besieged. These were the
Preparations in the City.

Maximine hearing that their Gates were shut, and that the City was in posture
of Defense, thought it most advisable to send Commissioners to treat with them,
and try whether by that means they could prevail upon them to open their Gates*
There was in his Army at that time a Tribune, a Citizen of Aquileia, whose
Wife, Children, and Family were amongst the Besieged; him therefore, and
certain Centurions, he sent to them, supposing that his Advice would have such
weight with his Fellow-Citizens, as would easily induce them to follow it. When
they came to the Wall, they spoke to them to this effect.

GEntlemen, Maximine our Liege Lord commands you to lay down your Arms, and to
receive him not as an Enemy, but a Friend; and advises you rather to sacrifice
to the Gods, than to spill the Blood of Men. He would have you duly affected
with the Ruin and Desolation of your Country, which, if you be obstinate, will
certainly ensue. It Is in your own Power to preserve at once both your Country
and your selves. So gracious is our Prince, that he offers you Pardon and
Indemnity for all that is past, being well assured, that what you have hitherto
done, has entirely proceeded from the Instigation and Practices of others.

These Words were pronounced by the Commissioners under the Wall, in a loud
Voice, so that all the People that stood upon the Walls or Ramparts, except
such as were upon Duty in the remote Parts of the Town, heard what was said;
for they all kept silence, and gave attention; insomuch that Crispinus began to
be afraid, and not without just Reason, considering the Instability of the
Multitude, lest they should be won upon by fair Promises to make a Peace with
the Emperor, and to open their Gates: So he ran to and fro upon the Walls,
exhorting them to a gallant Resistance, and beseeching them to hold it out to
the last, and not to violate their Faith and Allegiance to the Senate and
People of Rome.

He re-minded them also of the Glory of being the Deliverers and Protectors of
Italy, which they would merit by a brave Deportment in this Juncture; and
advised them not to believe the Professions of a perjured and a faithless
Tyrant, who was then actually contriving their Destruction, and made use of
fair Words only to disguise, and thereby more surely to effect his hidden
Purposes. He told them, That it was better to trust to the Chance of War; that
a Handful of Soldiers had often baffled a formidable Army; and that a mighty
Host had been often vanquished by a small Band of Men; that there was another
Reason why they should not be dismayed at his Numbers; for when Soldiers fight
for other Men, to whom all the Advantages of Success redound, they are apt to
fight but lazily, and as Men not concerned in the Issue of the Battle; for they
know very well, that though they are admitted to a Share in the Hazards and
Dangers that must be encountered in the obtaining a Victory, yet when it is
obtained, the whole Benefit of it accrues to other Men; whereas when Men fight
for the Preservation of their Country, besides that they have better Grounds of
Hope than the others, (in regard they don't invade other Men's Property, but
only guard their own) they go on too with more Alacrity and Cheerfulness,
because on this Occasion they don't obey the Commands of other Men, but the
Dictates of their own Necessity, and contend for a Victory, the whole Fruit and
Benefit whereof will be entirely their own.

These and the like Considerations Crispinus suggested to them, sometimes
addressing himself to the whole Company, sometimes to particular Persons. He
was a Man naturally of an august Presence, and very powerful in the Roman
Eloquence; he was too universally beloved, by reason of the great Gentleness
and Equity of his Government: So he confirmed them in their first Resolutions,
and commanded the Commissioners to depart from the Walls without effecting what
they came for.

'Twas said, that Crispinus was animated to the making this resolute Defense,
by the Soothsayers, who upon examination and view of the Entrails of the
Victims, gave him great Encouragement, than which nothing makes stronger
Impressions upon the Italians. There was also a Report handed about, That a God
of the Country, called by the Italians Beles, and supposed to be Apollo, and
had in great veneration in those Parts, had foretold that he should be
victorious. And some of Maximine's Soldiers affirmed, That they saw the Image
of this God fighting in the Air in defense of the City. Whether this was true,
or it was only a Story contrived to lessen the Reproach that would otherwise
fall upon so great an Army, for fighting so unsuccessfully with an
undisciplined Mob, inferior to themselves in Number, and therefore they would
appear to the World to have been vanquished rather by Gods than Men, I leave a
Question. However it was, an Event so strange and surprising made all Things
more credible.

The Commissioners returned to Maximine, and their ill Success served only to
inflame him to a higher Degree of Rage; so he made swifter Advances with his
Army toward the City: But when he came to a River about Sixteen Miles from the
Town, he found it exceeding broad and deep, it being the time of the Year when
the Snow that is frozen upon the neighboring Hills in the Winter, was melted,
which had swelled the River to so prodigious a height, that it was absolutely
impossible to pass his Army over it: For the Aquileians had taken care to break
down a large and goodly Bridge, built there of square Stone some Ages ago by
the Emperors of Rome: So there being no Bridge, nor any Transport-Vessels to
carry over his Army, he was obliged to make a Halt, being utterly at a loss
what Counsels to pursue.

Some of the Germans, being unacquainted with the strong and rapid Current of
the Italian Rivers, supposing that they flowed as gently as those in their own
Country, (which for want of a quick and violent Agitation are soon frozen)
ventured to take the River with their Horses, which though they could swim very
well, were all carried down by the force of the Stream, and drowned.

Maximine entrenched his Army, for fear of a Surprise; and having staid in his
Pavilion two or three Days, went out to view the River, and contrive a Bridge
over it; but wanting Materials, viz. Timber and Boats, he was informed by his
Engineers, that in the abandoned Villages there were great Numbers of round
empty Vessels of Wood, which the Inhabitants made use of to carry their Wine
in; these were made hollow like Ships, and they were of opinion, that they
would float upon the Water like so many Wherries, and if they were fastened
together, and covered with Wicker, and good store of Earth cast upon them, they
would be firm enough to stem the violence of the Current.

By the help of this Project Maximine easily passed the River with his Army,
and advanced toward the City. They found all the Country-Villages, as they
marched along, forsaken by their Inhabitants, and burnt and cut down all the
Vines and other Trees, utterly destroying all the Ornaments and Glory of the
Country: For the Trees are ranged in such beautiful Order, and the Vines so
artfully disposed, that their Branches mingle as they grow, and afford a most
delightful Prospect; the whole Country appearing to the Eye to be adorned with
Crowns and Garlands, as at some solemn Festival.

But now all these were rooted up by the ravaging Army, after which they
advanced to the Walls of the City: But in regard the Soldiers were sore
harrass'd in their March, Maximine did not think fit to attack the Town
presently; so he encamped out of the reach of the Enemies Arrows, and divided
his Army into Cohorts and Parties, assigning to each of them a part of the
Wall; and allowing one Day only for Rest, prepared the Day following for the
general Assault.

Accordingly at the Day they made their Approaches with all sort of Warlike
Engines, and assailed the Walls with great Fury, leaving no manner of Assault
unattempted. This was repeated almost every Day, fresh Attacks being made with
great Vigor and Gallantry, and the Walls surrounded by a powerful Army.

Notwithstanding this, the Aquileians made a brave Defense; the Doors of the
Temples and Houses were shut, and all the People, without excepting even Women
and Children, mounted the Towers and Bastions to fight against the Common
Enemy. There was no Age of Life so utterly useless and disabled for Service,
but on this Occasion was actually in Arms for the Defense of their Country. The
Suburbs, and whatever Houses were without the Gates of the City, were
demolished by Maximine, and the Timber converted into Battering Engines, with
which he essayed to make a Breach in the Wall, at which his Army might enter,
being resolved to plunder the City, and lay it level with the Ground, and to
leave the Country around waste and desolate. He thought it would not be for his
Glory and Reputation, to proceed on his March to Rome, before the destroyed
from its Foundations the first City in Italy that opposed his Arms: So he rode
through his Army (with his Son whom he had made Caesar) mixing Entreaties with
Promises, to raise and excite the Courage of his Soldiers.

But the Aquileians tumbled Stones down upon them, and filled Barrels, with
long Handles fixed to them, with Pitch, Sulphur, and other Bituminous Matter,
and when the Enemy approached the Walls, showered down upon them Streams of
scalding Pitch, which, with the other combustible Matter, lighting upon the
naked Parts of the Soldiers Bodies, spread it self all over them, insomuch that
they instantly fell to stripping themselves: Off went their Coats of Mail, and
all their other Armor, and happy he that could get rid of them; for the Iron
was glowing hot, and the Leather parched and shrivel'd with the Fire. There you
might see their Arms lying on the Ground, like Spoils taken from them, not by
Force, but Stratagem. The best part of the Army had their Eyes burnt out, and
their Hands, Faces, and all the other naked Parts of their Bodies miserably
scorched. Moreover, they covered Firebrands with Pitch and Rozin, and sharpened
them at the Ends like Arrows, which being lighted and darted into the Engines
so as to stick fast, easily set them on fire. At the first Fortune held the
Scales pretty equal; but after a while, Maximine's Soldiers meeting with warmer
Entertainment than they expected, grew weary and disheartened. Those who they
thought could not withstand the first Shocks of their Assault, made a stout and
resolute Resistance. On the other Hand, the Aquileians received new Accessions
of Courage and Vigor, and by frequent Rencounters arrived to a tolerable Skill
and Address in Military Matters, and made so slight of the Enemy, that they
could not forbear drolling upon them, not sparing even Maximine or his Son, but
reproaching and reviling them as they rid near the Walls, and treating them
with the last Degree of Scorn and Contempt.

This highly incensed Maximine; so being unable to pour out his Revenge upon
his Enemy, he was resolved his own Officers should feel the weight of his Hand:
So he put most of them to death, pretending they had not pushed on the Siege so
vigorously as they ought to have done; which Cruelty only rendered him more
odious to the Army, and more contemptible to the Enemy.

It happened that the Aquileians had store of all Sorts of Provisions, great Care
being taken that the Town should be well furnished with all Things requisite
for the Support of Man or Beast: Whereas the Army was forced to struggle with a
Dearth and Scarcity of all Things; for they had destroyed all the Fruit Trees,
and ravaged the Country around. They had some Tents indeed pitched in haste, in
which part of the Army lay; the rest lay scattered in the open Fields, exposed
to all the Inclemencies of the Weather. No Provision or Forage could be brought
into the Camp; for the Romans had blocked up all the Ways into Italy, and to
strengthen the Blockade, had built there Walls and Gates. Consular Men, and
Persons of the greatest Consideration and Worth in all Italy, were appointed to
guard the Coasts and Harbors, and to hinder the passing of any Vessels by
Water, to the end that Maximine might have no Intelligence of what was done in
Rome. All the Highways and Roads were diligently watched, and no Man suffered
to pass; by which means it fell out, that the Army, which pretended to be the
Besieger, was it self besieged: For neither could they make themselves Masters
of the Town, nor, if they raised the Siege, could they go on to- Rome, for want
of Transport-Vessels and Carriages, all which were seized upon before, and
secured.

There seemed also some Ground and Color for the Rumor that was handed about,
( viz*) That the Romans were in Arms; that all Italy and Illyria, as also the
Southern and Eastern Barbarians, were engaged with them; that they had
concerted to raise a Army, out of a general Hatred and Disaffection to
Maximine; insomuch that Maximine's Soldiers began now to despair. They labored
under a Want of all Things, even of Water, those poor Supplies which they had
being out of the River that ran by the Town, the Water whereof was tainted by
the Blood and dead Bodies which were thrown into it by the Aquileians, for want
of a Convenience for burying them within the Walls; together with such as died
in the Army by Sword, Sickness, or Famine; of all which, this River was the
common Receptacle.

The Army being thus reduced to the utmost Degree of Despair and Wretchedness,
when Maximine was reposing himself in his Pavilion, (there being a Cessation of
Arms for that Day) and most of the Soldiers were in their Tents, or retired to
their respective Posts; the Soldiers that belonged to the Camp in Rome under
Mount Alba, and had their Wives and Children there, fell upon a sudden Resolve,
which was, to assassinate the Emperor, that so they might deliver themselves
from the Fatigues of a long and almost endless Siege, and that they might not
contribute to the Desolation of Italy, to gratify a Tyrant so universally
hated and abhorred: So taking Courage, they marched at High-Noon to the
Emperor's Pavilion, having made his Guards Accomplices in the Design, and after
they had torn his Pourtraict out of the Ensigns, they assaulted and slew both
him and his Son, as he was coming out of his Tent to speak to them. The Captain
of the Lifeguard was sacrificed at the same time, together with all the
Favorites of the Tyrant: Their Carcases were thrown out to be spurned at and
trampled upon, and afterward to be torn in Pieces by Dogs and Birds of Prey.
Only the Heads of the two Emperors were cut off, and sent to Rome. Thus fell
Maximine and his Son, receiving the just Rewards of a Cruel and Tyrannical
Administration.

As soon as the Emperor's Assassination was made public, the Army was in great
Astonishment. The News was not equally agreeable to all. The Thracians and
Pannonians, who had been the chief Instruments of his Advancement, were the
most deeply afflicted; but in regard the Loss could not be repaired, they were
resolved to be as easy under it as they could, and to partake at least
seemingly of the general Satisfaction which this Massacre had given: So they
laid down their Arms, and approached the Walls attired like Friends, and
declaring Maximine's Death, requested the Besieged to open their Gates and
receive them, who were now their Friends, though before they had been their
Enemies.

The Aquileians did not think fit to comply with this Demand, but set out the
Statues of Maximus and Balbinus, and Gordian Caesar, adorned with Crowns and
Chaplets of Laurel, expressing their Affection to them in Shouts of Joy, and
exhorting the Soldiers to do the like, and to own those Emperors whom the
Senate and People had in their Wisdom made choice of: The other Gordians (they
told them) were departed to another World, and had taken their Places among the
Immortal Gods. Then they furnished out a Market upon the Walls of the City,
well stocked with all sorts of Victuals and Wines, as also with Clothes, Shoos,
and whatever a rich and flourishing City could afford.

At this the Army was infinitely more amazed, when they considered, that the
City had Provisions for a long Siege, and that the Scarcity of all Things in
the Camp was so extreme, that they must have perished by Famine before they
could have made themselves Masters of so well provided a Town. So the Army sat
still before the City, and was supplied with whatever they had occasion for
from thence. The Soldiers and Citizens conversing together, maintained an
amicable Correspondence, although the Form of a Siege remained, and the Roman
Army lay encamped around the Town. This was the State of Affairs at Aquileia.

In the mean time, the Couriers that were sent to Rome with Maximine's Head,
made all imaginable Expedition, and were received with open Gates by all the
Towns they passed through, the Citizens meeting them with Branches of Laurel in
their Hands; and having passed the Lakes between Altinum and Ravenna, they
found Maximus in Ravenna, drawing together the choicest of the Soldiers both in
Rome and Italy. He had also a considerable Reinforcement of German Auxiliaries,
sent to him by that Province, as an Acknowledgment of his great Care and
Diligence in his late Government in those Parts; and was raising an Army
against Maximine, when they arrived with the Heads of the slain Emperor and his
Son, and imparted to him the Tidings of Victory and Success, and that both Army
and People were unanimous in their Approbation of the Senates Choice of
Emperors.

Upon this News, so great and unexpected, the Altars were loaded with
Sacrifices, and all Men joined in the celebrating a Victory which cost no
Labor in the obtaining. Maximus having sacrificed, ordered the Couriers to go
directly to Rome with the Heads, and News of what had happened.

As soon as they entered Rome, and fixed the Head of the Common Enemy upon the
Point of a Lance, so that all the People might behold it, it is impossible for
Words to describe the Jubilee of that Day. No Man staid at home; but all, both
Young and Old, thronged to the Temples and Altars, and, as if some sudden
Frenzy had seized them, ran about, congratulating one another, and gathered
together into the Cirque, as upon some solemn Assembly. Balbinus sacrificed
Hecatombs, and there was no Magistrate or Senator but felt extraordinary
Emotions of Joy on this Occasion, the Sword that hung over their Heads being
now removed. Couriers also with Laurel Branches were dispatched to communicate
the News to the Provinces.

While these Public Rejoicings were making in Rome, Maximus parted from
Ravenna, and came to Aquileia, having passed the Lakes which are made by the
Exundations of the Poe, and the neighboring Fens, which discharge themselves
here into the Sea at Seven Mouths, for which Reason these Lakes are called by
the Natives The Seven Seas. Upon his Arrival the Gates of the City were
immediately opened, and the Aquileians received him with all the Marks of
Respect. Persons of Condition were sent to him from all the Cities of Italy,
with Addresses of Loyalty: Their Attire was White, and they had in their Hands
Branches' of Laurel, and brought with them the Gods of their respective
Countries, as also Crowns of massy Gold; and in token of their Affection, they
scattered Flowers upon him, which they seconded with Wishes of Long Life and
Happy Reign. The Army too that invested Aquileia met him with Branches of
Laurel, in the Habits of Peace. Though this Public Honor which they did him,
was not what any real Affection, but an affected Zeal and dissembled Loyalty
prompted them to, they put on a Mask, that they might appear of a right
Complexion for the Times: For most of them could not without Indignation and
Resentment behold their own Emperor basely murdered, and the Senates Creatures
sitting at the Helm. But Maximus, after he had spent two Days in offering
Sacrifice, upon the third ordered the Army to be drawn out into the Field,
where from a Throne there erected, he delivered himself in the following Words.

MAXIMUS his SPEECH to the ARMY.
Gentlemen,
THat it was your true Interest to submit to and fall in with the Roman People,
I doubt not but your own Experience has informed you. You have exchanged War
for Peace, and kept your Military Oath, that most Sacred Mystery of the Roman
Empire; and for the future if you preserve inviolate the Faith and Duty which
you owe to the Senate and People of Rome, and to us your Emperors, you may live
in the quiet Enjoyment of these Advantages. We are your Liege Lords, elected by
the Roman People and Senate, who were moved solely by the Consideration of our
Archievements, and the ancient Nobility of our Lineage: For the Empire is not
the private Inheritance of any particular Person, but belongs to the Collective
Body of the Roman People: We and you are only entrusted with the Executive
Power or Authority, to administer that Empire. Now if you behave your selves as
becomes good and loyal Subjects, and pay us the Respect and Honor that is due
to the Persons of Princes, you may live happily under Us, in the secure
Possession of all the necessary Supports of Life: And besides, your Example
will have a good Influence upon all our Cities and Provinces, and will incline
them to render a ready and cheerful Obedience to their several Governors. You
shall not any more be harrass'd in Foreign Countries, but shall live henceforth
at home, according to your own Humors and Inclinations. To curb the Barbarous
Nations, shall be our Charge and Province. The putting the Supreme Power into
two Hands, will facilitate the Management of Affairs in Rome; and if any thing
happen in Foreign Parts, that may require the Presence of an Emperor, one of us
will be always at liberty to observe the Motions on that Side. And I would not
have any of you harbor a Jealousy that any thing you have hitherto done has
left any Impression upon our Minds, or upon the Minds of the Roman People, or
the Provinces that revolted for Injuries then received; seeing what you did
then was in Obedience to the Commands of your Prince. Let there be then a
General Oblivion of all that is past, and for the future a firm League of
everlasting Amity and Friendship amongst us.

After this Harangue, he promised great Sums of Money to the Soldiers; and
resolving after a short Stay in Aquileia to return to Rome, ordered the
Remainder of the Forces into their respective Provinces and Quarters, only
taking with him to Rome the Praetorian Soldiers, with the Forces commanded by
Balbinus, and the German Auxiliaries, of whose Loyalty he had a singular good
Opinion, in regard he had governed in those Parts with great Moderation, before
this Advancement to the Empire. At his Public Entry into Rome, he was met by
Balbinus and Gordian Caesar, accompanied by the whole Senate and People, who
received him with Acclamations of Joy and Triumph. After this, they
administered the State with great Order and Gravity, to the general
Satisfaction of all Ranks and Degrees of Men. The People rejoiced, and gloried
in their Emperors, whose Noble Birth and Personal Merit rendered them worthy of
the Empire. But, on the other Hand, the Soldiers were violently bent against
them; they were offended with the very Acclamations of the People, and the
Nobility so much cried up by them, minister'd Matter of Disgust to these, which
was increased by the odious Circumstance of their being elected by the Senate.
The retaining also the Germans, and the quartering them in Rome, gave them
great Jealousy; they foresaw they would oppose their Designs, and suspected a
Project was afoot to disarm them, and that the Germans were to execute it, and
to have their Places if they succeeded; a late Instance whereof there was in
Severus's Reign, who cashiered the Guards that were concerned in Pertinax's
Assassination. So when the Games instituted in Honor of Jupiter Capitolinus
were to be celebrated, and all Men's Minds were bent upon the Shows and Public
Entertainments that were made on that Occasion, upon a sudden the Praetorian
Soldiers threw off the Mask, and boldly published their Disaffection to the
Government, which they had till now industriously disguised; and being hurried
on by a wild Rage, ran up to the Imperial Palace, and surpised the Persons of
the Emperors.

It happened at that time, there was no good Understanding between the Emperors
themselves: For each strove to engross the Sovereign Power to himself; so
extravagant are our Desires of Rule, and so incommunicable is the Nature of
that Power we desire. Balbinus laid great stress upon his two Consulships, and
the Illustrious Family from whence he was sprung, and thought they gave him the
Pre-eminence: And on the other Hand, Maximus valued himself no less upon his
Government of Rome, and his Skill and Address in the Management of Affairs:
And, in short, high Birth and great Alliances pushed them both on to the
Desires of sole and uncontested Dominion; which Thing ruined them both: For
when Maximus was advertised that the Praetorian Soldiers were in Arms, and
resolved to sacrifice them to their present Fury, he would have sent for the
Germans that quartered in Rome to quell this Commotion; but Balbinus opposed
it, apprehending that some Intrigue or Practice was carrying on against him;
for he knew very well, that the Germans were all devoted to Maximus's
Interests, and declared openly, that they were not sent for to repress the
Insolence of the Praetorians, but to wrest the Sovereign Power out of his
Hands, and lodge it entirely in Maximus.

During this Heat and Debate between the Emperors, the Praetorian Soldiers
(those that guarded the Gates giving way) broke into the Palace, and seized the
Persons of the Emperors, and tearing off their Clothes, which were courser than
they ordinarily appeared in abroad, dragged them naked out of the Palace,
treating them with all the Contempt and Indignity imaginable, even to the
striking, and calling them in derision The Senates Creatures: They plucked them
also by the Beard and Eyebrows, and haled them through the middle of the City
to the Camp, not forbearing the most irreverent and barbarous Usage. They were
resolved not to kill them in the Palace, but to reserve them for more exquisite
Torments, of which they would be longer sensible.

The Germans, upon notice of this Outrage, armed themselves in great haste, and
came running to assist the Emperors; whereupon the Praetorian Soldiers put an
end to their Lives and Torments together, all the Parts of their Bodies being
before most inhumanely mangled. Their dead Bodies they left in the open Street,
and mounting Gordian Caesar aloft, proclaimed him Emperor, (because at that
time they could find no body else) and cried aloud to the People, That they had
only destroyed those Emperors that were made such against their will, and had
elected Gordian, Nephew to that Noble Patriot of the same Name, who was
constrained by the Roman People to take upon him the Empire. After this they
retired with their new Emperor into the Camp, and shut up their Gates, making
no farther Effort at this time: And the Germans finding they were too late, and
that they whom they came to rescue were slain, esteemed it not advisable to
engage in a fruitless War, on the account of Men that were dead: So they
returned to their several Quarters.

Such was the cruel and undeserved Fate of these truly Worthy and Venerable
Patriots, who were justly raised to the Empire, for their Noble Birth, and
eminent Virtues: And Gordian Caesar, who was then about the Age of Thirteen,
was declared Emperor, and began his Reign.

FINIS.
Books sold by John Hartley over against Gray's-Inn in Holborn.
THe Blasphemous Socinian Heresy disproved and confuted: Wherein the Doctrinal
and Controversial Parts of those Points are handled, and the Adversaries
Scripture and School-Arguments answered: With Animadversions upon a late Book,
called, Christianity not Mysterious. Humbly dedicated to Both Houses of
Parliament. By J. Gailhard Gent. Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d.

The Epistle and Preface to the Book against the Blasphemous Socinian Heresy,
vindicated; and the Charge therein against Socinianism, made good: In Answer to
Two Letters. By J. Gailhard Gent. Price 1 s.

Verdicts of the Learned, concerning Virgil's and Homer's Heroic Poems.
Quarto. Price 6 d.

Regular and Irregular Thoughts in Poets and Orators. Quarto. Price 6 d.

A View of the Admiral Jurisdiction, wherein the most material Points
concerning that Jurisdiction are fairly and submissively discussed, as also
diverse of the Laws, Customs, Rights, and Privileges, of the High Admiralty of
England, by ancient Records, and other Arguments of Law, asserted. Whereunto is
added, by way of Appendix, An Extract of the Ancient Laws of Oleron, for the
better Regulation and Government of Merchants, Owners of Ships and Part-Owners,
Masters of Ships, and Common Mariners, in all Maritime Affairs: With a
Catalogue of all the Lords High Admirals that have been in this Kingdom since
King John's Time, to the Reign of His now most Gracious Majesty King James the
Second. By J. Godolphin, LL. D. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Utopia: Written in Latin by Sir Thomas More Chancellor of England. Translated
into English, by Bishop B. Price 1 s.

Antonii le Grand Dissertatio de Ratione Cognoscendi: and Appendix de Mutatione
Formali, cum Castigationibus Errorum, Calumniarum, Praevaricationum, quibus J.
S. in duobus Libris, quorum prior Methodus sciendi, alter Solida Philosophia
intitulatur: Cartesium, Malbranchium, stas, quos vocat Omnes. Immo and
Aristotelem, non Deum ipsum, multa cum Futilitate, nec minore Fastu, nuperrime
adortus est. Price 2 s.

The History and Fate of Sacrilege, discovered by Examples of Scripture, of
Heathens, and of Christians, from the beginning of the World continually to
this Day. By Sir Henry Spelman Knight. Wrote in the Year 1632. A Treatise
omitted in the late Edition of his Posthumous Works, and now published for the
Terror of Evil Doers. To which is added, An Historical Account of the Beginners
of a Monastic Life in Asia, Africa, and Europe. By Sir Roger Twifden Knight
and Baronet. Price 4 s.


