PIETY THE Best Rule OF ORTHODOXY.

OR, An Essay upon this Proposition: That the Conduciveness of Doctrines to
Holiness or Vice, is the best Rule for private Christians to judge the Truth or
Falsehood of them by.

In a Letter to his Honored Friend H. M.

(...), etc.

Clem. Alexand. By Hen. Hesketh, Vicar of S. Hellens, and Chaplain to his
Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. CHAP. I. The great need of every Christians taking heed of
Error. The difficulty in our present circumstances of doing so. The greatness
of that charity that endeavors to assist men in order thereto. The pitching
upon a rule whereby every man may do this, from that place of S. John, 1 John
4.6. CHAP. II. The Collection drawn from the preceding Text: That Piety is the
best rule of Orthodoxy. The sense in which the proposition is to be understood.
Two Postulata's in order to the proof of it. God has provided such a rule for
men to judge by, and the reasons urging a belief that he has done so. This
rule must be for the benefit and guidance of all men. CHAP. III. Two ways
proposed for the proof of the Assertion, Scripture and Reason. This Text
improved largely to this purpose, and Mat. 7.16. of which a full explication is
endeavored. CHAP. IV. The old Testament cited also for the proof of this, and
two great considerations added to give more Evidence to it. This the rule to
try Prophets by of old, and the best Criterion of a true Divine Miracle. CHAP.
V. A further discourse of Miracles, and their Evidence, and how to know which
are Divine, and which are not. An addition to all from the Nature of Heresy,
and wherein the Notion of it does consist. CHAP. VI. The Arguments from reason
for the proof of the Collection: Four proposed; and Two insisted on in this
Chapter: The first taken from the end of these Two Spirits in the World: The
second from the great design of Christian Religion. CHAP. VII. The third and
fourth Arguments proposed: The Inconvenience of substituting any other rule but
this, and the manifest advantage of this above any that can be substituted.
CHAP. VIII. Six rules laid down to be observed by us in our judging by this
rule, and three of them insisted on. 1. That we consider the Doctrines only,
and not the men that maintain them. 2. That we consider Doctrines not only in
themselves, and appearances, but also in their natural and direct consequences.
3. That we be sincere and unprejudiced in considering, and do not allow our
selves to pervert and wrest them. CHAP. IX. The other three rules insisted on.
1. That doctrines and modes of Religion formed by them be not considered only
in some single instances, but complexly and fully in all, especially those in
which they differ from others. 2. That men have a right notion of holiness. 3.
That holiness be considered not only in its immediate exercise, but also with
all the helps, advantages and encouragements to it. CHAP. X. Some Inferences
made from this Collection, particularly a Vindication of the Church of England,
which may justly challenge any Sect at this day to join issue with it upon this
Principle. The Conclusion.
THE INTRODUCTION.
Dear Sir,
AMongst those very many Sweet and Gustful Relishes that the Sense of your
Friendship leaves upon my Spirits, The fresh discoveries that I every day make
of your real worth and Goodness, is truly the greatest.

And certainly that man owes much to Providence, and his recognitions to it,
can hardly equal the Blessing, that has the good hap to contract Intimacies
and Friendships, of which he finds no reasons afterward to repent and be
ashamed, and to which he needs not study to put any Interruptions. And this is
the case of every man who has a worthy man, and a good man to his Friend, and
it is at present mine.

Sir, I do not intend to flatter you in this, I know that would be the surest
way to make my self more unworthy of such a felicity than I am. Nor do I intend
to take the measures of your worth from any things, but such as are certain,
and will assure such deductions. I do not proclaim you worthy and Good because
you are rich, and kind, and affable, and courteous, and studious as becomes a
Philosopher:

But I do this because you are concerned for Religion, and are tender of men's
Eternal Interests, and have a dear respect to Souls, and would have all men
partake of those felicities, of which your great Piety procures you many
blessed Antepasts now, and perseverance in that piety will assure your full and
perfect fruition afterward.

And truly Sir, these are things which in every age have reflected honor upon
men, but will much more do so in this. For a Gentleman to retain any sense of
Religion now, when unconcernedness for it is so much the mode, and scoffing at
every thing that is Sacred, so much the common entertainment, and so hugely
gratifying to the Genius of the Age. To be solicitous for humane Souls, when so
many are ready to question whether they have any or no; and of those that
profess to believe they have, yet so very few are pleased to have any regards
for their welfare. To be studying and contriving helps and advantages for them
in their progress to Heaven, when the disbelief of any future state has so
much obtained, and when it is counted wit, and a specimen of parts, to buffoon
and droll all thoughts of it out of the breasts of men.

To do all these things with sincerity and zeal, which perhaps will meet with
no better entertainment than derision or scorn, is certainly an evidence of a
great and fixed goodness, and renders you little less worthy of that praise,
which the Spirit of God was pleased to give Job for being perfect at Luz, and
Lot for retaining his purity in Sodom.

I shall not so far trespass upon your Humility and Modesty as to mention all
the Instances, in which these things discover themselves. This that your
present commands (for so I always interpret a Friends desires) require of me,
is alone enough. It is to give you my thoughts, what I judge to be the best
Criterion of truth, and by what marks a man might most certainly discover it,
in this mist, and great dust, that the eager Contentions, and tumultuous
disputings of men have raised about it, and obscured it in: And by what methods
a private Christian should proceed in this amazing diversity of Opinions, and
from whence take his measures of truth and safety.

This is (if I mistake not much) an act of such kindness, that it is not easy
for you to show, or men to receive a greater; and if I can do any service
toward reallizing the effects of it, I do not well know many instances, in
which I may more safely rejoice.

And truly as for that reason I do the more willingly, so for another I can the
more easily comply with your commands, and minister something toward this
great purpose, because it so falls out, that I shall but recollect my thoughts,
and transcribe (with very little variation) what I have delivered not long ago
in my own Congregation on this subject. And therefore I must beg you to accept
some Sermon-Notes instead of a formal Letter, and to pardon me, that I address
to you as one of my own People. Only Sir, my respects will not suffer me to
thrust you into the common crowd; something will be added which was not then
delivered, and you will perceive it, by being addressed only to your self.

PIETY The Best Rule of ORTHODOXY.
CHAP. I. The great need of every Christians taking heed of Error. The
difficulty in our present circumstances of doing so. The greatness of that
Charity that endeavors to assist in order thereunto. The pitching upon a Rule
whereby every man may do, from that place of the Apostle S. John, 1 John 4.6.
HE that seriously considers what the condition of Religion is at this day in
that part of the World that calls it self Christian; how almost all the
Congregations therein are divided among themselves, and have considerable
differences upon the account of which they separate each from other, forming
themselves into distinct Societies, according to their different Sentiments,
and ways of Worship.

And withal considers how confident all parties are of the truth and safety of
their own way, with how much clamor and noise they plead for it, and with how
much confidence they declaim against all that is opposite to it. While he is
certain that some (yea a great many) of them are certainly mistaken; it being
impossible that so many, and so very contrary ways should all be true.

He, I say, that seriously considers all this, may very well subscribe to the
reasonableness of that excellent advice of our Blessed Lord, when predicting
these things, Take heed and beware that no man deceive you: Mat. 24.4.
And may very well look upon the Ingemination, not only as designed to enhance
his care that he be not deceived; but as an intimation also how difficult it
will be to avoid his being so.

And truly he that has any due regard to his own Soul, or any just sense of
the present state of things, must needs subscribe to the justness of the
Ingemination upon both accounts.

For the welfare of the Soul in all its actings, does mightily depend upon the
Principles that it chooses to act by, and these are only then safe, when they
are the results of a sound and right judgment, which that judgment can never
be, that is Imposed upon by deceit, and cheated by Error. So that the necessity
of attending unto the Caution upon that sole account is very great.

And yet that necessity is heightened much by the other, for where there are
various ways that offer themselves to us, and none of these want their specious
pretenses, but are recommended to us with all possible art and confidence,
there the choosing and hitting upon the right, must needs be difficult, and the
avoiding deception not very easy.

The Consideration of these two things, has caused me oftentimes, with some
more than ordinary concern, to reflect upon the Condition of a private ordinary
Christian at this time, and with a great deal of pity, to compare his state, to
that of a Traveller in an unknown road, full of many various and different
turnings, which must not only needs distract and puzle his thoughts which of
them to choose, but create in him a great deal of fear lest he choose amiss.

And as compassion naturally engages to charity, and pitying a man's misery
prompts us to thoughts how to redress it: So I have many times thought with my
self, that man would do a good office, and a thing hugely conducive to the
welfare of men, that could pitch upon and prescribe a way, how to remedy this
great Inconvenience with ease and safety.

For as the erecting the Statuae Mercuriales (by the Ancient Romans) in all
common Roads, upon which were not only steps by which Travelers might mount
their Beasts and go on, but inscriptions also to direct them which were the
right paths, was then accounted, and is to this day remembered as a very high
instance of the kindness and candor of that great people. So certainly the
doing the like in this case for the poor Christian Traveller, would be so much
the greater instance of charity, by how much his way is more perplexed and
intricate, and the danger of his erring the greater and more momentous.

He that shall undertake to do this for him, may well expect his prayers for
his success, and if he should err in doing his utmost in it, may as well hope
for his compassion and pardon: If it can be done, it is really a great benefit,
and the design of it a great charity; and if a man chance to err in it, yet an
error that results from charity, may well expect a gentle and candid censure.

How to do this has been a thing that has long lain upon my thoughts, and a
case that I have much consulted about, I have been thinking what expedient to
pitch upon, what to substitute that might bear the stress of such an Enquiry,
what Oracle to erect, to which men might safely commit the resolution of all
difficulties of this nature, and with confidence repair unto, for a full and
safe satisfaction in them.

What the issue of all these consultations and thoughts has been I have
determined (this Lent) to acquaint you withal. And I shall take the rise of
what I purpose to deliver to you of this nature, from the words of the great S.
John, 1 John 4.6.
who lived to see the actual accomplishment of his Lord's great prediction,
that false Prophets should come into the world, and had the honor to be the
great prescriber of Antidotes against the infection of those deceivers. And in
that very place where he purposely undertakes this, does prescribe what I am
now going to insist upon as a sure remedy, a certain Criterion by which we may
judge: Hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of error.

CHAP. II. The Collection drawn from the preceding Text. Piety the best Rule
of Orthodoxy. The sense in which the Proposition is to be understood. Two
Postulata's in order to the proof of it. God has provided such a Rule for men
to judge by, and the reasons urging a belief that he has done so. This Rule
must be for the benefit and guidance of all men.
FOR these words of S. John, I think we may safely draw this Collection, Piety
is the best Rule of Orthodoxy, or plainer thus, The Conduciveness of Doctrines
unto Godliness is the best and safest Rule by which to judge the truth of them.

But before I enter immediately upon the larger handling of this Proposition, I
shall stay you a little while, that I may give you the full of what I mean,
when I thus speak. For as the Text speaks both of the Spirit of truth and of
error, so I shall understand the Proposition both ways, with reference to both
these.

1. Directly and positively. The Spirit of truth enclines to holiness, and
every doctrine that proceeds from this Spirit, does some way or other conduce
to that great end. And when doctrines, upon trial, are found to be subservient
to make men good and regularly holy, then they bear the stamp and impress of
truth upon them, and this is a safe way by which to judge the truth of them,
and conclude them Orthodox.

2. Oppositely or negatively. Whatever Doctrine or Opinion does tend to the
contrary, either teaching or encouraging sin and disobedience in all or in any
one particular instance of it, is certainly false, and proceeds from the Spirit
of Error, and let men be never so zealous for it, and confident in recommending
and obtruding of it upon others, yet this is a sufficient warrant for every
private Christian to reject it, and condemn it as spurious and dangerous: For
the Spirit of Error inclines men to disobedience, and whatever doctrine does
so, does proceed from it.

3. Comparatively. Thus where different Doctrines and Opinions offer themselves
to us, it is a safe way to examine carefully which of them conduces mostly to
make men good, and accordingly to make our estimate of them; accepting that
which is best attended with holiness, and a necessity of it, and rejecting that
which is any way failing herein.

And now by this you may see my sense of the Proposition, how I make obedience
and holiness the Shekel of the Sanctuary, by which all other measures are to be
tried. I make Gods Law not only the Rule of what ought to be done, but I would
have every thing that is to be believed brought unto it, examined how it
comports with it, and is subservient to the great design of it, and according
either to be accepted or rejected.

But before I come to show the truth and reasonableness of this Assertion, and
to prove this to be the safest Rule for all Christians to judge and examine
Truth and Error by; there are Two things which I shall lay down as Postulata's,
or things intimated to us from this Text, and of great advantage in order to
the assuring the truth of the great Proposition.

1. That God has left us some Rule to judge the truth and falsehood of Opinions
and Doctrines by.

2. That this Rule is obvious and plain, and intended for the guidance and
benefit of all men.

1. That God has not left us without some sure Rule to judge the truth and
falsehood of Opinions and Doctrines by: This is a truth, which no man that has
any honorable and becoming Sentiments of the goodness and wisdom of God, can
in any measure doubt of. He whose gracious Providence watches over all things,
certainly is regardful also of man. He that has implanted and put such an
instinct into the nature of all other things, as enables them to know what is
beneficial and hurtful to their respective natures, and according to pursue and
embrace the one, and avoid and arm themselves against the other; has certainly
not been wanting to man in this great Instance, but enabled him to discern
truth from falsehood, as well as good from evil, and to do both these in
Morality as well as Nature, i. e. to judge for his Soul as well as his Body.

And the truth is, if it were otherwise, man were of all things certainly the
most miserable, and a Religious man were the most miserable and pitiable above
all other men. And it would reflect great dishonor upon God, to provide for
the safety and conduct of man in all his little concerns; but to leave him
wholly unprovided for, and exposed to deception in that which is the most
sublime and momentous of all. And such (we know) is his Religion, it being the
way in which he is to serve his God, and assure his blissful love and favor,
and thereby secure the Everlasting welfare and happiness of his Soul.

I shall only desire Two things further to be considered in this case.

1. That God has plainly told us, that there ever will be Errors in the world,
and that no age shall want Impostors and deceivers to broach them, and
endeavor to entrap people with them: This he has resolved (for wise ends) to
permit still to be.

And can it then be supposed, that God should not furnish his servants with an
Antidote against them? Can any think so unworthily of God, as to believe that
he has exposed the beloved of his Soul, and the objects of his tenderest
compassions and regards naked and wholly defenseless, without any thing to
secure themselves against these plagues? This were indeed to overact the savage
cruelty of the Hircanian Tiger, and transcribe the weakness of the silly
Ostrich, Job 39.14.
which leaves her Eggs in the Sand, exposed to the foot of every Beast or
Traveller, to be crushed at pleasure: Nothing can well be thought of, that is
really more injurious and reflective upon Divine Providence than this is.

2. God has not only told us of these things, but cautioned us against them,
and strictly commanded us to beware of them, as is evident to any that consults
the holy Scriptures.

Now can it enter into the hearts of men to believe, that God that commands
this, should not provide some way by which it might be done? I could never yet
(though educated when such doctrines were much in vogue) bring my thoughts
quietly to believe that God would command utter impossibilities; which were far
to exceed the cruelty of the Egyptian Taskmasters, which himself has
condemned, and so tragically declaimed against: And I no way doubt, but that if
he have commanded us to prove all things, to try the Spirits, to keep our
selves from being infected with the error of the wicked; that he has also
furnished us with power, and provided a means, how we may do all these things.

God certainly never commands things in vain, nor will he tantalize the
endeavors of his people, nor make himself sport to illude the hopes and
endeavors of poor mortals, by putting them upon Acquists whose glories though
they may excite, yet their impossibilities do discourage, and frustrate the
most vigorous endeavors. And that man would have a strange notion of God, that
would fancy his commanding us to take heed of being deceived, and yet not
direct us to means by which we might do so.

2. That this Rule is obvious and plain, and intended for the guidance and
benefit of all men. Hereby know we, etc. And certainly he intends not hereby
only himself, or Apostles like himself, but all those whom in verse 1. he had
exhorted to try the Spirits, and not presently to believe every pretense of it,
which is equally the interest and duty of all men.

It is true the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and it is well when they
do, and in many cases mighty prudent to seek the Law at his mouth, consult him
often in our doubts and difficulties, and not be too peremptory in our own
conclusions.

But yet I think no man can with reason believe, that God ever intended these
to be the only Oracles, to which every Christian should repair and content
himself with the responses of. I think, I could urge inconveniences against
this, which the whole Conclave would be something puzzled to solve.

As God has endued every man with a Soul, and that Soul with an understanding,
and that understanding with power of judging and discerning things that differ,
and commanded every man to be faithful to this Talent, and diligent in
improving and increasing his stock of light, that thereby he may be able to
take the better heed he be not deceived: So doubtless he has substituted a way
by which every man may do this; and has not intended the benefit of it to be
confined only to some few particular persons.

It has been long since objected, and designed to reproach the holy
Scriptures, that they are very plain, and content themselves with familiar
representations of things, accommodated to vulgar capacities, and not fit to
satisfy the enquiries and exercise the curiosity of deep speculators, and
subtle Philosophers.

And the truth of the objection has been willingly granted (as to the main)
and yet the honor and excellency of them for that reason vindicated, and Gods
goodness thereupon magnified and exalted, who foreseeing that the greatest part
of his followers would not be great Clerks, and deep Scholars, but illiterate
and plain men, has mercifully consulted their weakness, and complied with it,
and provided for it.

And he that considers that God values the Soul of one man, equally with
another, and desires equally the Salvation of all, will presently conclude,
that therefore he has consulted the benefit of all men, and not set up a rule
to judge truth by, which should be mighty obscure and intricate, and very few
(only some learned men) should be able to reap benefit from.

Thus much therefore we have gained from this Text, both that God has left us
a way by which to know Truth from Error, and that this is such a way as all men
may improve, and make use of to the same end.

CHAP. III. Two ways propounded for the proof of the Assertion, Scripture and
Reason. This Text improved largely to this purpose, and Matthew. 7.16. of which a
full Explication is endeavored.
HAving thus prepared the way to the proof of the forenamed Assertion in the
preceding Chapter; I shall now address directly to it in this. And two ways I
shall endeavor to give strength to the truth of it by: 1. By Scripture. 2. By
Reason and Argument, warranted by Scripture.


1. I begin with the confirmation of this from holy Scripture, which indeed is
the chiefest way of proving this truth, and before all other things fit to
determine this controversy. For since we have reason with all due humility and
gratitude to acknowledge this to be a full, sufficient and perfect revelation
of the will of God to man, in which all necessary directions to happiness are
contained, and whatever else is needful to make the man of God perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.17.
as S. Paul warrants us to believe: So if God have provided such a way for men
to judge Truth and Error by, he has doubtless given some intimation of it in
these Divine Inspirations and Records.

Now what these speak of this matter I shall endeavor to acquaint you. And
first, as from this place of S. John I have taken occasion to raise, 1 John 4.6.
so I shall now try what there is in it, to confirm the Assertion. Which that I
may distinctly and clearly do, I must desire you to read the precedent verses,
and consider what the Apostle is designing in them. And that you will easily
find to be this, an endeavor to confirm those he writes to, in the true faith
of Christ, that they might not be drawn from it by any pretenses, and
particularly by those great pretenses to the Spirit, that were then so common
amongst all seducers, especially the Gnostics, as indeed it has been ordinary
ever since almost amongst all Heretics that have infested the Church.

This caution of not believing all these pretenses he expressly mentions verse
1. and by an excellent Argument enforces, because there are many false
Prophets are gone out into the world.

Now in order to this trial and discovery of the Spirits and the Doctrines
issuing from them, he lays down these three chief rules in the following
discourse.

The first whereof is the free confessing of Jesus Christ, and faith in him in
times of persecution, the lawfulness and prudence of denying of whom, when
trouble and danger threatened a man for so doing, was one of the great doctrines
of the Gnostics: This he treats of verse 2, 3. and then subjoyns a
commendation of these Christians, and congratulates with them, that they had
avoided the infection of these false teachers, showing withal, what had
assisted them to do so, and why they should persist in their care against them,
verse 4, 5.

The second rule is laid down in this Text; the intendment of which I shall
presently acquaint you more fully with.

But because this is general, he instanceth thirdly in a particular of
Christian purity and obedience, viz. true charity to our Brethren, which he
insists on in the following part of the Chapter.

I am not concerned to insist upon either the first or third rule so as largely
to explain them, but chiefly upon the second, for the ensuring of which, there
needs but only the right understanding of the word, Hear: He that is of God
hears us: And that by this expression is intended, obeying, cannot seem
strange to any, that will remember, that it is the common word by which
obedience is generally expressed in the Sacred Idiom. The places in which it is
thus used are too many to be named, and the commonness of the phrase too great
to need it.

So that by hearing us, is meant obeying our doctrine, which is of God (as he
speaks) i. e. pure and holy like its blessed Author, has nothing of worldly
greatness, or secular interest and design in it; but only of piety, and purity,
and self-denial, and contempt of the world, etc. and this is an argument of its
being truly Divine, and a Rule by which also to judge whatever doctrine is so,
or the contrary. That doctrine that is truly of God, is all for holiness, and
obedience, and purity, while the other is for worldly advantages, and suited to
common Interests, and hereby know we the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of
Error in all instances of doctrines, i. e. all doctrines that are conducive to
real holiness, are of God, proceed from the Spirit of Truth, and every doctrine
that inclines to the contrary does certainly proceed from the Spirit of Error.

Now if you think that I am injurious in referring thus the trial of Spirits
and doctrines only to this one Rule, while I have told you before that S. John
lays down Two more in this Chapter to the same purpose; I shall readily
confess the charge, but without any Imputation of injustice: yea, shall take
advantage from hence the more to strengthen this Assertion, and to lay down
this as the chief and principal Rule, forasmuch as both the others do relate to
it, and are instances of it. For a free undaunted confessing of Christ in times
of danger, and loving cordially our Brethren, are both of them chief branches
of Christian virtue and holiness, and indeed as they are almost above all other
things commanded by our Savior, so they have the choicest and most endearing
encouragements annexed to them.

So then the Argument from this place will be very clear and concluding; for in
that very place where S. John enjoins the trial of Spirits and Doctrines, he
lays down this as the great Rule for that trial, and though he add Two other
Rules also, yet they are but particulars and branches of this great one. And
then the whole of the Apostles directions in this case, amounts to thus much,
Whatever doctrine does conduce to make men truly holy, especially encourages
to the right taking up the Cross of Christ, and a cordial constant love to our
Brethren, that doctrine issues from the Spirit of Truth; and whatever doctrine
is contrary either to these Two single Christian virtues, or to it in general,
does certainly proceed from the Spirit of Error: and this I take to be the
natural and true purport of S. John in this Text.

But I would not have you think that he is singular in this, or without good
authority for what he says, we shall find he had sufficient warrant from his
great Master Christ Jesus, as we may clearly see, if we consider that speech of
Christ, Mat. 7.16, 20.
By their fruits ye shall know them. -- In the preceding Verses our Savior is
forewarning his Disciples of the coming of false Prophets into the world, and
of the very specious pretenses that they should make to deceive people by:
Having done this and cautioned against them, he lays down in this place a
Rule to know and discover them by, which Rule is very positive and plain, and
twice repeated, that we should not doubt of it, or forget it. By their fruits
ye shall know them; i. e. by the natural consequences and fruits of their
doctrines, by such conclusions as do naturally and by right arguing follow from
them.

So that the trial of Prophets is to be made by trial of their doctrines, and
these are to be tried by the natural consequences and effects of them: not by
what a man can discover in the professors or venters of such doctrines, for
these many times are very close and subtle Hypocrites, and lead their lives
with very great heed and wariness, wearing the Sheeps skin to conceal the Wolfs
heart, and always putting on the form of godliness to cover their malicious and
rotten designs, and no wonder, for Satan can transform himself into an Angel of
light: -- but by the natural consequences and effects of the doctrines.

For otherwise it were almost utterly impossible to make a discovery of
doctrines by this Rule, since all men do not live up exactly to the
consequences of their own Tenets. One man may have a right faith, and yet lead
a wicked life; and another may have a rotten false belief in some particulars,
and yet be tolerably well in his life. And there is no doubt, but many a
well-meaning man may embrace an Error in simplicity, without understanding
rightly what the mischievous consequences of it are, yea perhaps without ever
practicing those consequences. Men may be honest, and yet careless, and be
imposed upon, and so on the contrary too; but I shall say more to this
hereafter.

In the mean time, we may rest satisfied that our Savior means by fruits, such
things as are the natural consequences, and proper products of such doctrines:
and this he clears and assures the truth and reasonableness of, by an excellent
and well known comparison, and indeed it holds true both ways, men do not
gather Grapes from Thorns, nor Figs from Thistles, nor do Vines yield the
Berries of Thorns, nor does the Down of Thistles grow upon Fig Trees. For
though it be possible (and God knows too common too) for a man to detain the
truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.
yet the unrighteousness issues from the man, not from the truth. And though a
Heretic may possibly be eminent in some good things, yet his heart is to be
praised for it, not his head, i. e. his goodness is not the effect of his
Error, nor upon any account at all ascribable to it.

So then if we keep us to our Saviors sense, the Rule is true, and will never
deceive us. Those doctrines that design nothing, but to make men pure and holy,
and conscientious, and strictly regardful of our Christian duty, cannot but
issue from the Spirit of Truth, and Satan can never be contributive to a
doctrine that tends so much to the overthrow of his design and great Interest
in the world. But whatever doctrines or broachers of them, do any way infuse
into men, or encourage and prompt them to any Impiety, any Sin, let their shows
be never so specious, their pretenses never so fair, yet those Prophets are
false Prophets, and those doctrines fumes from Hell, whose great design it is
to corrupt men's manners, debauch their lives, and keep them from the love and
practice of piety.

This is all that I have to offer from these Two places of the New Testament,
and truly I think what has been offered, enough to confirm the Collection, and
to gain the assent of every good Christian to the truth of it.

CHAP. IV. The old Testament cited also for the proof of this, and two great
considerations added to give more Evidence to it. This the rule to try Prophets
by of old, and the best Criterion of a true Divine Miracle.
THE former Chapter having acquainted you with some proofs for this out of the
New Testament, I shall proceed to add some to them also out of the Old: For
this is no new thing, nor unknown to the Jews in time of old, but it was
delivered to them also, as the great Rule to judge by in this case: of which I
take that place of the Prophet to be clear evidence; To the Law and to the
Testimony, Isaiah 8.20.
and if they speak not according to this Rule, it is because there is no light
in them. In the preceding Verses the Prophet is inveighing against and
condemning the attending to any extraordinary pretenders to knowledge or
revelations, such as Wizards and Necromancers, and those that consulted
familiar Spirits: And in this Verse he lays down a Rule by which to try all
revelations and pretenses of knowledge; bring them to the Law and to the
Testimony, and if in any thing they differ from that, then there is no morning
or light in them, but they arise out of the infernal specus, and are suggested
by the Spirit and Prince of darkness.

This seems to me to be very clear, and yet I shall add something more, that
this was not only appointed to be the Rule of judging in all ordinary
differences about, doctrines, but in the most extraordinary also that could
possibly happen. I shall instance in Two that were the chiefest of all, --
pretensions to Prophecy and working of Miracles.

These were indeed extraordinary cases, and therefore, though the judging of
them did not belong to every private man, but only to the great Sanhedrim, (as
learned men have clearly proved) yet it will be very much to our purpose, if we
can prove that even this great Consistory was to judge by this Rule, of the
Truth or Falsehood of both of them.

And first for Prophets, I think the case is sufficiently clear from that place
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. from verse 1, to 6. from which (if you read and consider it
well) you will be able to make this Collection, that neither the predicting of
a future Event, no nor the coming of that to pass according to the prediction,
are safe and warrantable things to judge a Prophet by: for if that Prophet
entice any way to Idolatry, or deliver any thing that may draw them away from
their duty, in walking after the Lord, and fearing him, and keeping his
Commandments, and obeying his voice, he is to be rejected, yea to be stoned as
an Impostor, and a deceiver. So that the truth of the Prophet, and the divinity
of his prophecy was to be judged only (or at least chiefly) by the consonancy
thereof to the Law of God.

This is a thing that I judge worth our taking notice of at this time: Alas, if
the bold pretenders to prophecy in this Age could make this plea for
themselves, that things fall out exactly according to their predictions, what a
great noise would they soon make? how mightily would they boast? and plead (and
perhaps believe too) themselves to be true Prophets? And yet God himself tells
us, this is no safe and sure Rule to judge men true Prophets by.

For the Spirit of Error may possibly predict many things, and the Events
answer the predictions, and many times we know it has been thus. And we do not
know how far the skill of the Devil may extend in this matter.

Besides, God has told us, that he many times permits such things to come to
pass, that he may thereby try the love and fidelity of men: Cause these to be a
punishment unto all those that are unreasonably fickle and unconstant, and on
the other hand, that (as the Apostle speaks in case of Heresies) those that are
cordial and approved may be made known. 1 Cor. 11.19.


I know there are many Rules laid down by the Jewish Rabbis, and others after
them for the trial of Prophets, and a great stir made about them: But he that
will considerately read them over, as he will find this always mentioned as one
Rule, so he will find that it is the chiefest and safest, and that to which all
at last are forced to flee.

The Second case that I chose to instance in was the case of Miracles: for that
there are true and lying wonders, the Scripture clearly assures us. But how to
distinguish betwixt these, is really a very great and perplexing difficulty,
and some men have taken a great deal of pains to give directions herein: And
indeed must do so still, until they come to fix and rest upon this.

For when all is done, this certainly is the easiest and safest too, namely, to
consider what the effects and designs of them are, if they have Divine effects
upon men, especially if they only design to make men holy and good, or to
attest a doctrine that teaches men how to be so; then they carry the clearest
stamp of Divinity upon them that can be: but if they tend in any measure to the
contrary, either to encourage men in sin, or attest any doctrine, that teaches
any thing contrary to the holy Law and Precepts of God, then they are to be
suspected and rejected as immediate effects of the Spirit of delusion.

CHAP. V. A further discourse of Miracles, and of their Evidence, and how to
know which are Divine, and which not. An addition to all from the Nature of
Heresy, and wherein the Notion of it does chiefly consist.
BUT this Sir, may perhaps by you be thought too little to be said on this
great subject of Miracles; for the whole World does look upon them to be Divine
Testimonies, sufficient Evidences of truth, and able to assure the verity, gain
assent to, and entertainment of any doctrine that they are intended to attest.
The Christian Church in all Ages has spoken great things of them, and gloried
in them, and argued (with great assurance) the Divinity and Truth of the
Christian Religion from them. And he would certainly do a great disservice to
Christianity, that should go about in any measure to weaken the testimony of
them.

And therefore Sir, that I may not suffer under any of these prejudices, I
shall a little further enlarge this discourse of them, and what I have to say,
that it may be distinct and plain, shall be contained in these subsequent
propositions.

1. I do most readily grant, and cordially believe that Divine Miracles are
certain Evidences of Truth: For it is no way reasonable to suppose, that God
should annex his Seal to attest any thing that is untrue. Whatever God asserts,
must needs for that very reason be true, were there none else; and all the
World is agreed in their belief of this. So that I take it, Miracles are not
added to confirm the truth of what God has declared, but rather to convince
men that he does declare such things, or to attest the Divine Commission of
those that are his Instruments therein.

2. But then secondly, I do as assuredly believe that they are not the only
Evidences of truth. A Divine doctrine may carry in it many things, that may be
as clear signatures, and ought to be as convincing characters of Truth, as
immediate Miracles are. This may in some measure be collected from that
parabolical discourse of Abraham to the rich man in Hell: Luke 16.31.
If they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe though
one rose from the dead. Intimating that those doctrines in Moses, and the
Prophetic writings, had as much Evidence of Truth, and as clear Convictions
thereof in them, as the miraculous appearance of one from the dead could give
to them.

But there is a clearer place in the Gospel to assure this upon, for our
Savior does in one place, viz. John 15.22. as much aggravate the guilt of the
Jews Infidelity, in not believing his heavenly pure doctrine, as he does in
another, viz. verse the 24. of the same Chapter: For their not believing the
unparalleled Miracles which he did among them, which certainly he would never
have done, but that the Evidences and Convictions of truth were equal in both.

3. But then thirdly, I add that every Miracle is not an unquestionable
Evidence of truth, nor a sufficient warrant for men presently to believe upon
its sole account: All the world, I think, is agreed about this also: For all
men unanimously believe that only true and really Divine Miracles are
sufficient to assure the credibility of things. And all Miracles are not so;
for there are lying wonders as well as true, and it is not safe to believe
equally in both cases.

4. And therefore fourthly, there is an absolute necessity, that a man be
assured the Miracle is truly Divine, before he can safely believe upon the
authority thereof; otherwise he may believe the lying wonder as well as the
other, and believe what Jannes and Jambres say as well as Moses.

5. It is so very difficult, that it is almost next to impossible, by any thing
immediately in the Miracles themselves, to know which is truly Divine, and
which is not so: I say in the Miracles themselves: I mean they do not carry
such signatures upon them, that a man by them only, can easily make a judgment.

1. I have no reason to doubt, but that evil Spirits by God's permission, may
effect things that are truly miraculous, or if you require it plainly, true
Miracles. For my part, I do not see any reason, why the same things done by the
forenamed Sorcerers, were not as true Miracles, as when done by Moses, and it
will be hard for any man to show a difference. If the turning a Rod into a
Serpent was a Miracle, they did it as well as Moses. If converting water into
blood was a Miracle, it was so when done by them, as well as when done by
Moses: and though it be true, that Moses did some Miracles, which they could
not, yet that relieves us little; for though they did not all Miracles which he
did, yet they did some. So that still they wrought true Miracles as well as
Moses.

2. Nor secondly, shall men be relieved by saying some are lying wonders and
some are true: For it is probable, those wonders are called lying wonders, not
because they were not really wonders (or Miracles, for the word signifies
equally both) but because they were designed to attest an untruth, a lie: For
so the Greek seems especially to mean, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
(...), miracles or wonders of falsehood, as our own Translators put it in the
Margent; and so the learned Grotius expounds it, and justifies the Exposition
by a known truth, Nam quod vice genitivi est apud Hebreos, saepe finem
significat: where you have a Learned discourse to the purpose I am now upon.
And Beza also expounds it to the same pupose too, Mendacii stabiliendi causa
edita, Wonders wrought on purpose to confirm a lie.

3. Nor thirdly, will it any more help us to grant that some are lying wonders
in the other sense, unless we could certainly tell which were so. Whether the
wonder be real or no, it is all one to me, unless I be able to distinguish
betwixt them. Suppose those of the Egyptian Sorcerers, or Simon Magus, or
Apollonius Tyaneus (whom the Heathens set up to vye with Christ) I say suppose
these were not real Miracles, but prestigious and delusive, yet how shall any
man know, and make it appear they were so? they are as Convictive as true ones,
unless they could be plainly discovered not to be so: and how to do this (from
any thing in the things themselves) I profess my self wholly ignorant.

4. For fourthly, I shall receive little satisfaction by what is commonly said
in this case, that is a true Miracle which can only be effected by a Divine
power: for suppose that were granted true, yet how shall I know what can only
be effected so, and what not? No man knows the limits of Satan's power, nor can
say hitherto can he go, and no further, unless he can tell more than ever man
yet did: nay perhaps no man can exactly tell the utmost reach of natural power,
or define precisely how far natural causes when rightly applied, can work. And
if he know not this, he knows little in order to satisfaction in this matter.

5. Nor truly is there much more relief in flying to the evident greatness of
Miracles; though I gladly confess there is something in it; and it ought to be
adored as a signal act of Divine Providence, that Moses, and especially Christ
herein have the eminency above any other pretenders to Miracles in the world:
for Moses his Rod swallowed up the Magician's Rods, and Apollonius could not
heal all diseases, as Christ did, etc.

But still this is short of fully relieving us; for perhaps some things may
seem greater Miracles to us, which are not so indeed. And subtle wits would say
many things, to make it seem at least, that all Miracles are equally great.

And suppose it to be so, that many people might see some of these Miracles
only, and not the other: As suppose the Samaritans that saw the Miracles of
Simon Magus, did not see those of Christ, or the Apostles, nor those that saw
the wonders of Apollonius, to have heard of the other. I ask now what they
should do in this case? If a Miracle be a good ground of truth, then they had
that warrant to believe as grand falsehoods as ever were in the world.

But further yet, if you look into the Gospel, you shall find Christ telling
his Apostles, Mat. 24.24.
that the false Christ's that should arise after him, should show, (...), great
signs and wonders; and so great, as to deceive the very Elect, were they not
mightily assisted to avoid that deception.

6. From all which I collect that a bare Miracle is not enough to assure the
truth, and warrant the belief of every Doctrine attested by it: for then the
doctrine of Apollonius and Simon Magus had the same credibility as that of
Christ. Rev. 13.14.
And if you look into the Revelations of S. John, you shall find mention of a
Beast which deceived men by Miracles which he had power to do: And in another
Rev. 16.14.
place we read of the Spirits of Devils going forth to work Miracles: and Cap.
19.20.
again of a false Prophet that wrought Miracles. If Miracles therefore warrant
Faith of every Doctrine, then they do also warrant that of the Devil and his
Spirits, which God forbid.

7. Upon the strength of all which Considerations, I say that Miracles
themselves need something to attest them, and show men when they are to believe
them, and when not to do so; and I mistake much, if what has been said do not
make this apparent.

8. And therefore lastly, to bring all to a final issue, I do not know any
thing so certain a (...) of the divinity of a Miracle, as the end and effects
of it. If the doctrine that it is wrought to attest, be plainly pure and holy,
a mystery indeed of Godliness, and the effects that it produces in men be
answerable, i. e. the bringing them off from Idolatry and wickedness, to live
religious and holy lives.

And upon these Two accounts especially, we shall find Origin and most of the
first Apologists, proving the Divinity of our Saviors Miracles, and arguing
the Miracles boasted by the Heathen, to be Hellish and Diabolical, because they
were all done, (...), as Origin speaks, to the deceivableness of
unrighteousness, and to draw men into Idolatry, and all manner of filthiness.

And truly (for my own part) I do not know, upon what any man can safely rest
in this matter, but upon this. The design and effect of Miracles is the best
Index of them. Where a doctrine, upon due search, is truly divine and holy, and
contrived to no other end, but to make all men so, and Miracles wrought by the
promulgers of it, to attest the Divinity of their Doctrine and Mission; there
is doubtless all (the most unquestionable) evidence of truth, that even God
himself is able to give.

So that the holiness of a Doctrine, proves the Divinity of the Miracle, as
well as the Divinity of the Miracle attests the truth of the Doctrine.

And this is founded upon this most certain reason, that the Devil is a hater
of goodness, and therefore will never effect any thing, to encourage or promote
it amongst men: All his Interest lies another way, and his kingdom is
supported by sin and wickedness.

But God is a lover of holiness, it is his own very Life and Image; and as all
his works of Providence are intended for the good of Souls, so all his works of
wonder especially are designed to make men holy, and therefore shall never
attest any doctrine but what conduces to that great purpose.

I have now Sir, no more to add on this great subject, but only to show you,
that I am not singular in this Notion: if you will please to be at the trouble
of reading any the large discourses of the Jewish Rabbis on this subject, you
shall find this to be the only solid thing to be safely relied upon, and indeed
that upon which they are forced at last to rely chiefly upon.

But I shall mention to you two authorities, which I am apt to think, will
signify as much with you as the whole Sanhedrim. The Learned Grotius, and the
little less Learned Doctor Stillingfleet; if you read the Notes of the first
upon 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. you will find his opinion to be exactly consonant to what I
have been proposing. And if you will please to remember (what I know you have
read) the Ninth and Tenth Chapters of the Dean's Origines Sacrae, (in the
latter of which he says as much to distinguish true Divine Miracles from
false, as I think the matter can possibly bear) you will find, that though he
lay down other marks, and certainly say as much upon them as rationally can be
said, yet truly there is but little to fix contentedly and with satisfaction
upon, in any other, but these Two, viz. the nature and design of the Doctrine
they do attest, and the effects they produce in the minds of men.

And now Sir, before I put a period to this Chapter, I shall (and I do not well
know where better) add another Consideration, of some moment to strengthen our
present Assertion: And that is from the consideration of the true notion of
Heresy. For if the great Rule to judge this thing by, be holiness also, then I
think it will be another good addition to our present Argument.

I consider then that as Heresy is marked in holy Scripture as a very great
sin, and as severely characterized as any other sin whatsoever; so the chief
reason why it is so, is because it is in some measure or other a recession from
the holiness, and from that faith that is the foundation and support of it.

For therefore are Heretics called men of corrupt minds, Reprobates
conconcerning the faith, Enemies to God, and Antichrists, all which characters
do denote not their Error so much in matters of Faith, as in practice, and
imply their secessions chiefly from the rules of holiness.

And the truth is, according to the sense of the best Antiquity, men do so far
depart from the faith, as they do from holiness, and they are Heretics not for
that, but especially for this.

I do very well know how much men are altered now in their conceits about
Heresy, from what they were of old: And the multiplying Articles; of faith,
and adopting Explications of them into the Creeds, is too clear an evidence of
it, some men making these things advantages upon which to condemn for Heresy
presently whatever in any thing differs from them.

But Sir, these things move me very little, unless it be to lament, and
commiserate the uncharitableness of men in this matter.

He that would have a right notion of Heresy, must search what the Apostles,
and Apostolic Ages called by that name, and not presently reproach as Heresy
every thing that differs from him. And whoever will do so, will find that
Heresy is Heresy, because it is a work of the flesh, (...), a wicked opinion,
and an ungodly doctrine, an error in materia practica, in practice not in
opinion only, something that was amiss in genere morum.

For Faith is called by S. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.3.
(...), a doctrine according to Godliness; and those that are Heretics, are
called unjust, unclean, uncharitable, perjured persons, and for that reason are
said to oppose sound doctrine.

And that this only is the true notion of Heresy, may be made further to
appear, from these Two primitive and Scriptural observations.

1. The considering those persons and doctrines that were branded with that ill
character by the Apostles.

2. Their carriage toward the Jewish Converts in the great matter of
Circumcision, and the Law of Ceremonies.

1. Of the First, you will find in the Apostles times but a very few, nor in
the Age immediately succeeding: Some tell us not above seven, and every one of
them Heretics for this reason, because they taught practical Impieties, or
denied such Articles in the Creed, upon which the necessity of holiness was
founded.

Simon Magus taught monstrous things of the Holy Ghost, and blasphemous things
of himself. Ebion and Cerinthus denied the Divinity of Christ, enjoined the
observation of the Mosaic Law, and allowed uncleanness, and had impious
Theorems about lust.

And the same is as true of Menander Basilides, Carpocrates, etc. whose
opinions were therefore judged Heretical, not so much because they were real
untruths, as because they were open defiances to all Faith, Sobriety and
Sanctity.

2. If you consider the Apostles carriage toward the Jewish Converts, you will
soon perceive how far they were from censuring any errors presently for
Heresies, if they maintained the necessity of holiness and a good life.

For you will scarcely be able to instance in a doctrine more truly contrary to
Christian Faith, and the whole purport of the Gospel, than that of those Jewish
Converts was, which thought it absolutely necessary to Salvation to observe,
the Ancient Rites, and as S. James informs S. Paul, Acts 21.20.
were all zealous of the Law of Moses.

And yet we know these were always tolerated, no ill characters fixed upon
them, fellowship always allowed them, indulged and permitted to their error,
which lasted among them for the time of fifteen Christian Bishops, who were all
Circumcised, yea till the final destruction of the City and Temple, and all,
under Adrian the Emperor, and long afterward.

And this was the reason we know of the Apostolic Canons in that first great
Council, which were all contrived in favor to them, and counted necessary only
in order to the avoiding scandal to them, as was also the observation of the
seventh day Sabbath for some Centuries of years, only for the same reason.

From whence we may safely collect thus much, that in those best and most
charitable of times, no man was counted an Heretic that did err bona mente,
and retained a necessity of holiness, and a belief of the great grounds upon
which that necessity was founded.

And now Sir, this Addition will not be impertinent to our purpose; for all
Heretical doctrines are some way or other contrary unto holiness, and their
being this is the reason of their being the other, and while they are not one,
we ought by no means to call them the other, unless we will imitate the passion
of those men, who can endure none (no not the least) dissenting in opinion from
them in any thing, under any kinder character than Heresy. So that he that
maintained the being of Antipodes was like to be branded once with that name,
and Galileo hardly escaped the same character for maintaining the Copernican
hypothesis.

But Sir, if you desire to see this matter of Heresy more fully discoursed, I
refer you to a place in Dr. Taylor's Works, where it is insisted on at large,
with that plainness and candor, and strength of reason that is so common and
usual to that most excellent man; it is his Liberty of Prophesying, a good Book
under an ill name. But truly I know not for what reason, unless it were for
endeavoring by much truth, to assuage and mitigate the rash zeal, and unjust
severity of the late times against the Church of England, and all that adhered
unto her.

From whence whoever takes liberty to traduce that great man as an allower of
all Opinions, and any Medley in Religion, will be very unjust, and proclaim
himself either ignorant or unobservant of his design, which though it be to
gain favor to some speculative Opinions, yet no man reflects more severely
upon all that contradict holiness and a good life, and are vented to the
disorder and disturbance of the Government either of the Kingdom or Church.

And therefore I do not well see what disservice it can do that Church which is
far enough from imperiously imposing upon the Consciences of men, and rigorous
tying them up to exact compliance with it in all doctrines, but allows (as all
Churches must whether they will or no) a liberty to men's thoughts, provided
they reserve them to themselves, and vent them not in order to Schism and
Faction.

But whether it be thus or not, is not my business to determine, much less
becoming me to undertake to reach those above me what to say or think: but this
I freely say, I have so great an honor for the name of Dr. Tailor, that I
would not willingly have any ill thing to blot his memory, and would do more
than this (were it in my power) to cause it might not.

CHAP. VI. The Arguments from reason for the proof of the Collection: Four of
these propounded; and Two insisted on in this Chapter: The first taken from the
ends of these Two Spirits in the World: The second from the great design of
Christian Religion.
AND now I am at liberty to advance to the Second way I proposed for the proof
of this Assertion; and that is from Reason and Arguments; and there are Four of
these I shall choose to insist on; not that I think them the only ones we have
in this matter, but so sufficient that they may supersede all need of others.

1. The first shall be taken from the consideration of the different ends and
designs of these two Spirits in the World.

2. The second from the great end and design of Christian Religion.

3. The third from the inconvenience of substituting any other Rule besides
this in this case.

4. From the manifest advantage of this above any other, that can be so
substituted.

These Four things will give assurance enough to this truth, and make it very
evident.

1. I begin with the first, which is taken from the consideration of the
designs that these two Spirits have in the World: The strength of which
argument to our present purpose will discover it self in these two or three
consequential notices.

1. First, As these are directly contrary to each other, so they must needs be
supposed to intend, and drive on different aims and designs in the World. The
Spirit of truth is the Spirit of God, the Spirit of error is the Spirit of the
Devil: And when light and darkness are reconciled each to other, when Christ
and Belial become friends, then may we suppose these Two Spirits to consent,
and agree together in the fame designs, but not before. There is no communion
(says the Apostle) (...), 2 Cor. 6.14.
nothing that is in common, nothing that is mutually shared betwixt light and
darkness: But as soon as one appears, the other presently flies away, as when
the rays of the morning discover themselves, the dark shades run away, and
hide themselves on the other side of this Globe: And so it is with these two
Spirits, they are inconsistently opposite, and contrary each to other, and can
never be any more reconciled in their designs, than they are in their natures:
But those will still be as different as these are, as we see it still to be in
all other things, whose natures are contrary each to other.

2. Secondly, all the doctrines that issue from, or are suggested to men by
these two Spirits, must needs be supposed to be directed to these different
ends, and designed on purpose to promote the same. To suppose otherwise, were
to imagine them false to their own Interests, and neglectful of them, or at
least dull and short-sighted, and unable to choose or pitch upon proper means
for the promoting of the same; when no man has any reason to imagine either of
these things: For the Spirit of God is both Omniscient and Active, and can
never fail either to know what doctrines will best comport with its great
design among men, or to pursue, and reveal those doctrines to men, when it has
pitched on them. And he that will consider how very subtle a Spirit the Devil
is, and how unweariedly restless in managing his own designs in the world, can
neither think him ignorant and unable to pitch upon such doctrines as are
conducive to that design, nor slow and backward to obtrude the belief of them
upon men.

He that thinks otherwise of the Spirit of truth, thinks very unbecomingly of
God, and, as much as in him lies, precludes the way to his own welfare and
safety, and deprives himself of that comfort, which would issue from the hearty
belief of the Omniscience, and Providence, and Watchfulness of the Spirit of
truth for his good. And he that thinks otherwise of the Spirit of Error, and
looks upon the Devil either as a dull and unactive, or a silly and ignorant
Spirit, is imprudent and injurious to himself, in undervaluing that Enemy,
against whose subtilty and strength, his utmost endeavors will be little
enough. He is called a Lion for his strength, and an old Serpent for his
subtilty, and his restlesness to execute the effects of both, render him justly
formidable.

3. Thirdly, the great ends of these two Spirits in the world are only these,
to make men really and truly holy, and to make them really impure and vicious.
The first is the great design of the Spirit of Truth, this latter of the Spirit
of Error. The first the Spirit of Truth intends, as the only way to make men
happy. The second the Devil mainly intends as the sure way to render them
Eternally miserable.

There needs not much be said on this branch of our Argument, the Scriptures
are copious in attesting the truth of it on both hands. The great work of the
Spirit in the O.T. was to strive with man, as is intimated by Moses, Genesis 6.3.
i. e. to withdraw him from sin, and to induce him to the love and practice of
virtue. And the same is the end he is sent for in the New, to convince men of
the evil of sin, of the gain of righteousness, and (as a means to both) to
assure them of the certainty of Judgment: John 16.18.
and for this reason is called the Spirit of holiness often, not only because
he is essentially and eminently so himself, but likewise because his main
business is to teach and encourage men to be so too, and to assist them in
being faithful to those encouragements and teachings.

And then on the other hand, as it assures us that the first sin of man owed it
self to the temptation and suggestion of the Devil, so it assures us that all
his endeavor ever since has been to heighten that sin, and to promote the
love and practice of wickedness among men. For this reason he is frequently
called the (...), the wicked one, not only upon the account of his own
wickedness, but for his striving perpetually to propagate that wickedness, by
drawing men into all the sad instances of it: And for the same reason he is
called The Enemy, and the effects of his Enmity chiefly discover themselves in
this, the endeavoring to make men wicked like himself, and so to bring on them
a portion of those torments that are reserved for himself, and for all those
mad Sons of men that are wicked as he is.

And whosoever observes his actings as they are recorded in the Scripture, or
will but consult the stories of his dealing with the Heathen world, examine but
the doctrines which he taught them, and the rites and modes of Religion that he
instituted among them, will clearly see how all those doctrines tended to sin,
and how the whole body of the Heathen worship, was indeed what the Apostle
calls it, a mystery of wickedness.

Now from these things the strength of the argument will discover it self. For
since all the design of the Spirit of truth is to make men holy, to guide them
into all truth, that it may thereby lead them to all goodness: And since the
Spirit of error designs directly the contrary: And since all the doctrines that
issue from these, are directed only to these great ends: It must needs follow,
that whatever doctrine tends to holiness must needs issue from the Spirit of
Truth: And whatever tends to the contrary, must needs proceed from the Spirit
of Error. And that this is a sure and safe way to judge whence they proceed by.
For these two Spirits will ever be true to their own purposes and interests,
and will always have an eye to the promoting of them, in all the doctrines that
they propose to the Faith of men.

2. Another Argument may be drawn from the great end and design of Christian
Religion. For if we suppose the author thereof prudent and wise, every doctrine
therein will be so contrived, as to comport with, and promote the great aim of
the whole; otherwise he would in effect pull down with one hand, what he
endeavored to build with the other.

Now he that will consider and examine this Religion with that seriousness and
impartiality that things of this nature may justly expect, and challenge from
all men, will soon find that it is indeed what S. Paul calls (...), 2 Timothy 3.16.
a mystery of godliness.

The Author of it, the ever blessed Jesus, was indeed the Lamb of God, for his
spotless innocence, as well as other reasons.

A perfect pattern of all holiness and virtue. A divine person whose life was
never sullied with the least of those crimes, which so horribly stained the
lives of the Heathen Deities. Whose innocence approved it self so clearly to
his very Judge, as to extort from him this confession, that he was a just
person. Mat. 27.24.
Yea that most Envious and Critical observer, as well as Virulent accuser of
good men, could find nothing whereof to accuse the blessed Jesus: The Prince of
this world comes and finds nothing in me.

And if you look into the Religion that he instituted in the world, you will
soon find how exactly it resembles and bears the lineaments of its holy Author,
in all the parts of it. All its precepts and commands are so many injunctions
of all the instances of holiness, or prohibitions of the contrary instances of
wickedness and vice. All its promises are great encouragements to induce men to
comply with the purpose of those commands: And its threatenings are added only
to deter and affright them from all neglect and contempt of the same.

And should we survey the Articles of its Faith, and the doctrines that it
proposes to the belief of men we should soon find how mighty wisely they are
all contrived to promote the same great end. Even those that seem mostly
speculative and irrelative to duty, yet upon a closer view, will be found to be
excellently conducive to it.

For this is one honor justly due to Christian Religion, that it does not
propose any useless Theorems, nor any dry and unprofitable speculations to its
votaries, but only require of them the faith and knowledge of things which are
mighty useful, and greatly conducive to the real advantages of life and
godliness. And this Sir, may perhaps be made appear hereafter in a distinct
consideration of all those Articles of Faith, and particulars of Christian
doctrine, that have been mostly excepted against in this matter.

At present I content my self only in generals, and to add that this Truth is
so very plain, and so fully illustrated, and substantially proved by many
Learned men, not only those Ancient Heroes, and worthy Apologists for
Christianity, but even some later writers, and good men of our own Communion,
that I think it needless to insist further upon it, but only to intimate, that
you may boldly defy any objections against it, and challenge the whole world
either to instance in any one particular of it, that tolerates or encourages
any manner of vice, or to produce any other way of Religion, that so strictly
and universally enjoins and promotes holiness.

And if this be so, we may very safely from hence also draw an Argument, for
the proof of our present Assertion: For if the Christian Religion be designed
only to this great end, then whatever doctrine is truly and genuinely Christian
does certainly comply with it, and some way or other promote the same. And
whatever doctrine fails to do this, and is in any degree or instance repugnant
hereunto, is certainly Antichristian; and we have warrant enough to reject it,
as dictated by that Spirit of Error, which is certainly contrary to the Spirit
of Christianity and Truth.

For (as I said before) supposing the blessed Author of this Religion to be
wise and prudent as God, and to have intended hereby only to make men holy, it
cannot reasonably be supposed, that any doctrine which he has delivered
therein, should not be conducive to that great design; for otherwise he would
frustrate that by some doctrines, which he did endeavor to promote by others;
which were a thing so very unbecoming a wise man, that it would be blasphemy to
affirm it of the Son of God.

CHAP. VII. The third and fourth Arguments proposed: The Inconvenience of
substituting any other rule but this, and the manifest advantage of this above
any other that can be so substituted.
THE last Chapter has acquainted us with two Arguments, upon the strength of
which, I think, we may safely conclude, that this is one sure and certain rule
to judge doctrines that pretend to be Christian by. I shall now proceed to two
other Arguments, whose design it is to make this rule appear the best and
safest to judge by.

3. And the form of them is taken from the manifest inconvenience of
substituting any other rule to judge by in this case. I shall name those that
are most plausibly contended for, and show you the inconveniences that all of
them are subject unto.

1. I begin with that which is the best and likeliest of all, the holy
Scriptures: And I do not intend by any thing I shall say in this discourse, to
derogate in the least either from the authority or perfection of them. And I
readily and thankfully grant these two things, which will sufficiently secure
me from such an imputation.

First, if men were honest and sincere as they should be, this rule would
sufficiently supersede all need of any other, because it is a perfect
revelation of God's will, in which all things that are absolutely needful to be
believed, are fully contained, and intelligibly delivered and expressed; and
nothing but perverseness and design can perplex them.

Secondly, if men desire to know what holiness and virtue is, and to be
directed in the instances of their duty: then the holy Scripture will fully
satisfy them: And if men honestly consult these, none but the obstinate, and
such as design to cheat themselves, can mistake their directions.

But still after all this, I say we I are so unhappy as to see that holy
Scripture does not put an end to all controversies: We live in a Church that
allows us these in the fairest translations, and plainest expositions, and not
only allows but enjoins us the perusal of them; and thinks it has Divine
warrant to recommend to men the searching of the Scriptures. John 5.39.
And therefore commits men to their plain duty, against which it will permit no
prudential Motives (as they of Rome call them) to interpose. And yet even
amongst us, there are many sharp and eager contentions and disputes, to which
Scripture perhaps (if men were honest) would, but we see it does not put an
issue, and it may be never can for these two Reasons.

1. Because all parties plead it, and pretend to it; yea that very Novel Sect
among us, that at first so greatly disparaged and contended against it. It is
notoriously known what men had a hand in forming this Sect, and indeed there
are many clear signatures upon the foetus, to enable us to judge who was the
Parent, and amongst the rest this is one, and the design and policy in it
plain, which was to disparage the holy Scriptures, and bring them into
disesteem and contempt (as they have always done) and then the process was very
easy, for the private Spirit they could easily when they pleased take them
off, by showing it liable to a thousand inconveniences, and when the Scripture
was undervalued too, then the Catholic Church, and him that they pretended to
be the Infallible Head of it, was the next refuge.

But these men soon saw that such things would not long take in England, where
all men generally have a great veneration for the Scriptures, and whom it is
not easy to debauch into a total disesteem of them: and therefore now the
scene is changed, and these men are permitted to pretend to Scripture as
strongly as others, and all imaginable art used, that they may do it as
plausibly.

And indeed it may too truly be said, that this has been the common refuge of
almost all Heretics, who by pleading and perverting of it, have endeavored to
gain reputation to their several Heresies.

2. For secondly, cunning men can make a shift to wrest and pervert it: The
truth is, the Originals in which it was written, are so very copious, that they
are capable easily of various and different Interpretations. Sometimes a small
point, and a Comma makes a difference even to contrary Expositions. It was so
of old among the Jews, and it was so long since among Christians (as S. Peter
tells us) and we our selves sadly see it to be so to this day. 2 Pet. 3.16.


Now in these cases I ask what men shall do? Two men equally pretend Scripture;
and Two men give different Expositions of the same Scripture; in this case what
were a private Christian best to do? I know well enough what remedy the Learned
might have: But it is ten to one a private Christian cannot make use of the
same, because he does not understand the Original Languages, much less the
Criticisms of them, and the customs of the places and people related to: Nor
perhaps is so mighty well versed in Scripture, as by comparing one place with
another, to be able to collect the true sense of all.

In this case it is easy to see the inconvenience of substituting this Rule
only to judge by, because it self is perplexed, and equally pleaded by both,
and every common Christian cannot tell which of the Two it favors most.

2. Another thing pretended as a sure Rule to judge by in this case, is a
single person; for whom we know what kind of men plead mightily, and contend
highly that God has vested him with Infallibility, and designed him to be that
lively Oracle to which the Church in all its doubts ought to resort, and with
whose determinations all men should rest satisfied, and be concluded: And I
must needs say, were there any such person, there were a short and easy way of
silencing all disputes in the world.

But against this I offer only these two considerations.

1. First, That every man must be sure of this Infallibility, or else he can
never with any steddiness remit all his doubts to his Infallibility. But we not
only see that a great many of men plainly deny it, and almost all mightily
doubt of it: But

2. Secondly, are mightily satisfied, that no man ever can be sure of it, not
only because God himself has not declared a syllable of any such thing, which
he certainly would have done, had it been true, it being a thing of such
infinite moment, and so mightily concerning the world to know: But also because
it is evident, that such persons have mightily erred, and nothing is more
familiar than for one Pope to contradict the determinations, and repeal the
Sanctions of another. And also because they that most eagerly contend for this,
do not know how to tell us, when we are to judge him Infallible, and when not.

And indeed the effects of this pretense have been so monstrously pernicious,
as to prejudice sufficiently all sober men against it, who consider that this
very thing has had a mighty hand in debauching Christian Religion to those
horrid degrees, which we sadly see at this day.

3. General Councils: And I confess I am one of those who have a mighty
veneration for what just and lawful Councils shall determine, and I think it
would be of great advantage to the peace of the Church, if all men had so too.

But then I do not see why these should be appealed to as the only Rule or
Judges in these things: Not only because they cannot be pretended to be
Infallible, for they are men, and may err, and they actually have done so: But
also, should we allow them a kind of Infallibility (for absolute they cannot
pretend to) yet it will not be easy for every single person to know what they
have determined; and upon every difference that arose, new Councils must be
Convened, which is a thing next to impossible.

4. An immediate Spirit, which though some men so mainly contend for in this
Age, and many have done formerly, there having been few or no Ages of the
Church in which there have not been Enthusiasts, and pretenders to Divine
Impulses and Revelations: yet there are these two eternal exceptions against it.

1. That nothing more exposes men to the delusions of that crafty Spirit of
error than this does: And it is most certain, that pretenses to, expectations
of, and reliances on it, have been one of the chief causes of many ancient
Heresies, and of those woeful differences that are at present among us: And the
wildest errors that have infested the Church have been fathered upon it.

2. Secondly, That this also is to be tried by something else, as S. John
enjoins, Verse 1. of this Chapter, telling us, that many false Spirits are gone
out into the world, and therefore making it necessary for all that would not be
deluded by them, to make carefully a trial of them. And if the Spirit it self
be to be tried, it is not a Rule to try all things by.

5. Antiquity: And there is no doubt, but the streams are always purest, that
are nearest to the fountain: and Christianity flourished in its purity and
truth for some Centuries at the first. And if men would search Antiquity, and
let the Primitive times determine for them, there would not be so many contests
as there are in the Christian Church.

But there is this unhappy and invincible exception against it, that it is
mighty difficult, and next to impossible, to know what Antiquity believed and
practiced in many cases. We have but very little left us of the three first
Centuries: And the greatest Scholars, and they that have traveled farthest in
the search of Antiquity, are at a mighty loss, as to the knowledge of them: and
therefore how every private Christian should be able upon all occasions to have
recourse to it, and still have it in readiness to judge all things by, is very
hard to determine.

6. Catholic Tradition; for which some men contend both eagerly and sharply,
and have racked ingenuity to say all that can be said for it, and for what
reasons we know. And I do most readily acknowledge that a great deference ought
to be had to it, and a greater than generally is: But still after all that can
be said, there are these two exceptions against it.

First, That men cannot tell us what is a Catholic Tradition, and what is not
so: at least they can instance but in very few things that have unexceptionably
been owned for such: since few things have ever been pretended such, about
which there have not been great disputes and sharp contentions.

Secondly, Tradition is so very liable to corruption, and so very many plain
instances can be given of its degeneracy: Besides all which, the same
inconvenience still presses here too, for how all private Christians should be
able to guide themselves by this, cannot easily be showed.

7. The authority of that Church of which a man is a present member. And there
is no doubt, but every man ows a great respect to this, and should not but in
mighty plain and great instances ever think contrary to it: and there is as
little doubt but it would be mighty advantageous, and of great use and benefit,
for men to be ready to be concluded by the determinations and Symbols and
Canons of it, and I little question but a private Christian erring with this,
shall have a great deal to plead for himself, and shall have great abatements
made for his Error at the last day. But yet there are some exceptions against
this being made an only Rule to judge by, and amongst others these two.

1. That a man does not know his own Church to be Infallible, for there is not
any such promise made to any particular Church upon Earth: And though a man may
be mighty ready to be concluded by it, and in most doubts suffer that scale in
which the Churches judgment lies to preponderate, and to overruled all his
lesser scruples, yet till he be assured of its infallibility he cannot
absolutely commit his faith to the conduct of it, nor unquestionably permit it
in every thing to determine for him.

2. That then there might safely be as many different Creeds, as there are
differing Churches upon the Earth: and then there need not be so much disputing
about a true Church, nor hunting after marks of it; since the faith of every
man's own Church would certainly save him, which I take to be a doctrine too
bold for any man to believe, that exercises his reason to any measures at all.

I cannot easily remember any thing besides these, that can be substituted as a
Rule in this matter, but if I could, I do not at all doubt, but that it would
appear liable to as many or more difficulties than any of these: And I cannot
but think these great inconveniences that all and every one of these forenamed
are encumbered withal, are a sufficient reason upon which to reject them from
being Rules in this case; especially

4. If we compare this that I am contending for, and consider the evident
advantages that it has above them, and the less difficulties that it is
pressed withal. I have partly hinted before that there are these two things
greatly needful in such a Rule, facility, and safety; that it be both easy and
safe to judge by: and I think it a fair offer, the Rule that bids fairest in
these two, let it be accepted. I shall therefore a while consider it more
absolutely in it self, in point both of easiness and safety: and secondly,
compare it a little with these that have been named, and intimate something of
the advantage and preference that it claims before them.

1. It is a Rule that is truly capable of both these characters: For first, it
is easy to judge by; for few men but of common either knowledge or honesty,
can mistake in judging what is holy and what is not: seeing the knowledge of
these things is in a great measure imprinted on our very natures, and grows up
with us.

We need not go and consult Oracles, nor say who shall ascend into Heaven to
fetch us a resolution from thence; Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 10.6, 7, 8.
for as Moses and S. Paul both say the Word is nigh us, even in our own hearts,
there the great lines of duty are written legibly and plainly, and an honest
(though meanly instructed) mind will quickly attain the knowledge of them.

So that a Heathen might, and some actually have judged pretty rightly in this
instance: For as these give evidence of a Law written in their hearts, Romans
2.15.
as the Apostle tells us they do, so many of them that have attended closely to
this connate light, have by it alone attained almost to an exact knowledge in
these things, and passed a right sentence upon all Opinions and Doctrines that
did not consent with the same.

But supposing a man in the profession of Christianity, and under the advantage
of the written Law and Revelations of God; we set him in infinitely greater
advantages; forasmuch as all things of necessary duty are so clearly revealed
and made known therein, that it is not very easy to be ignorant of, or not to
understand them.

And secondly, it is as safe to judge by it as it is easy to do so: For first,
if a judgment be truly made by it, it is infallibly certain; and any doctrine
that truly tends to the promoting holiness, is as undoubtedly Christian and
Divine, and true, as if God had written it with his own hand: And every
doctrine that truly promotes and encourages the practice of vice, is as
certainly false and diabolical, as if we saw it proceed out of the mouth of the
old Dragon. And secondly, if a man should chance to err, while he really and
truly judges for this, I think it may safely be said that error is not
damnable: It is an error on the safer side, a mistake on the better hand: A
judging for God and his interest, where the will is honest and innocent and
good, and where that is so, I do not know how to call any thing a sin.

This I take to be certain, an honest heart using its sincere and true
endeavor, and intending really to embrace and follow that, which best teaches
its duty, and engages to it, is certainly safe. God's good Providence and
Grace will superintend and assist such a man, that he shall either not fall
into any error at all, or at least not into any damnable one: God's Spirit will
lead him into all truth, that is really needful for him to know.

2. Should we now make a comparison between this and the others, upon these two
things, we should presently see to which the advantage would incline. Some of
them are not safe to judge by, and some not easy to do so, and some again
neither of the two, as would easily be made appear, should we again review, and
distinctly consider them; which because I have not leisure, or a mind to do my
self, I shall beg and trust you or any other to do for me. I am sure he will
find all those clogged with some inconveniences, from which this is either
wholly, or in a great measure free; which I take to be a good reason, upon
which to give it the preference above them.

Not but that I can easily foresee that this Rule also may be pressed with some
difficulties, and could we lay down a Rule which were not, we should then
anticipate our future state, and contrive a way to secure man from all
possibility of error, which in this imperfect state is a thing rather to be
wished than hoped for: We must therefore in this make as good a shift as we
can, and choose that as the safest, which least subjects us unto error, or at
least to the fewest: which because this does, I therefore propose it as the
best thing to be attended to in this case: And only further add, that whatever
mistakes we may be subject to in judging by this, we may in a great measure
secure our selves from, by attending to those directions for the management of
this judgment, that the next Chapter will make known to us.

CHAP. VIII. Six rules laid down to be observed by us in our judging by this
rule, and three of these insisted upon.
THE judging of all doctrines being somewhat a difficult thing, and no Rule to
judge by being so mighty plain, but that men may be incident unto error in
their applications of it (as the former Chapter intimated) it will be needful
to contrive against that error as well as we can, and to preserve from all
misapplying this Rule as much as may be: In order to which there are these six
things which I shall prescribe to be observed carefully by us in this matter.

1. That in our judging by this Rule, we consider the doctrines only, and not
the men that profess and maintain them.

2. That we consider doctrines not only in themselves, and specious appearance,
but in their natural and direct consequences.

3. That we be sincere and unprejudiced in considering, and do not allow our
selves to pervert or wrest them.

4. That doctrines, or modes of Religion be not considered only in some single
instances, but complexly and fully.

5. That men have a right notion of holiness, and consider duly both in what
things it does consist, and all those things too.

6. That holiness be considered not only in its immediate exercise, but
together with all the helps, advantages and encouragements to it.

These are Rules enough to be observed by us in this matter, and I cannot
easily foresee any great inconveniences that we shall be pressed with, or
incident unto, if we keep us close, and attend carefully to them.

1. The first is, that in our judging of things by this Rule, we consider only
the doctrines themselves, and not the men that make profession of them; for
otherwise we shall be greatly entangled, and perplexed in our thoughts, and in
great danger of pronouncing wrong judgment, we may acquit the guilty, and
condemn the innocent, we may be ensnared to embrace the worst, and to cast off
the best and truest doctrines.

There are few things more common, than to see Heretics and venters of strange
and pernicious Doctrines, to behave themselves with the greatest seeming
strictness and caution of any men. Our Savior therefore represents them as
wearing sheeps clothing, Matthew. 7.15.
the show of a mighty innocence, and putting on the disguise of all possible
sanctity: And S. Paul informs us of much-what the same thing, when he lays down
among their other characters this of having a form of Godliness. 2 Timothy 3.5.


And the truth is, they were very imprudent and silly, if they should appear
otherwise, this is the surest way they can possibly take, to gain esteem to
themselves, and reputation to the doctrines they would proselyte men into a
belief of: well knowing that error in its native dress and true colors would
never be entertained by men, and therefore it is carefully apparelled in a
false and specious garb, by which it steals men's affections, and cheats them
into a love and esteem of it. And as designing men cloth their doctrines, so
commonly they do themselves; for the first great business of a Seducer is to
gain a reputation of being holy and good, which when it is once gotten, will
easily insinuate and make way for his doctrine; for men easily believe and
follow such men, and do not fear Imposture from those that they esteem holy and
good.

And on the other hand, it is often (too often God knows) seen, that men detain
the truth in unrighteousness, believe well and Orthodoxly, and yet are false to
their own faith, and treacherous to their avowed principles, and never live
consonantly to either. And by this means greatly reproach and scandalize their
own most holy profession, as the impure Gnostics did Christianity at the
first: And if the faith of such men were to be measured by their lives, and the
effects it has on them, they were doubtless the greatest Heretics in all the
world.

This is a suggestion which as it reflects a great deal of reproach and shame
upon such men, so it bespeaks the great heed and care of others, that they be
not hasty presently to judge men's Religion only by their actions: For many men
wear paints and disguises to conceal a rotten faith; and too many are careless
and foolish, and unmindful of adorning a true one.

It were easy to cite the best Antiquity to vouch the reasonableness and
prudence of practicing this Rule. For therefore the primitive Fathers of the
Church, when the seeming Sanctity of Heathens and Heretics was objected to
them, did strongly endeavor to expose their doctrines, and to show that such
things were not really the effects of them, but fucus's and paints on purpose
to give reputation to them. And when on the other hand, they were pressed with
the profane lives of some of their own way, they presently appealed to the
principles of their Religion, and thoroughly vindicated them, from any way
influencing, or inclining men to such evil things: And having done so,
proceeded to disclaim these men as false Brethren, and no true Catholics, and
therefore pleaded it an unjust thing to argue against Christians from the
impure lives of some that professed, but begged it as a reasonable thing, that
they would allow them the same favor, which they themselves challenged in the
like case, viz. that the failings of some pretended Christians might no more be
objected against the divinity and truth of that Religion, than the vices of
some Philosophers were thought meet, to disparage the credit and truth of all
Philosophy.

2. The second Rule is, that we consider doctrines not only in themselves, and
specious appearances, but in those consequences that naturally and directly
issue from them: For it is not more true of men, than of doctrines sometimes,
that they put on a very specious and fair outside, and in their present
appearance seem mighty innocent, which yet if a man closely inspect, and search
into, he will soon find to be very poisonous and destructive in the
consequences of them. This is always in some measure true of all Errors and
Heresies that are, one way or other they are pernicious in their intendments,
and if they be pursued to their just consequences, certainly destructive.

Let me give you one specimen of this instead of many, I would fain know what
seems more innocent, and of better effect, than that all men should attend to
that measure of light, that is in their own breasts? Hearken carefully to that
(...), (as some Ancients called a man's Conscience) that good Genius in a man's
own Bosom: And doubtless it were good men did this, and if they did so, they
would act much better than many do.

But yet who sees not the danger that lurks under this fair pretense, and what
horrid consequences flow from it, when driven to its true purpose? How it
wholly evacuates the satisfaction of Christ, and all necessity of a Savior:
Decries all need of Divine assistance and Grace: Renders wholly useless the
Divine Inspirations: Makes every man his own infallible Oracle and Teacher:
Exposes a man to the deceptions of that subtle and watchful Spirit; and
finally opens a way for every man to do that which is right in his own eyes.

It were as easy to instance in some other doctrines of this mad Sect, and all
others among us at this day, and show how even the most innocent of them (I
mean in which they differ from the Church) to be deadly and mighty mischievous
when pursued and driven home to their proper consequences: and perhaps Sir,
that may be done, if you require it, hereafter.

In the mean time, this will render it mighty necessary and wise, not to
consider erroneous doctrines only in their fair appearances, but to examine
carefully what the consequences and effects of them are.

And so on the other side likewise, there are many doctrines in the Christian
Religion Orthodox and Divine, that perhaps at first sight may appear very
irrelative to practice, or at least of no great moment to the purposes of life:
Yea, which to some men may appear unreasonable, and purely speculative, which
yet when a man has examined closely, and consider well of, may be found very
important, and greatly concerning, and very conducive to many real purposes of
goodness. And it will not be easy to instance in any, which I cannot show to
be conducive to some great instances of holiness, and whose truth and divinity
I dare not undertake to make good by the same.

3. The third Rule is, that we be sincere and honest in our considering
doctrines, before we bring them to this standard. I mean that we bring with us
no other design in the world, but really to know what such doctrines are, and
tend unto: For if any other thing be had in aim, any other design or prejudice
be permitted to mingle with our searches into these things, there is no doubt
but we shall deflect and warp from the truth in judgment. A very little skill
if there be not a great deal of honesty, will enable a man to expose any
doctrine, and those men that can so easily wrest the holy Scriptures, doubtless
can as easily pervert any doctrine though never so holy.

Facile est invenire baculum, said the old adage, and it holds true both ways;
he that comes either with a prejudice against, or a prepossession for any
doctrine, will easily find faults against the one, though never so rationally,
and something to justify his kindness to the other, though never so weakly
asserted: And when men will permit interest or passion, or humor or prejudice,
or any such thing to sit upon the Tribunal, and have a hand in judging
doctrines, it is not to be expected that they should be judged according to the
real merits and truth of them.

A gift, says Solomon, blinds the eye, Eccles. 7.7.
or destroys the heart, and a receiver of them is seldom upright. And it is
equally true of any other by-respect or sinister inclination. Nothing but a
fixed resolution and purpose to be honest and just, and truly to inform our
selves, can enable us to be true to our discoveries, and pronounce aright
concerning doctrines in this case.

It was no very unreasonable project in the Platonists of old, to institute
some previous purgations of mind, to be submitted unto by those that were in
quest of truth, well knowing that till the mind of man was unprejudiced and
free, it was not capable of Divine irradiations, nor in a capacity to
understand truth. And upon the same reason Aristotle prohibited young men the
study of Moral Philosophy, till they had in some competent measure subdued the
vigor, and tamed the hurry of their animal passions, and sensual inclinations.
And it were very well if men would do something like this, free themselves from
all manner of partial anticipations, when they are going to consider and judge
for their Souls.

And let me add Sir, there was never any age wherein the observation of this
Rule was more necessary, never a time certainly wherein the effects of
partiality and prejudice more discovered themselves, to the warping of men's
judgments, and clapping false biasses upon them, so that they either cannot, or
will not impartially and truly weigh things, or deal with any degree of candor
by them: wherein unjustly to pervert and misrepresent Books, is to answer them,
and the fastening on them a design which the Author never thought of, a
sufficient confutation of them: When men read Books on purpose to misunderstand
and traduce them, and think the most effectual way to baffle and defeat them,
is to buffoon and turn them into Ridicule.

Let me give you a few specimens of this, though I doubt not you have already
observed them your self.

Can you think we should ever have heard of a Rehearsal Transprosed, or an Ill
Play thought a good answer to a serious Book, had not this perverse humor
possessed some men that were proud of their great wits, and too fanciful to be
able truly to consider things?

Could any honest-hearted man, that sincerely read over an excellent Book,
called The Design of Christianity, ever have traduced it as a plain undermining
the purpose of the Gospel?

Had we ever heard of an Antisozzo, or a Melius Inquirendum, if that Author had
had as much honesty as he thinks he has wit? or considered the doctrines in
those Books (he would expose) with half as much integrity, as he has taken
pains unworthily to misrepresent them?

Can you imagine Satan would ever have been brought upon the stage
complementing Sherlock, if the Devil had not mightily assisted one Danson, to
misunderstand and pervert the design of that Book?

Could that perfidious doting Exiled Frenchman have ever espied and reported
such advances of the Church of England to Popery, had not himself made greater
advances first toward Frenzy or Knavery?

Or the late furious Collector of the Invidious Parallels made such a clamor
with them, and seek so basely to disturb the Ashes, and deface the Monuments of
those that rest in honor, but that something made a noise in his own head, and
hindered him from hearing or attending to the checks of his own Conscience for
such a piece of injustice?

I pray God Sir, deliver you and me, and bless us from falling into the hands
of such men, who read Books on purpose to misunderstand them, and consider
doctrines only to expose them: who react the cruelty and injustice of Ancient
Persecutors, that clothed the poor Christians in skins of Beasts, and then
glutted their malice and envy in worrying of them: And deal with Books as
Procrustes did with men, rack them till they come up to their own humor, or
cut them in pieces for not doing so: Who first tincture their own eye, and then
apprehend every thing to be of the same color; or having their own palates
vitiated, reproach as unsavory and bitter every thing that comports not with
the ill affections of it.

If it be my hard fate to fall into the hands of such men, and be treated by
them as some of my Brethren have been, I will yet have this to comfort and
support me, that it is not truth or honesty, but spleen and malice only that
persecute me. I should be concerned indeed, should I offend the first; but if
men acted by the other speak evil of me, I know who has bade me rejoice and be
glad.

CHAP. IX. The Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Rules are mentioned and insisted on.
4. THE fourth Rule is, that doctrines and Modes of Religion formed by them, be
not considered only in some single instances, but complexly and fully in all
together. I mean, that we take not only some few particular doctrines of a Sect
or Mode of Religion, and singly consider them, and pass a judgment upon all
only by them: But that we take a view of all its parts, and examine every
instance of it thoroughly, especially all those in which it differs from others.

For as there is very rarely or never any Error without some mixture of Truth,
the more to set it off, and give it credit: No more is there any Sect, any way
of Religion who does not acknowledge and teach some excellent Truth, and own
some very wholesome doctrines: And it will therefore concern every man that would
not be intrapped by them, not only to consider some few, but the whole mass of
their doctrines and belief.

Some things we may light of in the Symbols of all parties that may be
innocent, and true, and good, but others, in many, that are as really
diabolical and untrue: And he that will be induced by those good things, to
pass a judgment upon all, is imprudent and unwise, and may easily be induced to
absolve the most pernicious doctrines that were ever vented by any Heretic in
the world. The old Maxim is pertinent to be considered here, and it holds true
in this instance as strongly as in any others, to render a thing truly good
there must be a concurrence of all causes, when a failure in one is enough to
render a thing evil.

And therefore though a Sect do steadfastly maintain, and earnestly contend for
twenty great Truths, yet if it take into its Symbols of belief, one gross
Error, that plainly contradicts the design of Religion, and establishes
disobedience and vice in any one instance, it is a sufficient warrant for us to
reject it upon: and we ought not in that case to plead the many truths it
maintains, for in them it Symbolizeth with the Church, and holds them in common
with it: But upon the other it separateth, and makes the Schism, and takes its
denomination from, and therefore by those especially is to be acquitted or
condemned.

5. Th fifth Rule is, that we be careful still that we have a right notion of
holiness, according to which we are to judge, for if we mistake here, and do
not understand rightly our own Rule, we shall certainly err in our judging by
it. There are two things that I intend in this suggestion. 1. That we do truly
understand in what things holiness and real goodness does consist. 2. That we
consider all those things.

1. That we do really understand in what things holiness and the practice of
goodness does consist: For I observe that many are very apt to mistake here,
and to place holiness in the practice of things, which signify little or
nothing to the real purposes of it.

It has been an Error as ancient as the Pharisees time, to Tithe Mint, and
Annise, and Cummin, and yet neglect the weightier things of the Law, as
Justice, Mercy, and Faithfulness: And the Error has been transcribed in all
Ages since: For so some men have been mighty exact in the Ceremonial parts of
Religion, and yet greatly neglective of the real: And others have chosen to
themselves some little easy things, and laid great weight upon them, while the
more substantial and arduous duties have been disregarded by them: Substituted
some cheap trifling performances, in the place of real obedience to Gods
commands: Placed Religion in a habit, or a dress, or a demure look, or a
distinct form of speech, or some little Shiboleth or other, and by exactness in
these presently conclude themselves reformed, and separated from the pollutions
of other men.

I do not go to enquire into the reasons of men's doing thus, they are already
too plain, men can in these gratify their Lusts, and their Consciences too,
indulge their pride, and interest, and ease, and yet in some measure pacify
their own minds, for they do not wholly neglect Religion, only commute the
great duties of it into some cheaper performances, by which as they make a
shift to gull their own Consciences, so they may get a reputation among men,
before whom these things make a great and glaring show, and a mighty noise,
when faithfulness, and mercy, and truth, and humility, and the other great
instances of real goodness are more secret and unobserved, and boast not
themselves so before men.

This therefore is a Rule that is mighty necessary to be attended unto,
especially in this Age, in which Pharisaism is so much revived, and men's
Religion dwindled into appearances, and outside, and fair shows, and mere
pageantry. So that if we judge presently here by outward appearance, we shall
go near to judge unrighteous judgment: But if we consider that holiness does
not consist in these things, we shall go near to preserve our selves from any
overvaluing of them.

For in such a case the truth rather inclines the other way, and whenever we
see men mighty exact and critical in these little things, and eager contenders
for them, and placing great holiness in them, and distinguished from their
Brethren only by them: It is almost a sure sign, that such men are either fools
or knaves: Fools in being cheated by the great enemy to take up in little
things, and scramble about them, and in the mean time be diverted from those
great things upon which Holiness and Salvation do depend: Or knaves in being
exact in these, on purpose to conceal their failure in the other. These times
let us see, that this is too commonly the real case, you shall rarely or never
see, but there is some latent imperfection, where the paint and the outward
dress is so extremely curious; for men never use so much art, as when they are
purposing to deceive. Sincerity contents it self with a very plain garb, while
no curiosity and care is thought too much for the Hypocrite.

2. Secondly, That we consider all these things too: For if we judge by some
only, we may err mightily here too. There are few men so bad, as not to be
careful in some things, and to hope by those to expiate their disregard of
others: And none but those that have never conversed with men, can but know how
usual it is to have men hope, that one instance of virtue shall compensate for
the want of another, and that one good deed shall excuse another sin. For so he
that is a drunkard, can plead that he is just, and he that is unjust can
allege his fearing of an oath, and while either of these can do the one, they
hope God will pardon them for being the other: This I take to be one great
reason why so many halt in duty, and content themselves with a partial and
imperfect obedience.

And as it is with single men, so it is commonly with aggregate Sects: There
are few of these which are not mighty zealous for some good things, and by this
hope either to conceal from men, or obtain pardon from God, for their remisness
in others. So that we must be careful not to pass a judgment only by some few
things, but to consider whether this pompous zeal and care extend it self
equally to all both sins and duties, for if it do not, it is far from being
that zeal that is according to Godliness; for that is a regular thing, and has
an equal regard to every thing that is a duty, and an equal abhorrence of every
thing that is a sin.

This is a thing of great advantage to be considered by us, and by it we may go
near to discover almost all differences of men that are. It is a thing well
worth the notice of men, to consider how the Catalogue of sins is lessened, and
struck up into a very little room by most of the Sects among us at this day:
who though they be great declaimers against the sins of the times, yet they
mean commonly no more but swearing, and drunkenness, and whoredom, and murder
by those sins: while covetousness and pride, faction and Schism,
uncharitableness and censoriousness, and false accusing their Brethren;
disobedience to superiors, and blaspheming dignities, and such like, are
connived at, not censured as sins, or perhaps commended as innocent things. I
do most heartily acknowledge the former are very heinous vices, and can never
too much be declaimed against in an age so incident to them: But I know as well
that the others too are sins as damning as they; and it argues but an ill
spirit, and smells very rankly of hypocrisy, to cry out so much against the
one, and yet hug and cherish and indulge the other.

And it fares no better with the Catalogue of duties, which is lessened by some
men proportionably to the other, and the commandments reduced too at pleasure
that do prescribe them. It has been objected to the shame of Papists, that
they have quite expunged the Second Precept of the First Table out of the
Decalogue, and divided the Tenth to make up the number: And I think all honest
men have just cause to condemn them for it: But upon the same reason that they
are condemnable, are those too that expunge all the Six of the Second Table as
some do, and the Fifth, Ninth and Tenth as almost all do, especially of those
that infest us. It has been long since observed how the Classis and the
Conclave have exactly agreed in the violation of the Fifth Commandment; And in
their doctrines about Government, and obedience to it: But I think it no great
adventure to tell you, that not only these men, but every other Faction of what
denomination soever amongst us do the same too. And if the old saying be true,
that ex ungue leonem, then we may perhaps conjecture who has had a hand in all
these doctrines, and who does indeed mostly symbolize with Papists, They or the
Church of England, that they so much cry out against in this matter.

6. The Sixth and Last Rule is, that we consider holiness not only in its
immediate act and exercise, but take in also the helps and advantages and
encouragements to it: For there are many differences about doctrines that
particularly respect these: And though they do not immediately concern the
exercise of holiness, yet forasmuch as they relate to those things which relate
to that, exercise, and are great helps to it, therefore they are discernible by
this Rule.

Thus (for instance) a doctrine that more lively represents the advantages of
holiness and a good life: that more solidly evinceth the necessity of it: that
adds more excellent and endearing encouragements to pursue it: that more fully
assures a man of Divine aid and assistance in his endeavors after it; I say
doctrines that best do all or any of these things, have a good signature upon
them, and bring with them a very great argument of their Divinity and Truth:
And this is a very good reason upon which to prefer them before others, that
either wholly fail to do these things, or at least come far short of the other
for the solidness and clearness of doing so.

The truth is Sir, a very great many of doctrines about which men dispute and
differ so eagerly at this day, may be decided clearly and safely by this Rule:
particularly all the controversies stated by the Synod of Dort, and those that
depend on them: It will be no hard matter for a man of a common capacity to
discover clearly, which side of these questions gives the honourablest account
of God Almighty, both as to his Attributes and dealings with the sons of men:
which most magnify his love, and grace, and goodness to his Creatures: which
most clearly assert and reconcile his wisdom, and holiness, and justice, and
goodness: which most honorably explain and state the Divine Philanthropy in
the great acts of redemption performed by the Son of God: which most
intelligently and consistently explain the three great offices of the holy
Jesus: and fortify the hopes of the sons of men in endeavoring after
Salvation by all these.

Again, which of the two does most solidly evince the necessity of holiness and
a good life, and lay the more firm and assured foundation upon which to
superstruct that necessity: Which does add the most pressing Arguments and
Motives, and most rationally excite the endeavors of men after it: And lastly,
which does more lively encourage and animate those endeavors, with assurance
of Divine assistance and aid, to help the infirmities, and supply the
imperfections of them.

And by this may all the Antinomian Errors (which I take to be but the Tenets
of the old Gnostics newly revived) and all such wild opinions about Faith and
Justification by it, etc. be clearly discerned and judged too: And to conclude,
whatever doctrine fails in stating any of these things, which are so very
necessary to encourage and help men in the way of goodness, may safely be
rejected as an issue from the Spirit of Error.

I content my self Sir, only to give short touches on all these Rules, and to
say only so much as may make the reasonableness of attending to them to appear:
After which, every thing that might be added would appear tedious, and I think
it not good manners to be burthensom to any.

CHAP. X. Some Inferences made from this Collection, particularly a Vindication
of the Church of England, which may challenge any Sect at this day to join
issue upon this Principle.
HAving now given all needful assurance to this Truth, and prescribed the right
and safe management of it: I shall proceed to make an inference or two from it,
before I put a period to this Discourse.

1. That it is very possible by attending to this Rule, to put a speedy end and
issue to all disputes that are in the Christian world: And I am persuaded,
there are no Rules we can proceed by, so probable to do this with effect, as
this is: Nor any thing by which private Christians might so successfully secure
themselves from all mortal Errors as by attending to this. And if the disputing
men of the Age proceeded by this measure, and studied as much to expose the
wickedness, as to display the falsehood of Opinions, their labor would be less,
and their success more: Men may sooner discern good from evil, than true from
false: A little measure of knowledge and honesty, will enable men to do the
first, but it requires a quick judgment sometimes to do the second; for
falsehood wears the mantle of truth, and many times it is no easy thing to
discover the Impostor: And supposing men honest, they are more effectually
convinced by the wickedness of an Opinion, than by any arguments of its
untruth: For they do not know but men may impose upon them in these, but they
can judge themselves in the other.

And I should think these two things were enough to recommend this way of
determining controversies to the Scribes and the Disputers of this world: Since
it would reduce the controversies to a narrow compass, and men would more
effectually be concluded by a solid determination upon that issue: and
consequently by this means they would sooner be ended.

1. For first, there are few people so impudent, and past shame, as to plead
openly for Baal; and contend for doctrines that every one sees to be
introductive of wickedness: Impostors generally take another course, and gild
their Pills, and wrap their poisons in sweet and gay appearances; and let the
Opinions they would promote be never so pernicious, yet they are always managed
with mighty pretenses of zeal and piety; and by this they hope to prevail more,
than by all their subtle Arguments and fine Disputings; and indeed they do so,
and simple honest people are easily entrapped by them, who have not time or
skill, or both, to search into the bottom of all their doctrines: So that to
encounter with them upon this, were to rob them of that in which their strength
mostly lies, it were to suit the Antidote to the Poison, and to disarm Heresy
of that weapon by which it does the most mischief; it were to uncase the Wolf,
and show what really he is, which would more affect men with horror and hatred
of him, than ten thousand fine discourses about him would be able to do.

2. For secondly, blessed be God, men (especially that pretend Religion) are
not so far debauched, but that they retain a veneration for piety and goodness,
and a secret abhorrence of sin and profaneness: Many that live in the one, yet
condemn themselves in it, and most men though far from being good themselves,
yet have a secret esteem and love for those that are: And therefore when Errors
are truly discovered, and the impiety of them made known, then the Net is
spread in the sight of the Bird, and men are armed against the fine pleas, and
the enchanting pretenses for them, and are hardly proselyted into a belief of
them.

3. And thirdly, when the disputes are brought to this issue, and the contest
is upon it, and nothing left to determine, but which doctrine tends to make men
holy, and which does not so; then the judgment and the determination is more
easily made: For (as I hinted before) the lines of duty are plain, and not so
subject to those varieties of mistakes that other things are: Almost all
practical things are plain, and easily understood, unless it be in some rare
cases: And for the most part disputes and questions about them, do more perplex
and entangle, than they do unfold and explain them: About these every honest
man is in a good measure able to instruct himself, supposing him to have any
competent knowledge, and better able to judge, than he is of questions that are
curiously managed, with great skill and art on both sides.

4. And fourthly, for Controversies and Disputes that no way concerned
holiness, or related to it, men would soon perceive them to be impertinent and
needless, and the pursuing of them to minister only to Faction and Vanity: and
so would concern themselves neither one way or other about them; but let them
fall to the ground, with as little notice taken of them, as there was reason to
start them.

2. But the great design of these Papers, and therefore the chief Inference I
intend from this Subject, is for the Vindication of the Church of England, and
of the Reformed Religion professed by it. To this Rule it may most safely
appeal, and not fear to be tried by it: And as Bishop Sanderson says, The God
that answers by Fire let him be God. If amongst all competitions and
contending Sects among us, there be any to be found that does exceed, or equal
her for conformity to this Rule, they shall readily have the right hand of
fellowship, and due precedence yielded to them: And I challenge any of them all
to join issue with her upon this principle. And certainly this is a very fair
offer, since all the Separations amongst us have been commenced upon this
pretense: They have first separated from her, and then from each other, upon
pretenses of impurity in her Communion, and in quest of greater purity still.

If a man therefore offer to make good these two things:

1. That there is no reason at all for Separation upon this account; nor just
cause to object unholiness and impurity against her: Let her Articles and
Homilies be examined, her Liturgy as closely considered as may be: and if there
be any thing in either contrary to holiness, then condemn her and spare not,
she will (I am sure) acknowledge her error, and patiently endure a reproof for
it. But I defy any man living to do this, provided he exercise but any measure
of charity and honesty in expounding things: and do not imitate the severity of
that Heathen Momus, who rather than find no fault in the Picture of Venus,
would quarrel with her slip-shooe, and whose Motto in hunting for faults is,
Aut inveniam aut faciam.

2. That all and every of those ways, and forms of Religion that these men have
deflected unto, are much inferior to her in this matter: and may clearly be
detected to be false by this Rule, since every one of them espouseth doctrines
which either immediately, or in their just consequences are introductive of
wickedness, and contrary to holiness in some instance or other.

He, I say, that offers to make good both these things, as he will do a good
service to the Church, so he will do that which may justly shame and reproach
the several contending Factions that have so unjustly and unreasonably
separated from her: Now these are truths which no man need fear undertaking to
make good, and perhaps a specimen of them may ere long appear.

In the mean time I think it mine own, and intimate it as the duty of others
too, to bless God, and give him our heartiest praise, that has caused us to be
brought up in such a Church whose Faith is truly Christian and Primitive, and
that Faith which is according to Godliness, whose Worship is truly Pious, and
Grave, and Serious as such should be: All whose Doctrines and Articles, whose
Offices and Ceremonies are truly adapted to promote the same amongst all her
Votaries: And if Salvation be to be had in Communion with any Church in the
World, I am sure it is in such an One.

And to this to add a serious resolution to adhere steadfastly to the same, and
not permit our selves, like fools and children to be turned to and fro with
every slight of doctrine, by cunning and designing men: whose Interest or whose
Passion, and some pitiful low design oblige them to defame and destroy her, and
to make Factions and Rents in her, as the most certain methods unto both.

And (to conclude this Inference) when we are importuned and solicited by any
of these, and take upon us to judge of the Doctrines offered to us, let us not
so much consider the fine pleas that subtle men make for them, but bring them
to this touchstone, and try them honestly and carefully by it, and we shall
soon satisfy our selves, and find enough to preserve us against the infection
of them, and as S. John says, Hereby know the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit
of Error.

The Conclusion.
AND now Sir, I have finished that trouble which I intend to give you at this
time. I am very sensible, that besides the imperfections attending what I have
done, there are two or three things greatly wanting to complete this design,
and worthy of a larger consideration, being but only lightly touched in these
Papers.

1. To Vindicate all the Articles in the Christian Faith by this Rule, and show
the conduciveness of each to the great purpose of Holiness.

2. Secondly, To join issue with all Heresies, and the considerable Sects and
Opinions that disturb the peace of the Church at present, upon this question:
and try if the Principles of them all be not condemnable by this Rule.

But Sir, these are things which will take up more time than at present I can
spare to them: And I am willing to see how you resent this that I have done,
before I burden you with more. But to let you see how wholly I am at your
command, provided you remit me to my own time (us I am sure you will) I promise
to do in these what you think fit to require of me: Being extremely desirous in
every thing so to acquit my self, as may secure me the reputation and honor of
being

Your most humble Servant.

FINIS.

