Poor ROBIN'S VISIONS: Wherein is Described, The present Humors of the TIMES;
the VICES and Fashionable Fopperies thereof; And after what manner Men are
Punished for them hereafter.

Discovered in a Dream.

-- Fatebere tandem Nec Surdum, nec Tiresiam quenquam esse Deorum

Licensed May 17. 1677.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed for, and sold by Arthur Boldero Stationer at the Mitre in
Mitre-Court near the Inner Temple in Fleet Street, 1677.

Poor Robin's Visions
First VISION.
By Vision in a Trance, strange Things I tell,
What wicked Acts turned Mortals down to Hell:
And who they are; whose crimes are lively drawn;
Men once Incarnate, though the Devils Spawn.
IN one of those Mornings of the Year wherein the Earth breaths forth richer
Perfumes than are to be found in the Palaces of Princes; by the wholsomness of
whose scent, the distempered winds (purging their Bodies) ran to and fro,
whistling for Joy through the verdant Leaves of shady Trees, whilst Sheep lay
nibbling in the Valleys to teach men humility, and Goats climbing up to the
tops of barren Mountains, browzed there upon weeds, and barks of Trees to show
the misery of ambition; just at that time when Lambs were wanton as young
Wives, but not lacivious: when Shepherds took care to feed their flocks, but
not to fleece them; when the Lark with his Music had called up the Sun, and
the Sun with his light started up the Husbandman then, even then, when it was a
morning that would have tempted the worst of sluggards to have left his bed: on
a sudden I fell into a Trance, and methought the Caves where the most unruly
boisterous Winds lay imprisoned, were violently (...) open; they geting (...),
the (...) with fear of that (...); the (...) shot Lightning and (...) in
disdain of their threatening: the sturdiest Oaks were then glad to bow, and
stand quivering, whilst low Shrubs and Briars received a reward for their
humility by being out of fear of danger: so dreadful fury lead forth this
Tempest, that had not the Rainbow been a Water-mark to the World, (had what
appeared been real) Men could not have then suspected less than another deluge:
for showers came down so fast, as if all clouds had been distilled into water,
and would have hid their curled heads in the (...), whilst the waves (in scorn
to see themselves so beaten down) boiled up to that prodigious height, as if
(...) meant that Ships should sail in the Sky, and so waft men to Heaven that
way. To make these terrors more dreadful, I fancied that the Sun withdrew his
head as fearful to be seen, darkness then in triumph spread her sable wings,
and totally covered the Hemisphere wherein I was; the blackness of Night was
doubled at high noon; Beasts that were unaccustomed to such sights, ran madly
up and down bellowing; men were amazed; and in short with the rain it lightened
so fast, that the place wherein I was, seemed to be half-drowning, and half
burning; the Waters striving to have Victory over the flames, and they sweating
as fast to drink dry the Waters. To conclude, this Tragedy was so long a
playing, and was so dismal, the Scene was so turbulent, and affrighting: this
battle of Elements bred such another Chaos, that it did put me in rememberance
of that Ingenious expression.

-- Did not God say
Another Fiat, it had never been day.
A sudden alteration now appeared, for this storm seemed to be blown away, and
all things being quiet, methought I saw a great number of men together, and
drawing near unto them, I observed that each one had an Almanac in his hand of
different sorts, consulting with one another; these Physico-Astrological
Bil-men (commonly known by the names of Mountebanks and Quacks,) endeavored to
Apifie the Doctors, and took a world of pains to no purpose, to know whence
this disease of nature should proceed; but being all as wise as Gothams calves,
they could say nothing pertinent to the matter. The tempest blown over, the
Caelestiall bodies (for any thing these figger-flingers knew) were all in very
good health; the twelve Signs were neither broken nor beaten down from any of
the houses in Heaven; the Sun looked with as red and lively a countenance as he
used to do, and the Moon undoubledly (though then invisible) with as plump a
face; and though some of them with their wonted impudence and ignorance did
endeavor to maintain that this dreadful and sudden alteration of the weather,
did portend some! strange alteration in Church and State, yet one standing by,
(wiser then all the rest) told me he could not find by all the figures which
their Prognostications cast up their accounts by, that any such heavy event
should befall the wickedness of these our present times.

Hereupon another to satisfy my curiosity, told me he was credibly informed
that this commotion of the Air had its rise and derivation from nothing else
but Conjuring; hearing him say so, could not forbear laughing, knowing the
Bugbear Art of Conjuration to be as false and fabulous as the History of
`Pigmies, Amozons, and tales of old doting women. Though my laughter displeased
the Gentleman, yet it hindered him not from assuring me, that which he said was
a truth, and that this conjuring was about a Knight, not a Knight of worship,
but a Westminster Hall Knight, a Knight forsworn, a Poor Knight, a Perjured
Knight, a Knight of the Post: Sir said he, this Yeoman of the Pillory and both
Counters, (a long Inhabitant in new Alsatia) was sometimes since sent with a
Letter to the Devil; but he not returning with an answer, some mad fellows,
practitioners in the Black Art, laid their heads together, and swore to fetch
him from Hell headlong; and now you have seen the horred effects of their
operations.

Hereupon I was very desirous to know the occasion of his sending. It was thus,
said he: the Temple of the Muses (for want of careful looking after) falling
to decay, and many (that seemed to hate Barbarism, and Ignorance) being
desirons to employ workmen about it, and repair it; But having many buildings
of their own in hand, utterly gave it over; a common Counsel was therefore
called of all those who lived by their wits, and such who were of the livery of
learning, amongst whom it was found necessary, that to ease the private Purse
as general Subsidy should be levied, for the raising of such a competent Sum
as might maintain the said Almshouse, of the Nine Sisters in good fashion, and
keep it from falling, long were they in the collection of this Money, and
though the Collectors did even swet themselves to death, yet no income, nothing
could be gathered, the Gentlemen (for the major part) swore bloodily they would
not contribute an halfpenny, they had nothing to do with the Muses, they were
mere strangers to them, and why should they be assessed to pay any thing
toward the relief of such laizy companions. Where is the Wit they boast of, if
they cannot live thereon? As for Lawyers, they knew there was no Statute in any
Kings Reign could compel them to discourse on this account; men of the Sword
swore by their Arms, (some whereof were miserably out at Elbows) that they
never could satisfy their hungry stomach with the most curious dish that ever
Wit had dressing of, and therefore resolved to keep their Money against a
Gut-griping Campaign; Peace they cried had made them beggars, and were (some of
them well qualified for that profession, having lost their Legs, went up and
down on borrowed Stilts, that their Country might go sound and upright upon its
own. They complain much for want of Action, and Poor men had a world of Actions
against them, and were at so low an ebb, that Captains gave over their charge,
and were led by Sergeants, Scholars, and could have found in their hearts to
have made Money of their Books, Gowns, Caps, etc. to have paid their share to
this commendable work; but Earthly Souls held all that was theirs (how good
soever) in such vile contempt, that even those who upon a good pawn will lend
Money to the Devil, would not part with any Money to them upon any Interest, so
much did they hate the poor ragged Wenches, and their (...).

Hereupon at the next Sessions of the Wits; it was a greed upon to appeal to
the Parliaments of Gods, who taking their condition into serious consideration
on it, was by them presently enacted, that Apollo (out of whose brain men of
Wit and Wisdom came into the World; should with all expedition descend and
prevent ensuing mischief; least sacred knowledge having her intellectual Soul
banished from Earth, having no house there to Inhabit, the Earth should (as of
necessity it would) turn into its primitive Chaos, and men again into Giants,
to fight against the Caelestiall Powers. Mercury was likewise dispatched from
the whole Synod for the same purpose, as Ambassador to Pluto, (who is the
chief) Infernal Banker to persuade him by the utmost of his eloquence, that
Money might be more plentiful, or credit more easily obtained, that Scholars,
and such who strive and struggle for the Bays for want of its assistance, might
not be found to change their Lodgings oftener then their Shirts, and not knowing
how to live at liberty, are compelled to confine themselves voluntarily to
Ludgate, that to keep them from starving, they may go a share in the Lord Mayor
and Sherifs Baskets.

Apollo (according to the decree of the Caelestiall Upper House) is now
descending: the Fountains of Science flow, (by his influence,) and swell to the
brim: Bay-Trees to make the Garlands for learning, are every where new set, and
already green, the Muses have fresh colors in their cheeks again; their Temple
is promised to be made more fair, and there is good hopes that Ignorance shall
no longer walk or ride in that splendor, which better becomes the men of Wit
and Learning. Yet for this Mercury's Embassy, (notwithstanding all his craft
and polity) proves ineffectual; for he cannot raise the Golden Devil. A mad
Greek hearing this, who was with a Poetical fury resolved to assist him, and
in a bravery wrote a supplication in the behalf of Money, for its enlargement,
vowing he would convert all his blood into Ink, and his brains into Cotton, but
that he would have an answer.

The Petition being drawn up, he thought none could run faster to Hell with it,
and be sooner there, than a Suburbs (...), a Broker, or a Knight of of the
Post; the last he made choice of because of his name, and sent it by him, who
it seems having a great deal of business with the Devil, could not of a long
time be heard of; this was the cause of all this conjuring. Having ended his
discourse, this seeming gentile Snipper-Snapper vanished, so did the rout of the
non-sensicall deluding Star-Gazers, and I left alone; then did I enter into a
consideration, how many shifts men make, and how many shapes they assume; what
villainy they perpetrate, through what dangers they venture Conscience,
Reputation, nay life it self shall be offered as a purchase for that glittering
piece of Earth; the strange Magic of it drove me straight into a strange
admiration. I perceived it to be a Witchcraft beyond man's power to contend
with: a Torrent whose winding Creeks are not with safety to be (...) into: a
Poison that has a thousand contrary workings on a thousand bodies: for it turns
those that keep it Prisoners in Iron chests, into Slaves and Idolaters; and yet
even those that become such Slaves unto it, it makes them Sovereign Commanders
over a World of People.

My further consideration on this Subject was totally laid aside by a concourse
of people approaching toward me; hereupon I drew near to know the meaning of
this unusual meeting, I was quickly informed without asking, by their own
voluntary talking; (for great wagers were laid) that when the Petition was
sent, it would not be received; or if so, it would not be read over; or if read
over, not answered; for Mammon being the God of rich men, and not beggars, was
worse, thought on than he deserved, and therefore would not hear the Petition
of the Poor; (like a Lawyer in a busy Term) not be spoken with because his
Client had not a penny to pay Fees, but sued in Forma Pauperis.

Had it been a challenge, The Devil the best Fencer, and very apt to quarrel.
it is clear, he would have answered it: for he was the first that kept a
Fencing-School, when Cain was alive, and taught him that Embrocado by which he
killed his Brother; since which time he has made many Millions of Scholars as
expert in killing as ever he was; and and there is not a Kingdom in the world,
wherein his (...) do not swarm; having (...) in them all to teach wicked men
that damnable Science. At Sword and Buckler little Davy was no body to this
skillful Master of the Science, and as for Rapier and Dagger the Spaniard may
be his Journeyman, and as for single Rapier he values Monsieur with his Sa, Sa,
as little as Jack-Pudding does a Custard.

Now if he were to fight, it is a question which of the Play Houses his Prize
should be performed at; and whether the Money when gathered, he would have
couzened the Fencers thereof, or the Fencers him; because Hell being under
every one of their Stages, the Players if they had owed him a spite, might
with a false trap door have slipped him down, and there have kept him as a
laughing stock to all their yawning spectators, or had his Infernal Ship been
arrested to any Action how great soever, all the Law in Westminster Hall could
not have kept him from appearing to it, (for the Devil (...) to be nonsuited)
he would have answered that to: but the mischief would have been where should
he get any that would have pleaded for him, who could have endured to see such
a damnable Client every Morning in his Chamber? what Waterman for double his
Fare would have landed him at the Temple; but rather have struck in at
White-Friers, and left him there a shore with a Pox to him.

Whilst wagers were laying on all sides as I said before, a little Pug, or
rather Hellish Imp appeared among us; for his color and shape differed from
what was humane, yet he had the voice and speech of man; for thus he said;
cease your vain babblings, and do not by your Actions verify a Proverb among
you; none but Fools lay wagers; for Grand Seignour Diabolo, my Lord and Master
is fully resolved to answer his humble Orator, but being himself not brought up
to learning, (for to tell you the truth he can neither write nor read,) yet he
has been at all the Universities in Christendom, and thrown damnable Heresies,
like bones for Dogs to gnaw upon amongst the Doctors themselves; But having no
skill but in his own Horn-book, much perplexed he was to think where he should
find out a proper Scribe to Scribble for him; most of the Scrivners in the Town
he had at his beck, but they were so over-imploy'd in making Bonds between
Usurers and unthrifty Heirs, indrawing up Leases between overreaching
Landlords, and unwary Tenants, in Warrants of Attorney confessed to, the
Wine-Merchant by a young raw nimble Squire of the faucet which gives him inlet
to an House ready furnished with every thing good, but Wine; which House has
been (it may be) the ruin of a douzen of his rash predecessors, and will be
infallibly his if he have not an especial care: these, and a hundred things
more these Scriveners are busied in, as Conveyances, Final Recoveries, etc. and
at length by creating and undoing others, they turn Bankrupts themselves, and
so knavishly deceive their Creditors. For these and other causes Don Lucifer
was unwilling to take them from their Noverints, because in the end he knew
they were but his Factors, and that he should be a part-owner in their lading
himself. Then as for those Gallantillo's, who now wear misbecoming Swords by
their sides instead of befitting Ink-horns, as in the days of old; those
Lawyers Clerks I mean who venture the dirtying of their Silk-stockings, and
Ala-mode Spanish Breeches with trudging up and down from Office to Office, that
they may bubble their Clients and abuse these poor ignorant Creatures to their
faces, by exacting unreasonable Fees from them; my Master taking these things
into consideration, would by no means take them from their wide lines,
counterfeiting hands and Seals, etc. but stroking them under the chins, called
them his white-boys, and promised to remember them for their Ingenuity and
greatpains-taking.

After this, my great Master Monsieur Malefico (for know Sir, (said he) he goes
by several names, so that you cannot miscall him, call him what you please) I
say he went next to the writing Schoolmasters, and writing Stationers (those
puny Clark-undoers,) he took some of them by the fist, and licked their hands
exceedingly, some of them having almost as many hands as Briareus, by which
they were capacitated to counterfeit any thing; but perceiving by the copies of
their countenances, that for all their good Letters, they writ intolerable bad
English, and that the world would think him a dunce, if there came false
Orthography from him; he resolved to have nothing to do with those Ignormus's
(fellows whose faces look much like the first four lines of those humble
Petitions they use to draw,) and in an angry mood, cursed them, which curse (as
we have heard since) was converted into a blessing, so that many of them have
got great Estates no body knows how, which has been a great satisfaction to our
great Play Master of Perdition.

I hearing this, and fearing that our poor suppliant should loose his labor
notwithstanding the Devils promise, and be sent away with si nihil attuleris,
resolved to do that for nothing, which many would not do for any Money.
Hereupon turning boldly without any fear or terror (as I imagined) to his spawn
of Hell, I would undertake the task if he would direct me the way to the
infernal Regions; he presently took me at my word, and was strangely mistaken
in him, for I took him to be a Foot-Post, but he proved an Aeriall guide and
hurried me, in an instant to the place by me desired: neither did I much fear
my safe return, since I have read of several men who went thither and came
back again, and as many women; but I could never hear that any of them ever
returned; surely the Devil has a damnable love for the Female Sex, else he
would never have put himself to the trouble and disgrace of stealing a wife
from the Earth, called Proserpine Ceres's Daughter.

Upon my arrival, I found Hells Gates standing wide open; and afterward by
inquiry, I understood they were never shut. As I was entering, I cast my eyes
about on this side, and on that, to the intent I might see that beastly
monstrous Porter Cerberus so much talked on by the Ancients, but not a head of
him appeared there, which made me think that he either died before my coming,
or else never any such animal had a being. My guide and I proceeded forward at
length he introduced me into a spacious Hall, where Pluto sat in a chair of
state, attended by a vast number of his Subjects of different forms and (...),
and distinguishable as to dignity; by the greater or lesser splendor of
Ornaments they wore about their heads. It was a day, or rather more properly
night that, was set apart to give out new Commissions, and send fresh
Emissaries into the World to supply the places of such who had tired and spent
themselves in promoting new opinions in Religion, and propagating differences
and dissentions amongst all sorts of People, etc. Watching my opportunity, I
addressed my self to his Divelship, informing him of what I came about: but this
cunning Devil suspecting that I came rather as a spy to betray him, then as a
spirit to do his business, and that I was more likely to have him to
Barbers-Chyrurgeons Hall, there to anatomize him, then to a Barbers shop to
trim him, would by no means have an answer given to the Petition. As soon as
this flat denial was pronounced, the Knight of the Post who brought the
Petition, standing by me, presently thought to sneak off, which being
perceived, it was ordered he should be secured, and that he should severely pay
for all his false Oaths and Perjuries he had committed on Earth, etc. Hereupon
he was hurried away by a throng of Sergeants and Yeomen whither I know not, but
undoubtedly, directly to the place of punishment; for these Officers there,
have not the convenience of milking their poor Prisoners by the way at Taverns
or Alehouses as they had on Earth, till they carried him to that place of
ruin, where there is no hope of ever coming out till Death becomes his Turn-key.

This sight did somewhat startle me, and thought it not safe to tarry longer in
the presence, but undiscovered slunk away, resolving to view this Hellish
Country, and muster all my Wits about me, to fight against this Captain of the
damned crew, and not only describe his Territories, but discover his stratagems.

Second VISION.
Hells Map's here drawn, in which it does appear
Where Hell does lie, and who they be live there.
WOnder is the Daughter of Ignorance, none but Fools will wonder, how I and
this grand Sophy of the Whore of Babylon should meet together, or what charms I
carried about me whilst I talk with him, or without taking so long a journey to
visit him in his own Kingdom, where, or nearer home (if any one had occasion to
use his Divelship) a Porter may fetch him with a wet finger.

These are but idle Inquisitions; his acquaintance is more cheap than a
strolling Player or Fiddler, The Devils Rendezvous.
and a Night-walker's equally alike dangerous. His Lodgings here are as well
known as a famed Miss, Midwife, or wonder-working Outlandish Mountebanks are,
and his walks more open and public than those upon the Burse in Holland, or
here on the Exchange; where at every step a man is put in mind of Babel, there
is such a confusion of Languages. For in Term-time the Devil upon Dun rides to
and frow (sweating) from London to Westminster, seldom an hour in one habit,
and of different fashion and color. In the Vacation he either plays the Devil
with spend-thrift indigent Clarks, or else steals into a Gaming Ordinary to
verify the Proverb made on him, that he will play at small game rather then
sit out, and yet appears like a Captain; at a Cockpit, like a young Country
Gentleman: at a Bowling-Green, like a wealthly, yet thrifty Tradesman, who
understanding well the Ground, and Gamesters, never plays or bets himself, but
on advantage: you can never miss of him at either Counter-Gates, Smith-field,
the Bars; Turnstile in Holbourn, Drury Lane; sometimes he takes his walks in
the Dutchy-Liberty; and if not there, he may be certainly found near the
Monster-Tavern in the Strand. Having therefore ( as Chamber-maids use to do for
the faces of those they attend on over night) made ready my colors, the
Pencill in my hand, my Card lined, my Needle (that capers over two and thirty
points of the Compass) touched to the quick, East, West, North and South, the
four Trumpeters of the World, that never blow themselves out of Breath; I will
ingeniously and boldly give you a Map of the Country that lies lower than the
Seventeen Provinces, yea lower than the Tin-Mines, or Cole-Pits of Newcastle.

The names of the strange Country are many, which for brevity sake I shall omit
to recount, and only call it by the most known name. Hell, in discovery of
which, the quality of the Kingdom, the condition of the Prince, the Estate of
the People, the Traffic thither, but none from thence Description of Hell.
shall be painted to the life, as it appeared to me in my Vision.

It is an Empire that lies under the Torrid zone, and by that means it is
hotter at Christmas then in Spain, Italy, or France ( which are accounted
pockie hot Countries) at Midsumer. To tell the truth and shame the Devil, it is
built upon stoves and hot-houses, and you cannot set foot into it, but you have
a fieri facias served upon you; for like your Glass-house Furnices the fire
never goes out insomuch that all the Inhabitants are broiled like Carbonadoes
with the sweating sickness, and yet none of them die on it.

It stands further off then the parching Indies: yet to see the wonderful power
and Art of Navigation, if you have but a side Wind, you may sail sooner thither
then a Married-man can upon St. Lukes day to Cuckolds Point from St.
Katherines, which upon sound experience, and by the opinion of approved Pilots
and Mariners, may be done in less then half an hour.

If you travel by Land to it, the ways are delicate, even, spacious, pleasant,
and very clean; but toward the end thereof, the Road is dirty, deep, stinking,
etc.

You never turn when you are traveling thither, but keep altogether on the
left hand; so that you cannot loose your way unless you turn to the right; and
there you will sind with much difficulty a narrow Path winding to and fro,
nothing but thorns under foot, on each side thereof most dreadful precipices,
from whence without great and diligent care you will fall irrecoverably to all
Eternity. In this track you will meet with ghastly apparitions, enough to run
you into despair; but the greatest danger you will meet with, are a number of
Ignes fatui, which some call new Lights; these will direct you if you follow
them into an everlasting state of perdition; But if you keep your way,
despising troubles, and trampling on difficulties, it will bring you to a place
shall recompense all your sufferings.

The Temperament of the other place aforesaid, is quite contrary to this, and
the miles thither are not half so long as those between London and St. Albans,
nor a quarter so dirty in the depth of Winter, as your French miles are at the
fall of the Leaf.

Some say it is an Island encompassed about with certain Rivers, called the
Waters of sorrow: others prove by infallible demonstration, that it is a
Continent, dis-regarded by Heaven, for the Sun never darts its benign, all
comforting Beams upon it.

Though unhappy in this, it is exceeding rich, for Christians, What Persons are
there.
Jews, and Infidels that are Usurers, or men of Honor and Estates, not doing
any good to King or Country but Mortgaging what they have, to propagate
Self-indulgency, after the one has made away his Soul here for Money, and the
other for pleasure and debauchery, they shall meet with them there again.

You have of all Trades, Professions, Estates and dignities in that place;
excepting Poets only; for I found very few of those who when living might
justly challenge the Bays in those Dominions; but there were Millions of those
who writ Pamphlets, Ballads, Bawdy Songs, or a Copy of Verses ( three parts
stolen) in praise of his Mistress. Players too of all sorts swarm there, as
they do here, who have faces like Flamboys, but Wits colder then a flint, for
that when urged, will produce its nimble sparks, but you may sooner knock the
others in the head than get two lines of sense from them of their own
Composition. But observe how justly these Players were served, the Cacodaemons
or Head Officers of that Country having smelt out that their ocupation was
mercenary, and only for gain, he purposes to make up a Company; and be chief
sharer himself, de quibus suo loco; of whose doing you shall hear more by the
next Post.

Though I have given you plain Instructions how you shall not miss of your way
thither; however, least you should forget, it is but inquiring of any Tavern
Drawer, who has been Cup Bearer to one of the seven deadly sins but half a
score years, or any Merchant of Maiden-heads that Trades in Virginia
Commodities, and either of them is sufficient to direct you (...) But neither
they, nor the most weatherbeaten Cosmographicall Star-catcher of them all, can
take his Oath that it lies under just such an Horizon, whereby many are brought
into a Fools Paradise, by gladly believing there is no such place at all; or
that it stands upon Fairyground, or is as that Enchanted Island, the imaginary
O Brazeel.

And now I come to unrip the Bowels of these Infernal Antipodes; and since my
Flag of Defiance is hung out, I will yield to no Truce, and with Tamberlain,
like fury, march against this Grand Turk, the chief Enemy to Mankind.

Third VISION.
Charon's ill-natured; and to speak it fuller, (ler,
There Is naught more testy but a Graves-end Skul
The Knave takes none in, but who Money bring,
And seats the Clown often with the greatest King.
IN my journey to the lower Regions, I met with thousands of Infernal
Travelers, who perceiving that my guide was one of their own Contrymen,
interrupted me not in my passage; whereupon I asked him what they were? he
answered, that they were his Masters, the Devils Nuntio's; some bound for Rome,
about Church Affairs, others for Turkey, Germany, Swedeland, Denmark, France,
Holland and Spain, to make breaches amongst them the wider, that the feuds and
differences among them might continue the longer; so that by the constant
effufion of an Ocean of blood, Pluto hoped to have his Kingdom the better
Peopled; in short, there was no Kingdom or Country, unto which there was not
sent whole droves of these Diabolical Emissaries.

In a few minutes, as I said before, I arrived at the Banks of Acheron, where
you are not baited at by a whole Kennell of yelping Watermen, as you are at
Westminster-Bridge, Temple-Stairs, etc. And ready to be torn in pieces, to
have a tester rowed out of your Pocket. In this place there is no livelihood
for Ship-Carpenters, for there is but one Boat, and in that one, Charon is the
only Ferry-man; so that if a Bankrupt should bawl his heart out for a pair of
Oars to make have away from his hot pursuing Creditor, he must be content, to
go with this dull heavy Skuller. At first this Watermans wages was but small,
being but an halfpenny, then it came to a penny, it is now advanced, and is
risen to three halfpence: for all things grow dear in Hell as on Earth, by
reason it is grown so populous.

The form of this Boat is like a Gravesend Barge, and the Passengers
privilidges alike; for there is no regard of Age, of Sex, of Beauty, of Riches,
of Valor, of Learning, of Greatness of Birth, he that comes in first sits no
better than the last, for they all sit alike; Will. Summers gives not Richard
the Third the Cushion, nor was there the breadth of a Bench between the Tyrant
Oliver, and a Footman.

Princes and Peasants, the Valiant and the Coward, Churchmen Mores Sceptra
(...) Legionious (...).
and (...), Aldermen and Cobblers, Booksellers, and Ballad-Singers are all
alike to Charon, for his (...), Luck, (the old Recorders Fool) shall have as
much Mat, as Sir Lancelot of the Lake, he knows, though they had an Oar in
every man's Boat in This Waterman is as Churlish as the worst that rows on the
River of Thames.
the World, yet in his they cannot challenge so much as a Stretcher: and
therefore though he sails continually with Wind and Tide, he makes the proudest
of them all to stay his leisure, It was a Comedy to see what a crowding (as if
it had been at a new Play) there was upon the Acorantick Strand, so that I was
forced to tarry my turn, because I could not get near enough the shore;
whereupon I resolved to wait with patience, walking up and down till the coast
was clear, and to take my observations of the condition of the Passengers.

Amongst these, there were a great number of Courtiers, who brought with them
great variety of Ala-mode apparel which they had bought with their Money, and
large Patents for Monopolies, which they had begged. Lawyres came in great
droves clothed in Sheepskins, and laden with Writs, Declarations, Judgments,
Leases; purchased Lordships, etc. Some of the Black Robe seemed there so pursy
and windless with bearing three or four livings, that they could scarce speak
to any body. Merchants came laden with Bags of Guinies, and other Coin,
gotten no otherwise than by (smuggling, a smoothing expression for the
downright word Robbing) their Princes Customs. Captains came marching, some in
Armor Cap-a-pee, but unbatter'd, some in Coats all over bedawb'd with Gold
Lace, raised out of the ashes of dead pay, Scholars in their (...) ragged Gowns
thronged here together, with their long sleeves crammed with Books of Logic of
diverse sorts, according as each one fancied; one was clearly for Father
Aristotle, and his Commentators; another was so in love with old greasy Jack
Seton, that he has lickt him over again and again; others were for the new Des
Cartesian way, and his followers: I asked a stander by (that was waiting for a
passage as well as my self) what he thought might be their intent? In Troth,
(said he) I cannot tell, unless that hearing that the Devil is a subtle
Logician, and full of Sophistry, they are going to try whether they can run him
down in Disputation. Citizens, and others who made themselves Bankrupts; and
thereupon took the King's Bench or Fleet, to no other end than to defraud their
Creditors, came hither in great numbers, sweating basely under the burdens of
that, for which other men had sweat honestly before; there were some here, of
all Professions and Occupations. At last, there came a parcel of things,
Animals, what shall I call them, the (...) of whom had like to have made (...)
split my sides with laughter; approaching nearer their habits and expressions,
informed me who they were, a Nursery of Rogues and Whores, spawned either in
Hatten-Garden, Barbican, or More-fields, in proving their profession by
strolling (like Gypsies) up and down the Country, as they could never agree
when on Earth, there being always a Civil War among them; so their feuds
followed them thither; there was nothing, but thou Rogue, thou Whore, to be
heard among them, but the women were more violent one with another, then with
their contrary Sex; there was hardly one among them that had not some very
visible scar in their faces, which they received either from the heavy or hot
blows of Mars or Venus, those who had them not in their faces, had sad Symptoms
of their displeasure in other places, which might be conjectured by their
halting, etc. The Van-Leader of this Rabble-rout, seemed at a distance, to be a
very handsome young fellow; but coming near, and minding him well, I quickly
found my mistake; for it was a Woman whom I knew, one that had been a Whore to
the whole house, and such Auditors as would stick at nothing for above a douzen
years. Necessity forced her into this Masculine habit; for having worn out her
Petticoats to tatters, she undertook to play a man's part; and so apparelled,
rubbed off with what belonged to the stock of the house; had not the Lace been
copper, the red Coat she wore would, have amounted to a good price. The next
that came had pincht something to cover his nakedness, but he fared nothing
near so well; having only converted a piece of an old Scene into a Champain
Coat, which made him look so Comically, that the most serious there present,
could not for bear laughing. Every one had got his Snack, and all in several
fashions, that one would have thought each man came from a several Country, all
ready dressed to Act a Play, to the Devil. The Woman appeared most pleasantly to
the eye, having taken up some properties of their House, without the consent of
their Patron, with which they made a hard shift to dress themselves, having
worn out their own clothes by strolling like Gypsies up and down the Country;
one, though not above fifteen years of Age was dressed in the habit of an old
Bawd; another as young as her, in the fashion of a Witch; a third in a garb
representing a She-Devil, and all of them so strangely, and phantastically
apparrel'd, that all the Drolls, Farces, or Comedies that they ever Acted, came
short of this pleasant sight of their Persons.

What every one brought with him, Bag and Baggage, he was compelled to throw
down, like Travelers on the Road beset by High-way-men, were forced to
deliver, e're they could have a Pasport to be shipped into the Flemish Hoy of
Hell bound for the Netherlands, for if every man should be permitted to carry
with him out of the World what he most delighted enduring his abode there, the
Vessel would be overladen, and consequently sink under its burden: Charon
therefore strips them of all, and leaves them as bare as the native naked
Indians; and glad they were ( for all their howling to see themselves so
fleeced) that for their Silver they could not have wastage over. In therefore
they thronged, some wading up to their knees; and those were young men, they
were loath to make too much have, swearing they came thither before their times.
Some up to the middles, and those were Women, they seeing young men going
before them, were ashamed not to venture farther then they. Others waded to the
chin, and those were old men, they seeing their riches and vast Treasury taken
from them, were desperate, and would have drownded themselves, but that Charon
slipping his Oar under their bellies, tossed them out of the Water into his
wherry. The Boat is made of nothing but the worm-eaten ribs of Coffins nailed
together, with the splinters of Fleshless shinbones, dig'd out of Graves, and
broken in pieces. The Skulls that he rows with, are made of Sextons Spades, The
Stuff of which Charons Wherry is made.
which had been hung up at the end of some great and dreadful Pestilence or
Contagion: the Bench he sits upon, is a rock of dead men's skuls, the worst of
them being an Emperor, as great as Prester John, or Mahomet, and a huge heap
of their Beards serving for his Cushion. The Mast of his Boat is an Arm of an
Yew-Tree, whose boughs instead of Rosemary had wont to be worn at Funerals.
The Sail was made of two patcht winding-sheets, wherein a Broker, a Catch-pole,
and Tally-man had been laid; and if at any (...) it wants mending, it is always
pieced with the winding-sheets of Bawds, Bullies, Pimps, Panders; and the like.

The Waterman himself is an old churlish grisly-faced fellow, with a Beard
filthier than a Bakers Maukin with which he sweeps his Oven, which hung full of
knotted Elflocks, Charons Character:
and serves him for a Swabber in foul weather to cleanse his Vessel. His eyes
stare so wide, (by being blear'd with the Wind) as if the lids were supported
by gags to keep them open. More salt rheumatick Water runs from them, than
would pickle all the Herrings that shall be carried to Roterdam for a Twelve
month; his hands are so hard, and scaled over with dirt, that Passengers think
he wears Gauntlets. His breath belcheth out nothing, but stinking rotten damps,
which lie so thick and foggy on the face of the waters, that his fare is half
choked e're they can get to land. The Sea-coal furnaces of twenty Brew-houses,
make not such a smoke, nor the Tallow-pans of as many Chandlers (when they
melt) send out such a smell. He is dreadful in looks, and currish in Language,
yet as kind, and as affable as a Courtier where he takes a liking. He sits in
all storms bare-headed; for if he had a Cap, he would prove as unmannerly as a
Quaker, and would not pull it off to a Pope. His apparel.
He has a Gown girt about him made of Wolve-skins tanned, signifying his
greediness, but worn so long, that it has almost worn away his Elbows. He is
thick of hearing to them that sue to him; but to those against whose wills he
is sent for, a Fiddler hears not of a Wedding, or the opening of a Window sooner.

The River which Charon plies upon, is as stinking, muddy, but much thicker and
blacker, than Fleet-ditch after a great rain. In taste it is very bitter, yet
to those who know how to distill these deadly Waters, very wholesome.

Fourth VISION.
Charon and Robin talk, as Charon rows;
And being landed, boldly on be goes,
Session's in Hell, Souls brought unto the Bar,
Arraigned, andjudg'diaCatalogue what they are.
CHaron having just discharged his freight; I cried a Boat, a Boat; for I was
unwilling to go over with such a crowd of miserable sad Souls. My voice being
heard by this Skuller, although he was very weary; over he came; As soon as I
was well seated, Charon began to complain what a bawling there has been, with
what fares he has been posted, and how with much tugging (his Boat being so
thwack the has split one of his Oars; and broke his Boat-hook, so that he
canrow but slowly till it be mended. And were it not that the Souls pay
excessive rents for dwelling in the body, he swore by the Stygian Lake, he
would not let them pass thus for a trifle, but raise his price; why may not he
do it, as well as fine Misses their rotten Commodities,

And now he began to brag, what a number of glittering sparks, gallant Fellows,
and delicate Wenches went lately over with him, whose names he had in his Book,
and would have particularly nominated them unto me, but that they earnestly
entreated him, not to spread their names any further, since they were so
notoriously known already.

The only wonder (said Charon) that these Passengers drive me into, is, to see
how strangely the World is altered, since Pluto and Proserpina were married: for
whereas in the days of old, men had wont to come into my Boat all slasht,
stabbed and cut, some with one Arm, others with never a Leg; a third sort with
heads like Calves, cleft in sunder, and the mouths of their wounds gaping so
wide, as if they would have cried for a Boat to come unto them; but now the
case is altered; for my Fares for the most part, are such, who were poisoned by
their insatiate wives, that they may take the freedom of having their Lust
satisfied by others; or else dispatched by their longing Heirs for living too
long; Miscent By this you may understand that Charon can speak Latin.
Aconito Novera filius ante Diem Patris inquirit anno, some are scorched to
death by whores, and so hurried out of this World; others come reeling out of
Taverns into my Boat, and if they come bleeding too, it is ten to one the
fatal wound was received either by giving the lie, or invindication of the
pocky whore their Mistress. Surfeits on Food, as well as Wine send Shoals of
wretched mortals to me. I have been lately troubled with great droves of People
who died in the field; but how I pray? not in the bed of Honor by Sword or
Bullet, the miserable wretches, were hungerstarved. A little before these, came
a parcel of drowned Rats, but as fat as Bacon-hogs; they had been half roasted,
and half boiled, by their rank scent, I knew they had more to do by water than
by land; and since their profession was somewhat like mine, I was fain for pity
sake take them in, for they had not a Stiver among them all. Now if the three
Destinies spin no finer threads than these; men must either (like Esculapions)
be made immortal for mere pity sake, and be sent up to Jupiter, or else the
land of the Black Moors must be made bigger: for the Great Lord of Tartary will
shortly have no room for all his retainers.

By this time ( Charon looking before him,) as Watermen use to do, that is
behind him, perceiving he was almost a shore, he desisted from discoursing
further, and without loosing any time, I leapt ashore.

The ways are so plain and direct, that I soon arrived at the Court-gate of
Avernus, which stood wide open. Hells Porter fawned upon me, yet would not let
me pass, till I gave him his fee. He takes no Money, but executes his bawling
office only for Victuals; his name is Cerberus, but the Household call him more
properly the Black-dog of Hell. He has three heads, but no hair upon them, the
place is too hot to keep hair on, instead of hair they are all curled over with
Snakes, which reach from the Crowns of his three heads along the ridges of
his back, to his very tail, and that is wreathed like a Dragons tail. Twenty
couple of Hounds make not such a damnable noise when they howl, as he does when
he barks; his property is to wag his tail when any comes to the Gate for
entrance, and to lick their hands; but upon the least offer of making an
escape, he leaps at their throats; sure he is a mad Dog, for where ever he
bites, it rankles to the death.

His eyes is ever watching, his mouths are continually gaping, and his howling
is perpetual.

No sooner was I entered, But I met with thousands of miserable Souls, pinioned
and dragged in Chains to the Bar, where they were to receive their Trial, with
bitter (...) bewailing (all the way as they went) and with loud execrations,
cursing the bodies with whom they sometimes frolickly kept company, for leading
them to those impieties, for which they must (to their everlasting ruin and
destruction) dearly answer.

It was Quarter Sessions in Hell, and looking narrowly about me, I chanced to
see my Knight of the Post, who was sent from Earth on a message to Pluto:
though he had been at many of their Arraignments, and knew the horror of the
Executions; yet I perceived by his Countenance that the sight of the Prisoner
struck him into an astonishing amazement.

The Judges are set, (being three in number,) severe in look, sharp in Justice,
shrill in voice, and dreadful in their sentence: the Prisoners are Souls that
have committed Sessions in Hell,
Treason against their Creation: they are called to the Bar, their number
infinite, their crimes numberless the Jury that must pass upon Sin is the Jury.
them, who are their sins empanneld out of the several Countries where they had
their being, and are sworn to find whose Conscience is Conscience given in
evidence.
the witness; who upon the Book of their Lives, where all their deeds are
written, gives in dangerous evidence against them; the furies who stand at the
elbow of their Consciences are there already with flaming whips to make them
confess: for they are the Beadles of Hell, that whip Souls in the Devils
Bridewell, or else his Executioners to put them to worse torments.

The Indictments are of several qualities according to the The several (...)
uts.
several offenses. Some are arraigned for Ambition in Court and Camp: nor is
the greatest Monarch on Earth therein the least spared, if his Ambition be
found to swell to that height, that it runs beyond its own proper bounds, and
overflows the Territories of his Neighboring Princes: some for corruption in
the Church, and minding more the fleecing than the fatning of their flock: Some
for the hollowheartedness in the City: some for deceit and cheating in shops:
some for Pride in the Pulpit, and loftiness in the streets; some for abominable
Hypocriste in a Conventicle: some for eating men alive in Prisons: some for
Briber y; some for Extortion: a World for Drinking and drabbing; neither was
there a small number of such who impudently and ignorantly kill People by
virtue of a License to practice Physic. In short, every particular sin at his
heels to condemn Such who sell. Sheepsturds guilt over, for Universal
Diseases, curing Pills.
him; so that to plead not guilty were folly; to beg for Mercy, Madness: for if
any should do the one, he can put himself upon none but the Devil, and they to
make quick work, give him his Pasport; if any do the other, the hands of an
hundred Monarchs under their great Seals will not be taken for his Pardon, nor
the least mitigation of his punishments; for though conscience comes to this
Court poor in habit; Diseased in her self, wretched in her face, heavy in her
gate, and hoarse in her voice, yet carries she such stings within her to
torture the poor Prisoner if he confess not the truth, that every word is a
Judges Sentence; and when he has spoken, the accuser is not suffered to plead
for himself, nor to fee Counsel to do it for him.

In what a lamentable condition stands therefore the unhappy Prisoner; his
Indictments is impleadable, The misery of a Prisoner in that Jury.
his evidence irrefutable, the Judge Impenitrable and implacable, the Judgment
formidable, the Torments insufferable, the manner of them unutterable, he must
endure a death without dying; Torments ending with worse beginnings: by his
shreeks others shall be affrighted, himself afflicted; by thousands pointed at,
by not one amongst Millions pitied; he shall see no good that may help him;
what he most does love, shall be taken from him; and what he most does loath,
shall be his companions. Ad hereunto the sad cogitation of that dismal place,
to which he is condemned; the remembrance whereof, is almost as grevious, as
the punishment there to be endured.

That you may apprehend the better the horror of this Vision; suppose that
being gloriously attired, deliciously feasted, attended on Majestically, Music
charming thine Ear, Beauty thine Eye, and that in the very height of all Wordly
Pomp that thought can aspire to, thou should be tumbled down from some high
goodly Pinnacle (built for thy pleasure) into the bottom of a Lake, whose depth
is unfathomable, and circuit incomprehensible: and that being there thou
should be surrounded in a moment with all the polluted Villians that ever
sucked damnation from the nasty breasts of black Impiety; that the place it self
is gloomy, hideous, inaccessible, pestilentiall by damps and rotten vapors,
haunted by Millions of Devils, and pitched all over with Clouds of darkness,
that the eye of the Moon is too dull to pierce through them, and the fire of
the Sun to weak to dissipate or dissolve them: then that a Sulphurous stench,
must still strike up into thy nostrills, Adders and Toads be still crawling on
thy bosom; and which way soever thou turnest, a fire flashing in thine eyes,
yet yielding no more light than what with a glimpse may show others how thou
art tormented, or else show unto theethe tortures of others, and yet the flames
to be so devouring in the burning, that should they but glow upon Mountains of
Iron, they were able to melt them like Mountains of Snow.

Lastly that all these horrors, are not woven together to last for years, but
for Ages of Worlds, and Worlds of Ages. Into what gulf of desperate calamity
would not the poorest beggar throw himself headlong into, rather than taste the
least dram of this bitter portion.

If Imagination can give being to a more miserable place than this described;
such a one, or no worse than such a one, is that into which the guilty Souls
are led captive after they have received Sentence of Condemnation: and what
tongue is able to relate, the groans and Ululations of a wretch so distressed;
ten thousand Pens of Steel would be worn blunt in the description, and yet
leave it unfinished.

Fifth VISION.
The Writ for Golds enlargement now is read,
And by the Prince of darkness answered:
The Devilish abroad his commendation sends;
All Traitors are his Sons, Brokers his Friends.
NOw since the Infernal Sessions is adjourned, and the Court broken up, let us
seek out our Knight of the Post, we have already related his ill success in his
Message when he addressed himself to the Devil, and by delivering a Petition, for
his pains he was sent to an house of Correction, but the Devil considering,
that if any longer he detained him there, he should be a looser for want of his
service on Earth, caused him to be set at Liberty, and ordered him to deliver
into his paws the supplication about Gold, his Secretary was called to read it
to him; but he had not read above half way, before the Work-Master of witches
snatched it out of his hands, and thrust it into his bosom in great rage,
railing at this Letter-Carrier, and threatening to have him lasht by the Furies
for his loitering so long, or Canterized with hot Irons for a fugitive: but
this Devil in carnate recounting the many services he had done his Infernal
worship he was dismissed with a blessing, telling him moreover, that during his
absence the Author of the supplication had been landed by Charon, of whom he
willed to inquire within what part of their Dominion he had taken up his
lodging.

Now I understand he intends to answer every word of the Petition by word of
mouth; yet because he knows, that at the return of the Post aforesaid, and
walking upon the Exchange of the World, whither he charges him to hasten for
the good of the Stygian Kingdom that altogether stands upon quick Trassique,
they will flutter about him crying, what news? To stop their mouths with
something, stop them with this; that touching the enlargement of Gold (which is
the first branch of the Petition) say thus The Devils answer (...) he Petition.
that Pluto's, ( Pluto's Kinsman) being the only setter up of tempting Idols,
was born a Cripple, but had his eyesight as fair as the day; for he could see
the faces and fashions of all men in the World in the twinkling of an eye. At
which time for all he went upon Crutches, he made a shift to walk abroad with
many of his Friends, and none too but what were good men, a Poet or a
Philosopher might then have had his company sooner than a Justice of the Peace,
or a Skarlet Gown Alderman: Virtue went at that time in good clothes, and Vice
fed upon beggary: Alms-Baskets, Honesty and Plain-Dealing had all the Trade in
their own hands, so that Prodigals, Cheats, and Desperado's with the rest of
their dissolute Faction, could not tell how to live, for want of the assistance
of their Guardian-Angels, and in great danger of starving in the very streets.
Jupiter taking notice to what side Pluto's did most incline, for what reason I
know not, struck him stark blind, so that ever since he has played the good
Fellow, and the meerest Fop in all the Town may lead him where he list, and
make sport with him in any drunken assembly: now he regards not who thrusts his
hands into his pockets, nor how it is spent, a Fool shall have his heart in
these days, as soon as a Physician and an Ass who cannot spell, that will never
as long as he lives, get out of his Horn-book, go laden away with Guinyes,
Duckatoons, and what not from his Indian Storehouse, when Ibis Homer, that
has lain sick Seventeen years together of the University Plague, watching, and
patiently waiting for a Cure, shall not for an hundred weight of good Latin,
and twice the quantity of most excellent Wit, and Reason, receive a three penny
weight in Silver: his ignorance arising from his blindness, is the only cause
of this Comedy of Errors; so that until some Mountebanck or Quack by some
means Galenical, Chemical or Chyrurgical, can pick out that Pin or Web which
sticks in both his eyes, (and that will very hardly be,) it is Irrevocably set
down in the Adamantine Book of fate, that Gold shall be made a perpetual Slave
to Slaves, a drudge to Fools, a Fool to make Woodcocks merry, whilst Wisemen
mourn for want thereof: or if at any time he chance to fly for refuge into the
Chamber of a Courtier, to a mere Hawking Country Gentleman, to a young Student
at the Law, or to any Tradesmans eldest Son; the first will be sure to hold him
fast and make much of him, the second to it may be will take delight in his
Society; but it was a thousand to one the last will be soon cloyed with his
conversation, and in a little time be totally rid of his company.

He would have proceeded further, had he not been interrupted by some weighty
business; this gave me an opportunity to go and make a Geographicall Survey of
Pluto's Kingdom.

The Temperament of the Air of this place, is very hot and dry, ten thousand
times warmer then that which lies right under the Line. It is so unwholsom,
that the strongest Mortal living cannot breath in it the tenth part of a
minute, unless he bring with him some Aqua Caelestis, a certain Heavenly
Antidote which will preserve him from its killing Contagion.

There are no lights in that Firmament but Blearing Stars putrid Exhalations,
flying thither, proceeding from the rotten stinking Carcasses of Vice and
Vanity, the number whereof is innumerable: though light be comfortable, this is
comfortless, and no otherwise useful than to burn in the bowels of
Hells-dark-Lanthorns, and to light the eye where it shall see Millions of
things in horrid and most dreadful shapes in different forms; the least
affrighting of them all would if seen on Earth, at first sight, kill the most
undaunted man that ever there had being. These Infernal Territories are so
vastly extensive that not one of the Inhabitants (how skillful soever in
Cosmography) nay not the GrandSeignour of the Place, could ever find out its
Longitude, but the Learned here will not admit of Antipodes, that the form
thereof is Globular, none will deny: and like the Earth in some measure has a
small Sea or Lake, whereinto some Rivers do discharge themselves. There is one
River of a very strange Nature and wonderful operation, the water is bitter in
taste, and unsavory in scent, and whosoever drinksd own but half draught of his
remembered former follies, it will prove Amaulentum Poculum; Gall is Honey, and
Assa Fetida, Damask Roses to it.

Some I knew whose names were famous and dreadful, through the whole Town for
making it their business to beat the Constable and his Watch, and in the
continuance of their Morning Rambles, if they could not find the opportunity of
being so mischievous to kill whom they met, then content themselves with
breaking innocent Glass-windows; and at last being tired with doing things
shameful, and evil, repair to their respective Lodgings, and sleep out the
remainder of the day; that they may be enabled to go through stitch with the
dark deeds of the ensuing Night. As it was no laughing matter, I could not find
in my heart to be so vain as to smile to see what sower faces they made when
they tasted this water, one sip was sufficient, it would not go down the
thousandth part so fast as a Glass of Burgundy or Racy Canary.

Madam Fickle, and Madam Fidle Faddle with such like bundles of Exchange
Trompery, who had blown up their unthinking Husbands beings, by costly
Essences, they tasted too a cup of their never to be forgotten Pride and
Vanity, but instantly their sighs came so thick from them, that filling the
Soul with too much wind, Charon was in great fear that the Boat would overset;
besides, this water is commonly turbulent, and how can it otherwise choose,
being stirred with so many fighting perturbations.

Here were a number of Waterdrinkers as of Epsom, Tunbridge, Dullidge, etc. who
drink it not for any great Virtue they found in it, but they loved the places,
because it gave some (and they were Gamesters) an opportunity to cheat and
cousen, and to light on luxurious Women, to Cukcold their Husbands, these
tasted too, but as gingerly as the Ass eating Thistles fearing to prick his
chops. That little they swallowed, brought fresh into their remembrances, all
their cozenages Impieties. Debaucheries, etc. and without hiding the least
fault, exclaimed aloud against their Villainy and wickedness. There was a parcel
of Semstresses who were got into this crowd, and with the rest drank of these
bitter Waters, to external view they seemed to be very pretty Moppets, but
understanding what their profession was, and how educated, being first picked up
by the Reverend Matrons their Mistresses, for the sake of their young and
handsome faces, which would be a great inducement to bring Custom to their shop,
viz. Young Gallants (alias) Scourers of the Road near Maiden head-Thicket, who
teach them quickly another Trade besides what they learned of their Mistresses,
and being set up for themselves, managed it to an hair, I say understanding
their Occupation and practices, undoubtedly their outsides were not so fair,
but that their insides were as foul, these (having each of them drank a draft)
shed an Ocean of tears, running down like Torrents over their blubbered cheeks,
and with such continued streams, that all the Linen in their shops would not
serve for Handkerchiefs to dry their deluged countenances; and all this came by
thinking what variety of pleasures they had untimely left behind them, and what
torments they were like to endure everlastingly, for so much indulging their
senses, with all manner of Riot and Luxury.

As for the name of this first River it matters not much; the Ancients call it
by the name of Styx; but call it by what name you please, all that I shall say
further of it is this, that the Water is very thick; and how can it otherwise
choose, being stirred with so many thousand fighting perturbations. Having
passed over this first River, you shall presently have your way stopped by
another; it is a little cut by Land, but a tedious and dangerous Voyage by
Water. Here too you must wait your Mariners leisure, the same wrangling ill
looked Fellow that was your first man, is your last man; here you shall lie at
every Havens mouth for a wind till Beelzebub hales you: this River the Men of
Old, whose Nodles were filled with stories of their own making about Gods and
Goddesses, and their offspring begot by stealth on over-powred Mortals,
Devilish fighting Fellows. I say they called this River Acheron, which after
many Circumgirations falls into the Stygian Lake.

It is the Water of loathsomness, Loathing of (...) Second River.
and runs with a swifter current than the former: for when the Soul sees deaths
Barge (...) for her, she begins to be sorry for her Ante-acted evils, and then
she is sailing over (...); but when she draws the curtain, and looks (...) upon
the Pictures, which her own hand drew, and finds them to (...) ugly, deformed,
disproportionable, (...), etc. she abhors her own workmanship, and wishes for
more Sail, that she may the more speedily be transported over the Stygian
Torrent.

The third River is called Repentance of our Sins, the third River.
by the first born Sons of Apollo, Cocytus, somewhat cleaner than both the
other, and is the Water of Repentence, being an Arm of Styx.

Many have here been cast away, and frozen to death, when the River (as
oftentimes it does) grows wonderful cold.

All sorts of Souls are not suffered to sail upon it; for to some (as if the
Water had sense, and could not brook an unworthy burden; it swells into
inexpressible Tempests, to fling them to and fro, and at length in the storm
are cast away and drowned; to others more love cannot appear between two
faithful and indeared Friends, than the gentle smoothness of these Waters do
express.

Besides these, there are two other Rivers, viz. Phlegeton and Pyriphlegeton,
burning Rivers which fall in with Cocitus: Sailing over which there is no great
matter of danger; (though they look with all the Unless you sail safely even by
the Waters of Repentance, you are in danger to be drowned in despair.
horror and dread imaginable,) but if they do no harm, it is because the
Ferry-man has wafted you safely over the Waters of Repentance; otherwise those
hot liquors will instantly invade and seize all parts of your body, and
penetrate your very Soul. No boiling Oil, Lead, or what the Earth can produce
most hot, horible, and tormenting comes (...) it in the least degree.

Whilst I was in a serious contemplation about things of this greatest
importance; news was brought me by a certain malicious pug, (to divert me from
such thoughts) of a very pleasant passage between Charon and Mercury, the
Messenger of the Gods, which you shall find discovered in the next Vision.

Sixth VISION.
Hells Skuller and the Pursevant of Heaven,
Cast many recknings up, but are not even
Till a Plague falls: Soldiers set out a throat,
Men brave and stout come mangled to his Boat.
AT the Banks-side, when Pluto's Pursevant came to take Water, Mercury ( that
runs of all the Errands between the Gods) having been of a Message from Ceres,
to her daughter Proserpine (Hells tawny sooty Queen) finding Charon in his
Boat, because as if it had been in a long Vacation few fares were stirring,
fell to cast up old reckonings between himself and the Weather beaten-Skuller,
for certain od trifling things laid out about Charons business.

The first Item that stood in Mercury's bill was for Nayls to mend your Boat,
when two Baylifs and their Bums came drunk from a Bawdy House, and falling out
upon the division of the spoil, which they had got by arresting a Monyed Crack,
split three of the boards with their Club-fists -- 4 d.

Item laid out for Pitch to trim your Boat, about the middle of the last great
Contagion that she might go tight and brave, and do her labor cleanly -- 11 d.

Item For Glue and whip-cord to mend your broken Oar -- 3 d.

Hold there cried Charon; in your two first Items, you have somewhatoverreatcht
me; but I must (...) this is reasonable; yet I have carried a great many in my
Wherry Male and Females, from the Silken Whore to the pitiful poor
Tatterdemalion that have had forty times more Whip-cord given them for nothing:
but now go on.

Item For Juniper, and other Pocky and Plaguey Antidotes, Perfumes, to sweeten
your Boat after it carried those bone-eaten, flesh-(...), wretches whom
Hot-houses and Hospitals had spewed out of their tuition.

A Pox on them (cried Charon,) who got by the Raskalls?

Item Lent to a Company of Countrystrolling-Players, Eleven in number one
shearer and his Female Cub, three Hackney Jades, and Six Journey men, that with
wandering up and down to Fairs and Markets to little or no purpose, through
extreme want, Pox and Poverty were brought to Deaths door; which Money was lent
upon their stock of apparel, which they call properties, to pay for Boat
hire, intending to try, if they might be suffered to play in the Devils name,
which stock afterward came into your claws, and you dealt upon it, in all
amounting to thirteen pence halfpenny.

They had a Pattent, and his hand to a Warrant, but their rags served to make
me Swabbers, because they never fetched them again; so that belike he proved a
good Lord and Master to them, employing them to make new Perge Mentiri,
profane Drolls, and obscene Farces, which should be sent annually by Hells
Nuntio, to the Rabble of Wit-pretenders, and Play-spoilers that constantly
erect Booths in, and frequent Bartholomew, and Southawrk Fairs.

Item, when a Cobbler of Poetry, called a Translator, Play-patcher, or Cutter
of Plays, was condemned to be duckt three times in the Cuckingstool of
Periphlegeton (being one of the scalding Rivers in Hell, because he scoft at
his betters, and reprehended the works of those he could not mend, laid out at
that time for a disguize to convey him away from the shame and punishment -- 4
d.

Item For Needle and Thread to dearn above two and fifty holes in your sails,
and to a Botcher for half a days work about it -- 7 d.

That botcher (cried Charon) I preferred to be Lucifers Tailor, because he
works with a hot Needle and burnt Thread, and that seven pence he gave me for
my good will; why should not I take bribes as well as others: if it be Lawful
for them, it is so for me. I know not how you may escape said Mercury; but for
others you speak of, they will find a severe punishment for so doing.

Mercury having cast up all the whole sum of his debt, the Skuller told him, he
was now out of Cash, it (...) a hard time, and he doubted there is some secret
Bridge made over to Hell, and and that they steal thither in guilt Coaches.

But however (continued he) though the Market proves bad, bear with me till
another Epidemicall Sickness happen; or some great Battle fought between the
Hungarians, and the Great Turk, or next Champain between the French and
Hollanders with their Allies, any of these three, will be sufficient to wipe
off not only my old score, but build me likewise a new Boat: Mercury seeing no
remedy, though he knew well enough that the old churl was not without Money,
took his wings and away he flew to Olimpius.

Scarce was he out of sight, but on the other side of the River stood a
company, crying out lustily, a Boat, a Boat hey, and who should they be but a
gallant Troop of English Spirits, all stob'd, cut, and slasht like so many old
Romans, that for overcoming death in their manly resolutions, were sent away
out of the field crowned with the Millitary Honor of Arms.

The foremost of them was a person of so comely and composed presence, that
Nature and Fortune had done him wrong, if they had not made him a Soldier. In
his countenance there was a kind of Indignation fighting with an exalted joy,
which by his very gesture was plainly apparent; for he was jocond that his Soul
shook hands with his body in so glorious a triumph, but disdainfully angry that
she wrought her enlargement through no more dangers; yet were there bleeding
(...) enough on his Breast, which testified he did not yield till he was
conquered, and was not conquered, till there was nothing of a man left in him
to be overcome: for besides those Mortui and muti Testes, which spoke most for
him, when he himself was past speaking, he made a shift to lay down an overplus
of life (when the debt was discharged at one mortal payment before) only to
show in what object account he held deaths Tirany, Charon glowting upon him,
demanded who he was, but he scorning to be his own Chronicle, or Trumpet of his
merited same, and not suffering the rest to execute the Office, they all leaped
into the Ferry. Amongst whom one that sat out of his hearing within the reach
of the Waterman (to shorten the way, London quoth he) gave him breath, Holland,
has felt his blows, and England now cannot choose but find his loss. He was
naturally inclined to the Sword, yet knew better how to end quarrels than begin
them. At Sea he lost an Arm with unimitable patience, which first storm did
rather drive him on to more dangerous adventures, though to the hazard even of
a Shipwreck, then like a fearful Merchant run his fortunes and reputation on
ground, for the boisterous threatenings of every idle billow. Wars at Sea
ceasing, he went into France to try his Valor by Land, and it was his hard hap
to loose an Eye before Maestricht, hereupon he resolved to leave the remainder
of his body to that Country, which had taken from him one of the best Jewels of
his life, since it had a piece of him he would not so dishonor the place, as
to carry away the rest untoucht, or unbroken, into the field therefore comes
he, (the Fates putting both eyes into one,) of purpose that he might look on
none but his Enemies; where a Battle being to be fought, his own merit
advanced him to advance the Colors, by which dignity, he became of the fairest
marks, which was then to be shot at, and where a great part of that days glory
was to be won. But such was his hard Fortune that the Enemies ambition
thirsting after his Staff, threw at all in hope to win his Colors, and instead
of striking them out of his hands struck him: in so much that he was twice shot
and twice run through the body, yet would not surrender his hold for all those
breeches, but stripping the prize for which they, off from the Staff to which
it did belong, and wrapping his dying body in it, before his Colors could be
called his Winding Sheet with his Sword in his hand he threw himself into the
thickest of danger, where after he had made several prodigious proofs of his
incomparable, Valor most valiantly came off with no more life left, than what
would serve to deliver up his spirit in the Arms of none but his Friends and
fellow Soldiers. So that as if Fortune had been jealous of her own inconstancy
Death (at her entreaty) took him away in the Meridian of a happiness, lest any
black Evenings overcasting should spoil it with alteration.

Charon hearing so laudible a Character of this brave young Man, hum'd, and
seemed much pleased with his fare: Now whilst this Comrade of his was making
this Relation this Valiant Ensign was delivering an Oration to his fellow
Soldiers there with him in the Boat wherein he proved this Thesiis.

That it is the pleasantest life to be always in danger.
Elevating his voice, said he, fellow Soldiers give me leave to tell you that
danger is nothing else but a mere Chymaera, a notionall nothing; for if we say
there is such a thing as danger before hand, it may be fear or misinformation,
yet possibly the danger may never touch us. If we consider it in the present
tense, and really effected, it is not danger, but Misery, and if we consider it
in the preter tense it is past and gone. Now (...) all time is comprehended
under these three terms, and this falls under none of them, it follows that
this has no time at all, which being inseparable to every existence, as the
measure of its duration, it will be evident, that danger is a mere Nonentity,
and those that fear it, fear just nothing.

In the comparison of good and evil, we ever account those evils the least,
which are the least lasting, and on the contrary, those goods the best which
are the most constant and durable. Now for Dangers supposing that we should
grant them to be evils, what more Courteous and slight evils could we wish for,
than those that are come and gone in a moment. But dangers are so far from that,
that they are commonly sooner past than known, but the remembrance of them
remains perpetually fresh, and bring every day new circumstances to claw the
understanding. Nay and such a faithful good it is; that no Malice of Fortune
can berave us of, but it stays with us in other miseries, whereas Friends
Patrimony, Honor can quickly vanish, and as we can no more grasp them than a
shadow, so we can no more recommand them, then call back Yesterday.

But supposing Danger, such a thing as ought possibly to be feared, since all
wisemen agree with the Stoics in this, that we ought not to be troubled for
things which are not in our power, and we cannot help, and that the life of man
is beset with such a many contingences, which may every minute either surprise
or assault us, what a madness were it to anticipate our inevetable misery, and
like one who threw away his Gold, for fear of losing it, yet since Death will
at last conquer us, the madness of men has not showed it self any more in any
thing, then in their fear of it. Some assossinating themselves for fear of
assassination, and therein showing at once an act of the greatest Cowardice and
cruelty (for every thing must love it self the best) that is possible. Others
execute themselves by lingering deaths, and tortures of their fears, and so make
it a punishment greater then ever nature meant it. Whilst the gravest and most
sober men put it only among the boons of Nature, and by their frequent
composures, even at the very instant of their dissolution, confute the horror
of it And if this great Bugbear of Mankind, when its Vizard is off, prove such
a tame Foolery, I wonder what the Petty dangers must shrink into.

There is nothing among all the excellencies of Mankind, more shining than
knowledge and Courage, and both these without dangers would be dull, heavy and
unactive habits, what use were there for knowledge if we met not with the mazes
and intricacies of life? And what more wise than a present ingenuity in
avoiding dangers, or a vast conduct in preventing them, or a sly dexterity in
weakening them. If there were no storms at Sea, what use were Pilots of, but
talkative burdens: but upon the (...) outrage of a Storm, they are the only
things, that are called upon, and worshipped.

For Courage it is only seen in danger and without them Hares and Lions are of
equal fortitude, great Souls that dare affront dangers are therein tried, and
move at that time in their natural motion, and to its own proper bounds, every
thing has an appetency, and therefore must necessarily delight in it. And can
there be a greater pleasure to a man than for so small a triflle, as his own
heart should enable him to conquer a Monster or a multitude.

Brave minds are like Gold purified by the fire of dangers, and exalted up to
their due perfection. And if nature do so cheerfully, even in her vegetative
things embrace every advantage, may we not think that rational Souls have
these desires so much the more strong, by how much their natures are the more
noble.

For the passive part of Fortitude, it is so far from being a Traitor to the
happiness of man that it inebriates the mind in all calamities and makes them
lushious nay restorative unto her. Now this without danger could not be; for
jealousy ever attends on Misery, and there is none holds fast one link of it,
but he may justly fear for to catch another. What greater misery than Poetry,
which threatens by flying from us, and is a negative Enemy? yet by enduring of
it, it becomes light. And since what is not burdensome to us, but light must
needs please us, and that a man is never himself but when he exercises his head
or heart, which without dangers he could not do, it is evident that we are
beholding to them, as the spiteful Spurs and dear entertainments of the life
of man. Moreover man delights in nothing so much as in Fame, and how can he be
more glorious than by showing a serenity, nay gladness amidst so many Enemies
as dangers, are? Or what can be more delightful to him, than to see he is so
much his own Master, that he can defy all casualties, and either carelessly
contemn them or expect them with confidence. What more pernicious to whole
Armies, nay even insulting Conquerors, then security? What better means to
frighten away securities than dangers? which needs must be of a Sovereign
virtue, that are a means to preserve whole Armies, and of a most diffusive
fruitful nature, that when they appear least they are greatest.

Besides rewards are proportioned to dangers; which shows (them of a worthy and
deserving nature; and therefore many men have been called the Saviors of their
Country, at one time for some little performances which if they had done at
another time would hardly have been noted, and hence it is that many great
Stratagematick Wits have no better ways either for startling their Enemies, or
retaining their Friends, than by increasing the show of their dangers.

But if the shadow and mere representation of dangers, what is the substance
and dangers themselves; when a man's in safty few regard him many may envy him;
but falling once into danger, tears, commiseration, relief, and that possible
from his Enemies which is the sweetest of all come unto him.

Since we have manifested the rare use and necessities of dangers, it will not
be hard for us, now to show them of that gallant and cordial nature, that they
closely accompany the cast things and imediately flow from our most apparent
happiness, from which they are not more seperable than heat from light.

And are not I pray the best things in greatest danger; Porcellan, and Venice
glasses are the most apt to be broken, the Richest flowers are the soonest
cropped, the best faces do the soonest decay, the best men are most liable to
envy, the Richest to spoil, and indeed, what better in all the World, then that
divine Stone of the Chemist; yet men in the atchieving of it, do commonly
hazard both their brains and Estates, and in case they come near and end, it is
a very good escape, if their Glasses be not melted or broken.

But indeed to consider the thing aright, dangers are so incorporated and
mingled with the best course of life, that like Hippocrite, Twins they both
live and die together. What more fortunate than to be the favorite of the
Prince, yet the Thrones of Princes themselves are not placed on Cubes, nor are
those Cubes founded on Rocks, or Cemented with Brass, they may die by the
cornel of a Grape, by an Hair, etc. and then where is the Favorite. Does not he
hold by a poor Tenure, that has no more assurance.

This brave young man undoubtedly had proceeded, but that he saw he was just
upon landing. Charon (as well as the rest of the company was infinitely pleased
with this Oration, who having rid his Boat of them directed them to those happy
places, which were allotted to none but Martiallists.

Seventh VISION.
In the old Bedlam of this loathsome Hell,
See more what Persons chained in every Cell.
BEing tired with my stay in these Infernal Regions, I fully resolved to make
my progress to Elysium, but before I shape my course that way, give me leave to
tell you there are several sorts of Cells in this Bedlam of the damned for
several sorts of Offenders; sor Atheists, for Swearers, and (...), for
Murderers, for Adulterers, for Religious, Pipocrites, etc.

There was here a large Apartment for Huffs ( because their number was very
great) who made the Earth quake where ever they came, with their roaring
Broadsides of new Minted Oaths, upon every slight, or no occasion at all.

Next these were a parcel of Beauty-Hunters, who for profit, or pleasure, or
both (like the Libertine in the Play) will have no mercy (in their damned heat
of Blood) on the Female Sex, from thirteen to threescore, having followed this
Trade so long till their Carcasses have become rotten by often washing and
tallowing, patching and mending; that they hardly durst venture the striding
over a Kennel, fearing they should fall all to pieces in that bold and
desperate attempt:

Casting my eyes of from these, I saw a number of spruce fine Foolls who
(whilst on Earth) had more skill in fashions, than knowledge of good manners
whose Wit and understanding did not lie in their Heads, but flaxen Wiggs; and
their valor in the showing their Silver-Swords ( with as much Ribbon at the
Hilt as would go near to trim a pair of Pantaloons, and this garniture they had
rather show in the open streets, then the naked Blade privately in the field,
or publicly in the defense of their King and Country: instead thereof Oaths
were their daily Prayers, acknowledging no other deity then a Miss, her Shrine
the Stage, and a Comedy the samnity of all their Devotions: These were of the
number of those dreadful Male Butter-flies, which you must shun, least they
fly in your face, or bribe their Bullies to do it for them, because they dare
not do it themselves for want of Courage.

Here were a bundance of Shopkeepers and Tradesmen, either such who designedly
broke to cheat their Creditors; or such whose Consciences were too wide to be
measured by their own yard, for as the one is too large, the other is shorter
than it should be; by which means they ran through the several Offices of the
Parish, from Skavengers to deceivers of the Poor, and so forward, living
plentifully at home, and allowing their Wives the longing satisfaction of
having a Country house, wherein she may enjoy the full liberty of entertaining
some peculiar friend, without any reflection from an Husband.

Turning my head about I saw a thousands of such who were called by doting
Poets, Earthly Goddesses, and yet poor worms lived on nothing but corruption;
had they been composed of pure Metal, their often burning would have refined
them.

With these were mixed a great many whose Age pleaded five times their
Antiquity, at first fight one would have sworn they were Mother Shiptons own
Sisters they were so like her Picture, only they herein differed, that she is
reported to have a monstrous long Nose, but most of these had none at all, and
very few but what had lost an eye in the Battle. These Moths to Maiden-heads,
and Murdresses of Chastity, such, who nastily feed, on what others sit upon:
these Beldams with the younger fry cried out they were undone by fire, and
therein spoke truth, for they were burnt out of the World with a Pox to them,
and came hither (black Souls) like Charcoale lighted at one end.

I should tire the Reader and my self too, should I give him a particular
account of all the remarkable things I saw there, wherefore I shall come to my
last Observation, and that was upon a sort of People I knew not what to make
of, they were a Miscellany of several Sects, and were broachers of dangerous
opinions, when they were on the Earth; and although they differed in judgment
about many things, yet they all agreed in this particular.

That Women ought to go naked.

Observing them to be a parcel of Mad-fellows, and the women as shameless and
as impudent as they, I inquired by what names they were known by and
distinguished: one standing by, told me, that some were called Fifth
Monarchy-Men, the rest Ranters, Familists and Adamites: Adamites said I? what
Opinion are they of; the Ringleader of this Faction over-hearing me ask this
question, readily replied that they were such who endeavored to prove that it
was not only lawful, but necessary for Mankind to go naked; and since said he,
I was one of the first that did spread this opinion, when I trod the Stage of
the World, I will obstinately maintain the same here in this place, where for
us there is no hopes of Redemption.

Having so said with a loud voice, he delivered this speech, by which you may
guess that the Creatures of the Devil, cannot only Cant, but speak eloquently
too, when they please: and thus he began.

Though we may justly (...) the displeasure of the Women, in asserting this
Thesis of the Lawfulness of going naked, by divesting of them of all that the
Taylour contributes, which is as much as to (...) them of the best part of
themselves; yet I am sure, I shall have the (...), if not the favor of most of
Mankind; or at least the most noble and flourishing part of it, Youth, (did
they hear me) which are the only Judges in this case.

As for those things which they call Old men, I except against them as a
Generation of decrepit and (...) understandings: a People, whose minds could
they be looked into, would prove infinitely more monstrous then their bodies;
and such, as like Old Munkies, having either gnawed away, or lost their Tails,
read Lectures to young Ones to eat theirs too. And now to speak only like an
Angel of Light, I positively affirm, that what was done in the Primitive times,
when our reason was not depraved with long traditionall Customs, nor tinctured
by any prevalescent humor, is most consonant to the Law of Nature, and
consequently ought most to be followed. The first Man and Woman were so far
from being clothed; that it was the great mark of their Liberty and
Uprightness; and the first brand that stigmatized them after their
transgression. Nor did the Ages that presently succeeded that, either grow up
into a garb or fashion, but continued with a very little variation, and
possibly what their Progenitors did only with Figleaves, they supplied with
Kids-kin Aprons.

Yea, and those Nations who have not alienated their naked simplicity, either
by commerce, or busy inventions, do as yet retain this open integrity, and
declines not into these unworthy Sophistications of Garments; as was observed
in many of the Indians at the first discovery, who living merely among
themselves, and by their own peculiar Customs, it is to be supposed, most
retained among them, of that which Nature desired to be kept pure and unvaried.

Not to say, that all men naturally desired to go uncovered, yet certainly, it
is a shrewd suspicion of it; for when the Sun begins to shine warm to cold
Nothern Countries, the People know no better way to congratulate the presence
of that fruitful Light, then by putting on thin or open clothes, and frequent
bathings: but since that Tyrant Custom, prohibits them absolute nakedness, they
would approach it as near as they can.

Now in Women these desires, are far more intense; for they at all times
uncover the part of their chiefest Beauty, as their Face, Neck, Ereasts and
Hands, so that they do endeavor in part to break that restraint, which hides
the rest of their glory, and to set forth their delicate Tresses, pleated and
weaved with such variety, their Ivory Necks, their Harmonious Faces, their
Milky Sphericall Breasts, and their melting Hands. And though possibly
Jealousy may cause all these to be bad, yet it is but violation; and the
weather, and yet that is but Providence, or possibly Company, and that is but
compliance; for what Woman is there (if not tainted with deformity) that could
not wish that all her Garments were of Lawn, and transparent, rather then Rich
and Gorgeous: for if (as it is the opinion of some) that Souls unwillingly
depart out of fair Bodies, that must needs be a curious Mansion which so fine a
substance is in love with, and then I pray can you blame the owner to delight
in it: and what a torment is delight, if shut up in one breast, and not
diffused into a lively communication, for all kind of blessings multiply by
their division, and what greater blessing; than a rare Symetry and contexion of
Feature, which can charm knowledge into admiration, and Majesty into Love.

Mortal men give to Virtues the habits and visages of Women, and of all the
Virtuous Truths among them ( not us) is looked upon the best, for say they
(Truth is looked upon the Mother of Justice, and Justice say they again)
comprehends them all, yet she is naked, although she love the public, and hate
corners, and is it not very fit, that all the Sex should imitate such an
excellent pattern and Mistress.

It may be objected by the foolishly chaste, and continent, that this would
produce infinite provocations, and incitements to the enjoyments of the flesh;
that I may remove all such scruples, from such Stomachs, I say not, (for though
I speak) now against such Vices and Vanities that bring thousands into this
Kingdom, viz. Painting the Face, light and loose Garments, Artificial Tours,
Hexure and Fracture of Gate, with an hundred things more to hide deformity; I
say these add more fuel to a lustful breast, than if all went with no other
Mantles then nature thrust them into the World with.

If men would consider it aright, there is nothing that does so much puff up
lust, as the circumstances of Rich apparel, curious Dressings, Essences and
strong (...), which serve up the apprehension, and fix the Imagination upon
something that is great. So that by this means by deligent search there might
be found a vast number of great Persons, zealously courted to have their
appetites satisfied; whereas if they were either left naked, or reduced to a
Vulgar garb, they might lie fallow, or be Indcted for Witches. Now nakedness
restores women to themselves; for what an irregular height do Venetian Chippins
mount them to? What Towers do the Turkish Tires wear upon their women's heads?
How are the Grecians buried in clothes? How do the (...) of all Nations
disguise them, that they must put on their Masquin habits, or be taken to
pieces like Watches e're they can be enjoyed. And to what other end were they
made? The Customs of Countries are different, and that garb is Majestic in
one place, which is ridiculous or sordid in another. All People have not the
same conceptions of Beauty; which is as hateful to an Ethiopian, as black to
us. But once uncloathed women and they were all the same, but the conceptions
about the Harmony and measures of a body differ not. And what greater right can
be done to women then to bring them to be judged by one Rule. And since every
woman judges her self the fairest, she that would be backward to this
Arbitriment, would be a diffident of her self, and consequently a Rennegade
from her Sex. Now what better way of Judgment then those Rules, which the
voices of all men conclude upon.

There have two great blemishes lain upon this Sex: the uncertainty and change
of their judgments, and their inconstancy in their clothes and carriage. And
how can either be better removed, than if they were once reduced into such a
posture, as they should all necessarily agree in, and they had not Liberty to
change? And I pray what other way is there unless you make them all naked?

But then they may complain, take away their Arts and Ornaments, they shall
want of their complacency and provocations to either Husband or Gallants: to
which I answer, that since it is fit to borrow the customs of others, as well
as imitate those of our Ancestors the Danes and Britians, if they be useful
and fit to be assumed, there may be seen choice of dressings enough in the one,
and other Indies.

In a word, since Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. appear as nature made them, since the
strongest and most handsome Animalls are satisfied with their own natural
vestures, and the most ugly and deformed repine not, since the most delicate
and Aramatick flowers are not ashamed of their barks of Prickles which are
commonly unsightly, if not offensive; in it is but an irregular and diseased
desire in women, who are the Masterpieces of Nature, and of that sort of
productions, wherein she is most vainglorious and emulous to undo her self, to
descend to those little poor adulterations of Art, which are so far beneath
her, as the most exquisite artificial thing in the world, is below the most
careless production of Nature.

As he was about to proceed, I slunk out of the crowd, fearing the pollution of
my understanding, by the fullness of his Doctrine; and knowing the Devil to be a
Logician, and a cunning Sophister, I knew not but that he might set on to work
this dangerous disciple, of his to make me his Proselite; and upon my return
engaged me to be his Factor in spreading this erroneous opinion, to the utter
undoing of Female modesty, and shame-facedness.

Eighth VISION.
The fields of joy described, there none must dwell,
But purged Souls, and such as have done well:
Some Soldiers there, but none that died in love,
Poets sit singing in a Laurel Grove.
WHilst I directed my course for Flizium, and the Ferriman was plying his Fairs
for covetuousness of Money, the wandering Knight (aforesaid) having dispatched
with the Devil, and understanding that he, upon whose business he was just at
that time walking in the Elizian Gardens, he vainly thought to take that in his
way; but the Infernal Laws barring him from entrance into those sacred places,
he told Charon, that he was going on a Message for his Hellish Lord and Master,
and therefore demanded waftage over; which was done accordingly: and finding
himself where he would be with as few words, as he was wont to carry pence in
his purse, he instantly mounts one of the Devils Hacknies, and away he rides to
follow his other worldly business; about which, whilst he is damnably sweating,
take a survey with me of those (...) Fortunata, ordained to be the happy
Countries for none but blessed Souls possession.

The walls that encompass these glorious habitations, are as white as the Front
of Heaven, they shine like polisht Ivory, but the stuff is finer, high they are
like the Pillars that support the Court of Jove, and stronger they are then
Towers built by Enchantment: there is but one Gate to it all, and that of the
most refined Silver: so narrow it is, that but one at once can enter round
about; it wears a Girlde of Christalline-waters that are sweet and redolent.

Walk into the Groves; besides the inexpressible harmony of the winged airy
Quire, you shall see Swains piping, and Virgins chastely Dancing; Shepherds
there live as merrily as Kings, and Kings are glad to be in the society of such
harmless rural companions.

The (...) there complains of no wrong, the Orphan sheds no Tears; for (...)
has there no residence, nor cruelty abode with the sway of greatness: the poor
Client needs fee no Counselor to (...) for him, for there is no Jury to bring
in Verdicts true or false, or Judges unjustly to cast, or maliciously condemn,
There is all mirth without immodesty, all (...), without base abufing it, Songs
(...) continually without bawdry, all sorts of Wines without intemperance, all
riches without Sensuallity; all Beauty without Painting, or other
Sophistications; alls (...) without Hypocrisy, or (...).

Winter there Plays not the Tyrant, neither is the Summer breath contagious:
for Spring is ever there perpetual, adorning the boughs with flourishing
leaves, the Fruits continually growing, and the flowers ever budding. The
Benches whereon the blessed Inhabitants sit, are sweet Beds of Violets; the Beds
whereon they lie, Damask-Roses; their Pillows for their Hearts, are
Hearts-Ease, etc. Neither is this a Country free from all Travelers, but is
the Kingdom, and very Palace, where happiness her self keeps Court, and none
are allowed her followers and attendants, but such as are of merit.

Of all men in the world, griping overreaching Landlords, dare not quarter
themselves here, because they are Rackers of Rents. A Pettifogger, or splitter
of Causes (who has taken a Fee on both sides, from the Plaintiff, and
Defendant) will be damned (...) he come with in sight of this place: Some
Shopkeepers come many yards short of it: Farmers, who raise their Corn in a
dear time unreasonably, cannnot reach it by thousands of Acres: Some Seamen,
for want of a true Compass that may guide them thither, steer a quite contrary
course, and a Tailor shall never get thither unless he creep through the (...)
of his own Needle: though true Poets, are free Denisons hereof; yet here is no
Room for Pamphletteering Poetasters, Balladmakers, and their chaunts, since by
the insufferable noise of their Nonsense they must consequently be disturbers
of the peace of that Kingdom. Women (for all their subtilety) scarce one among
five hundred has her Pew there, especially old Midwives, Chambermaids, and
waiting Gentlewomen, their secret doings and contrivances are too well known to
be let into these Lodgings. None can be free of these Liberties, but such as
have consciences without cracks; hands not spotted with uncleanness; feet not
foundered or worn out with walking to do mischief and injuries and Hearts that
never were dig'd hollow by the Instruments of flattery and dissimulation.

There are many sorts of Men more that are absolutely (...) entrance, to tell
you who they are, I shall not only take up too much time, but overfret the
Hearts and (...) of them that are so concerned; I shall therefore inform you,
who have free admission into these Teritories.

In the first place, young Infants, who died at the Breast, and never sucked of
the Sins of their Parents: these are most welcome thither for their Innocence.

Choristers if not drunken, debaucht sinful Persons, but devout and holy
Singers, whose Divine Anthems have bound Souls by their Charms, and whose lives
are Tapers of Virgin-Wax set in Silver-Candlesticks to guide men out of Errors
darknefs, they know their places there, and have them for their integrity.

Some Scholars are admitted into this Society, but the number of them, all is
not so many as two Colleges can produce in the University of Oxford: and the
Reason, is they either kindle Firebrarnds (in the Sanctified places) by their
contention, or kill the hearts of others by their coldness.

One field there is among all the rest, set round about with Willows, it is
called the field of Mourning, and in this upon banks of flowers that wither
away, even with the scorching sighs, of those that sit upon them; are a great
number of amorous Malcontents (there quantity for several years of late has
not been augmented for People now adays, are not so foolish and indiscreet) I
say these look of the same complexion, as the (much to be pitied) Mad-folks
in Bedlam; and these forelorn Lovers like them desire to be alone; such as
pined away to nothing, for nothing; such as for the Love of an inconstant
wanton Weathercock, have gone drowned in Tears to their Graves, whilst she in
the mean time went laughing into another bed, to think she had lost so kind
and melting a Coxcomb as this her deceased Sweetheart.

All the joy that these poor fools feed upon, is to sit singing lamentable
Dities to some doleful Tunes; for though they have changed their old lives,
they cannot forget their young Loves: they spend their time in making Myrtle
Garlands, and shed so much water out of their eyes, that it has made a pretty
little River, which lies soaking continually at the roots of the Willowtrees,
there is another piece of ground wherein are encamped none but Soldiers; and
of those not all sorts of Soldiers neither, but only such who died nobly in
the Wars: and yet of those but a certain number neither: that is to say, such
that in Execution were never bloody: in their Countries revenge, severe, but
not cruel, such who held death in one hand, and mercy in the other; such who
when drawn out upon some Foreign expedition by the order of his Prince, was
more willing to go than stay; not like such, who made all means they could in
gloriously to stay at home, than venture the honorable dying a broad for King
and Country, Beyond all these places, is a Grove, which stands by it self like
an Island; for a stream (that makes Music in the running) clasps it round
about Laurels grew so thick round the banks thereof, that Lightning it self, if
it came thither, could not pierce through them. It seems without a desolate,
and unfrequented wood (for those within are retired into themselves) but from
them came such harmonious sounds, the sweetness whereof cannot be suggested to
the best Imagination.

There are none permitted to resort to this Heavenly Musick-Room, but the
Children of Apollo (Poets, and Music all Composers) the one creates the song,
and gives it life, or number the other lends it voice, and makes it speak
Music.

When these hapy spirits sit asunder, their bodies are like so many Stars; and
when they join together in several Societies, they then show like so many
Heavenly Constellations. All the whole walk is full of pleasant Bowers and
curious Arbours; and the discourse that one Brother entertained another with,
was not in dull Prose; but like Evanders Mother they speak all in Verse, no
Antic, eloquence is so sweet; nay their Language is so pleasing to the Gods,
that they utter their Oracles in none other.

This place is not over-filled with Poets either Ancient or Modern (for Poets
are rare Production) though there in habit a great many, of most Nations, men
of incomparable parts, whose Poetical flights have soared out of the sight of
such, who fancied the Eye of their understanding was as caute as the greatest
pretender thereunto. I shall forbear to name the men of worth I saw there, if
for no other reason that I am unwilling thereby to provoke the malice and envy
of some, who undeservedly may (pretendedly) find faults in their Poems and
severely censure their Persons, for no other reason than that they might impose
upon the world, a belief that the ( frothy non-substantiall Moderlins) deserve
as good a place there, as any of those Wity Worthies of their times.

Looking about me, I saw a jolly company of Souls grown up to full perfection,
who had got under shades of a large Vine laughing to see M. S. (one whom I
remembered I had not only seen, but had drank with him and A. B. an hundred
times an Health to the confusion of Sorrow;) I say they laughed heartily to see
their Brother (who was but newly come to their College) with the sharp and
Satyricall Spirit, that still haunted and followed him from Earth hither; for
he inveyed bitterly (as he had wont to do) against dry-fisted Patrons, accusing
them of his untimely death, because if they had given his Muse that
cherishment, which she most worthily deserved, he had fed to his dying day on
Capons, and on what his Palate most coveted or desired, and not on
Ship-Bisket, or the Sheriffs-Basket; not be forced to walk in the fields with
an empty Stomach) when others resort thither to get one) there to contemplate
the miseries of a poor Poetic life, or study some well laid plot to Hocus his
Landlady into a further credence or belief; or to find out one, amongst the
great number of his acquaintance (of whom he has not yet borrowed Money of)
whom he may persuade to lend him some small matter to supply his present wants,
in this his great extremity.

Setting aside (the others laughing,) one came indifferently serious, and (...)
him what news in the other world; before he could return an answer to the
question, he was surrounded and hemmed in on all sides, seeing so great a
conflux on a sudden, I got as near as I could to the crowd, and could hear him
say somewhat to this purpose, Brethren, the reason why I made more than
ordinary haste hither to secure my self a Room, for fear I should be
disappointed should I have staid longer on (...): for there the Age is grown so
Universally (...) that if all the Professors of Poesy and Dramatiok Hero's must
have a place here, I know not how it will contain them; nay the very Women are
grown so (...), that they presume to prescribe Laws to the Stage.

Every one is a Wit, or would be so esteemed; and their whole endeavor is to
(...) their own reputation out of another; thus it comes about that he that
was cried up yesterday for writing a new Play, either by some of his Friends or
Hirelings, was three days after as much decryed by such who had no other way to
shuffle in a Play, or no Play, imposing on the Credulity of the Actors.

Sense, though insignificant words, (...) clothed, will not pass current,
mystical Nonsense guilt over, instead of Gold with Lacker, this is that
precious Nothing so much in Fashion.

There is great struggling for the Bays, and those that see it (...) impossible
for them to ingross it wholly to themselves, will notwithstanding make a long
arm, but they will reach a leaf thereof. As at an Hurling in Cornwel, there is
commonly some mischief done: so some of these Witty Combatants or Contenders
for this Prize, have received considerable damages irrecoverable: which made
one of the most ingenious of the most known Wits write thus.

Amongst the men, I mean the Men of Wit,
At least they past for such, before they Writ;
How many sad (...) for the Bays,
Proudly designing large returns of Praise,
Who durst the stormy patchless World implore,
Were soon dashed back and wrackt on the dull shore
Broke of the (...) stock they had before, etc.
To be short, (said he) I did there find (notwitstanding their fine and fair
pretenses) that Barbarism was grown to be an Epidemicall Disease, and more
common then the Gout (alias Pox) or Toothache.

Being demanded how Poets and Players agree one amongst the other, he replied,
as Physicians and Patients do agree; for the Patient loves the Doctor no longer
then till by his means he has recovered his health; and the Player loves the
Poet so long as the Sickness lies in the Pit, when none will come into it,
hoping by some lucky hit of this man of Wit, that the House will be so crammed,
that they must be forced to raise the Rates double of the two Galleries, and
thereby barracado out the Vulgar. None but the Favorites of the House (said
he) can be admitted to have a Play Acted; and into so low a misery, if not
contempt, is the sacred Art of Poesy fallen, that though the Author (who is
worthy to sit at the Table of the Sun) work his brains to gain applause from
the more Ingenious, yet when he has done his best, he works but like Occus,
that makes Ropes in Hell; for as he twists, an Ass stands by, and bites them in
sunder, and that Ass is no other then the misunderstanding Audice, or that
which is prepossest with Prejudice.

And now (said he) having done with the Poets and Players, I shall (as briefly
as I can) give you an account of what Remarks, and Observations I made (before
I took my leave of the Terrestiall Globe) on the present Vices, Vanities, and
fashionable Fopperies of the Town; the Infection whereof has spread it self
Universally.

And first, by way of Paradox, give me leave to prove by good circumstances,
that the honesty of the Age (wherein I lived) exceeded the Former and that the
World was never honest till then, (...) so proceed to my Observations.

We read of a Golden Age in former times, but that was the mere Fictions of
Poets; now some are of the opinion, that the Golden Age was never till now;
since Gold and costly Presents compass all things: in opposition to these, some
would have it the Iron Age, since fire and Sword of late has swallowed up such
(...) (and one would think) inexhaustible Treasures. Now all that I can say for
the honesty of this Age I spoke on, that the worst of impieties are now adays
honest men's Professions: let their Practices be ever so bad, yet they would be
accounted honest men.

There is a place called Alsatia wherein lies Quartered a Regiment of dangerous
Fellows, who shall Mortgage their Ears to any Knave for a little Money, nay
their Souls too, rather then he should lose an Estate in which he has neither
Right nor Interest; and yet these Fellows do impudently claim the appellatio of
honest men, although there are not -- greater under Heaven.

Now are not the Employers every whit as bad as the foresworn Hirelings; nay
worse by a great deal, and yet these must be called honest men, for no other
reason, but because they look big in the worlds Eye, and abounding with Money
(according to which all things are valued, and is the equivolent price of all
things) they imagine nothing to be above their reach, but being just and honest.

The world is but a great Market in which every thing is sold; as large
consciences, fair Misses with foul Bodies, Wit, Vanity, Knavery, Men's lives,
and their Reputations, and the welfare of their Families thrown in to boot.

The opulent are the Men who fix their thoughts wholly upon (...) their
Estates, no matter by what means, and that which animates them, (...) the
consideration of this indisputable point, That the Rich man is never out of
esteem, and repute, though he is generally known to be an (...) Knave, but most
stand so much in fear of his power, that they dare not call him so to his face;
and he knows withal, that he cannot loose his interest in a good name, but by
the loss of his Fortune. Who then would be in love with indigent Virtue? She
may be admired by some, and followed by few, and here lies her unhapiness, that
without wealth she seldom procures, and rarely maintains her esteem in the
World. Hence it is, that Rich men conclude they may bear themselves (justly)
high, even to the expression of others, being already owners of what all men
covet, all admire, and without which, even they who villifie it, cannot
subsist, or effect any great exploit.

And now I pray, how contemptible is Power if not regulated by Wisdom, for it
disposes the Possessors thereof to greater follies, and extravagancies then
others; and if they be but for a while left to their own wills, without any
check or guidance, Vices take deeper root in them, like Weeds in good ground,
and afterward grow too prevalent to be extirpated.

What is it that man would not undergo, rather than subject himself to the
Barbarous Pride and Capriciousness of some Persons, who are of so odious and
insupportable a nature, that it is not to be wondered, if even men of
despicable fortune, and rank, choose rather to suffer their present want and
penury, then subject, and be concerned with them.

And now Brethren (said he) for their better information I writ a Satyr, to let
them know, that they are Obnoxious to Laws, and that neither Revenues, nor
Dignities exempt them from the Rules of Civility, and therefore ought not to
set at naught such as they surpass in Estate, and to think, because they are
not wealthy, therefore they are not men, and because some of the meaner sort
are servants, therefore they must be consequently their Slaves. These I advised
(if they purposed not to resign themselves wholly up to Pride, and Arrogance,
and if they will not divest themselves of all Humanity, and relinquish that
Nature and Reason, which distinguish as much Man from Man, as from other
Beasts; if they intend not to degenerate into bruitishness) to nourish Friendly
Inclinations, and make an amicable temper of Spirit as much their nature as it
is possible. In former Ages, he that was rich in Knowledge, and not as in these
days in Lands and Houses, was accounted a Wise man; but alas now there is no
man wise, but he that has Wit enough to gather wealth. The honest and
ingenious, if they chance to miscarry, and forced by necessity to desert their
habitations, they are slighted, and derided by Rich men; and if pitied by any,
it is no otherwise then by saying, Alas, poor Man, he was no bodies Fo, but his
own, which is an English Phrase for a Fool.

Was not that a strange Age I lived in, where Vice, went by the name of Virtue;
Drunkness was called good Fellowship; Murder reputed Manhood, and the Actor, a
Man of undaunted Courage, Petulancy and wanton Dalliance was termed Gallantry,
and Gentile Courtship; Impudence passed for Audacity; Pride for Generosity;
Avarice, for good Husbandry, Hypocricie, Nicknamed, Sincerity; Adulation and
Flattery bore the name of Complacency; and that which our Predecessors, called
downright Knavery goes by the names of Wit and Policy.

In former Ages there were many inperfections attributed to Women, that are now
accounted no defects at all, nor scandalls to a good name, viz. the bitterness
of the Tongue the Pride of the Heart, the Shamelesness of the Face, immodest
actions, impudent looks, lightness of Behavior, looseness of life, nor some
other remarkable Marks, or Symptoms of a (...) vicious Woman, which are looked
on as nothing, neither are these Imputations any blemish to Female reputation.

A woman's honesty is penned up in a very little room, it is confined only from
her Apron-strings down-ward; yet there is no imperfection in a woman but want
of Chastity; and who is able to prove that; or who dares do it, if he could, if
her Gallant be a I urioso, `Desperado, etc. and being zealous in the
vindication of the withered Honor of his (...) sickle Mistress, nothing shall
(...) turn to wash off the (...) stain of being called Where, but the
hearts-blood of him, that spoke that fatal, (...).

Whither will you tend your steps? Which way will you turn your Eyes? Or to
whom will you lend your listening Ears, but you shall meet Vice most splendid in
the fashion. Walk into the Streets, and there you shall meet with droves of
Lack-lands, yet by their Wits, or rather Shifts, who more fashionably fine than
they, that you would take each of them to be Proteus, the God of Shapes, or
some there like Caelestiall power, then poor contemptible men, mean creeping
creatures, whose over-indulgent Parents breeding them up to nothing, and
feeding them continually without any pains taking of theirs, like a Pird in a
Cage brought up there from the Nest, and never taught to provide for its self
abroad, at length giving it its liberty it is only let out to starve abroad in
the wide world; Thus these gaudy miscreants being never brought up to any civil
ocupation, for an honest livelihood, as soon as ever they part from the warm
spreading wing of their kindly foolish Mothers, are ready to starve, till the
Devil taking notice of their wants and evil Inclinations, undertakes to be
their Tutor, teaching them the Black Arts of Burglary, (...), Dicing, Drabbing,
Padding, etc. and when he has read to, and perfectly taught them the knowledge
of these destructive (if not damnable) Sciences, some of his best and most
forward Proficients he sends to a College called Newgate, and (to raise them
to an higher Pitch) from thence to Tiburn, the Tunces, and the lesser expert in
these Hellish Exercises, are sent to be corrected for their negligence and want
of better understanding, some to the Pillory, some to the (...)-(...), and
others to People Foreign Plantations, and thus the Devil sooner or later (...)
his (...) to his faithful Servants, by (...) them after this manner.

Now should any honest man be so inconsiderate as to tax any of those, with any
of (...) Villainies (though they know themselves to be guilty of every one of
them,) the accusation to the Accuser, has proved little less than loss of
life, occasioned by the offenders, if they have escaped their own forfeited
lives: when at liberty again, to let the world know how guiltlesly they are
accused, and to possess (...) with an undeserved good opinion of them, what
ostentations did they make of their future hopes of their enjoying (after such
a Relations decease) a large and plentiful Estate, though they never saw their
Father, and knew not to whom their Mother was related; and ever had such little
hopes that should attend them, whilst they lived in the world there, that they
never had hopes of an Heaven thereafter.

In short, Vanity was never so predominant, as when I lately left the Earth;
Vice never so modishly (...), and is grown so impudent, as to walk up and down
barefaced at noonday, and too frequently in public, shows her very nakedness.

The world is become feeble, her spirits are spent, and her former vigor is
vanished, she is now twice a child, and begins to dote afresh, on what she
sometimes scorned.

In former days men lent their whole endeavors to win honorable repuration by
Virtue and Gallantry of Actions: but now they are for wealth (no matter how
gotten) Popular Applause, Ostentation, Luxury, and what not?

The old fashion was to do well; but now it is enough to speak well, to Drink,
Eat well, Swear well, (...) well, (...) well, Damn well, (...) well, Game well,
(...) well, (...) well, Run in debt well, and never pay well, Sing and Dance
well, with a great many other Wells which are the shameful Ills that now
attend the Iron Age.

In former times men were accustomed to perform, but now enough (...) promise,
and are as good as their words but in a different nature, for the Payment which
they make is not to their Creditors, but thus; (...) for an Habeas Corpus to
the Kings (...) or (...); or duce to (...), the other disbursements are for
(...), Prison (...), plenty of Wine, good Cheer, frequent Rubbers at Bowls for
Guinies; and all this and much more at the charge of their poor sinking
Creditors.

The Monuments of goodness are so weather-beaten, that Iniquity has left
almost no Character there of undefaced. And now adays, that man is looked upon
by some as the most refined piece of humane nature, who is both Witty, and
wicked; and where the Wit is (...) by friendship or affection, the weapons of
Reason are many times wrested, and sometimes managed against Reason it self: He
would have poceeded much further I imagined, (for he was a man of a nimble
ready Invention, voluble Tongue, and long winded,) but that he was interrupted
by the loud laughter of the jolly (and ingenious) crew who were then his
Auditors, wondering to here their Brother Poet turned Parson; the noise whereof
(which I imagined) did suddenly awake me.

FINIS.

