Prichard Mayor.
Martis xj. die Septembris, 1683. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi Angliae,
etc. Tricesimo Quinto.
THis Court does desire Mr. Hesketh to Print his Sermon Preached on Sunday
last, (being the Day of Thanksgiving Appointed by His Majesty, for the
Discovery of the late Treasonable Conspiracy against His Majesty's Person and
Government,) at the Parish Church of St. Mary le Bow, before the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Citizens of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON, PREACHED Before the Right Honorable The Lord Mayor And ALDERMEN of
LONDON, At the Church of St. Mary le Bow.

On September the 9th, being the Day of Thanksgiving for the Discovery of the
late Treasonable Conspiracy against His Majesty's Person and Government.

By H. HESKETH, Minister of St. Hellens, London, And Chaplain to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by T. M and J. A. for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red-Lyon, in ^t.
Paul's Cburch-Yard. 1684.

To the Right Honorable Sir WILLIAM PRICHARD, Lord Mayor of LONDON, And the
Honorable Court of ALDERMEN.
My LORD,
I Would not contradict the purpose of my Sermon, in disputing your Commands
for the Printing of it. Whatever it is in it self, you have rendered it
considerable by making it your own, and Publishing it as the Expression of your
Gratitude and Praise to God upon so great an Occasion.

For my self, I am not much concerned, nor greatly care what Interpretation,
some make of this Discourse. I have the Innocence of my own Thoughts to acquit
me, which I regard more, then a Thousand Censures from unthinking Men. I am
sure I meant well, and am not Sensible of having Transgressed any of the great
Measures of the Gospel, and therefore apprehend no Cause of being troubled at
any thing, but that I failed (I Fear) of Corresponding with the other great
Solemnities of that August Festival. And yet in that you are pleased to Relieve
me, by your Favorable, and kind acceptance of my Endeavors.

I do not know, that I ought to Apollogize for the plainness, or (as some I
hear are pleased to speak) the sharpness of the Discourse.

My Lord, This is a time that requires and warrants plain dealing. Our
Adversaries have been pleased to pull off their Visors, appear barefaced, and
tell us in plain English, what they would be at, and I think it high time for
us to be plain with them, and Mince the matter no longer, they have superceeded
a great deal of Pains, that we were at before, in persuading Men what their
Doctrines and Principles are. They have outdone us in this themselves, and
exposed both, beyond all Arts of Concealment or Disguise.

I have no By-Designs of Passion or Revenge in any thing I have said, much less
to Incense Authority against any Men's Persons; But I think I can never be too
severe in Reflecting upon, or too earnest in cautioning against such Principles
and Practices, as are so directly destructive to our Peace; So greatly
dangerous to our King; So Dishonorable to the Reformed Religion, and so Fatal
to every thing that can be dear to Christian Men.

But my Lord, While I approve my self to your Lordship and your Honorable
Brethren, I know not that I ought much to regard Men so far below you, from
whom I expect no kind Treatment, when I consider how they Treat those so far
above me, and Ridicule the whole Service of the Day as Hypocrisy and Trick.

I Heartily Pray for the Happiness of this City, and of your Lordship, and your
great Brethren, that have so happily steered it through its late Storms, to its
present Measure of Peace and Order. I Congratulate the Honor that it begins to
regain, by its Loyalty and Love to so good a King. I rejoice, and Bless God for
your great Care, and unwearied Pains in R^oting out the Seminaries of Sedition,
in Suppressing Irreligion and Profaneness, and doing what lies in Men, to the
recovering Unity and Concord once more among us. In which worthy deeds, that
you may ever proceed, and be succeeded by the Blessing and Concourse of the
Divine Providence, is, and shall be the Daily Prayer of,

Right Honorable, Your most Obedient and most Humble Servant, Henry Hesketh.

1 Pet. II. 15. For so is the Will of God, that with Well-doing you may put to
silence the Ignorance of Foolish-Men.
WE are Summoned together, Honorable and Beloved, by the Providence of a
Gracious God, and the Command of a Religious King, to double the Devotions of
this Day, and to add to our common Eucharist, the most Affectionate and
Cordial, the most Intense and Signal Praises of our Souls, for the Deliverance
of our King and our Selves, our Church and Government, and what ever can be
dear unto Christian Men, from a Barbarous and Bloody Design to Rob us of all at
Once; by a Violence and Treason, which though Papists have been counted
Infamous for, yet some that call themselves Protestants, have been pleased to
Transcribe from them, and not only Rivaled, but Excelled them in. As if it were
a Glory to exceed in Wickedness, or that henceforth, none should be Infamous
for Conspiracy and Rebellion, for Perjury and Treason, but themselves only.

I do not think it a meet Entertainment for this Audience, to play the Orator
upon the Foulness of the thing, before those who know the whole Story of it, as
well as my self.

Nor to spend this time in Signallizing the Mercy of our Deliverance, and
striving to Enhanse and Raise our Praises for it; the bare recollecting the
Bloody Design of it, will supersede all Art, and Argument, in both these.
Interest here will mingle and combine with our Devotion, and our Respect, not
only to the Public, but to our Selves, call loudly on us. Most of you that sit
there (it seems) were Marked out for Destruction, and some of you intended to
be made Barbarous, and Lasting Examples of their Fury.

But you have been entertained already, (I doubt not,) with these Preludes; and
therefore I have Resolved upon another Method at this time. And that is to
offer such an Instancing your Gratitude, as will signify the Truth of it, and
put you upon such an Expression thereof, as will infallibly assure its
Acceptance with that God, to whom you Offer it.

For as we then most truly Honor God, when we express a great Sense of His
Power and Sovereignty over us, in our Lives. So we then only Glorify, and
Acceptably Praise Him, when we Live according to his Commandments, acknowledge
the Reasonableness and Goodness of his Laws, and Cheerfully do those things,
that are Pleasing unto Him.

Among these, there cannot well be a higher Instance, then to Live up to the
Principles of that Excellent Religion, that He has appointed to be the Measure
of all our Actions. When we strive to gain Credit and Reputation to it, and
upon all occasions, express a great Concern for the Honor of that, which was
Purchased at the Expense of His own Son's Blood.

And (to bring us close to the purpose of this Day's Service,) we shall then
most acceptably Bless God, for our Deliverance from the effects of other Men's
Treasons, when we Detest all such things our selves, and Abhor all such
Principles and Practices as Lead to them.

Our firm and steady Loyalty to our King, will be the best Testimony of our
Thankfulness for His Deliverance. And the most Serviceable Respect we can
express to our Religion, and our Church, which we so much Rejoice in the Happy
Escape of, will be the honest Endeavoring to clear it from that Reproach and
Scandal, that this Un-Christian and Barbarous Conspiracy may have occasioned
some to cast upon it. To which purpose, nothing can be better direction to us,
then this Apostolical Intimation in the Text, For so is the Will of God, that
with Well-doing you may put to silence the Ignorance of Foolish-Men.

In speaking to which, I shall endeavor to do these Four things;

First, Inquire what was that Cavil and Objection against Christian Religion,
which St. Peter would have Silenced here.

Secondly, By what Method he would have this to be done; by Well-doing.

Thirdly, Consider the great Reason and Argument, upon which he presses it;
The Will of God.

Fourthly, and Lastly, Make some Inferences from the whole; by way of
Application.

First, I begin with the First; To Inquire what was that Cavil and Objection
which these Foolish-Men made against Christian Religion, which the Apostle here
has respect unto, and would have Silenced.

And this we may be Resolved in, by considering the Two Verses immediately
preceding the Text, in which the Apostle does press the Duty of Obedience and
Subjection to our Lawful Governors, both Supreme and Subordinate. Submit your
Selves to every Ordinance of Man, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto
Governors, as those that are sent by him. And this he presses by an Argument
that can never fail of Effect upon a Good Man, (...), for the Lord, and out of
Conscience to him, whose Institution, Government is, and who has Commanded
Subjection to it.

Upon which, these words immediately follow; by which we plainly understand,
that the Objection which He enjoins this Subjection in confutation of, was,
that old and early Clamor, That Christian Religion was an Enemy to Government,
and the Professors of it Factious and Seditious Persons.

And that Christian Religion, and the Proselites to it, did Suffer, and were
Persecuted upon this Suggestion, we Learn from several plain places of
Scripture, and passages in Ecclesiastical Story.

The great Clamor against the Christians, upon which that great Uproar against
them at Thessalonica was stirred, Acts 17.6, 7. was this, These that have
turned the World upside down, are come hither also; and these all do contrary
to the Decrees of Caesar, saying, there is another (one Jesus) King.

This you will also find the chief thing in the Accusation against St. Paul,
managed by Tertullus, and that in which that cunning Man seems to repose
greatest hopes of Success, Acts 24.5. For we have found this Man a Pestilent
Fellow, and a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the World.

The like you may find, also the great pretense, for the Persecution of St.
Paul and Silas at Pbilippi, Acts 16.20. These Men do exceedingly trouble our
City, And teach Customs which it is not lawful for us to Observe, being Romans.
Where though the true Reason was that loss of Gain by a Maid that had a Spirit
of Divination, and was Dispossessed by St. Paul; yet the Popular pretense, and
that which took so easily with the Citizens, was, their Troubling the
Government, and Teaching things contrary to their known Laws.

The Histories of the Church tell us, the same was continued against the
Primitive Christians, and that which they oftenest Suffered upon. The Law
against the Collegia, (i. e. the Riotous and Tumultuous Meetings in the Roman
Provinces,) which had often been the occasion of Sedition and Mischief to the
Government, was applied to the Christian Conventions, and made use of by their
Enemies, to incense the Emperors against them, who always looked upon such
Assemblies with a very Jealous Eye.

This was indeed the very Masterpiece of Satan's Policy, and the Subtil'st of
his Wicked Contrivances against them; by this he had wrought the Condemnation
and Overthrow of the Blessed Jesus, and even constrained Pilate to give
Sentence against Him, when he was determined to Absolve and Acquit Him, John
19.12, 13. And by the same Artifice he hoped also to Destroy His Religion, and
to Root the Profession of it out of the World.

And I do most readily confess, that were this accusation true, were Christian
Religion Inconsistent with Government, an Enemy to it, or a Disturber of it,
there could not be an Objection that would be more Fatal to it; all the
Reproach and Dishonor that Men could load it with were Just, there were no
Apollogy to be made for it, nor any thing to be expected, but that all the
World should Combine together against it.

I do not mean only Kings and Governors, whose Prerogatives and Rights being
Invaded, their Power and Government Lessened and Disturbed by it, must
naturally engage them into Hostility against it; but I mean all wise Men too,
of what Rank or Quallity soever, who knowing the benefit of Government, and how
much the Peace and Happiness of the World depend upon it, must needs be
prejudiced against that, which by disturbing this, would fill the World with
Confusion and Faction, and all those Mischeifs that naturally flow from those
poisonous Springs.

All Men that have any becoming thoughts of the Providence and Goodness of God,
how tender He is of the Good of Mankind, and how largely He has provided for
it, how wisely He conducts the course of Humane Affairs, and steers them by
Rules, which would make them, and all things else happy, can never believe that
to be a Divine Religion, or be persuaded to accept it as coming from God, which
perplexeth the course of things, and defeats these good purposes of God in the
World.

God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion, the Author as well as Lover of
Concord and Peace, and not of Ruin and Dissension among Men, and therefore can
never be the Author of any Religion, that is Destructive of the one, and
naturally effective of the other, among them.

And therefore it greatly concerns all those that have any Respect for the
Christian Religion, to be sure to clear it of any such Objection as this was.

Secondly, And by what means the Apostle would have this done, is the Second
thing Incumbent upon me to show, The Text expresses it by Well-doing, That by
Well-doing you may put to Silence, etc.

The Notion of Well-doing is certainly in this place a little more strict and
restreyned, then it is commonly in other places of Scripture, in which it is
used to express the whole matter of Christian Duty, and is the same that the
Scripture calls sometimes Holiness, sometimes Righteousness, and sometimes
both. And I cannot but let fall this good Note from it, that there is not a
more excellent, and certain way to credit our Holy Religion, and to take off
all Objections, and scandals against it, than the Holy and Good, the Exemplary
and Virtuous Lives of those that profess it. This is that Adorning the Doctrine
of our Savior, that the Scripture calls for, and in the common Estimation, and
Eye of the World, will signify more than Ten Thousand of the best Arguments we
can ever urge for it, I pray God give us all Grace to consider it, and to
comply with the purpose of it.

But the Notion of Well-doing here, is that Honest and Regular, that Ready and
Conscientious Subjection to Government, that he had pressed in the preceding
Verses, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake.

And then St. Peter's words may be thus Paraphrased, whereas your Religion is
Aspersed as an Enemy to Government, and your selves Persecuted as Disobedient
and Seditious Persons, be sure you take care, by your Submissive Obedient
Temper, your Respect and Honor to your Governors both Supreme and Subordinate,
your ready Obedience to their Ordinances and Laws, to let the World see how
falsely these things are objected against you, and how unjustly your Religion is
Aspersed, with Favoring or Influencing any such Practices.

There is another very considerable way of clearing Christian Religion from
this Scandalous reflection, and it is one way that the Ancient brave Apollogists
have taken in their noble Defenses of it, and it may not be very Impertinent to
take notice of it.

And that is to appeal to the known Doctrines and Principles of it, and
challenge the World to Instance in any one saying in the New Testament that the
utmost Art and Subtilty of Man can Interpret to any such purpose, whether there
be the least hint or encouragement given to Rebellion, or any thing that can
warrant the least undutiful carriage toward our Governors.

Or rather to say, whether there be not directly the contrary, whether there be
not the utmost said there to secure all Princes from any fear of being Rivaled
in their Power, or Entrenched upon in their Prerogative, by Christ or any of
his Votaries.

And whether there be not enough asserted there, to assure Government, and to
engage all Persons to Subjection, upon better Arguments, and stronger Reasons,
then any yet were ever made use of before, for here the Reason of Subjection is
laid deep, and charged immediately upon the Consciences of Men, resistance is
declared to be resisting the Ordinance of God, and Damnation is expressly
Threatened against it.

Obedience is not only Recommended, upon the great Advantages of Quietness and
Peace, of Happiness and Order, that result to the World from it, nor backed
with the Sanctions of Temporal Punishments to those that Rebel; but it is
pressed upon Reasons of Conscience and Duty to God, and the danger of incurring
that Eternal Damnation that is prepared in Hell, for the Disobedient and
Lawless.

Now, this is one good way of Vindicating Christian Religion from this
Aspertion, and sufficient to convince all Considering-Men, how invidiously and
unjustly it is cast upon it; and there is no reason to doubt, but St. Peter
knew this as well as any Man; and yet this is not the Method that he prescribes
in this Case, but Well-doing; he would have those Excellent Lessons of
Obedience and Subjection, that are in the Precepts and Doctrines of
Christianity, Transcribed into the Lives, and Exemplified in the Practices of
all Christians; as the best way to clear Christian Religion from this
Aspersion, that the Ignorance of some Men cast upon it. And it is certainly the
most Effectual way.

For First, All Men have not Parts, to Examine what the Principles of a
Religion are, or to Understand what the Natural Consequences from them be; and
many that can do this, yet are Idle, or cannot spare time to do it; and all
these will go that near way of Judging a Religion to be such, as they behold
the Professors of it to be.

Secondly, Actions are commonly and popularly more Convictive, then Principles
and Professions; Quid verba audiam, cum foeda videam? said he in the Comedy,
and it is the Temper of most Men.

Kings will be better pleased, and satisfied, with the Quiet and Peaceable
Lives of their Subjects, their cheerful Obedience to their Laws, and their
ready Compliance with their Pleasure, then with all the fine Formal Caresses,
and Protestations of Loyalty and Love. And I wish some Men of late had not
given them too great cause to conclude, that Men's Practices and Professions do
not always go together.

Men, it seems, may fill the World with loud Protestations of their Loyalty,
and call God to Witness, they mean nothing but the Honor and Safety of the
King, and yet at the same time be Conspiring against both; they may seem
wonderfully Sollicitous for His Life and Safety, and fill all places with their
Fears of His Danger, even then when they are Complotting how to Entrap Him;
they may make Votes to Revenge His Death to the uttermost upon others, when
they are Designing to effect it themselves, and cry, God forbid that such a
thing should happen, when they mean only, that any should Murder Him but
themselves; and in a word, they may tell God, and Man, (as many have done in
their Canting Prayers, and Protestations,) that all their dear Liberties, and
Properties, and their dearer Gospel and Religion, hang upon the single Thread
of the King's Life, and yet at that very Instant, be Resolving to Cut that
Thread off.

And Thirdly, I must needs say to the Dishonor of some Men, that they have
Robbed Christian Religion of this way of Defending it self, and Defeated the
Effect of this Appollogy for it.

The Champions of Popery, (to their Eternal Shame,) have told the World, that
though these are the open Principles of Christianity, and this the plain and
express Doctrine of the New Testament, that it might curry favor with the
Roman Emperors; yet there was a secret Cabala and Tradition to the contrary,
that while they were Weak, it was fit such things should be said; but when they
got Power and Strength, and their Religion was Invaded, they might then stand
up, take Arms, and Right themselves upon Princes; and that the good of the
Church, and the Interest of Religion, would not only Expiate, but Legitimate,
and Justify, whatever was done for the Promoting of them.

A pretense then, which never any reflected a fowler Reproach upon Christ's Holy
Religion. But I do not much wonder, that they that can so palpably pervert the
Truths of Christianity, do sometimes make bold with the Honor of it too; that
they that can Outface a plain Doctrine of the New Testament, with a pretense of
an Oral Tradition in other Cases, go about to Justify their Unchristian
Doctrines and Practices, with the like Artifice and Fraud in this.

But I should not be Just, should I leave this Reproach only upon them; there
are Protestant-Jesuits, it seems, as well as Popish, and those that have as
exactly Transcribed these Doctrines, as if they had Learned them at the Feet of
Mariana. But the Saints, you know, may Borrow of the Aegytians, and perhaps you
may never hear of any Suit Commenced against them, if they Restore not again.

I have not time to Instance in those Systematical Doctors, that are as Text to
our Dissenters, and as concluding with them, as the Man of Geneva; there is one
among our selves that supercedes all need of looking further. The unhappy
Author of the Life of Julian, with his Borish Sayings, do plainly Assert this
Monstrous Truth.

I wish Men were mistaken in thinking, that this Book was prepared as an
Encouragement and Prologue to the tended Tragedy; against the very time of
which, (it seems,) a Vindication was prepared, but that Providence, and the
Defeat, have taught the Author a little more Prudence, then to Publish it.

But I must return to my purpose; by this short Account, you may see upon what
reasons St. Peter recommends this way of Silencing this Aspersion upon
Christian Religion, before any other, viz. Because it is the most plain,
palpable, Conviction, that this is unjustly Objected against it.

I only add, That the good Christians of Old took care to use this Method; and
could not by any Severity, and ill Usage, be ever Tempted to the contrary; they
were Peaceable and Submissive, they readily Obeyed, and heartily Prayed for
their Governors, even when most Barbarously and Unjustly provoked to the
contrary; so that not one Christian Died as a Rebel, or a Traitor in all the
Early Persecutions of Christianity, nor for several Centuries; and you may
challenge any of these Factours for Treason to Instance in one.

Nay, it is well known, that Julian himself Acquits them from this Aspersion,
and Upbraids his Heathen Subjects with the Obedience and Loyalty of the
Galileans, (as he Scornfully calls them,) which is the more remarkable
Testimony, for coming from the Mouth of the bitterest Enemy that Christianity
ever had. I cannot think this passage unknown to the Writer of his Life, and
had he had the Grace or Honesty not to conceal it, it might have been Antidote
against the Infection of his Pamphlet.

Thirdly, And now how much it concerns us to Imitate these Brave Men in this,
is the Third thing Observed out of the Text; This is the Will of God, i. e.
This is the plain Command, and Law of God, by which His Will is made known to
us, and we are directed what to do in this Case.

I stay not to Improve this Argument, and show how Cogent it ought to be with
all Men. We have a greater Sense, (I hope,) of God's Power and Sovereignty over
us, His Right to Command and Govern us. Our own great Obligations to Him; and
the Infinite Danger of Offending Him; then to need a further pressing of this
upon us. These things are the very Reasons and Foundations of our Religion, and
therefore are not now to be Learned by such Grave Professors of it.

What I purpose therefore further upon this, shall be to venture at giving some
Account of this Will, and Command of God; and Intimate some of those great
Reasons, that it relies upon. I shall only name Three, and very little more
then name them.

First, This is His Will, because He knows this to be so very much for the Good
and Happiness of the World.

It is most certain, next to Men's Being, their Orderly and Peaceable Living in
the World, is the greatest and most valuable Blessing of this Life. A State of
War and Confusion, of Jealousy and Danger, is scarce Preferable unto Death it
self.

And he that contends, this was the State of Nature, yet makes it so Calamitous
and Dismal, that Men would rather part with their Dear Liberties, and entrust
the Conduct of themselves, and all their Interests, to one only Person, then to
Live in such an uneasy Condition, wherein themselves, and all they had, were
Exposed to the Violence and Pleasure of every one.

The Reasoning of this Man is True and Good, though the Foundation of it be
utterly False; for there cannot be a greater Unhappiness, then to Live without
Government, in continual Jealousy and Fear, Exposed to the Will of every Man,
whose ill Nature, and Interest, should prompt him to Anoy us.

This makes Government so absolutely necessary for the Happiness of the World,
and God out of His Immense Wisdom and Goodness, and Care for the good of
Mankind, lays this Command upon Men, to be careful in this Instance of
Well-doing, to be Obedient and Subject to Government, without which, it could
not be preserved; but Confusion and Disorder, and that Shoal of Mischiefs, that
always follow them, would break in upon Men.

Secondly, And that Hints to us the Second Reason, upon which I found this Will
and Command of God; I mean, the supporting and maintaining His own Appointment,
and Institution.

I cannot stay now to reflect upon those unworthy Atheistical Accounts, that
have been given of Government, in this unhappy Age; the Great and Prime Author
has, long before this, given Account of them to his God; though I cannot but
drop a Tear, as I pass, to consider, with what Eagerness they have been
Imbibed, by the Men of this Unruly Generation, and what Mischievous
Consequences they have been Impron'd into.

The great Principle, is, what I hinted before, That Men by Nature were in a
State of War against each other, that to remedy the Inconvenience of that
State, they chose to cast themselves into Government.

The Consequences deduced hence are such as these, that therefore all
Government is Founded upon mutual Compact, and a consent of the People, That
all Government is Originally in them, That Kings, etc. are only their Trustees,
and Creatures of their making, That upon Maladministration, they may call
them to Account; Depose them, if they see cause; Resume their Power into their
own Hands, or Entrust it to any other, whom they please.

These are the Blessed Principles that the Godly and the Sober, the Saints and
True Protestants, have Bartered with an Atheist for, and he, doubtless, with
the Devil. It is pity we have not time to reflect upon them with the sharpness
that they justly deserve; but I take the want of this somewhat the better,
because I speak to them who know and believe the Scriptures, and by them are
sufficiently Antidoted against such Hellish Infections, which are enough to
undo the World, and bring Confusion and all manner of Mischief upon it.

The Holy Scriptures give us quite contrary accounts, they let us know how
Mankind entered into the World, and that Men did not spring up out of the Earth
like Mushrooms, altogether; they let us see how Men were Born into Government,
and found themselves under the Anticipations of it; they call God the King of
Kings, and Him by whom Kings Reign; they tell us, that Government is His
immediate Ordinance, and that the Powers that be, are set over us by God.

It cannot therefore but be thought, that Obedience and Subjection unto
Government, should be His Will, since otherwise He would not have contrived
sufficiently for the maintenance and support of it. We cannot think that God
would Institute Government, and then leave Men at liberty, whether they would
Obey, and Submit to it, or not.

And Thirdly, He has made this His Will, and our Duty, for the credit of His
Holy Religion.

As there cannot be a greater dishonor to Religion, than its inconsistancy
with Government (as has been hinted already, so there can scarce any thing
more Endear it to the World, and gain Credit and Reputation to it, then to see
its Principles Assert, and its Professors Practice a Hearty Regular Subjection
and Obedience thereto.

Men will by this see, that it Designs the present, as well as future Great
Happiness of all; and be convinced, that God has no other Design in it, then
the Universal Good of all Mankind.

Kings will become its Nursing Fathers, and be tender of it; as that which
Secures their Crowns, Establishes their Thrones, and is the surest Firmament of
their Sovereignty and Power.

And all Wise Men will Admire, and Adore, the Goodness of God in it, and become
Votaries to that, upon which they see the Peace and Happiness of the World so
very much to depend; and (according to the Text,) by this means it will Triumph
over this worst Objection against it, and put to Silence the Ignorance of
Foolish-Men.

Fourthly, And now I proceed to make some Inferences from these things, by way
of Application, which was the last thing proposed.

And First, I take occasion hence to Infer, Who only are true Christians in
this Case of Subjection, and who are not, and with respect to our selves, who
are Truly Protestants, and who only pretend themselves such.

I have Intimated already, how strictly Christianity engages all Men to be
Subject to Government, and that it is a Reproach and Scandal to it, to be
thought otherwise. I further now add, that the Church of England Asserts the
same, and that upon the same Principles too; that the Reformation (as to this)
was only paring off the Excresscencies, and Usurpations, of the Papal Supremacy
over the Regal Power and Prerogative in this Kingdom, and that, as it was
managed, not by Tumult, and Popular Noise and Fury, but by the Royal Power and
Favor, so it supports it self only by the same, and owns that Dependence upon
it, and enjoins that Subjection to it, that it is most certain, Christian
Religion did own, and did pay, in all the Primitive and Purest Times of it.

This is the temper of our Reformation, and these are the Principles upon which
it was managed; and by this we may learn to Determine, who are Truly Friends to
it, and in the Modern Phrase, who are the True Protestants, and who are not so.

We have been slinging Names at one another a great while, and a great Contest
there has been, who stick closest to the Interest of Protestant Religion, and
to the Reformation, the Church of England and Her Sons, or the Variety of
Dissenters from Her; we are all at one stroke Discarded from being Protestants,
and must pass for Papists in Masquerade, and Popishly affected, and some Hot
Men will undertake to show you step by step, our Advances toward Popery. But
all Ranks of our Dissenters must be allowed the Name of True Protestants, yea,
although some have neither Church, nor Priests, nor Sacraments, nor any thing
like Christian Religion, but only the Name, and the Confidence to call
themselves so.

We have often told our Hot Brethren, of their Symbolizing with Rome, both in
their Principles and Practices, in the Case of Subjection to Government, we are
ready at any time to Justify one part of the Charge, and to draw a Parallel
between them; and they are pleased, it seems, to Justify our Charge, and save
us any pains in the Second.

The late Horrid ^ebellion, and Murdering one of the best of Kings, because He
was not for their Turn; their Ungovernable Temper, and Attempts of Rebellion,
since the Restoration, and this Conspiracy against the Life of the King, upon
the very same Reasons for which they Barbarously Murdered the Father, will be
Evidences clear enough, to let all the World see, who have Transcribed the
Doctrines of the Papists, who Practice upon their Principles, and that if we
must pass for Papists in Masquerade, we know well enough who are Protestants
only in Masquerade.

There has been a great deal of Artifice used of late, to wash the Guilt of
the late Rebellion, and the Bloody Consequences of it off themselves, and to
fix it upon Papists, and all the stories possible, have been Mustered up, to
show their Influence upon all those things; they have been contented to have
been reputed their Tools, and would choose to be called Fools, (it seems)
rather then Knaves.

Were the present Age so Silly and Credulous, as to be Imposed upon by this
pretense, (which all the World knows to be False, and only an Act of present
Pageantry and Fraud,) yet I do not see how it would much advantage the Cause of
these Men.

It plainly acknowledges what their Principles and Inclinations are, and what
they are ready prepared to do, when cunning Men offer them an occasion, and
manage them; there is no competition here between these Two Parties, about
Honesty, only which is the more Subtle and Cunning; though for my part, I think
they might as easily compremise this Dispute, as the other.

It is in this Case, just as it is with the Faulkonor and his Hawk, the
Inclination of the one, makes it as ready to Kill the poor Partridg, as the
other Desires it should; only perhaps he can advantage this Inclination, and
direct it better to compass the Design; and were this a Crime, I do not see
what great need there were to contend about the Guilt of it; if I do that which
my own Will and Nature strongly incline me to, I know not that I am e're the
less Guilty, because I have Accomplices, or Directors, in it; no Man could ever
manage a Hawk to such a purpose, were not his Nature bent that way; and all the
Art and Pains in the World shall never make a Pidgeon to do it.

But did their Arts of Color and Extenuation, etc. signify any thing to clear
them in that, I would fain know, how they think to be cleared from the Guilt of
pursueing the same Methods unto, and Conspiring the Execution of the same thing
again now? Unless this also be another Popish Design.

If Men had been so weak as to be Cajowl'd by their Artful Pretenses and
Pallations, for what has been; yet what Artifice shall be used now? by this
repeated Instance of their Principle and Temper, they preclude all ways to
their Vindication; all Men see now what the Beast is, notwithstanding his
Visor, or his pretended alteration of Nature; the Lady shows herself a Cat,
when the Mouse appears; the Royal Heart, (it seems) cannot come in ^^ght, but
the Lion starts up, how Demure and Drowse, how Sleepy and Tame, soever he
before appeared to be.

Secondly, I would beg you to consider, as an Inference from this Discourse,
what a Woeful Transcendent Guilt they bring upon themselves, that being called
Christians, and pretending to be the Purest Christians too, do by their Plots
and Treasons against their Sovereign, their Disloyalty and ill-doing, open the
Mouths of Men against this Holy Religion, and reflect Dishonor upon the
Blessed Author of it.

I could heartily wish, that this Inference were Impertinent or Needless; but
the reason of this Days Service shows us it is not; and amongst all the Sad
Circumstances of that Treason, (which we come to give God Thanks for our
Deliverance from) there are none we ought more to be concerned for, then the
Impiety and Guilt of the Conspirators, and the advantage that some Men will
take hence, to Reproach the Protestant Religion.

First, Were I to Aggravate this Barbarous Intendment, from the bare
Circumstances of it, without any respect to the Dishonor it reflects on
Christian Religion; there are such Crowds of Considerations that offer
themselves; both from the thing intended, the Person against whom it was aimed,
and the Circumstances of those Engaged in it, that truly I should scarce know
where to begin, or how to end.

Consider Oh Wrethed Men, what you were Designing, and tell us, Is the Murder
of one of the best of Kings, together with all His Relations and Adherents? Is
the Ruin and Destruction of the Purest Reformed Church upon Earth? Is the
Overturning and pulling in Pieces the best Government in the World? Is the
Burying a Glorious Kingdom, an Opulent Flourishing City, in Misery and Blood?
Is the Massacre of so many Thousands of Honest and Peaceable of your Brethren?
Are all these such mean things, and Trifles, that they must be Perpetrated to
Glut the Malice and Revenge, to Gratify the Pride and Ambition, of a few
discontented and Villainous Persons?

Must such a King be so Requited by you? Oh Base and Ungrateful, beyond
Example! Is this the best Return you can make Him for all his Indulgence and
Favor? Has He Suspended the Laws, and Screened you from Punishment, only for
this? Must His Life be taken away, to whom all yours have been so often, and so
Justly Forfeited? And must He Die, by whose Unparalled Mercy only you Live?
Can this Meagre Snake find no Breast to Sting, but that in which it was
Fostered and Warmed, when it was above half Starved and Dead? Oh Monsters of
Ingratitude! Oh Sarpentine Brood indeed! that Gnaw through those Bowels that
gave them Being.

But Oh Cursed Impiety, and Hypocrisy! Are these things becoming True
Protestants? Is this the Effect of all your Starched and Formal Godliness? Do
all your Oaths, and Vows of Loyalty, and Service to your King? Do all your
Appeals to God, for the Sincerity of your Intentions? Do all your Solemn
Protestations of Care and Concern for His Safety, as that upon which your All
depends, come at last to this?

What shall we say of such Men? Who can help us to Names and Characters bad
enough for them? Should we Ransack all their own Base and Venomous Pamphlets,
and apply them here, they would be Favor and Extenuation of their Crimes, who
have put off, not only Religion, but Humanity, and are Actually commenced
Devils.

Secondly, But to Consider, that all this was Designed under the Mask of
Godliness, and Cloaked with high pretenses of Religion, makes the Guilt swell
Big, almost beyond Imagination, and brings that Reproach upon the Reformed
Religion, which (in some Men's Reasonings,) it will scarce ever be cleared from.

Heretofore it was the Reproach of Popery, and Protestant Divines have Objected
it, as the Dishonor of the Conclave, That they Usurped upon Kings, and made
their Condition so very Unsafe; that in some Cases they allow Treason, and
encourage it in others; that they Subject Princes to the pleasure of their
Bishop, and make their Kingdoms, and Lives too, Forfeitable, whenever he shall
please to take Pet against them, and Absolve their Subjects from their
Allegiance to them.

But that any of the Reformation should Transcribe the same Principles, and Act
to the uttermost ill Consequences of them; that the Classis should match, or
outdo, the Conclave; that Covenants and Associations should be entered into by
True Protestants; that Plots and Conspiracies against the Life of a King,
should shelter themselves under the Gospel, and Religion be made to color
that, which almost above all things it Abhors.

This is a thing which no Good Man can hear without Grief and Indignation; Oh
tell it not in Gath, let it never be Published in Askalon, to make Sport and
Pastime to the Uncircumcised that Dwell there.

The truth is, it may justly make a Good Man's Heart to tremble, to reflect upon
the Horrid Guilt, and Woeful Condition of such Men; it is bad enough to Violate
the Laws of Religion, but to Traduce and Defame them, and Expose them to the
Contempt of others, is much worse.

It will be found a matter hard enough, to Answer for our own Sins, and to bear
the Guilt of our own Crimes; but when other Men's Sins must be put into our
Account, and all that Railery and Reproach they have cast upon Religion, be
Answered for by us; our Case then will be Sad and Intolerable.

It were Impardonable enough for any that pretend to Religion, and the Purity
of it, ever to be Guilty of such things; but to pretend Religion for them, is
such a palpable piece of Loathed and Fulsome Hypocrisy, as Exposes them to
the Contempt, and Abhorrence, both of God and Man; I pray God give some Men
Grace to consider it.

Thirdly, Another thing I would Intimate, by way of Application, is the
Obligation that lies upon us, to be as Active in Well-doing, as some are in the
contrary; and to press us all to be Loyal and Obedient to that King, which
Providence has set over us, and Subject to that happy Government that it has
placed us under.

Did we want Arguments, either from the Temper of the King, or the happy
Constitution of the Government we Live under, there are enough would offer
themselves readily to us. Lord! how Happy is our Condition, as to both; above
that of these Christians to whom St. Peter Writ this Epistle.

They were under Arbitrary Government indeed, under Heathen Persecuting
Emperors, and such, whose Vices made them worthier the Name of Beasts, then of
Men; for so Claudius and Nero were, in the Reign of the First of which this
Epistle was Written, as Learned Men Determine. If they therefore were Obliged
to be Loyal and Subject then; how much Gladlier may we be so now, who Live
under no Laws, but what we our selves have an Interest in making, and under a
Prince, in whom Clemency has been a Fault, if it ever was, or can be so in any.

Had any of the Men that are pleased to Cry out so much of Arbitrary
Government, and Persecution, Lived in those Ages, they would have known better
what these things mean, then to Asperse the Mildest Government, and the most
Gracious Prince, and the greatest Favor, that ever was showed to Obstinate
Ungovernable Men, under the same Names now.

Were it Christian, or Lawful, to Wish Punishment to any Men, I would only Wish
this to these; that they were but to Live abroad a while, under the Kings and
Government of any of our Neighbour-Nations, I do not doubt, but they would soon
Learn as Heartily to Wish they were under their own again, as now they have
Cause (would they Consider duly) to Rejoice, and Bless God, that they are so.

But I Urge no other Consideration now, but the Reason of the Text; which is
the Honor and Credit of our Religion, which so much depends upon this; as has
been hinted; the Reformation has many sore Enemies, and so have we too, that
watch greedily for any little thing to Asperse us with, and Triumph at the
appearance of any, and know full well, how to Magnify, and Improve the least
thing to our Dishonor. It Concerns us therefore to be so much the more
Careful, to Defeat their Expectations, to Adorn our Holy Profession, by this
Instance of Well-doing, to such a Pitch, that Envy may Burst it self for Rage,
at its Disappointment.

Let me beg Men to consider what a Religion they Profess, one that is truly
Christian in this Point. What a Church they call themselves Members of, a
Church that has always been Famous for Loyalty, and once (we know) Martyred
for it; what a Shame then must it be for any of us to be Ungovernable and
Disloyal? Quarrelling with our Superiors, and perking up against Government
upon every little trifling Reason? How certainly shall we hereby forfeit all
the Blessings we can expect from our Religion, and incur that Damnation, that
it Threatens to all that are Traiterous and High Minded, Factious and Unruly,
and Movers of Sedition either in Church or State.

How much better were it to be Loyal and Faithful to our Prince, Obedient and
Subject to our Laws? how much better were it for him? how much more
acacceptable unto God? what a Service to our Religion? and consequently to our
Selves, both at present, and in the great Day, when the Accounts of all Men
must be made up, and their Great and Eternal Fates Settled and Adjusted.

To this purpose there are Three or Four things, which I would Recommend unto
Men, had I time.

First, To Rid themselves of all those ill Opinions, that are so naturally
productive of Rebellion, and Undutifulness to our Governors, there are many of
these Adopted, even into the Creeds of most of those, to whom these Discourses
are most needful.

By these, Men are fit, and ready prepared for Rebellion whenever a Temptation
is offered to them, and I will never wonder if they embrace it; better is not
to be expected from 'em.

It is possible a Man may believe very ill, and yet live tolerably well, and we
see some Men's Hearts are better than their Heads, but certainly such Men act
upon mighty Disadvantages, and in this truly, upon such as are next to
insuperable.

False Principles will influence Men's Practices, especially in this Instance,
and they always may do so, such Men are always under a Temptation, but when
Oppertunity and Interest Unite with Principle, then the Temptation is
Invincible.

We see that Interest alone is able to Debauch most Men's Consciences, and
doubtless has made many Rebels, who were otherwise well persuaded and inclined
too; but when a Man's Conscience (I mean his Persuasion) Joins with Interest,
and warrants the Lawfulness of Rebellion, as well as the other does suggest the
Expediency and Advantage of it, there is nothing of good to be expected from
such a Man, if he do not actually Rebel, it is only for want of Oppertunity or
Strength to do so.

Secondly, To take heed of all those things that lead to Rebellion, and which I
will call Practical Dispositions to it.

It is rarely seen that Men Jump into Treason and Rebellion on a sudden. It is
in this, as it is in most great Instances of Vice, the Mind starts and boggles
at them at first, but they are Trained in by little steps and degrees, and pass
such Stages before they arrive to the confidence of ventring upon them.

It is certainly thus almost always in Cases of Rebellion, and perhaps this may
be one of the Reasons, upon which it is compared to Witchcraft by the Prophet,
none commence Witches on a sudden, but are Trained into it by Art, and
intermedial Vices, first the Feces of Envy and Malice, and next the gratifying
these in some defined Instances, and then the using some strange and Antic
Rites, from which some extraordinary effects either do, or are fancied to
proceed, from whence a belief of being able to do any thing insinuates it
self, and at last the fatal Contract is Sealed, and the poor Soul Commenceth
Devil before its time.

Thus it is in the Methods of Rebellion, first Men entertain Fears and
Jealousies, and their Minds are amused with Feigned Portents and lying Wonders,
which ill Men Interpret as they please; then they keep Company with Turbulent
and Discontented Persons, and form themselves into Clubs and Cabals, and hear
their Governors Aspersed and Lessened, and all the Stories that can be rallyed
up of their Weakness or ill Conduct, aggravated. Then things appear amiss both
in Church and State, and Consults are held for the Redress of them. Means are
proposed, and Debates are had, and Men begin to think themselves Wise and great
Statesmen, Fancy presently how bravely they could Govern, and much better then
those that do. And then the bewitching thoughts of Honor and Grandeur, of
Wealth and Greatness, that would accrue to them, were the present Governors
removed, Insinuate themselves, and perhaps the way to this appears easy too.
And then the Man begins to appear in Public, and is seen in Riotous Tumults,
and Heads Factions against the Government, and by that means is hardened into
more daring Actions, and then finding himself cried up for a Noble Patriot, and
Defendor of the Peoples Liberties, Jumps into downright Treason, and having
drawn the Sword against his Prince, throws away the Scabberd, and resolves to
finish his Traytorous Purpose, or Die in it.

And doubtless many Men have arrived at this at last, who little Thought of any
such thing at their setting first out, it is good therefore to take heed of the
beginnings of Evil, and to Fear Imbarking on that Sea, from whence it is so
very difficult to Return.

Thirdly, To beware of entertaining Differences about Religion, especially of
entering our selves into any Society of Dissenters, and those that Separate from
the Established Religion among us.

How naturally Differences about Religion are productive of Disorders in the
State, and how strongly Faction in the Church disposes Men to Rebellion
against the Government, has been sadly Experienced by this poor Nation, and
been further cleared by a Learneder Pen of late.

To which I shall only add Two further Observations at present, one Ancient,
the other Fresh and Modern. The First is this, That Heriticks and Schismatics
were the first that ever spoke against Government, and withdrew their Obedience
from it, among those that are called Christians. The first of these were the
Gnostics, the Scholars of Simon Magus, who are expressly charged with it in the
New Testament. The Second was the great Author as well as Denominator of the
Donatists, whom I find Optatus charging with the Impudence and Impiety of
setting up himself against the Emperor, nay, of Advancing himself above Him.

To which it is not Impertinent to add the account that Abbaspineus gives of
this matter, in his Notes upon the Third Book of that Reverend Man; when the
Donatists first made the Schism, and were condemned by the Church: they
Appealed to Constantine the Emperor, but when he favored not their Purpose,
nor did their Work, then they grew Angry, and the Cry was, Quid Imperatori cum
Ecclesia? As the same Father tells us, which Story I can never read, but I
presently am imagining, I hear the Story of our own Schismatics, who so
exactly agree with them in this, as well as all other great Circumstances of
that Schism.

They are wonderfully for Soothing and Courting Kings, and leave no Art untried
to endear them to Favor them, but when they refuse this, then they Execrate,
and Tumult against them. They will Petition most submissively, and stuff their
Petitions with Insinuations of their Loyalty and good Meaning, but they follow
the Rejection of their Petition with a Remonstrance, as we have seen it lately.

The Modern (or rather present) Observation, I would make, is this. That not
one of all the different Sects of Dissenters among our Selves at this Day, are
rightly Principl'd in the point of Subjection to Government, but do openly avow
such Principles and Doctrines, which strongly dispose Men to Rebellion in many
Cases. I speak not this without Observation, and if any Party find themselves
agreived by it, they may have it Instanced when they please.

Upon these Reasons therefore, I advise every Man that would preserve his
Loyalty and Faithfulness to his King, to take heed of this thing, to shun all
such places, as Houses of Infection, and never to enter himself of these
Conventions, where Men list their Names against the Government, and (in effect)
declare themselves ready against it, whenever their Patriots, and Blessed
Teachers, shall think fit to call upon them.

Fourthly, And Lastly, I advise Men to look upon Loyalty and Subjection, as a
Branch of their Religion, and to think themselves bound to maintain the one,
upon the same great Reasons that they Practice the other.

This is the likeliest thing (I know of) to keep Men steady in their
Faithfulness to their King and Government. I do not like to hear Men count
Subjection an Act of Superarrogation, or Generosity only; I like the Word in no
Case, and in this almost least of all. Let Men in this but do their Duty, and I
dare say Kings will desire no more, and do what they do in a Sense of Duty, and
then there is good hope of them. He that is so ready to do more than he should,
I fear will sometimes do less.

He that is Loyal to his Prince upon any other Score but Religion, is so upon
an accidental Reason, and such as may alter, and so may be the contrary upon
the same Reason.

He may be so, or he may be otherwise, as these changeable Reasons (such as
Honor, or Interest, or Fashion, etc.) shall determine him. When he that is
this, upon the Reasons of Religion and Conscience, is fixed, and can never
alter, till he desert those Principles which will always be, and continue the
same.

Give me the Man that Loves his King, because he Honors his God, and is Loyal
because he is Religious; this Man is steady, and his Loyalty impregnable, you
can never make him Rebel, until you convince him there is no God, nor shake his
Allegiance, until you can disargue his Faith, Loyalty becomes the very Nature
and Soul of this Man, but it hangs very loosely and uncertainly upon all others.

And now to return to the purpose of this Day, and Conclude with it.

1. Let us first of all give God our hearty and humble Praise, for giving us
such a Religion, that we need not be ashamed of Owning and Defending, and
setting over us such a King, which we need not blush to Avow Love and Honor
unto.

Our Religion is so Holy and Divine, so Pure and Peaceable, so attested for
True by Arguments that are Infallible, and so Adapted and Contrived to all the
great Interests of Men, that all that oppose and speak against it, will but
gain to themselves the Character in the Text, and prove themselves Ignorant and
Foolish Men.

Our King is a Prince whom some former Ages would have Idolized, and none but
very ill Men can but Love and Honor now: whose Judgment and Insight into all
things worthy the Study of Man, Courtesy and Affabillity, Clemency and Mercy,
and all the Instances of good Nature, render worthy of all Mortal Respect and
Honor, were He a private Man only, but being a King, make him worthy of that
which is almost Divine.

2. Let us give the same God the same Praises also, for Preserving both this
Religion and this Prince to us, a mighty Providence has superintended, and
guarded both, and signallized it self in many extraordinary, and almost
miraculous Deliverances of them, amongst which this last deserves not to be
thought the least.

The serious Observation of these (I am apt to think) is enough to convince an
Athiest, and cause him to cry out as the Psalmist does, Verily there is a God
that Judges in the Earth. And to consider how much we are interested in them,
and owe to them, is enough to fan up our Praise even into the Flames of
Cherubims, and to fill us with a Joy too big for Expression, and to raise up
our Thoughts into Rapture and Amazement, into Extacy and Wonder.

3. Let this fresh Deliverance endear both this Religion and this Prince the
more to us, and cause us to think most highly of that, which God delights to
Honor and Protect.

Let us entertain this Holy and Heavenly Religion with the same Rapturous Joy,
and Love, that our Forefathers did after the Marian Persecution.

And receive this Prince not only as the Appointment and Ordinance, but as the
Special Favor and Gift of Heaven (as the Church excellently teaches us) and
with the same Transports, and Loud Joys, that we did at His Miraculous
Restoration from His long Exile.

Let it cause us to add Cheerfulness and Joy to our Subjection, and to esteem
it as much our Interest and our Happiness, as it is our Duty.

4. And finally, let it heighten our Devotion, and inflame our Zeal in our
Prayers to God for them, that Religion may be preserved to us, and be the
Blessing of our Children.

That the same Circles of Providence may still be over, and about the Head of
our King, and cause His Face to Shine in Happiness and Joy, that God will
follow Him still with Loving Kindness and Blessing. Scatter all His Enemies
that delight in Treason and Blood, and cause the Crown upon His own, and his
lawful Successors Head, still to Flourish.

We are all of us greatly concerned (we see) in His Safety, and to our great
Comfort, we see God is so too. Oh let us Pray, that He will continue to be so,
that He may be still; as a Field which the Lord has Blessed, and that He may
Flourish as a Tree which He has Planted with His Right Hand, and Watered with
the Dew of His own Blessing, under whose Shadow we also may Rejoice and Sing.

And to conclude, Let us Period the Service of this Day, and employ the Residue
of our Lives, in rendering unto God that Service and Praise, that belongs unto
God, and unto Caesar that Love and Honor, that Obedience and Subjection that
belongs unto Caesar. Which God Almighty by His Grace Enable us all to do, for
Christ Jesus Sake. Amen.

FINIS.

