A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES Held for the County of Surrey, AT Kingston
upon Thames, March 30. 1699.

By HENRY HESKETH, Rector of Charlewood, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

London, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1699.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN HOLT, Knight. Lord Chief Justice of England, and
One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
IT is by Your Lordship's Command (for such any signification of Your Desire
shall always be to me) that this Discourse is made thus Public; and the
Kindness that you have showed to the Author, makes it Duty in him to lay it
with all Humility and Thankfulness at your Feet.

I did not think that there was any thing in it, to recommend it to such a kind
Acceptance, unless Honesty and Plain-dealing come in Reputation again.

But when I saw Your Lordship's Thoughts seconded by the Worthy Gentlemen upon
the Bench, and Grand Jury too, I confess I was affected, not so much with the
favor showed to my self (God knows) as with the joyful hope, that the true
Spirit and Temper of Religion breathed in those Persons, who by the Influence
they have upon, as well as Interest in their Country, may happily propagate it
to others below them.

May God Almighty verify the Presage, and inspire them with Zeal in this Noble
Design. May that Heavenly Dew, which now I begin to hope is fallen upon the top
of Hermon, refresh not only the immediate Declensions, but at last Water the
very Fields of Zion. And may Your Lordship, and all those Worthy Persons,
rejoice in those. Blessings which God has promised to give there to all good
Men now, and in those greater Portions of Bliss that he has provided for such
hereafter. This is, and shall be the daily Prayer of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most humble and obedient Servant HENRY HESKETH.

1 TIMOTHY i. 9. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a Righteous Man, but
for the Lawless and Disobedient, for the Ungodly and for Sinners, for Unholy
and Profane, etc.
THE Connection of these Words is not so very plain, but that we may pertinently
enough stay to clear it; and the rather because doing that, may let us easilier
into the meaning of them.

The Apostle had in the precedent Verses reflected with some smartness upon a
company of pretended Apostles and false Teachers, that had crept into the
Conventions of Christians, who pretending to a more perfect understanding of
the Law than other Men, boasted themselves to be the only true Teachers of it,
and seeming to penetrate deeper into the more abstruse sense thereof, they took
occasion to teach the belief of some strange mystical Genealogies, and to amuse
Men's Heads with needless though curious Speculations, and Questions of no use,
either to Faith or Manners.

It is very probable, the Apostle meant that primitive Sect of the Gnostics,
so called from their pretending to a deeper and more exact Knowledge of the
Mysteries of Christian Religion than others; and his speaking of their busying
themselves about Genealogies, etc. makes it very clear, that he meant that
Pestilent Sect, which made a great noise with these; a Specimen of which the
Learned Grotius gives us in his Notes upon this place.

Having reflected upon these high Law Preachers, with a design to warn Timothy
and others to beware of them, lest what he had said might be misinterpreted; as
if he meant to disparage or undervalue the Law, he tells us, ver. 8. that the
Law is good, if it be used lawfully, i. e. to that end and purpose for which it
was made; which was not to employ Men in Genealogies, and vain Janglings, but
to excite them to the doing of that good which it commanded, as well as to
restrain them from the Evil it forbid. And when Men use it themselves, and
teach others to use it to these Ends, they use it as they should; and when they
preach it up to this End, they do laudably and well.

But it was not so very proper and pertinent to make such a noise with
preaching the Law to Christians, who if they answered their Character were good
Men, for whom the Law was not intended; for we ought to know this, that the Law
was not made for a Righteous Man, but for the Lawless and Disobedient, for the
Ungodly and for Sinners, for Unholy and Profane, etc.

In speaking to which Words, I shall crave your Patience only while I do these
two general things.

I. Endeavor to give the true sense and meaning of them.

II. And then endeavor to make that sense as useful to us as I can; by drawing
some such Inferences from it, as may be pertinent to this Meeting, and the end
of it.

I. I begin with the first, in which it will be needful to show, 1. In what
sense, and upon what reason it is here said, that the Law is not made for a
righteous Man. 2. In what sense, and upon what reason, it is said to be made
for the Lawless and Disobedient, for the Ungodly and for Sinners in general;
and especially for such profane and wicked Persons as he afterward
particularly instanceth in.


These two I think will be enough on this first general; for I do not think it
so needful to waste our time in giving the Notion of a Righteous Man, for whom
the Law is said not to be made.

This is plain enough in Holy Scripture, if Men would let it be so, and had not
some ill Ends in perplexing the Notion of it. I confess there are two Notions
of a Righteous Man, as well as of Righteousness in Scripture; the one more
restrained, and then it signifies a Just Man; and the other more lax and large,
and then it is the same as a Good Man, i. e. one that is careful to do his Duty
in all the Instances of it, respecting God, his Brother, or himself, which our
Apostle expresses by living soberly, and righteously, and godly in this World,
Tit. 2.12.

It is commonly taken in this sense, and I believe almost always so, where it
is singly named, and when one of the other words are not joined with it, as in
this place, and a hundred more both in the V. and N.T. and the word is very
proper in this sense: For as all Duty, of what nature soever, is founded in
Justice, and the variations of one are but so many Instances of the other; so a
good Man is properly called a righteous, or a just Man, because he is just to
his God, just to his Neighbor, and just to himself.

Not alas that he is always exactly so, and comes up to the Rule in every
thing; for this is a state of Imperfection and Weakness, wherein the very best
Men are sometimes born down by surprise, and the violence of Temptations, etc.
but being sincerely so to his Power, begging Pardon for what he falls short in,
and striving still to do better, he is upon the gracious Terms of the Gospel
reputed a righteous Man, and shall be accepted as such.

But now to come to our purpose, how is the Law said not to be made for such a
one? Has a good Man no Interest in the Law? nor may he expect the benefit
thereof; is not a good Man at all concerned to regard God's Laws? or is he not
chargeable with Sin, if he happen to transgress them? does this favor those
wild freaks of Antinomianism, that we have heard vented in this loose Age? that
a Child of God is not concerned about the drudgery of Duty, or obliged to it,
that it is no great matter whether he regard the Law of God or not. He is
justified by Faith in Christ, and whether he observe the Law, or transgress it,
is no great Matter, the one shall no more help on, than the other shall
prejudice his Salvation.

But must we understand this Speech of our Apostle to any such purpose, or in
Patronage of it? God forbid! This were to abuse the Law indeed, and perhaps in
a much worse sense than these Heretics did.

So that you see it will be needful to give the true sense of this Speech of
our Apostle, and rescue it from those gross Abuses that have been put upon it,
and those wild Inferences that have been deduced from it in this Enthusiastic
Age.

To which purpose I observe first negatively, that we must not understand this
Saying absolutely, or think that it holds (...), as the Schools speak; as if
either,

1. A good Man were not at all concerned in the Law, or had not right to claim
the Benefit of it in any case; for it is both his protection from Evil, and
remedy against it; and he may warrantably apply to it for both these ends.

So that in this sense the reverse to the Text is true, the Law is made for the
Righteous, and not for the Sinner. It is made to protect the Innocent, and not
the Guilty; to secure good Men from Wrong, and to repair them when they receive
it.

It is a wild freakish Conceit to think the contrary, as some ancient
Heretics, and a present Spawn of them among us pretend to do, as if by a
seeming over-strictness in this and some other, both Doctrines and Practices,
they would conceal or compensate for their Looseness and Blasphemy in others.

There is an extremity, I must confess, in this, as there is usually in most
Cases of this Nature, and the Apostle seems to tax it in the Christians at
Corinth, that is, to go to Law for every Trifle, and to implead Men presently
for every little Trespass; to take every Advantage in Law that another Man's
Ignorance and Simplicity may give us; to be (...). righteous evermuch, as
Solomon calls it, Eccl. 7.16. for many Cases may happen, in which it will not
become a good Man, or is hardly consistent with that Character, to be rigorous
in Prosecuting another, though in strictness the Law may be on his side. Lesser
Injuries were much better to be born, than rigorously to be Prosecuted. And our
Savior seems not only to Advise but Command it, in that seeming hard Saying,
S. Mat. 5.19, 20. the meaning of which is only this, that it were much better
and wiser, in many Cases, to put up lesser and tolerable Injuries, than
revengefully to Prosecute him that offered them, and force him to make the
utmost reparation.

But where there are Extremities, there is usually a just and virtuous Medium;
and so there is in this Case, and that is the warrantableness of a good Man's
expecting the protection of Law in all Cases, and pleading the Benefit of it in
some. For the great fundamental Reason and Intention of Law is, that an
Innocent Person should be protected from Evil in all Cases, and suffer it in
none.

2. We must not so interpret this Saying, as if a good Man were not under the
obligation of Law, or not in duty bound to regard and obey both the Laws of
God, and of his Country too, as much as any other Man.

There has a wild Doctrine indeed been propagated in these looser Ages, that a
good Man is above Law, and manumitted from it, is a Freeman in Christ, and must
not be the Servant of Men. Dominion and Property is founded in Grace, and the
Saints are to give Laws to others, and not to receive Laws from them.

What Mischief has been done under the Umbrage of this Doctrine, and what
barbarous things it has been pleaded in vindication of, those that have either
considered some late Passages in this Nation, or read the Story of the wild
proceedings of the Anabaptists in Germany before, are able to tell you. And
were it not that the Jesuits Morals are well known, and their Avowing, not only
the Innocence but Merit of the most unchristian things that are done for the
Interest of their Church, it might be thought impossible, that Men that wear
the Profession of Christianity, should so unlearn their good Religion, as to
commit such things under pretense of it.

But that this Inference also is far from being warranted by any thing our
Apostle means in this Saying, is evident. For,

1. The Divine Laws are the Rule of a good Man's Life and Actions; and the
Gospel is so far from tasking these, or discharging good Men from them, that it
ties the Obligation to them closer and more strongly: And this is spoken so
expressly, both by our Savior, Mat. 5.17. and our own Apostle too, Romans 3. ult.
that none can well mistake it.

2. And we find the same Apostle as express too, as to a good Man's Obligation
to the Laws of his King and Country; and as long as the five first Verses of
the 13th Chapter to the Romans are uncancelled, there will be no avoiding of
it, nor any pretense of Saintship, or Clergyship either (if you will give me
leave to make a Word) that can excuse or discharge from it. For according to
the Doctrine in that place, those that think otherwise, and act upon those
Thoughts, may receive to themselves Damnation, with a non obstante either to
their being Clergymen or Saints.

3. No nor 3dly, must we so expound this Passage, as either to teach, or think,
that a Righteous Man does not sin, or offend God, if he do in any thing
transgress his Law.

I confess, so far as any Man is Righteous, so far he is from transgressing
God's Law; and in proportion to his failing in any Duty which that Law
requires, or committing any Evil which it forbids, so far he falls short of the
Character of a Righteous Man. But this being (as I said before) a State of
Imperfection, in which (says Solomon) there is not a righteous Man that
sins not, some Transgressions of the Law are incident to a Righteous Man,
but these must not be exempted from being Sins.

I enter this Remark in opposition to another freakish Opinion, that has been
propagated in consequence of the Antinomian Doctrines, touched at before. For
it is pretended, that God sees no Sin in his People; and, that as there is no
Condemnation, so there is nothing condemnable in them who are in Christ Jesus;
but those things which in them that are out of Christ, are formally Sins, lose
their Malignity, and are no Sins in them that are in him.

There was once a Book printed in London, Anno 1656. and with the Approbation
and Commendation of most of the leading Ministers there (especially of the
Independent Party) in which there is this memorable Passage: In case you be at
any time, by sreason of the weakness of your Faith, or strength of your
Temptation, prevailed with to transgress any of Christ's Commands, beware you
do not thereupon take occasion to call Christ's Love to you into question, but
believe firmly, that he loves you as dearly as he did before you transgressed.
-- For this is a certain Truth, as no Good in you, or done by you, did, or can
move Christ to love you the more; so no Evil in you, or done by you, can move
him to love you the less.

This Book was called, The Marrow of Modern Divinity: And it might truly be
called of Modern Divinity indeed, for I am sure there is nothing of the
Primitive Ancient Divinity in it. Those good Men, those famous Lights of
Christ's Church, neither knew nor taught any such Doctrines, but as they found,
by sad Experience, that none (while here) were so perfect as not to transgress
the Laws of Christ; so they were far enough from thinking that those
Transgressions were not formal Sins even in the best of Men.

And therefore, as they taught with St. John, 1 John 1.8. that if the best Men
said they had no Sins, they would deceive themselves, and the Truth, etc. so
they taught too, that daily confessing of our Sins, daily Repentance for them,
and daily Applications to the Mercies of God and Merits of Christ for the
pardon of them, was necessary for the most Righteous while they lived in this
World.

2. But how then are we to understand this Passage in our Text? Why, I think,
we shall best, and most distinctly do this, by considering that there are two
Parts of the Law, or two Things considerable in it; the Preceptive (if I may so
speak) i. e. the Thing commanded, or forbid; and the Sanction, i. e. the
Punishment threatened to enforce Respect to it.

1. There are some that adventute to say (and perhaps, if well understood,
safely enough) that the first was not given for a Righteous Man: Their Reason
is, because a good Man needs not the Direction of an external Law to show him
his Duty, because he is in some Sense a Law to himself, as our Apostle speaks,
Romans 2.14. he finds it written upon the Table of his own Heart and Mind, and
needs not say, who shall ascend into Heaven, etc. to fetch him the Knowledge of
it from thence, as some interpret another Passage in the same Epistle.

Thus it was (says Ireneus) with the good Men that lived before Moses; they
had no written Law, nor needed any, because they found (as I said before) the
great Lines of Duty written upon their own Minds. Now it is in its proportion
true of all good Men since, and what need they the Pedagogie of a Law to teach
them their Duty, that understand it well enough, if they will attend to the
Instruction of their own Minds and Consciences?

But I will not adventure to lay all the weight of this Saying only upon this
Exposition (though I confess it has very good Authority to plead;) for I do
not think this inward Light so very clear in Men, but that they may want a
clearer Director and Guide in many Cases; and I am sure the best Men have
gladly accepted, and acknowledged the Benefit of the written Law and Revelation
of God.

2. I would therefore rather think, that this Speech of our Apostle respects
the Sanction of the Law; I mean the Penal part of it, i. e. which commands such
Duties, and forbids such Sins, under the Penalty of Sufferings and Punishments,
in case of neglelecting the one, and committing the other. And this, I think,
may be said not to be made for a Righteous Man in these two respects.

1. That it is not the Impellent of his Duty, or not the great Argument that
influenceth his Obedience: He serves his God, and does his Duty willingly, and
from a vital Principle within, and so needs not the Rod of the Law to whip him
to it. For what need of a Law (says St. Chrysostom) to force them to Duty, who
do it willingly of their own Accord, by the Influences, as well as Assistance
of God's Spirit and Grace? and I find St. Augustine, St. Hierome, and others,
quoted to the same purpose.

And this seems to be favored by what our Apostle speaks so often of the
Gospel Spirit, in opposition to the legal, calling one the Spirit of Love, as 2 Timothy 1.7. and the other of Bondage, as Romans 8.15. one therefore is called the
Spirit of a Child, which does his Duty out of filial Respect and Love; the
other of a Slave, who does what he does only for Fear.

I am not of some ranting Enthusiasts Opinion, that it is altogether below a
Good Man, to have either any regard to Reward or Punishment; I think Hope and
Fear two very useful Passions in Man while he is in this State, and that it is
not unbecoming Good Men to be influenced in some Measure by them. Though I do
believe that the more a Man improves in the Divine Life, the more he gets from
under their Government, and the less he needs them; and in time arrives to that
settled State, and that sweet Relish of God and Goodness, as to be able with the
good Man of old, to say, Amor meus pondus meum. Love is the great Weight that
sets my Mind in Motion, and the prevailing Argument in all my Duty and Services
to my God.

2. The Penal part of the Law is not made for a Righteous Man, because he is
not obnoxious to it, nor within the reach of it. The Penalty of the Law is to
be inflicted upon those only that transgress the Law, which a Righteous Man, so
far as he is righteous, does not; and for what he does amiss, God will accept
his Repentance, as a deletery of his Guilt, for the sake of what his Savior
has done and suffered for him. Being made free from Sin, he is freed from the
Curse due to Sin, and so in this Sense (as well as some others) is not under
the Law, but under Grace.

This shall suffice for the Explanation of this Negative part of the Text, The
Law was not made for a Righteous Man.

2. The next is the Positive, but for the Lawless and Disobedient, i. e. for
Sinners in general, and for those notorious Sinners in particular, which are
afterward mentioned, as a just Reflection upon those impure Gnostics, who
taking upon them to be the most refined Expounders of the Law, were in the mean
time the most gross and lewd Transgressors of it.

To our understanding of this there will need the less to be said, after what
has been offered upon the former. To proceed therefore here in the same Method
we did before.

1. I observe first, Negatively, The Law was not made for the Lawless and
Disobedient, etc. either first, to indulge them in their Wickedness; or, 2dly,
protect them in doing amiss; or, 3dly, secure them from Punishment when they
have done so. We are by no means to think the Apostle means any such things;
and it were a gross misunderstanding the Reason and Design of Law to think so.

The same Apostle tells us, That Magistrates are appointed for the Punishment
of Evildoers; and the Law is the Instrument by which they punish them: And it
were as gross a perverting the End of Laws, to slacken them in favor of an ill
Man, as it would be to stretch and tenter them to the Prejudice and Punishment
of the Innocent and Good.

2. The meaning then positively must be in some such Particulars as these that
follow:

Either first, as to the directing part of the Law, to show wicked Men their
Duty, and to mark out their Sins; and perhaps this may be asserted not without
good Reason. For though the great Lines of Duty, and the difference between
Good and Evil, be drawn pretty clear upon the Minds of all Men, and a Sense
thereof wrought into the very Contexture of Human Nature, so that there is no
pulling it out, without quite unravelling the whole.

Yet it may reasonably be presumed, that this Sense is much weakened and
distorted, and this Innate Light greatly obscured in most Wicked Men: And I
would fain hope, that a great part of the Wickedness committed in the World is
done out of Ignorance, as much, or more, than Wilfulness. I would not willingly
think so ill of Human Nature, or allow it to be degenerated to such monstrous
degrees, as that all Men that sin, do so of malicious Wickedness, as the
Psalmist speaks. Most Wicked Men, I hope, do not know when they do amiss, at
least, do not actually consider that they do so.

So that upon both Reasons, the Law may be said to be wisely made for a Wicked
Man, to supply the Light of his own Mind, which he has obscured, and to force
him to advert to that (...), that kind Monitor in his own Breast, which he by
his wicked Arts has endeavored to silence and stop the Mouth of.

However this be, it may to be sure, be safely asserted, that the Law was made
for a Wicked Man, up-these two Reasons that follow.

2. That it might restrain and curb the Evil Propensions of Men, and keep them
in from breaking out into those Wickednesses that they are so very prone unto.

This is certainly the chief Design and Aim of Laws, not only by their Light to
mark out all those Instances of Vice, which are so destructive to Men
themselves, and especially to the Community of which they are Members (just as
Buoys and Seamarks are set to give notice to Mariners of Rocks and Shelves,
that they may take care in time to avoid them;) but also by their Sanctions and
Threatenings of Punishment, to fright Men from them.

For as well as Men love Sin, they love not the Suffering for it; and as
violent and impetuous as their Inclinations are to the one, yet they may be
checked and awed by the other.

Fear and Love are two most powerful Passions in Human Nature; and until all
Wicked Men have quite put off these, or surmounted the force of them, the
Sanctions of Law will have some effect upon them, because they cannot allow
themselves to transgress, and incur those Penalties, till they have quite lost
all love and respect to themselves, or quite extinguished all fear of
Suffering. And whatever we may see to induce us to believe that hardened
Sinners have done both these, yet I am apt to believe, that they are far from
them. They do in truth but put a bold Face upon a bad Matter. They sin, not
that they care not for Suffering, but that they hope they may escape it. They
feel some secret Checks, and uneasy Bodings of Danger in their own Minds and
Consciences; but they study Arts to weaken the Power of the one, and disargue
the Presages of the other; and then they venture upon Sin with less regret or
control.

But certainly while the sense and fear of Suffering is fresh upon their Minds,
self-love and fear will have some hold upon them; and then the threatenings of
the Law will have some hold of them too, so as in some measure to be a curb and
restraint upon them.

So that Laws are wisely and with great reason made to this purpose; and while
humane Nature remains in any measure like it self, they will not fail of some
effect upon Men. And it is owing chiefly to these, and God's immediate
Interposition with them, that the World is not quite overrun with Wickedness
and Confusion long before this time.

3. But there is a third Reason upon which the Law may be said to be made for a
Wicked Man; and no doubt but the Apostle had respect to it, and that is, it is
made for his Correction and Punishment.

This is also one great end of the Law, though I think but collateral and
consequential; for as I think it would be a reflection upon Law, to say, that
it directly intends Punishment and Suffering; so I think it as great a Mistake
to say, that a Man obeys the Law, by suffering the Penalty threatened by it, as
well as by doing the Duty commanded in it. Upon which Reason I profess, that to
me there are some Difficulties in the Doctrine of Active and Passive Obedience,
as they are commonly received, which I can never get over, till I can be
persuaded to believe, that a Man is as obedient a Subject in dying for Treason,
as in yielding faithful Allegiance to his Prince.

But I return to what I was saying; that though Laws are made to restrain Men
from sinning, yet they are made too to punish them for sinning; and without
this all their threatenings of Punishment were to little purpose; it would avail
but little, as to the end of Law, to threaten Suffering and Punishment to
Offenders, if it were not intended to execute what is threatened; and (as
perhaps will be said by and by) if sometimes when there is occasion, that which
was threatened be not actually executed.

But I will stay no longer upon this Doctrinal part of my Discourse, but
proceed immediately to the second.

II. General, which is to make it as useful as I can, by drawing some
Inferences from it, which will show this Discourse not to be wholly
impertinent, or irrelative to the Reason of this Convention.

1. And first I observe from what has been said, what a happiness it is to the
World in general, and to Nations in particular, to be under Government and Laws.

There is abundance of Wickedness in the World (God knows,) but if it were not
for Laws, there would certainly be a great deal more. And we that see how
hardly Men are restrained from Sin, by all the Arts of Government, and utmost
Severities of Laws, may easily tell (without the Spirit of Prophecy) how
impetuous and violent they would be, were they not under these at all. All the
Penalties and Threatenings of Punishment cannot overawe Men so, but that they
will venture upon Wickedness; what would they do then, if they were under no
apprehension or fear of them?

It has been commonly said, that without Government and Laws, the Societies of
Men would be but so many wild Arabian Herds; and the truth is, they would be
very little better. That state of War which the great Factor for Atheism, in
this Nation, makes to be the natural state of Man, would be so still; where Men
would be everlastingly clashing and fighting with one another, where Might
would be the only Right; and where the Stronger would still be preying upon the
Weaker; where there would be no such thing as Rights and Properties, nor any
Man sure to enjoy any thing that he had, any longer than another should please
not to dispossess him of it. A Man can hardly think, but no Man can fully
describe the Misery and Confusion that would be among Men, the Fears and
Jealousies that would still haunt and disturb them in such a State, without all
hope or possibility of redress.

I have often thought, that it was not without some show of Reason at least,
that those Men in the Heathen World of old, that had been happily instrumental
in reducing Cities and Nations under Government and wise Laws, were honored
after their Death with Divine Worship, Men thinking that the good they did to
their respective Cities and Nations was so immensely great, that no mortal
Honors were big enough to be returned for them. And upon the same reason did
some wise Lawgivers easily persuade the People to believe, that they had their
Laws from the Gods.

And the truth is, the benefit bespake a God, and was worthy of a God, and no
meaner a return was due for it; and all the fault was, that it was
extravagantly misplaced upon those who were but only Instruments in these
Blessings, under that great and good God, who has fitted Men for Government,
and inspired them with Knowledge and Skill to make Laws, that were both so
useful to support Government, and so beneficial to those that were under it.

To him therefore be the praise of these Blessings always returned. Let those
great Men, that have been, or are Instruments under him, in conferring these
Blessings, have all Honor and Respect fit to be paid to Mortal Beings. But let
God be adored and praised both in them and for them.

And that I may bring this Inference something closer to our selves, let me
observe, that if there be a Nation at this Day, under Heaven, that has cause
to bless Almighty God for this Happiness, we in this Kingdom and Nation have
more. Other Nations are under Government, and doubtless have many wise and
excellent Laws; but he that has observed the state of those Governments, and
those that live under them, and then reflects upon our own, may very well
borrow the Verse of the Poet a little changed, Felices nimium bona si sua
norint. -- O happy England, if it would but think it self to be so; and be
ready to think that there was nothing wanting to make this the happiest
Government in the World, so much as Men's considering and being satisfied, that
so it is.

A Government settled in that happy poise, that Subjects are as much secured
from the power of the Prince, as the Prince is so from the Insults of the
People, under no Laws but what themselves have an Interest in making, not
liable to any Exactions to which themselves do not consent.

May God Almighty always continue it, and make us duly thankful for it. And may
all Factious and Seditious Persons, that would disturb, or overturn it, be
marked for common Plagues, and avoided as such. May they feel the Penalties of
those Laws which themselves despise, and of sharper too if they can be made.
May they by a bleeding Experience find, that our Laws which are so much for the
protection and benefit of good Men, were in truth made for such lawless and
disobedient Wretches as themselves.

There are many excellent deductions that might be made from this Argument, but
I must not think to have time allowed me for them. Therefore I shall only crave
patience while I remark only one more. And that is this,

2. If the Laws be made for disobedient and wicked Men, then I hope it will be
thought fit to execute them against such.

Here is a black List of some notorious Crimes following in the Text, and some
so unnatural that a Man might think them hardly competent to Men. But there are
several others besides them, that it may be deserve as severe an Animadversion
of the Laws, and I would to God I could not say among our selves at this day.

It is a very melancholic Reflection to observe how strangely Profaneness is
come to abound of late in this Nation, and to what a monstrous height it is
grown, so as almost to scorn all Law, and bear down all restraint of it.

It is something strange, that in a sober Nation (as this has been accounted)
a Nation professing Godliness and Christian Religion; and this Religion
reformed from many gross Errors, etc. that stick to it yet in many other
Nations, I say it is something strange that in such a Nation, and where there
are so many excellent Laws against it too, Wickedness should overflow, and
cause such a dreadful Inundation.

It were perhaps worthy of an Inquiry what the Causes of this should be. And
besides the common ones that always operated to this purpose, and always will,
I believe these two will be found to be the most influential.

One is that wretched Artifice of our Enemies of the Roman Communion, and the
Method that that blessed Sect of Jesuits have taken to bring us over to their
Religion by; which was by unhinging Men's natural sense of Religion, and arguing
them into Atheism, or a downright Skepticism and questioning the Obligations
and Reasons of all Religion; yea, a studied propagating Sensuality and Looseness
of Life and Manners, as well as of Belief.

It may well seem strange, that Atheism should be thought a likely way to bring
Men to Religion, or Looseness in Life a good Method to make them good
Catholics. If we consider things only superficially, we may very well question
the Policy of this.

But alas we are deceived if we do so. Those cunning Sophisters know what they
do, and are as subtle as the old Serpent in it; bring Men to an Atheistical
Temper once, and then all ways of Religion are alike to them. Debauch their
Manners, and then if there must be any Religion, let it be the easiest, that
which will allow the greatest latitude to Vice, and give hopes of Pardon upon
the cheapest terms. And let the R. Religion alone for that.

We have lived to see the effect of this Policy in the few Proselites that they
gained, when they played their Game openly among us; when it was easy to see
what was the most prevailing Argument in most of their Conversions.

Another Cause doubtless has been from our own unhappy Differences and
Contests about Religion among our selves. In the starting and fomenting of
which, though it be notoriously known that they have had a great hand, yet we
are so imprudent and unhappy, as to pursue their Methods against our selves.

The effect of these is too notorious to need instancing, it being natural for
Men that see so many Religions to question all, or resolve to be of none, till
all be agreed. Especially when they think they are indulged, or at least can
pervert the meaning of an Indulgence to that purpose; for let it be marked as
well as can be, it will be found, that as long as Men are indulged to be of
what Religion they will, there will be a great many that will be of none at
all. It is seen to be thus among us, and is plain matter of Fact. Men are
permitted upon some Conditions to go to what places of Worship they think best,
but abundance under that umbrage go to none at all; which though it be quite
beside the Intention of the Law, yet it seems little notice is as yet taken of
it.

Now when Religion is at so low an ebb among us, it is no wonder if all manner
of Profaneness and Wickedness run high, and so high (as if not timely checked)
to be very likely in a little time to overflow all.

But therefore sure there is more need to give check to it, and stemm this
Torrent by the strength of Laws. Which were they as vigorously executed, as
they are wisely made, would go near to take down the Crests, and Con^^dences of
wicked Men, and cool their courage in Sin. Men may Hector, and make a noise,
but Law edged and backed with strict Execution, would be too hard for them, and
whatever Confederacies or Complications in Wickedness there might be, the Sword
of Justice would as easily dissolve them, as that in the hand of Alexander did
the Gordian Knot.

And thus far I dare say we are all agreed, but here comes in the great
Question, how shall we get these Laws executed? and on whom does that
Obligation to execute them lie?

The Supreme Authority and Power has discharged it self, and gone as far in
this as it can; both by making us good Laws, and awakening them too by repeated
Proclamations, and Remembrances in Parliament; so that He that, under God, has
been so Instrumental in saving us from one Evil, has showed himself willing
and desirous too that we might be secured from worse.

But alas what can a poor Prince do more? He may recommend Virtue by his own
Example; and He may discourage Profaneness by his Frowns; but alas few live
under the Influence of the one, or within the reach of the other.

He may impart of his Power to others under him, and commission them as his
Delegates to do Justice; but what if these be remiss, or neglect to do it? It
is said that Kings have long Ears and Hands too; and it is true, because their
Authority reaches far, and can punish in the most most distant Places. But
then it is as true, that they but see and hear with other Men's Eyes and Ears,
and need them to give them Information of Misdeeds, as well as their Hands for
the Execution of Law against them: And if those other Men fail in either of
these, who, I pray, is to be blamed?

It is very well, and a Happiness to the whole Nation, that at some stated
times the Laws are awakened by solemn Executions. But alas, what does this
signify whilst they lie dormant all the Year besides? What does the Punishment
or Death of a few forlorn Thieves, desperate Robbers, or some few bloody
Murderers signify, as to giving Check to the Wickedness of a Nation? There
are other Sins perhaps, both as heinous in their Nature, and pernicious in
their Effects as these, either not taken notice of, or not punished; as
Lewdness, Whoredom, Cursing, Swearing, Fraud, and Knavery, Drunkenness, and all
manner of Debauchery, etc. that brave even Authority, and laugh at Law.

My Lords the King's Justices can but punish what is brought before them; not
be thought to know in a strange Country what is done amiss, and worthy of
Punishment, unless it de presented to them; and what a little of the Wickedness
done among us that is, who knows not?

It must be you, Gentlemen, that are the Guardians of Law, and the Guarrantees
of Peace in your Country, that must lend your Hand to this Work, if ever it be
done. There cannot many things be done amiss (at least in many places) but they
will come to your Cognizance, especially if you would please to be strict in
taking account of those Officers that are under you, and let them see that you
are really in earnest in your Charges to them.

I hope I need not use Arguments to persuade you to so good a Work; it commends
it self sufficiently to all sober considering Men: It is a Work that would
endear you to your God, making you (in a Sense) Saviors of your Country, and
by the Mercies of God, save your own Souls in the great Day of the Lord Jesus.

If therefore you love and honor your God, rescue his Glory and great Name
from the bold Profanations of Wicked Men. If you love and pity your Sin-sick
Country, administer this Physic; without which her Disease will soon come to a
woeful Crisis. And if you love your selves, discharge worthily this high Trust,
which your God and your Prince has honored you with, that you may give up
your Account with Joy at that great Day.

The Laws of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel are (I hope) faithfully made
known, and the Terrors of the Lord urged upon Men, by those upon whom that Duty
is incumbent: And if there be any that are either false to their Duty in this,
or render it ineffectual by their own looseness, I thank God, I have no milder
a Request to make for them, than that of our Apostle against these false
Teachers related to in the Text, (...). For as I do really believe a vicious
Clergyman to be one of the worst of Men in himself, so I look upon him as the
most infectious and pernicious in his Example. But I hope there is no need of
this Reflection, but that we shall approve our selves the Servants of Christ,
and your Servants for Jesus sake.

But alas, suppose these were never so faithful in their Duty, who will believe
their Report, or be concerned at what they denounce against Sinners? Men live
by Sense, and not by Faith; and things that are so distant make little
impression upon them. They must be present and sensible Punishments that must
have effect upon an unbelieving and profane Generation of Men.

While Religion stood only by its own strength, and the Church had only
spiritual Weapons to war with, those Weapons were not carnal, but mighty
through God as our Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.4. For God was pleased to ac, company
those spirtual Censures with present Punishments; and to be delivered to Satan
was for the destruction of the Flesh without a Figure.

But when Scepters bowed to the Cross of Christ, and Kings became Nursing
Fathers to his Church, then God expected that the Temporal Sword should do that
upupon obstinate Offenders, which he had been pleased to do by the Ministry of
Angels, in consequence of the Spiritual: and so he expects it should do still,
and therefore it is hoped those that bear the Sword, will not bear it in vain.

It will require some measure of Courage, and the Spirit of a sound Mind to do
it, I confess: But what if it do? the Work will support it self, and yield you
that inward satisfaction, and that comfort, which will bear you out against all
the Reproaches and hard Words that can be cast upon you by an evil Generation.

And would such worthy Persons but suffer themselves to be effectually
persuaded to one thing, whatever difficulties there might be in this Work, with
God's Grace it might happily be effected. The thing I mean is this, Care to
free themselves from those Vices, which they should punish in others; else it
is to be feared they will never do it, or never with Courage and Success.

We say, when a Clergyman takes heed to himself as well as to his Doctrine, he
speaks like his great Master, with Authority and Power; and when a Gentleman
does one, he does the other too. Evil Men will reverence and dread such a one,
but little regard all the Threats or Menaces of one as vicious themselves.

Here our so much wanted Reformation must begin, and when it does so, then it
will go on: Then may we begin to hope well, when we see living Sermons, and
living Laws; when the Lives of those in Authority as much reprove and shame, as
their Power does fright, and punish the Lawless and Disobedient, against whom
they let them see, and feel too, that the Law was made, and not against a
Righteous Man.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and
One God, be ascribed Dominion, Power and Glory, for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

