Imprimatur
Hic liber cui Titulus, The Case of eating and drinking unworthily stated.

July 20. 1688. JO. BATTELY.

THE CASE OF Eating and Drinking Unworthily STATED; And the SCRUPLES Of Coming
to the Holy Sacrament UPON THE Danger of Unworthiness SATISFIED: Being the
Substance of several Sermons, Preached in the Parish Church of S. Hellens,
London.

By HENRY HESKETH, Vicar of St. Hellens.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettelby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1689.

To the GENTLEMEN And others my beloved Parishioners, THE INHABITANTS Of St.
Hellens, London.
SIRS,
I Have now at last been able to comply with your request of making this
Discourse public: I heartily thank you for the good will you entertained it
with at first, for the satisfaction you are pleased to say you received from
it, and for the respect and kindness to me (for that I know you intend) in your
repeated wishes it might be published.

I am pretty well assured of your respect to what your own desires have formed,
but I have no great reason to be so of others; whom therefore I must beg to
consider that it was delivered in a plain, popular, Pulpit-way at first; and
that as I have not concerned my self to alter it, so I could not have done it,
without more time, and labor than I was willing to allow to it.

You must be pleased to stand accountable for it, and for my self I shall be no
further concerned, than to wish it may have that effect upon others, that it
has had upon most of you; and I should not wholly despair of it, if Men were
willing to receive satisfaction, as certainly they ought, in a matter of this
moment.

I pray God Almighty preserve our excellent Church: open men's Eyes to see the
truth of our Religion, and incline all our Hearts to comply carefully with
this, and all other institutions of our great Lord. To whose protection, and
Blessing I heartily recommend you all.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The first thing proposed in this Discourse, is to give a plain
Exposition of the Words; to which purpose it will be necessary to consider the
import of three Expressions in them. page 6. CHAP. II. Having in the former
Chapter cleared the true sense of the words: I proceed in this to the second
general that I proposed, to draw some general Conclusions from them, which may
be proper to be considered in the present case, and to which I shall reduce (as
to so many heads) what I intend further to say in this Discourse. The
Collections that I purpose, are three that follow. page 18. CHAP. III. I
advance to the second Collection that I made in order to the taking off the
exception that men make against coming to the Holy Sacrament, upon the reason
of these words, viz. That the possibility and danger of eating and drinking
unworthily, is not a sufficient reason for men to abstain from the Holy
Sacrament upon. page 66. CHAP. IV. I begin with the first of these
Considerations, which is indeed the foundation of all the rest, and which when
I have cleared, the reasonableness of the other will easily follow: the
Argument is this, the Communicating in the Holy Sacrament is a plain, express,
necessary duty. page 74. CHAP. V. The second Consideration that I named as an
Argument for the Truth of our Collection is this, The possibility and guilt of
doing this service of our Religion is no greater, than of doing others amiss,
which yet we count necessary to be done, and our selves do keep up the exercise
of. page 81. CHAP. VI. The third Consideration that I proposed as an argument
for this second Collection is this, The Punishment threatened to eating and
drinking unworthily, is no greater, than what may be feared upon our doing
other services of our Religion amiss, and is threatened thereunto. page 102
CHAP. VII. I advance to the fourth Consideration, which I proposed for the
truth of our present Collection, viz. That whatever sin or guilt there is in
eating and drinking unworthily, there is the same, yea there is greater in not
eating and drinking at all. page 124. CHAP. VIII. I add a fifth Consideration
to confirm the reasonableness of our second Collection, viz. That this danger
of eating and drinking unworthily is caused by our own only default, and is
what with competent care we may redress. page 136. CHAP. IX. The third thing
proposed to Consideration on this head, is this, An ordinary competent
endeavor and care (with Gods common Grace) may suffice to remove this
unworthiness, and put men out of the danger of it. page 155. CHAP. X. I go on
then to the fourth thing that was proposed on this head, viz. that though men
may have been careless, and indisposed themselves for the Holy Sacrament for
one time, yet they ought to be more careful to prepare themselves against the
next, for continual indisposition can excuse no man; so that if some present
indisposition be upon a man now, yet care ought to be taken for its removal,
that he may be fitted and prepared to Communicate the next time that providence
calls him to it. page 185. CHAP. XI. We are come to the third and last
Collection which was made from this Text, viz. That the true and only design of
the Apostle in these words, and in this form of speaking, was to engage the
Corinthians to that reverence and devotion in the Holy Sacrament, that became
so solemn a service of Religion, as that is. I shall not need to stay long on
this Argument, for I design but two things only upon it, and a little will
suffice to dispatch them both. page 198. CHAP. XII. And then there is only the
second and last thing remaining upon our hands. For having showed that to bring
them to devotion and reverence in the Holy Sacrament was his design; it will be
proper now to show how reasonably he might undertake that task, and how
becoming it is for them, and us, and all that engage into that service. page
212.
Books Written by the same Author.
A Serious Exhortation to frequent Communion. Piety the best rule of Orthodoxy.
INTRODUCTION.
THere are few things more commonly instanced in the practice of Men, and none
of more pernicious and mischievous consequence, than the (...) as the Greeks
call it, i. e. an extravagant humor of running out of one extremity into
another.

I need not stay remarking the commonness of that, which is instanced in every
days experience: nor seek for proofs of its bad effects, when we see nothing
more to debauch the opinions and practices of Men.

For there being in almost all cases, two extreme vices for one real virtue; it
is very rare that Men running from the one, stop in the intermedial stage, or
take up, till they come to the utmost extremity on the other hand. It Is a hard
matter to make a sober Convert, and so to bring a Man either to reform one
Vice, or quit such a false Opinion, and evil Principle; but that he shall leap
too far, and never think himself removed enough from it, till he sits down
quite in the other extreme.

The Nature of Man is sullen, or impetuous, and like a restive beast, either
unwilling to stir at all, or to run away without any restraint or moderation,
and our spightful enemy is watchful and cunning, and knows too well how to
impose upon us.

It is indifferent to him, in which extremity we fix, since he knows both to be
equally destructive to us; and therefore he not only willingly permits, but
sometimes purposely pusheth on a transition from one to the other, that he may
the more effectually secure our destruction. Since he not only gratifieth our
humor and affectation of novelty and change thereby, but cheats us into an
opinion of being Converts, and having quitted our sins; when alas we have only
shifted the Scene, but the same act is continued still; the same evil sticks
close to us, only it appears in another Garb, and is acted in a differing
instance.

There are not many instances in which all this is more unhappily visible at
this day, than in Men's deportment and carriage toward the Holy Sacrament of
the Lords Supper: from despising it on one hand, Men come to dread it on the
other, and from thinking any preparation almost too much, they come to believe
that none is enough for it.

Time was when Christians crowded to this Holy repast, as the Doves do to their
own windows; and the good Fathers of the Church were employed in directing them
how to come, and not in persuading them to it: heretofore want of due
preparation was the crime, but now neglect and contempt is the great guilt: Men
cannot have arguments against their coming unduly, and unpreparedly to the
Lords Table; but they carry those arguments too far, and make them to conclude
against their coming at all.

That which S. Paul used as an argument to reform one Error among the
Corinthians, we have improved into an excuse of a worser among our selves; and
what he intended to show the danger of coming amiss, we make use of to fright
our selves from coming at all.

Our duty lies in the middle, and both these extremities are equally distant
from it; it is the latter of these which is the great distemper of this time,
and which this discourse is designed to endeavor the cure of; and in order
thereto to consider those words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.29. which sound so
terribly to some men, and which they have improved into so great an exception
against coming to the Holy Sacrament, for whosoever eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords
Body.

From which words a great many Men have taken up a superstitious fear and dread
to approach the Table of the Lord, and from thence have fallen into an
unchristian neglect, and disregard of this service, apprehending some
extraordinary guilt would be contracted, and some mighty danger incurred by any
little failure in it, above what may be feared or contracted in any of the
other services of Religion, though they do not perform them so well as they
ought to do.

To this purpose you may hear them argue at this rate. You see what a mighty
great deal of preparation is necessary to our receiving the Holy Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, and that upon no less a hazard than eternal damnation: you
hear the Apostle saying expressly, that whosoever eats this Bread, and
drinks this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood
of the Lord, and eats and drinks damnation to himself.

And what now would you have us to do? We are very sensible of our own
infirmity, and know too well how far we shall fall short (after all our care)
of being worthy to engage in such a sacred service of Religion, or discharge it
so worthily as we ought to do; and therefore since we know this beforehand, is
it not much safer to sit still, than to run so great a hazard? choose rather
not to eat and drink at all, than to damn our selves by doing so unworthily.

This is really the case, and these are the reasonings of too many men; the
great danger of eating and drinking unworthily, frights them from this service;
and they choose rather wholly to neglect their duty, than to venture so great a
stake upon the undertaking of it.

This is that error and fault of Men, that I would vindicate these words of S.
Paul, from having any influence upon; and I am very confident, whether I can
successfully do this or not; the Apostle was far enough from any such intention
or thought in them: his meaning was only to direct to carefulness and reverence
in doing this duty, and by no means, to discourage or fright Men from it.

In the prosecution of this design, I have proposed to do these three things.

I. To give a plain (though short) account of the sense of these words.

II. Draw some general deductions from them, which I judge proper to satisfy
these fears of Men, and take off those objections which they make against
coming to the Holy Sacrament, upon the reason of them.

III. To make some plain practical reflections upon the whole Argument.

CHAP. I.
The first thing proposed in this Discourse, is to give a plain Exposition of
these Words; to which purpose it will be necessary to consider the import of
three Expressions in them.

1. WHat is the true sense of eating and drinking unworthily in this place.

2. What discerning, or not discerning the Lords body means.

3. What we are to understand by damnation, and by eating and drinking
damnation, in this Text.

By considering these we may perhaps gain something, toward the understanding
the true intent and meaning of the Apostle in this place, and freeing our minds
from those affrightments, which men are fallen into, from their mistaking of it.

1. In order to the understanding the true meaning of eating and drinking
unworthily, it may not be unexpedient, to consider what the signification of
the word is in other places, that secondly we may better know what there is to
determine the sense of it in this place.

1. The word (...) which we render unworthily, may perhaps best be understood,
by considering what the signification and use of (...) is, which it is the
opposite unto. Now though that do indeed signify worthy in the strictest and
most rigorous sense of worthy, yet in the New Testament it is oftener used to
signify that which is fit and becoming, or at least as often used in this
sense as the other.

Thus (to instance in a few places) in Luke 3.8. bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance, that is, such as are becoming repentance, or as it is rendered Mat.
3.8. meet for repentance, in Romans 8.18. for I reckon that the sufferings of
this present world are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in Christ; i. e. they are vastly different, there is no correspondence
upon which a comparison may be made between them. Ephesians. 4.1. that you walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called; i. e. sutably to it, and as
becomes those that make profession of it. And so in all the places where
Christians are exhorted to walk worthy of the Lord, worthy of God, and worthy
of the Gospel; the true sense of all which the same Apostle expresses, Phil.
1.27. by letting their conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.

And thus in all the places in the New Testament in which Men are either
exhorted to endeavor, or declared to be worthy of the Kingdom of God, and
worthy of the future glory: you are not to understand worthy in the utmost
sense of the word, as it means merit in the sense in which that is now become
matter of Controversy, (for that is against the constant sense and language of
the New Testament,) but only as it signifies meet and fit and duly qualified
for such glory.

Just as most of the Schoolmen, when they come to talk closely of merit,
distinguish between meritum ex condigno, and meritum ex congruo, and when they
would assert man's merit before God, make it at last to dwindle into meritum ex
congruo, i. e. no merit at all properly speaking, but only fitness and
meetness, to receive blessing from him: and truly I do not know one place where
the word is used of Man, with respect either to God, or future glory, or doing
his duty, but it is used only in this sense, for meet and fitting, and so as
becomes him in all these respects.

Now according to this sense unworthy must needs signify unfit, unmeet, and
unbecoming; and accordingly you shall find it is used in two places in the New
Testament, which are all the places (I think) besides this Cup: where it is
meet with Act. 13.46. Seeing you judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, and 1 Cor. 6.2. Are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters? i. e. are
you unfit to make peace among the brethren, and to umpire the small differences
that happen between them?

This now is the signification, and this the use commonly of the word in the
New Testament, viz. to signify unfitly, unbecomingly, and not always
unworthily in the strictest sense of that word.

But yet this is but the general signification of the word, and the particular
is to be determined by that particular matter that it is applied unto; so that
to determine that here in this place, we need only to inquire what that
particular worthiness and becomingness is, which ought to accompany the doing
any duty, or service of our Religion; and eating and drinking in the Holy
Sacrament unworthily, will, and must needs be the contrary to it, according to
this signification of the word.

Now the great and necessary qualification, to render the doing any service of
Religion becoming and fit, is great reverence and devotion, out of a just sense
of the sacredness of that service, and the greatness of that God, that it is
done unto; and therefore to perform any such service of Religion irreverently,
rudely, carelessly, and profanely, is to do it unworthily; and is that very
unworthiness that our Apostle intends in this place.

And that we ought to understand it so here, I think I may safely conclude from
these two further considerations.

1. The reason of the thing, which will not suffer us to understand unworthily
in the strict and rigorous signification of it; for then no man in this present
lapsed state could avoid eating and drinking unworthily, after his utmost
endeavor and care not to do so.

The best, and most devout Man living, falls short of that worthiness and
perfection in doing this, or any other service of Religion, that it should be
done with; he fails in many circumstances of that exactness, that ought to
grace all religious performances.

The Lord is great, and cannot worthily be praised, as our old Translation
renders that passage, Psalm. 96.4. i. e. It exceeds the power of Man in this
imperfect State, to praise the great God in that sublime manner that he ought
to be praised: in many things (says S. James) we offend all, Jam. 3.2. and in
all (even our best things,) it is certain we offend in so many circumstances,
that should God be extreme to mark what is done amiss, no service of the
holiest man living could expect to be accepted by him.

Who is sufficient for these things? cries the inspired S. Paul, 2 Cor. 2.16.
and yet he speaks it but of preaching the Gospel; it were perhaps proper to
move the question concerning this service, and that with some advantage too.
Who is sufficient or able to perform it worthily? and what Man is he, that can
think he discharges it anytime, in every circumstance so as he ought to do? we
may safely enough answer the question, and say not one.

So that the very reason of the thing concludes us to this sense of the
expression; for otherwise, no Man living ought to commucate, nor could do so,
without eating and drinking damnation to himself; which I believe the strictest
urgers of this place (to this purpose) do not believe.

Every Man finds it too true in daily experience, and every good Man puts it
into his daily confessions, that he does greatly fail, fall very short of doing
this, or any other duty so worthily as he ought to do, and consequently does
always eat and drink unworthily, if that were the signification of that
expression.

2. The second thing that concludes us to this sense of eating and drinking
unworthily, is the expression that the Apostle explains it by afterward in
this Text; and we need but let him expound his own meaning, in order to our
right understanding of it: now that he does in the last clause of it, not
discerning the Lords body; this is added by the Apostle both as an explanation
of the precedent phrase, eating and drinking unworthily; and a reason too of
that punishment that is due to him that does so: he that eats and drinks
unworthily, does not discern the Lords body, and he that does not so, eats
and drinks damnation to himself.

This expression I shall choose to explain in the second place, as being indeed
the true Key to this Text; and what the import of it is, we may easily learn,
both from the phrase, and that particular error and miscarriage of these
Corinthians, which the Apostle does here perstringe, and which this whole
discourse has a direct regard unto.

The Greek word (...) signifies not differencing, or distinguishing the Lords
body, and is the word commonly used to signify the differencing of meats and
other things under the Law; and being applied here to the body of Christ in the
Holy Sacrament, it signifies plainly the eating and drinking the holy Symbols
of it, as common things. The eating that bread, as common bread; and drinking
that cup, as common wine; the putting no difference between that which is
common, and that which is holy; the eating the Lords Supper just as men do a
common Supper, or Meal in their own Houses, and making no difference in our
respects and regards to the one, more than to the other.

For it is plain (and I shall have occasion hereafter to show it fully) this
was the great miscarriage and fault of the Corinthians, which the Apostle so
sharply taxes in this place: they did eat the (...) the Love Feasts
disorderly, and in great confusion, yea to excess and drunkenness; and the Holy
Sacrament which they are in the close thereof, they are irreverently, and
without any due sense of the sacredness of it; just as they ate at home in
their own houses, without any sense of Religion, or mystery in it, and without
making any difference between that, and a common morsel of bread, or cup of
wine.

This is the particular sense of eating and drinking unworthily in this place,
and by this Key we may come to the true understanding of it; and though perhaps
we may extend it further, and make it to comprehend some other failures beside
this, yet we do it but by Analogy and proportion, in which we may possibly be
mistaken, and in which our own reasonings may fail us; but whether they do or
not, nothing but this is that eating and drinking unworthily, which the Apostle
means in this place. So that although those other things may possibly cause Men
to eat and drink unworthily in some sense, yet not to do so in the sense of
this Text; and therefore Men should be infinitely careful, how they apply this
to other things than what the Apostle did, or assert the same guilt and danger
to be incurred equally in one as well as the other.

3. The naming of which, brings me to the third and last expression that needs
to be explained, in his eating and drinking damnation to himself; in doing
which I shall but need to consider what the strict and particular reference of
damnation is in this place; for the word (...), being of a general and
indefinite signification, and being used to express any judgment whatsoever,
must be fixed only by the circumstances of the place; and by that we shall best
understand what it does specially refer to.

I do not deny, but the word is sometimes used to signify what we commonly
restrain it to; i. e. that eternal damnation in hell that is prepared for the
impenitent, and unbelievers; and those other appellatives of vice which the
Scripture describes, such as Whoremongers and Adulterers, Extortioners and
Covetous, Drunkards, Murderers, etc.

But because it is sometimes used in that sense, therefore to understand it
always so wherever we meet it, is a great mistake, and sometimes of very ill
consequence. I could show this in some other instances, besides that under
present consideration, were not the truth too visible in this alone. For by
this means Men have been frighted from the Holy Sacrament, and (as I observed
before) sat down in a total disregard and neglect of it; choosing rather, and
thinking it the safer side of the question, not to Communicate at all, than to
run an apparent hazard of damnation by doing so.

And I must confess were this really the case, they would have at least some
appearance of a reason to plead for themselves; and would almost stand upon the
same ground with us, and have the same argument against coming to the Holy
Sacrament, which we use to persuade them to the same.

The highest Argument that we have to this purpose, is that it is a plain duty,
relying upon the express command of our dying Lord, which wilfully to
transgress must most certainly be a damning sin.

Now the same would these Men have to plead against it, were this the sense of
damnation in this place; and so would run no greater a hazard in not receiving
it at all, than they do in receiving it unworthily and amiss; they must be
damned in receiving it unworthily, and they can be no more, in not receiving it
at all.

This I call a gross misunderstanding the sense of damnation in this place; for
whatever it may signify in other places, it is plain it does not signify so
in this: And this is evident, if we consider what the punishments are, which
were inflicted for this sin, which the Apostle instanceth in the following
verse, for this cause many are weak, and sickly among you, and many sleep: i.
e. This gross irreverence of yours toward the Symbols of his own Son's body
and blood, has provoked God to punish you with many sicknesses and diseases,
and some among you have been cut off, and have died by them.

In all which there is not one word of eternal damnation, nor any mention made,
but of temporary, of external, or corporal punishments only; nor is there any
necessity of inferring the danger of damnation from these: for Men may be
punished in this world, and spared, and pardoned in the next, and it is not
only possible, but common and ordinary to be so.

Eternal damnation is the final excision, and last wrathful destruction of
wicked Men; it is the last unmixed cup of Gods vengeance in which there is no
allay of mercy, not one grain of favor mixed with it; but such Judgments as
these here are far from being so: they are always medicinal, and preventive, to
correct and amend former faults; and to prevent the last and final destruction.
They are intended for the salvation of Men, and do not always so much as
preface to their damnation. Yea when they proceed so far as to cut off Men's
lives, they may be only correcting, and punishing of them here, that they may
be finally spared hereafter.

And so the Apostle plainly tells these irreverent Corinthians that these
punishments were, Verse. 32. When we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world, i. e. God inflicts these
judgments upon you, to bring you to a sense of the sin that caused them, and to
learn you to reform, and abstain from those things, whose consequences you have
found to be so bitter: they are so far from intending your eternal damnation,
that they are purposely designed to prevent it. They are the medicinal
chastenings of your good Father, which are inflicted indeed for this your great
fault, but intended as expiations rather of the guilt, than eternal punishments
for it.

This now I think is the plain, true exposition of this place, which I have
therefore given in the first place; because it may be of good use to take off
something of the terror that seems at first sight to be in it, and to let Men
see, that these words rightly understood according to the purpose of the
Apostle in using them, are not so frightful, as at first perhaps they might
apprehend them to be, and may serve therefore in consequence of that, to take
off something of that fear, and dread of coming to the Holy Sacrament, which
their minds may have entertained upon the reason of them.

CHAP. II.
Having in the former Chapter cleared the true sense of these words: I proceed
in this to the second general that I proposed, to draw some general Conclusions
from them, which may be proper to be considered in the present case, and to
which I shall reduce (as to so many heads) what I intend further to say in this
discourse; the Collections that I purpose, are these three that follow.

1. That eating and drinking unworthily in the sense of this place, is a thing
hardly to be committed by Christians in this age.

2. The supposed danger of eating and drinking unworthily is not a sufficient
reason for Men to abstain from the Holy Sacrament upon.

3. The true purpose of this place is to deter Men from irreverence and
rudeness in eating and drinking in the Holy Sacrament, and engage them to that
devotion and reverence, that becomes them that do discern the Lords body.

These are three material Collections, proper to be considered by all
scrupulous persons in this case; and therefore I shall endeavor to the utmost
of my power and skill, to discourse them with that plainness and evidence that
they require and deserve.

I begin with the first, eating and drinking unworthily in the sense of this
Text, is hardly to be committed by Christians in this age.

In order to the clearing the truth of this Collection, it will concern me to
do these following things.

1. Show what this eating and drinking unworthily was, and wherein this sin of
these Corinthians did consist.

2. Consider the Circumstances that all Christians now are in, which set them
almost above the possibility of being guilty of it.

3. I shall inquire what can be counted eating and drinking unworthily in
proportion to this.

4. And consider in the last place, whether these also be not almost
incompetent to Christians, especially to any that are concerned in our present
case.

SECT. I.
IN order to my discharging the first thing undertaken, I shall need but to
repeat a little of what I said in the explication of this Text, and this phrase
in it.

Not discerning the Lords body is certainly the Key to the meaning of eating
and drinking unworthily, and by considering the one, we may come to the
understanding of the other; and by examining how the case stood with these
Corinthians, we may easily understand both.

By their not discerning the Lords body, the Apostle means their not
considering that this was an immediate service of Religion; and that the morsel
of bread which they did eat, and glass of wine that they did drink were
Sacramentally the very body and blood of Christ; they put no difference between
these sacred Symbolls of our Lords body and blood, and common food and drink;
nor showed greater reverence in eating and drinking the one, than doing so to
the other; they ate in Gods House just as they did in their own, and made no
distinction between this and a common meal.

Yea (and which is something worse yet) they did this not only thus
irreverently, but in intemperance, and downright drunkenness; for so he tells
them verse. 21. One is hungry, and another is drunk.

How this monstrous disorder happened among them, has been hinted already; and
may more fully now by giving a short account of the ancient practice of the
Church in this matter. Now that briefly stood thus, the Holy Sacrament was
usually prefaced unto by a public feast of Charity, which is called in
antiquity (...) a Love-Feast, to which you have frequent reference in the New
Testament; to this Feast every one contributed, and brought some portion,
according to his ability, of which all feasted lovingly together; reserving
some portion for the Holy Sacrament, which they always celebrated in the close
of this Feast.

Now this grand profanation of this Holy Service happened thus: instead of
feeding lovingly all together of what was thus brought by all, each one fed
singly upon his own portion, by which it came to pass, not only that the poor
had little or nothing to eat, but the rich had too much, which brought them to
excess, and even to plain drunkenness: one is hungry and another drunk, in
which sad condition approaching to the Table of the Lord, they were very unfit
to consider the sacredness of it, and very unlike to pay that reverence that
was due to it.

That both these things contributed to their not discerning the Lords body, and
in consequence of that eating and drinking unworthily, we may fully satisfy
our selves, by considering the Apostles dealing with them, in the latter part
of this Chapter, where he falls upon this Argument.

For because they were so grossly ignorant in the reason and design of the Holy
Sacrament, he explains that fully to them, from Verse 22d. to the 27th.
acquainting them with the Author, reason and purpose of this institution; that
it was an immediate service of Religion, instituted by Christ himself just
before his suffering, and instituted to no meaner a purpose, than to be a
solemn rite of commemorating his death, which should be used in his Church till
his coming again to judgment. For I have received of the Lord, that which I
also delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus in the same night in which he was
betrayed, took bread: and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said,
Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of
me. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying,
This cup is the New Testament in my blood, this do ye as often as ye drink it in
remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
show the Lords death till he come.

And because through their scandalous intemperance preceding, they so horribly
profaned this service; therefore he shows them both the sin, and great danger
of it, and presses them to a serious care to reform it: as you may see in the
27, 28, 29, and 30th. Verses. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and
drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and
drink of that cup. For he this eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. For this cause
many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. For if we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged. In which words it is plain he refers to this
scandalous abuse of theirs, aggravating both the guilt and danger of it, in
words as high and dreadful, as could well be thought on; that thereby he might
bring them to a dread of it, and to the use of those means which he prescribes
in order to the reforming of it.

This (in short) was the eating and drinking unworthily that the Apostle so
sharply taxes, and God had so severely punished these Corinthians for; and
when we consider seriously the horrible grossness of it, I believe we shall
subscribe to the equity and reasonableness of both: this was so extremely foul
and gross a profanation of the Holy Sacrament, that we cannot wonder either at
the vehemence of the reproof, or sharpness of the punishment: it was such a
crime, as was scarce ever heard of in a Christian Church, and at the very name
of which (I am persuaded) a Christian heart cannot but tremble: if damnation in
the most dreadful sense of the word had been threatened, or had been inflicted
up on this sin, it had been no wonder.

SECT. II.
2. LET us therefore enquire whether any Christian now needs much to fear, or
can well be guilty of the like, and we shall soon find, that they are almost
above the possibility of it.

1. For first these preceding Love Feasts are now abolished, and wholly
disused, and have been so for many Centuries of years: for these Feasts not
only giving some color of a reason to the Heathens to traduce the Christians
upon, as if they indulged to all manner of sensuality and uncleanness in them,
as they very well knew themselves did in their Bacchanalia and some other
Feasts, but also giving too much occasion to exorbitancy and disorder among
themselves; and coming in a little time to be abused indeed to some ill
purposes, were by public Order and Canon of the Church prohibited, and wholly
laid down, and continue so to this day.

So that to us there is no such possibility of this disorder and excess,
because we are out of the reach of that, which was temptation and occasion of
it in them; and that custom and practice is wholly antiquated, and laid aside
among us, which betrayed them into it.

2. And secondly the time of communicating in the Holy Sacrament with us, is
wholly changed from what it was of old for the same reason: it was then not
only called the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but indeed was so, i. e. in
imitation of our Lords practice it was celebrated at Supper time; though I
cannot but by the by note, that to me it seems plain, it was celebrated
antelucano tempore, during those hot and raging persecutions in Pliny's time;
when the Christians were glad to meet early before day to perform the services
of their Religion, for fear of discovery by their persecutors.

But however that were, it is certain that generally it was observed in the
Evening, at Supper time; a time which was really more inconvenient in this
respect, and when men were in more danger of not observing it with that
reverence and devotion, that became both it, and themselves too: and that for
these two plain reasons.

First, that at night Men's minds and thoughts are commonly more loosened, and
far from that seriousness and consistency, that they are usually in a morning.
Mark it, and you will commonly find a great difference between a Man's morning
and evening devotions: in a morning our thoughts generally are both more clear
and united; but by that time the hurries of the day are over, they are more
pusled and disordered with the business that has employed them; so that they
cannot so easily recollect themselves, and fix upon God and Religion again:
upon which reason it is thought by some Divines, that the Psalmist compared his
early devotions to incense, but those of the evening to the lifting up of his
hands, or to the common sacrifice.

So that in this we have greatly the advantage of them, and the wisdom of the
Church has thought fit upon this reason to change the time for the observation
of it long ago; we receive it now in the morning, and that upon Sundays and
Holydays too. i. e. both when our thoughts are more active and united, and when
we are out of all temptation from other business, and before we can well have
disordered our selves with any.

Secondly, Another advantage on our side lies in this, that in the morning we
are usually fresh, and free from any steams of intemperance, and from any
temptations to it, which in the progress of the day men too often meet with,
and by too easy compliances with, are too often ruffled and disordered by
before evening.

Men are generally sober in a morning, and S. Peter thought Men could not be
drunk at the third hour of the day, i. e. (according to the Jewish way of
dividing the day) at nine in the morning; and though perhaps in this degenerate
age and place, some exceptions might be produced against the Apostles rule; yet
it is not ordinarily and commonly so: Men are neither in such danger of being
over taken, nor so commonly so in a morning, as (God knows) they too commonly
are seen to be at night: so that upon this reason also we have something the
advantage of them in this respect, and cannot well come drunk to the Lords
Table, unless we be beasts, and monsters of intemperance.

3. And yet there is a third instance, in which the Christian Church has taken
care to secure us in this instance. And that is its injoyning us to receive the
Holy Sacrament fasting. For this there are several Constitutions and Canons of
the Church producible, by which certainly it has taken the utmost, and most
effectual care possible for the prevention of such profanation of this Holy
Service.

For because that the custom of Communicating in the evening continued longer
in some Churches than in others; though they could not break that custom, yet
by this institution they thought they provided sufficiently against all
possibility of this profanation: and indeed so they did, for it was not
possible for them to come drunk to the Holy Sacrament in the evening, who had
fasted all the day preceding: this constitution would either certainly change
the time of the Holy Communion, or it would secure it against this profanation,
or rather (as we see it has done already) it would secure both purposes.

This Custom has now generally obtained in this, as well as all other
Churches. Men generally receive the Holy Sacrament fasting, and I believe few
do otherwise, unless it be out of some necessary respect to health, or some
present infirmity; in which the Church does, and always did allow a
dispensation, well knowing that God requires mercy and not sacrifice.

4. To these we may add in the fourth place, that high respect and veneration,
that Men generally have, and have long been accustomed and taught to have for
the Holy Sacrament, even above any other service and ministry of Religion.

The truth is, instead of profaning the Sacrament by our Common and irreverent
carriage at it, we have run on the other hand into a superstitious fear and
dread that keeps us from it; and I believe there is not one instance in a whole
age producible of a Man's being drunk at the Lords Table.

The worst of Men, the worst profligate and debauched will lay some restraint
upon themselves, both before, and after the Holy Comunion, and we may commonly
see that they do so. Men have generally more veneration for Religion, than to
go drunk to Church, or dare to appear before God, when they are so unfit to do
so.

And yet even these Men have a higher sense of, and a greater veneration for
the Holy Sacrament, than other services of Religion, and a mightier horror and
dread of coming carelessly, and without respect unto it. Yea the very same men
that dare so irreverently and regardlesly attend other Ministeries of Religion,
yet are seen to be very serious and devout in this. They that can sit at
prayers, as if God were rather petitioning and praying to them, than they to
him. They that can lay themselves down to sleep at a Sermon, and perhaps sooner
fall into sleep on a hard bench there, than the softest down in their own
houses: they (in a word) that can behave themselves in Gods house, with as
little reverence and show of devotion, as they do in a Warehouse or a Stable:
yet when they approach the Table of the Lord, seem generally very reverent and
devout, and I hope really are so.

5. There is yet a fifth thing that may pertinently be observed, as of effect
to secure Men against this profanation of the Holy Sacrament; and that is their
having been so long taught what a mighty deal of preparation is necessary to
it, and having been so loudly alarmed with the great danger of communicating
unworthily in it.

This has been the current Doctrine, and the common way of dealing with Men,
for some ages. The great business of the good Fathers was not to persuade Men
to come to the Holy Sacrament, for that they always accounted their necessary
duty, and till this last age, none ever counted to pass for Christians that
neglected it; and therefore their business was only to direct the zeal and
devotion of Christians in this instance, and not to excite it, to direct and
instruct Men how to come acceptably and as they ought, and not to argue with
them about the duty of coming: and therefore there is so much met with in their
writings about the necessity and way of due preparation, and so little about
the obligation to come: many books written to instruct Men in the methods of
due preparation, but there was no necessity of insisting upon that, which is
our chief task and business at present.

For in the latter part of this feculent, and almost worst of ages, Men have
run their instructions and doctrins into the other extreme; pressed so much the
necessity of an extraordinary preparation, and aggravated so mightily the
danger of receiving unworthily, that Men are frighted from the Sacrament,
rather than invited to it; and have thought it (as I said before) safer to keep
wholly from it, than to run so great a hazard in the observation thereof.

These things (we find) stick fast in Men's minds yet, and it is a hard thing to
dispossess them of that superstitious fear, that these doctrines have struck
them with: Men are now in more danger to run into the contrary extreme, than to
fall into this; in more danger to stay wholly from the Holy Sacrament upon this
dread of it, than to run to it carelessly; and without any due regard of the
sacredness of it.

Upon these reasons it may (I think) safely be said, that Christians now are in
little danger of this sin; and almost out of a possibility of eating and
drinking unworthily, in the sense of this Text, and which the Apostle taxes
the Corinthians for.

SECT. III.
HAving proceeded so far upon the strict sense of this place, and the direct
design of the Apostle in it: I go on to a material scruple, and a very
important inquiry, very fit to be considered and resolved. And that is, whether
nothing be eating and drinking unworthily besides this? does a Man never eat
and drink unworthily, but when he comes drunk to the Lords Table? does not this
open a gate to very great looseness and carelessness, and make communicating
worthily a very light and easy thing? to what purpose needed the good Fathers
of the Church, to have taken so much pains to direct Men how to fit and prepare
themselves for this service? and have pressed the observance of those
prescriptions with so much earnestness, as they did, if this where the only
instance in which Men could eat and drink unworthily?

This I call a very considerable inquiry, and therefore I shall endeavor to
give it as plain and full satisfaction, as I am able. It seems to consist of
several parts, to all which I shall endeavor to suit proper answers in these
following propositions.

1. Whatever Men may say or think in this matter, this only is that eating and
drinking unworthily, that the Apostle means in this place, and to which he
threatens this punishment.

This I have cleared already, and need not stand repeating it again: not
considering the Lords Body, but eating the Holy Sacrament as a common meal,
being as regardless and intemperate at the Lords Table, as Men commonly are at
their own, was that sin of the Corinthians which the Apostle here taxes, and
which he calls eating and drinking unworthily.

Now if Men would consider this, it would be one good step toward their
satisfaction in this case, and of good use toward the removing their fear of
eating unworthily. For why should men fear incurring the same guilt, unless
they committed the same sin? and while they are very sure they shall not commit
the one, why should they discourage, and afflict themselves with fears of the
other?

It is neither safe nor fair dealing to apply passages of Scripture beyond
their own proper intendment: and few things have done more harm in Divinity
than this. As we cannot establish, or prove the truth of doctrines from the
bare chiming of words; or because some sayings may be found in Scripture, that
seem to found to our sense and purpose; no more ought we hastily to extend
reproofs, and threatenings beyond their own proper matter.

As for example, to make this clear in a parallel case. Every failure of a
Clergyman in the discharge of his public duty, is not presently to be thought
to be Nadab and Abihu's offering of strange fire, nor is presently to expect
the like miraculous punishment from heaven. No more ought we to conclude, that
every failure in eating and drinking the Holy Sacrament, is presently that
eating and drinking unworthily that the Corinthians were guilty of: or that
every Christian is therefore liable to the same damnation, that we think they
were threatened withal.

The Corinthians did not discern the Lords body, made no difference between the
Sacrament and a common meal: came drunk to the Lords Table, and in a condition
that made them utterly unable to pay any respect or reverence to the Symbols of
their Lords body and blood, and therefore were sharply threatened, and punished
too: but what is all this to thee, that even tremblest at the thoughts of such
horrible profaness? why needst thou discourage and fright thy self from coming
to the Holy Sacrament with fear of the same guilt and punishment, when thou art
very sure, thou shall not commit the same sin? and (let me add) when if thou
have the least sense of Religion in thee, and do in any measure discern the
Lords body, thou can not commit it.

But now some Men may yet reply, what did this passage so solely concern the
Corinthians that it respects none else? is there no use that we may make of it?
nor any instruction to our selves that we may improve it into?

I answer, why yes we may, and there is scarce any other such passage in holy
Scripture, but we may improve so too: and there are two very useful
improvements that we may make of this to our own advantage.

1. The first is to engage our utmost care and caution against the same sin:
and this is the prime, principal, and most proper improvement of it, to take
heed that we do not sin after the similitude of transgression that they did.

This the Apostle tells us in a like case; the threatenings of punishments,
that fell upon the Jews (...). were our examples, and intended as admonitions
to us, that we should not lust, and become Idolaters, and murmurers as they
were. 1 Cor. 10.6. and 10. and it ought to be just so here also: the
threatenings and punishments of the Corinthians, for their gross and scandalous
profanation of the Holy Sacrament, ought to caution us against the like
irreverence. But I do not understand any good reason, why we should afflict our
selves with apprehensions, and fears of the same punishment, while (thanks be
to God) we are far enough from the same sin, any more than there is reason for
those men presently to expect the Plague, the exterminating Angel, the fiery
Serpents that destroyed the Idolatrous and Lustful Israelites, who were never
guilty of any uncleanness, or idolatry like theirs.

2 But we may go further yet in our improvements of this, and such passages in
the Holy Scriptures, i. e. to engage our care not only against the same sin,
but any thing that looks like it, or comes near it.

It is not safe coming within the reach of a danger, nor approaching so near as
the Verge of a sin, if a man can help it: a wise man will not only beware of
the same sin, that he sees so sharply threatened and punished, but even of any
that looks like it. And as every Clergyman that ministers before the Lord, may
by the sin and punishment of Nadab and Abihu learn to be very careful in the
discharge of his sacred function: So every Christian by considering the sin of
the Corinthians, and what befell them for it, may learn how greatly it concerns
him, to be devout and reverent at the Lords table, and to take heed of every
thing that looks like a profanation of that Sacred Ordinance.

But as I do not know any reason, why he should think every little failure of
his, to be the same unworthy eating and drinking that they were guilty of, no
more do I know any cause, why he should presently dread the same punishment,
that was inflicted upon them.

2. But I advance a second proposition in further answer to this question, viz.
That although this be the only true notion of eating and drinking unworthily in
this Text; yet it is possible that Men may fix that notion upon other things,
by the rule of Analogy and proportion. I mean there may perhaps be some other
things that may cause a Man to eat and drink unworthily in some proportion to
what the Corinthians did. So that I am far from saying that no man needs fear
eating and drinking unworthily, but he that is drunk at the Lords Table. There
may possibly be other things to bring a man within that guilt, as well as that;
and this is as much (I think) as can be required in this objection. But then I
say withal these two things, which I would have always considered as the
conditions of this concession.

1. That whatever those things are, that men think to bring within the compass
of this guilt, they do it but reductively, and (as I said) but only by analogy
and proportion. Those sins whatever they be, are not primarily intended in this
place, but brought in only by our own arts of deduction, and reasoning, in
which we may possibly be mistaken, and which are far from being so certain, as
the discourse of the Apostle is. So that if men will needs bring in other
things within the compass of this guilt, and within the reach of this
punishment, besides what the Apostle intends and speaks of; they ought to be
infinitely careful, and very sure that the Analogy will hold, and that their
own deductions be rational and certain. This is absolutely necessary in all
arguments that proceed upon proportion: the cases and circumstances must
exactly correspond, or else the argument will not only be weak, but trifling
too.

And when we consider how uncertain the most confident men's reasonings commonly
are, and how very subject they are to be mistaken in them, it will be a hard
matter to know certainly when their inferences may be depended upon, and when
not. So that men have great need to be very careful in their discourses of this
matter, what they do determine to be eating and drinking unworthily besides
what the Apostle meant: for though they may seem to themselves (and perhaps
others too) to have the safer side of the question, and to pursue a design
which may seem the better of the two, i. e. to secure a mighty reverence to the
holy Sacrament, above what the other doctrine seems to do.

Yet they may be so far mistaken, as thereby to occasion a greater mischief,
and while they go unwarily to engage men to come with that exactness of
preparation and care, that they would have them to come with; they may possibly
fright them from coming at all; and (to deal freely and plainly) I do not know
a more likely way to do this by, than by being too free in such inferences,
enlarging the notion of eating and drinking unworthily, and extending it to
things, which it is certain the Apostle never meant.

I am very much mistaken, if this be the safer side of the question. I think it
much better that a man retain some sense of his duty, and take some competent
care to do it; though it be but imperfectly, and far from that exactness that
it ought to be done with; than that he wholly neglect it, and live as if we
were unconcerned in it: and for my own part, I would much rather bring men to
do their duty, and set about it as well as they can; than by any doctrine of
mine encourage them to sit down in a careless neglect, and disregard of it. I
would much rather encourage men to their duty, than fright them from it: and
therefore as I will not be very forward to make any thing eating and drinking
unworthily, which I have reason to believe the Apostle did not intend: so I
will not be hasty in agreeing with them that do, unless I be very well
satisfied that the Analogy is true, and that the circumstances in both cases be
the same.

2. Another thing that I would have observed here is this, that nothing can be
eating and drinking unworthily in analogy to what the Apostle means here, but
that which argues or infers as great an irreverence to this service, and as
gross a profanation of it, as this of the Corinthians made them guilty of.

Their eating and drinking unworthily consisted in this, and therefore if men
make any thing else to be eating and drinking unworthily like them, they must
prove the same, or as great irreverence and profanation to be in it. If they
can find any other thing, which equally hinders men from discerning the Lords
body, or yielding any more respect to the sacred Symbols of it, than the
Corinthians did, then I will yield that that may be allowed to come within the
guilt of eating and drinking unworthily, that the Apostle here refers to.

This is that Key that lets us into the Apostles meaning in this Text, and
opens to us his sense of eating and drinking unworthily: and therefore if men
will use it to any other things, they must see that the wards exactly agree, or
else it will do no more service to them in this cause, than a common Key will
do toward the opening a Lock, which it never was fitted for. The Corinthians
did eat and drink unworthily because they did not discern the Lords body, and
therefore those that do eat and drink unworthily like them, must as little
discern the Lords body as they did. This is the rule that we must proceed by in
this case; if we will conclude rightly concerning any other thing, it must be
something that sets men as far from discerning the Lords body, and renders them
as unfit or unable to show any becoming respect to it, as this disorder of the
Corinthians did them; otherwise it is not eating and drinking unworthily in
proportion to them: in this the Analogy must truly hold, or else all our
deductions will miserably fail.

SECT. IV.
HItherto we have been smoothing the way, and so far (I dare say) we have gone
upon sure ground, but now we must advance to a more uncertain and slippery
path, and to that in which the difficulty pincheth most.

3. And that is the third thing proposed, viz. to inquire what can according to
this rule of proportion be admitted to be eating and drinking unworthily, as
these Corinthians did: what it is that can hinder us from discerning the Lords
body, and paying that reverence and respect to it in the Holy Sacrament, that
men ought to pay; as that disorder and intemperance of these persons did them.
This is the main question, and the resolution of it will set us pretty well to
rights in this difficulty.

There are but two things, that (after my best considering of this question) I
dare pitch upon, to bring into any comparison, with this unworthiness of the
Corinthians: and they are these, gross ignorance and wilful resolved
impenitence. I name these two, because I think I can make the correspondence to
hold, and I name no more, because I cannot see that Analogy to hold in any
others. Upon the reason of one of these men cannot, and upon the other they
will not discern the Lords body; and therefore in both cases are as far from
any due respect and reverence to it, as the Corinthians were. I shall consider
them distinctly, and examine them upon this reason, of not discerning the Lords
body.

1. Gross ignorance, I mean it in the great principles of Christian Religion,
especially in that great mystery of our redemption by Jesus Christ; when men
understand little or nothing of Christ's coming into the world, or of the
reasons of it, or that bitter suffering and death that he underwent for us.
When they know not, what the reason of this institution was, or what our Lord
would have signified in it.

If any adult Christian be thus grossly ignorant, and being so, communicate in
this service, I do not know how to excuse him from eating and drinking
unworthily as the Corinthians did: for it is plain, in this case he cannot
discern the Lords body. He will look upon the Elements, but as common Bread and
Wine: he will not consider that they are the Symbols of Christ's body and blood,
and that the breaking of the one is to signify the breaking of Christ's body on
the Cross; and the pouring out of the other, the shedding of his blood for our
redemption, and that our communicating in these is communicating in the blessed
effects and benefits of both. He does not know that by this solemn rite of
Religion, he is to commemorate with gratitude, and transport, the amazing love
of his dying Lord, and that in this he may expect those communications of
divine grace, that shall strengthen and refresh his soul, as really and truly,
as his body is by the Bread and Wine.

And being thus profoundly ignorant in these things, such a man will eat that
morsel of Bread, and drink that Wine, but just as these Corinthians and their
fellow Grecians used to do the like in the end of their feasts, as a Concluding
Morsel, and as a Grace Cup, in token of that love which was amongst the ghosts,
for so they used always to end these their conventions. And just like them he
will be far enough from apprehending any thing of Religion and Mystery to be in
it, and consequently to that, far enough from that devotion and reverence that
becomes every Communicant in this service.

This was the reason why converts in the ancient times of the Church were
usually kept in the rank of Catechumens for some time, and competently
instructed in the principles of Christian Religion, before they were admitted
to full Communion, and to this service, and this is the method that the Church
of England proceeds in to this day to have all baptized persons Catechized, and
competently instructed in their Religion, and thereupon Confirmed, before she
admit them to the Lords Table. And (by the way) I would to God, that this were
so carefully kept up and practiced, as it should be, and then we should have
but little reason to fear any men's such gross ignorance, or communicating
unworthily upon the reason thereof.

2. The other thing that we may allow to be the cause of eating and drinking
unworthily in proportion to this of the Corinthians, is resolved wilful
impenitence.

In this case it is as plain the Analogy does hold, or indeed exceed rather:
and the not discerning the Lords body is alike in both cases; a resolute
impenitent wretch does as little discern the Lords body, as the Corinthians
did, and (besides that) does despite to it; instead of showing forth the Lords
death, he comes to avow it; instead of commemorating the love and blessing of
it with joy and transport, he comes to put a scorn and affront upon it; instead
of reflecting upon it with sorrow and shame for the sins that caused it, he
comes to repeat it, and to justify all the barbarous indignities of it:
instead of improving it into an argument of repentance and reformation, he
comes to deride it, to insult over it, and resolved to continue in his sins, in
plain defiance and spite of it.

This in the Language of the Apostle is called Crucifying afresh the Lord of
glory, and putting him again to the same open shame; trampling under foot the
blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was redeemed, and should have been
sanctified. Heb. 10.29. And truly is in effect, a seconding all the malice and
spite of the Jews, avowing the treachery of Judas, justifying the Sentence of
Pilate, and vindicating the barbarous and remorseless cruelty of the Roman
Soldiers: yea, and let me say, is in him that professes Christianity really
exceeding, and outdoing them all.

The guilt of most of the orher is capable of some extenuation, either
ignorance, prejudice, or interest: but what shall excuse such a man's guilt? or
can be pleaded in extenuation of it? who has been baptized into the faith of
Christ, and solemnly vowed love and obedience to him, as his Savior and Lord,
and yet wilfully outdoeth the greatest indignities and affronts, that his most
treacherous servant, or most implacable enemies could offer to him?

This was one great reason, why the discipline of the Church in her primitive
times of purity was so very strict and sharp. Why she was so quick to observe,
and as careful to punish all notorious and profligate offenders, by suspending
them from all Communion with her, and not admitting them to this highest act of
it, 'till they had given full testimony of their repentance, and sound
amendment; well knowing how unfit such persons are to communicate in such
sacred and divine mysteries, besides a great deal of other mischief that they
do. And were this discipline preserved, and duly exercised, as the Church of
England requires, and desires it should: there would be none to incur this
horrible guilt, or be guilty of this lamentable profanation; the honor of the
Holy Sacrament would be secured, and this high profanation of it be effectually
prevented, and provided against.

SECT. V.
ANd if we consider things well, we shall find that things are not so bad among
us, but that both these instances upon which men may Communicate unworthily,
are pretty well provided against: or however that they are not committable by
any Christians that offer themselves to the Holy Sacrament, or have any fears
upon them of coming unworthily to it; let us consider how circumstances stand
in relation to both.

1. And first as to this gross and scandalous ignorance, how much soever some
men have made it their business, to cry out against, and taken liberty to
traduce the members of our Church as a company of blind and ignorant creatures;
thinking that there could be light no where, but where themselves shined, and
that nothing but darkness and ignorance must succeed, when such lights as
themselves were removed, and their instruction of the people ceased.

Yet thanks be to God, care is taken that people be competently instructed in
the principles of Christian Religion, and I hope much better than they have
been; the generality of the members of our Church I believe do competently
understand their Religion, and any one is impardonable that does not. I am sure
instruction and knowledge is not hid from them, but they have both in as
plentiful a measure, as it may be the Church has ever enjoyed. It is not easy
for them to remain ignorant under such advantages and means of knowledge as
they enjoy, and if they apply their minds to them (as the Church begs them to
do) they cannot do so.

I would not be afraid to have the comparison made between the members of the
Church of England, and the proselites to any of the various sects among us; if
the trial were made, it would be found who are the ignorant: who truliest
understand what Christian Religion means, notwithstanding they may be
undervalued, and reproached by ignorant, conceited and supercilious opposers.
If I may be allowed to speak my observation; I would say, that of all the
people that I ever conversed yet with, some that think so highly of themselves,
have I found to be most truly ignorant. Knowing and well skilled (I confess) in
the little distinctions of their sects, pert and bold in quarrelling with the
Church, and offering their little exceptions against it, etc. a sign that in
these they are chiefly instructed; but as really ignorant in the true grounds
and principles of Christian Religion, as the meanest of those, which they so
scornfully and imperiously pity as poor ignorant people.

But these things call me too much out of my way. I only mention them to show,
that men cannot well be counted so grossly ignorant, as to bring them under the
danger of eating unworthily upon that reason; and that if any should chance to
be so, it is their own fault only, and the Church is wholly free, and to be
acquitted from being in the least accessory to it; but I pass the further
prosecution of this, and proceed to what is more pertinent to my purpose.

And that is to show by what measures a man may judge himself, and his
knowledge in this matter, and what those measures of knowledge are, that will
set him above all this danger; and I dare pronounce him to have attained to
these, that has so much knowledge as enables him to understand that Christ
died for the redemption of mankind, to satisfy for the sins of the world; and
to purchase pardon for men upon the Conditions of repentance, and faith in him;
that the Holy Sacrament is instituted to be a commemoration of this death of
Christ, to give God Almighty hearty and devout praise for it: and to assure us,
that if we truly believe in Christ and his merits, repenting us of our sins,
and resolving by Gods grace to lead a good life, we shall be pardoned for what
is past, and enabled to perform what we resolve for the future truly upon.

These are no mighty arduous or difficult measures of knowledge; a man that is
a grown Christian, and has lived under the instruction of the Church, can
hardly be thought so ignorant, as to come within the danger of eating and
drinking unworthily upon this reason: he will be able to discern the Lords
body, to understand that this is a sacred and religious service, and to put a
difference between it, and a common meal: he will understand what it means,
what he ought to do, what to expect, and what posture to put himself into, when
he does approach to the Table of his Lord.

2. But the more important and seeming difficulty is yet behind, and that is to
apply what I say to the second thing I mentioned, to wilful impenitence, which
is both the greater, and seems to be the more common evil of the two. And yet
I think I may safely adventure to say of this, what I did of the other; that it
is hardly competible to any Christian, but (to be sure) not to any that is
desirous to come to the Holy Sacrament.

The reasons of my affirming this I shall give presently, when I have premised
one thing; and that is this, that it be always remembered what I am speaking of,
namely wilful, obstinate, resolved impenitence. I am not speaking of
impenitence that proceeds from mere carelessness; from want of consideration,
from irresolution and instability of mind; from the violence of temptations,
and want of being true to our aids and assistances against them; much less of
breaking our vows and good purposes, and failing to make good our pious
promises, and resolutions, after we have repented, and in some measure
reformed, and so proving eventually and finally impenitent.

But I am speaking of a wilful obstinate sinner, that resolves to live and die
in his sins, and be damned for ever for them; this is that impenitence that I
am speaking of, and this is that man that I am inquiring after if any such be
to be found: I say, if he be to be found, which I verily believe he is not, at
least amongst those that call themselves Christians, and have not wholly
renounced their baptism; much less among those that keep up the practice of
religion, and would (but that they are fearful) come to this Holy Sacrament.

1. First then let us inquire and search among those that retain the name of
Christians, that keep up a form of Religion, and are not actually turned
Renegado's and Apostates from it: let me see the wicked'st, and profanest of
those, that dare either tell me, or his own conscience, that he resolves never
to repent and amend his life: this is a thing next to impossible for any, that
believes any thing of his Religion; that has any sense of a future state, and
of the terribleness of that divine wrath, and those dreadful torments in hell,
that all impenitent wretches must most certainly undergo in it; the stoutest
sinner in the world must sink under the apprehension of these, and not be able
to bear up against his own mind, and the terrors of his conscience, when he
reflects upon them; and there are but two ways, by which men defeat the effect
of their belief, and fears of these things, so as to dare to continue
impenitent under them.

Either first by banishing as much as they can all thoughts of, and reflections
upon them; bringing themselves to a stupid careless temper of mind, that they
may live in a total disregard and forgetfulness of them, without all sense of
them, and without thinking a thought becoming a man, or a Christian: And when
they cannot do this, but their thoughts will pursue them, and break in upon
them, as sometimes they will, whether they will or no; then flying to company,
and sensualities, and thereby diverting, or drowning the clamor of their own
minds; just as those wretched Parents who sacrificed their children in the
valley of Hinnom, were forced to drown the noise of their dismal cries, with
the louder one of Drums and Trumpets.

Or Secondly, by quieting their minds with some thoughts and hopes of repenting
hereafter; this is the grand cheat that men put upon themselves, and the common
artifice by which they sooth their own minds, and keep them in peace, and make
a shift to continue and go on in an unreformed state, although they do believe,
and sometimes think of the dismal danger thereof.

These are the two great frauds that the grand enemy puts upon sinful men, and
has learned them to put upon themselves too; but for which, it were next to
impossible for any man that has the least measure of Christian faith, any
sense and belief of a future state, durst continue in an impenitent condition:
but still in neither of these cases, does the man resolve to be impenitent, and
so is not the person that I am speaking of; in one case the sottish man
neglects, and thinks not of repentance, but in the other he thinks, and has
some hopes of it too: he hopes he may repent, and reform hereafter, though he
be so miserable and vain, as never to put these thoughts in execution: so that
in both cases he is far enough from obstinacy, and a wilful resolution never to
repent; so that still I say, a resolved impenitent is scarce to be found in the
whole crowd of Christians, no not the most profligate and profane among them.

Much less, Secondly, among them that keep up the practice of Religion, and
either do, or would come to the Holy Sacrament, if this fear did not hinder
them: it is not to be supposed that any of these are resolutely and designedly
impenitent; if they should, they would give the lie to themselves, have not
only their impenitency, but the most wretched hypocrisy to answer for, and so
be doubly unworthy should they communicate in this service.

But this case is clear, and needs no further inquiry into; such persons are in
an actual course of religion, and the services of it, and far enough from that
wilful impenitence that we are discoursing about: they are so far from
resolving never to repent, that their only fear is, they repent not enough,
that they are not reformed and holy enough; and consequently are far enough
from the danger of eating and drinking unworthily upon this reason.

But this case of impenitence may yet require some further inquiry into, in
order to some scrupulous persons fuller satisfaction in it; for it may yet be
doubted, whether nothing but resolved wilful impenitence does bring a man
within the danger of this guilt; what are we to think of eventual impenitence?
and what shall we judge of the case of that man, who goes indeed to the Holy
Sacrament with a purpose, and resolution to reform, and amend his life, but
afterward is false to his purpose, and fails to execute his good resolution?
does not this man eat unworthily? were it not better for this man, not to come
to the Holy Sacrament at all?

This is a case that will deserve to be considered, and the rather because I
fear it too often happens, and is known to be matter of common scruple in this
thing. Men are too commonly false to those good promises, that they make to God
and themselves, and those good purposes that they fix upon at the Holy
Sacrament and knowing this too well, they are afraid to come to the Sacrament,
for fear they should not be so good as their promise; their own sad experience
has taught them how desultory, and unconstant their resolutions and tempers
are; how strong the temptations they may afterward meet with, and how weak
their own virtuous good purposes yet be; and therefore they think it safer to
stay a while 'till they have made some trial, and 'till they have a little
better strengthened their good resolutions and tempers, than to venture
presently upon that service which they may abuse and profane, by being false to
the resolutions they take up, and the promises which they make in it: This is
the case, and to the scruple taken up upon it, I return these three things in
answer and satisfaction to it.

1. That every man ought indeed to be true to his vows and promises as near as
he can; and when he has taken up such a resolution, and given his faith to God
he ought to perform it, and to do his utmost to stand to it.

It is certainly a dreadful fault to play fast and loose with God almighty, to
promise, and never take any due care to perform what a man does promise: there
is not a sadder instance of a loose, careless, trifling spirit, than to be
prodigal in our promises, and niggardly in our payments of them; to be forward
upon all occasions to promise great things to God, what reformed, what good men
we will become and be, but yet to be regardless and careless afterward whether
we be such or not, and never to apply our selves in earnest to make good what
we have promised, and to put our good purposes in execution.

2. But yet Secondly, a man's doing thus afterward, does not make his
Communicating in the Holy Sacrament to be eating and drinking unworthily in any
proportion to what is intended in this Text.

His having received the Holy Sacrament may aggravate the guilt of his after
failure; but that subsequent failure does not so affect his precedent
communicating, as to render it eating and drinking thus unworthily; if the
purpose of the mind be then serious and sincere, his receiving the Holy
Sacrament is far enough from being unworthy or faulty; and (as I said) his
failing afterward does not affect it all.

But then do I consider what I say? can that purpose of mind be sincere and
serious, which afterward is not put in execution? does not a man's failing
afterward to make it good, show that he was perfidious and an hypocrite in
making of it? why no (I say) it does not, a man may be in earnest and sincere
in making a promise, and taking up a resolution, and yet possibly fail of
making it good afterward; his failing afterward is no argument that he was
not in earnest when he made it: it is argument indeed of his carelessness and
irresolution, but it may arise from a thousand reasons, besides his falsehood
or hypocrisy when he made it.

Many a man in the time of affliction, and sickness (for example) makes fair
promises to God, what he will be, and what he will do, if God please to spare
him; and this (I doubt not) really and in earnest, and with a sincere purpose
of mind at that time, to be, or to do as he promises; and yet afterward that
sense of things may wear of, and that purpose of mind abate, and that specious
promise may come finally to nothing: but this is not because the man was not
then really in earnest, but because afterward he is careless and trifling, and
easily led away with temptations that interfere with his former promise, and
purpose of mind.

And so (I doubt not) it may be, and too often is with men, when they come to
the Holy Sacrament, their pious purposes for that time may be sincere, and in
earnest, and yet afterward wear off, and come to nothing.

3. And therefore Thirdly, I affirm a man in this case does come with one great
qualification which should attend his communicating in the Sacrament; i. e. a
purpose of repentance and reformation, and which will most certainly secure him
against all possibility of eating and drinking unworthily in the sense of this
Text, or any like it.

So that instead of staying away, for fear that he should change his mind
afterward, he ought (I think) the rather to come, that he may not do so: the
great reason certainly lies on this side; seeing there is not any better course
that he can at present take to fasten his good purpose, and to secure it of
effect, than this: for by this means he will make his promise more solemn, and
affecting upon himself, cause it to stick the deeper and closer upon his own
thoughts, and receive that grace most infallibly from God, which if he be
faithful and true unto, his pious resolution will continue, and he may be
enabled to act according to the intention of it.

SECT. VI.
4. I Add now a fourth thing worthy to be considered in order to our
satisfaction in this inquiry, viz. that whatever the sense of eating and
drinking unworthily is in this Text, or whatever men can think to be like it;
discerning the Lords body will secure them from it.

What discerning the Lords body means I have showed already, and I need repeat
very little of it again: it means these two things.

First, putting a difference between the consecrated Elements, and common Bread
and Wine; the looking upon the Holy Sacrament as an immediate duty and service
of Religion, and consequently performing it with that devotion and seriousness,
that reverence and respect, that men use to show in other services of Religion:
the want of this was the cause that made the Corinthians to eat unworthily, and
provoked God to punish them with sundry diseases and death, as he afterward
tells them; they did not make any difference between this, and a common meal in
their own Houses; they did not take it to be any peculiar act of Religion, they
came intemperate and drunk to the Lords Table; and therefore (to be sure) were
far enough from that reverence and devotion, that so sacred a service ought to
have been performed with.

Secondly, discerning the Lords body means something more; not only to look
upon this Holy Sacrament as a solemn and immediate act of Religion, but as the
Sacrament and immediate representation of Christ's body, i. e. his body broken
and slain for the sins of the world; and the Communicating therein to be the
commemoration of his death, and partaking in the blessed effects of it; to look
beyond the Elements to that which they are designed to signify, and
Sacramentally are; to look upon the bread not as common bread, but the
substitute of Christ's body; and the wine not as ordinary wine, but the figure
of his blood; and so regarding the whole service, both as the most devout and
solemn commemoration of Christ's death and passion, for the expiation of our
sins; and partaking as truly and effectually in the benefits and blessings of
his body and blood, as if we did eat and drink that very body and blood
themselves.

This is the great end of this service, and the reason of our Lords institution
of it; and to discern the Lords body is to understand it so, and look upon it
as such; which it is most certain these Corinthians were far from doing: either
so ignorant as not to understand the reason of it, or so grossly irreverent and
careless as not to consider it; for had they done either (much more both) they
could hardly have been guilty of such profaneness, or of eating and drinking
unworthily as they did.

And that is what I would say in this period, that whatever the sense of eating
and drinking unworthily is in this place, the discerning the Lords body will
secure men from it; and this I shall endeavor to make plain in these following
considerations.

1. The not discerning the Lords body is here made the reason of their eating
and drinking unworthily; this I have cleared already to be the reason both of
the sin and punishment too: from whence it is plain, that discerning the Lords
body would secure from both; for if men eat and drink unworthily, because they
do not discern the Lords body, then if they do discern it, they will not eat
unworthily; for the old rule is true in morality as well as nature, and will
hold in this instance as well as others, take away the cause, and the effect
will cease.

2. But Secondly, this appears clear in the nature of the thing; for there is a
direct and immediate virtue and power in discerning the Lords body, to cause in
men all those qualifications, that render them meet for this service, and
sufficiently secure them from eating unworthily, as the Corinthians did, yea
and from doing so in any sense like unto them.

For First in general, if men discern the Lords body, they will presently
perceive that this is a most sacred solemn service of Religion, and not any
ordinary thing; and by this will not only be admonished of that reverence and
devotion, that it ought to be performed with, but strongly induced to it. Men
naturally have some sense of reverence and aw upon their minds, when they are
addressing themselves to devotion, and when they engage into the services of
Religion. And so they will have here also, when they consider what a solemn
service of Religion this is, and has always been esteemed to be in the
Christian Church; and truly they can hardly be otherwise, if they have any
sense of Religion, or any dread of the Almighty upon their Spirits.

And Secondly, if men discern the Lords body here, so as to understand the
special reason of this institution, that it is to commemorate the mighty love
of our Lord in dying for us; that it is to be a religious solemn representation
of his meritorious bitter death, and passion for our sins; they will find that
it will even naturally beget in them repentance, and faith, and joy, and
charity, and thankfulness, and a very high sense of the love of God and Christ
toward poor sinners.

These are the highest and meetest preparations for the Holy Sacrament, and
those qualifications that fit us for the receiving of it; and the death of
Christ is the highest argument, and most powerful means of effecting these in
men, that God Almighty has to offer or can use with them. The Apostle seems to
count it irresistible, and such a one as cannot miss of effect upon men that
consider it. 2 Cor. 5.14. The love of Christ constrains us, because we thus
judge, that if one died for all, then all were dead, etc. And truly if Men do
thus judge, if they do seriously reflect upon the transcendent and amazing love
of Christ in dying for the salvation of sinners, it will even constrain them to
repentance and faith and love, almost whether they will or no: if the grace of
God be irresistible in any argument of the Gospel, it is certainly so in this;
and I will adventure to say it is so far so here, that those are monsters of
Men, or they do not consider things as Men, that can resist, and defeat the
effect of it.

So that the Holy Sacrament being so sensible a commemoration of this death,
the very visible representation of it, the evident crucifying of Christ before
our eyes, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.1. the true discerning of it, and of
the Lords body in it, will be of the same effect to produce all these things in
us: I appeal to the experiences of good men for the truth of what I say: let
them tell you what a mighty efficacy they find in the Holy Sacrament to this
purpose; and how powerfully they feel their hearts moved to these things by it;
and truly if we consider the natural causality of things, we shall be inclined
to think it almost impossible it should be otherwise: let us consider them a
little singly.

1. As for repentance, whether it imply sorrow for sin, a sense of its mighty
evil and danger, and a resolution against it, or all these together, as indeed
it does, what can effect this in me, if the Holy Sacrament do not? can I see
the Lords body broken, and his blood poured out (as I do in the Holy Sacrament)
for sin, and to make the great atonement to the divine justice for sin; I say,
can I see this without a sorrowful reflection upon my own sins which had a hand
in this suffering? Or can I doubt what a mighty evil sin is, which could not be
expiated by a meaner sacrifice, than the death and suffering of the Son of God?
or of how dangerous and insupportable effect that punishment must be, which the
Son of God could not bear without horror and astonishment, without fainting and
death? or lastly can I consider all this, without some resolution and purpose
to reform from sin, and to beware of that whose consequences and issues I see
to be so dreadful and insupportable? I am sure I cannot consider these things,
but they will have some effect upon my mind; and I am sure, if they have not, I
do not duly consider them.

2. And as for faith, whether it respect the gracious declarations, or kind
promises, or terrible threatenings in the Gospel, or all these; can I doubt the
truth of any of these, when I see the son of God die to confirm it? can I
question whether God be gracious and ready to forgive sin, when I see him
exposing his own Son to death, that he may with honor do so? can I doubt his
promises to all penitent sinners, when I see the truth of them sealed in his
Sons blood? or can I think that the divine threatenings of wrath and vengeance
against all impenitent wretches, will not most certainly be executed on them,
when I see God inexorable to his own Son, and letting him suffer and die,
rather than permit sin to pass unpunished?

In a word, the whole Covenant that God has made with man, the new Covenant of
grace and mercy, which the Gospel is the joyful publication of, is here (as it
used to be of old) ratified and confirmed by blood, and the blood too of the
Son of God; which is such an assurance and confirmation of its truth, as can
never fail us, and beyond which our faith cannot desire a greater.

3. And then as to a mighty sense of the love of God to poor Man, what can so
clearly (and almost beyond desire) assure us of it, as the death of his Son?
you may see how the Scriptures triumph in this, and magnify it as the
mightiest instance, the highest exaltation of the divine love, that is
conceivable; and how can I possibly question this, when I see him parting with
his own Son, his only Son, the Son of his bosom and dearest love? yea exposing
him to suffering and misery, to pain and shame, to death it self, nay to that
ignominious and cursed death upon the Cross, rather than poor Man should perish
eternally, and there should not be a way to save him by?

4. And lastly, as for joy in this love of God, as for praise and thankfulness
for it; what can effect these in my soul, if the representation of Christ's
death in the Holy Sacrament cannot? had I seen him hanging upon the cross,
bleeding, fainting, swooning, dying, and with expanded arms ready to receive
and embrace me, it could not have affected me much more, than the visible
representation of all this in the Holy Sacrament may do. If I reflect upon it
then as I should, (and that I shall do if I discern the Lords body) I can
scarce entertain the thoughts of it with less than rapture and transport: but I
am certainly the most ill natured person living, and for ever the most unworthy
of the blessings of it, if I fail in any measure of joy, and thankfulness, that
I am able to express.

These now are even the natural effects of discerning the Lords body, and they
are such things as will make us meet partakers of these holy mysteries, as our
Church speaks, they will set us far above that unworthiness that the
Corinthians were guilty of, yea or any other thing that can be counted
unworthiness in preparation to it. By all which things my fourth proposition is
I hope made good, and brought to an issue. And so is all that I intended to say
on this first general Collection.

CHAP. III.
I advance to the second Collection that I made in order to the taking off the
exception that men make against coming to the Holy Sacrament, upon the reason
of these words, viz. That the possibility and danger of eating and drinking
unworthily, is not a sufficient reason for men to abstain from the Holy
Sacrament upon.

I Add this Collection, to come up more closely to the exception that men make
against this service, and that which they hope to excuse their neglect of it
upon. The danger (they tell us) of receiving unworthily is great, and the
Apostle says expressly that it is so: now we have great reason to think our
selves unworthy to come, and to fear we shall come unworthily, if we adventure
to come; and therefore think it the safer course not to come at all, than run
so great a danger in coming, we are very unwilling to damn our selves; and we
hold it* the safer way to stay away, and venture it to Gods mercy, than by
coming unworthily to incur the plain danger of damnation.

This is the great exception, and the general plea of men in this case; and at
the first hearing it seems to argue great modesty, and regard to a man's eternal
salvation; and therefore deserves to be considered by us. Now though what I
have already said was intended to satisfy this exception, and if truly
considered, be (I hope) of good effect in order thereto: for if men consider
that eating and drinking unworthily in the sense of this Text, is a sin that
they can hardly be guilty of; and when they consider themselves, may be sure
they are not; it may surely enable them to surmount this scruple; for while
they are so far from the sin, they need not be afraid of the punishment.

Yet I advance this Collection in order to the further satisfaction of it, and
when Men are convinced in this point also, that if they were in any likelihood,
or danger of eating and drinking unworthily; yet that were not a sufficient
reason for them to abstain from the Holy Sacrament upon, then it may reasonably
be hoped that they will no longer stick at this exception, nor hope to be
excused upon the reason of it.

This therefore is that which I am going to make good the truth and
reasonableness of; that the possibility of eating and drinking unworthily is
not a sufficient reason for Men to keep away from the Holy Sacrament upon, nor
fit to be admitted as an excuse in this case; and therefore how honest and
sincere, how conscientious and tender soever Men may account themselves in
staying from the Holy Sacrament upon this exception, yet it is a temptation and
a snare, a very great error and mistake, and that which will never bear them
out in this omission: and this I shall endeavor to make good, first by the
circumstances of this place, and the Apostles discourse in it; and secondly, by
some arguments founded upon the truth of the thing.

1. From the circumstances of the Apostles discourse in this place; there are
many things in it, pertinent to my purpose, but I shall only briefly observe
these few that follow.

First, the Corinthians were grossly guilty of this sin, they did eat and drink
unworthily in the most notorious and scandalous manner possible; the Apostle
plainly tells them so, instances in evident matter of fact, and blames them
with that sharpness, that so foul a matter justly deserved.

Yea secondly, he aggravates the sin and guilt of this miscarriage, to a very
high degree, and threatens it with a very sharp and severe punishment.

And yet thirdly after all this, he does not give them any the least allowance,
or liberty to stay from this holy service, till they had repented of, and
reformed sufficiently this miscarriage: he does not tell them, that their
unworthiness rendered them unfit to come to the Table of the Lord, or gave them
a dispensation from it: he does not advise them to stay away for the future,
till they had better fitted themselves, for fear of damnation by coming
unworthily.

You do not read one word spoken by him to any such purpose, but rather
directly the contrary: let a man examine himself, and so let him eat; and when
ye come together tarry one for another, and if any man hunger, let him eat at
home, that ye come not together to condemnation: in all which the Apostle does
not advise them to intermit this service, and let it alone, 'till they had
better considered it, and better prepared themselves for it; but he requires
them still to keep up the practice of it, but to reform their great faults and
errors in it; to come still together to eat this bread, only to examine
themselves, to consider what they were going about, what they were doing, that
they might eat it becomingly as they ought to do.

He taxes very severely and sharply, the fault in doing the duty, and presses
earnestly the reformation of that fault; but he does not make the fault an
exception against, or dispensation against the duty, nor say one word, that
might allow or encourage their intermitting of it, by reason thereof; from
whence (I think) I may safely collect thus much, that what the Apostle said to
the Corinthians concerning the sin and danger of eating and drinking
unworthily, was never intended to hinder Men from eating, nor designed to be an
excuse and plea for Men's not doing so, as some are pleased to make it at this
day.

For if it had, there is no doubt, but he would have given some plain
intimation of it; or at least have said something, from whence Men might have
collected that to be his meaning; we cannot suppose, that he would have been
silent in so very great, and concerning a case; and not have given Men some
warning, rather than let them run on in a fact which was sure to pull down such
judgments upon their heads.

It seems plain the Apostle had no such thoughts of this matter then, as some
Men have now; he never thought that the sin, or danger of doing a duty amiss,
might be made an exception against doing it at all, or that threatening
damnation to eating and drinking unworthily, should scare Men from eating and
drinking at all; he takes what care he can, that the duty may be performed, and
the error in doing it effectually reformed: but he never makes the danger of
the one a dispensation from the other, nor lets fall the least word that can be
interpreted to such a meaning; he tells them indeed what a great sin it is to
eat and drink unworthily, and he tells them what punishments it makes them
obnoxious unto; but he does not therefore tell them they may stay away from the
Sacrament for fear of committing the sin, or incurring the danger, or that it
were safer for them to keep wholly from the one, than venture the hazard of the
other: no; and he does not do this, when they did actually commit the one, and
when they did as really suffer under the other.

Now the Improvement that I make of this procedure of the Apostle, and this
last named circumstance relating to it is this; that therefore the care,
possibility, and fear of eating unworthily, should not be thought a sufficient
plea for not eating at all; the Apostle did not allow or encourage Men to stay
away from the Holy Sacrament when they did greatly profane it, when they did
eat unworthily in the grossest sense; much less then may Men stay away from it,
only upon a suspicion and fear of this, and of that punishment that is due to
it.

This I take to be a true way of arguing, and worthy of consideration in this
matter; the Corinthians were extremely faulty in this thing, not only were in
danger of eating unworthily, but actually did so in the grossest manner; and
yet the Apostle says not one word of their staying away upon that reason,
which he certainly would have done, had he thought this cause of just
exception, and that it had been better for them to stay wholly away from the
Holy Sacrament, than to contract so great a guilt, and incur so dreadful a
punishment by their coming amiss, and not as they should do.

This I confess is a negative argument, which is not always, and in all cases
good and concluding; yet in such a case as this it certainly is so: if a thing
be no where said in Scripture, which (if it were true) is very necessary and
importing to be known; and if it be not said there, where it was very proper,
and necessary it should have been said; then we may from that silence of the
Scripture conclude against it: if we deny this argument, we shall hardly be
able to make good the sufficiency of the Scriptures, or the faithfulness of the
inspired penmen of it; we must be forced to entertain mean thoughts of the
great S. Paul, if we can think that he knew of any such things, and yet would
not reveal it, when there was so fair an opportunity for doing so, and when it
was so very necessary, and of such advantage to be known.

2. But I shall proceed to add some other considerations, which will be as so
many rational arguments for the truth of our present collection; which was the
second way that I promised to make it good by: I shall insist upon these five
that follow.

1. Our Communicating in the Holy Sacrament is a plain necessary duty.

2. The possibility of doing it amiss is no greater, than of our doing other
duties of Religion amiss, which yet we our selves count necessary to be done,
and do keep up the practice of.

3. The punishment or danger of doing this amiss is no more dreadful, than what
may be feared upon the like failure in doing other duties amiss.

4. Whatever sin or danger there can be in eating unworthily, there is as much,
or greater in not eating at all.

5. The danger of eating unworthily, is that which is occasioned only by our
own default, and which we may correct, and get out of the reach of.

These are plain considerations, pertinent to our present purpose, and which it
will highly concern all that labor under any scruples and fears in this case,
seriously to weigh, and consider well.

CHAP. IV.
I begin with the first of these Considerations, which is indeed the foundation
of all the rest, and which when I have cleared, the reasonableness of the other
will easily follow: the Argument is this, the Communicating in the Holy
Sacrament is a plain, express, necessary duty.

I Should think, I need not be put upon the proof of this in a Christian
audience; nor required to make good that, which no one that has read, and
believes the Gospel can deny: and I must confess, to me it is matter of great
wonder, that any Christians should look upon the Holy Sacrament otherwise, than
a necessary standing duty and service of their Religion. I am very sure, it
relies upon as plain and express a command, and upon as weighty and great a
reason, as any ministry in Christian Religion either does, or can do; and would
men consider both these things, they could not remain doubtful in this matter;
they could not look upon the Sacrament as a thing of choice, and left to their
own freedom whether they would observe it or not; but tied upon them by plain
and peremptory precept, and made matter of their necessary and fixed duty.

And to the end that all Christians may look upon, and esteem it as such, I beg
that these few things among many others may be considered by them.

1. That the Holy Sacrament is instituted, ordained, and commanded by our Lord,
in words as express and plain, as ever any thing could, or ever was commanded
by him: I shall need for your satisfaction in this, but barely to repeat the
words of the Evangelists, three of whom mention the institution of the Holy
Sacrament: Mat. 26.26, 27, 28. and as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and
blessed it, and brake it, and gave to the Disciples saying, take eat, this is
my body. And he took the cup, and gave thanks and gave it to them, saying drink
ye all of this: for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for
many for the remission of sins. Here it is plain, the Sacrament is instituted
by our Savior, and delivered to his Disciples with a command to eat and drink
of it; and you meet with the very same words, Mark 14.22, 23, 24.

In S. Luke the matter is something plainer, where it is not only instituted by
our Savior, as the others relate it; but a command given for their doing it
likewise after his death in remembrance of him: Luke 22.19. And he took bread,
and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them; saying, this is my body
which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me.

And that it was not a command that enjoined the doing of this at that time
only, S. Paul shows clearly in 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26. where it is observable
that he speaks of it as a thing, which our Lord charged him also with as well
as the other Apostles. For I have received that of the Lord, which I also
delivered unto you; that the Lord Jesus in the same night that he was betrayed,
took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said take eat, this
is my body which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me: after the
same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, this Cup is the
New Testament in my blood, this do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of
me: for as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords
death till he come.

I beseech men to consider what is said in all these places, and then to say if
any thing can be plainer; if there ever was, or could be a more plain command
than this is, do this in remembrance of me: if this be not an express command,
never any was such; and if we may disobey this at our pleasure, I know not why
we may not disobey all others as well.

2. It is not only a command, a positive institution that relies only upon the
will and authority of Christ commanding it, but upon a very great and good
reason, and is recommended upon an argument that shows it to be eternally
reasonable and becoming. Not only do this, as S. Matthew, and S. Mark speak,
but do this in remembrance of me, as S. Luke, and S. Paul relate the matter;
which the latter repeats again, as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye show the Lords death till he come.

These words make it to rely upon a reason that is both becoming, and obliging
also, even until the final coming of our Lord to Judgment: for nothing can be
more reasonable and fit in it self, than to keep up in the Christian Church,
the solemn and most grateful remembrance of Christ's death; and they that can
think otherwise, are unworthy to share in the benefits of it.

Besides the instituting of it to this end, makes it perpetually obliging also.
I mean to the end of the world, and as long as there shall be a Christian
Church in it; for so long it will be fit to keep up the memory of it; and this
reason will not only hold, but improve and grow stronger in every succeeding
age, and period of the world, in which the sense and memory of it will be in
danger to expire, and wear off: so that every such age will rather have
greater, than lesser reason, to keep up this solemn commemoration of it.

3. To these intimations I may add one thing very considerable to our purpose,
from the practice of the Apostle, and the circumstances of his discourse in
this Chapter; a learned Man has taken notice of them before me, so that I
shall but just name them.

First, that the Apostle takes so much pains to instruct the Corinthians in the
right way of Communicating in the Holy Sacrament, and to reform the profanation
of it, that they were guilty of.

Now can any man reasonably think, that he would have done this; if he had not
looked upon it as a necessary duty tied upon Christians, by Christ's own command
and institution? Certainly no, he that gives direction how to do a duty,
supposes the obligation, and necessity of it, or else he speaks to little
purpose. And (as that great Man speaks) can any man think the way and manner of
doing an action to be a duty, and yet that action it self no duty? this is not
supposable.

And we may be sure, the Apostle would never have spent so great a part of this
Chapter in directing how to eat and drink, how to order and prepare themselves
for it, but that he looked on it as a duty necessarily incumbent on them; nor
be so impertinent as to concern and busy himself, in directing the
circumstances of an action, which was not necessary to be done, but arbitrary,
and at their pleasure whether to do it, or no.

The second circumstance is what I observed before, that he did this even when
the Corinthians run a very great hazard, and incurred a grand guilt, by their
profanation of this service, and coming so unworthily to it.

Certainly had the Apostle looked upon this, as any thing less than a necessary
duty, he would have gone another way to work with them; he would have
discoursed to them at another rate, and have told them it were much the better
and safer way, to stay away from the Sacrament, than incur so great guilt and
punishment by coming so unworthily: this would have been the advice, that a
great many Men now according to their principles, would have given to them, and
indeed do give themselves, and others too.

But it is evident the Apostle speaks not one word to this purpose, nor knew of
any warrant he had to do so: he had no authority, to grant them any indulgence,
or license to stay away, though they were apt to come so very unfitly. He was
to recommend it as a necessary duty, and to press the serious and becoming
observation of it; but he had received no warrant from the Lord to dispense
with that observation: he would have them to look upon the Sacrament as a
necessary standing service of their Religion; to count it their duty to eat and
drink, and his province was only to direct them how they might do it
acceptably, and not to their condemnation.

These Considerations are sufficient to convince all Christians, that this is a
plain necessary, indispensable duty, instituted, and intended by our Lord, to
be a standing service in his Church: 'till his second coming to judge the world.

And its being so, becomes one very good argument to our present purpose, and a
good foundation to superstruct the truth of our observation upon; for that
which is necessary must be done: and the danger of doing it amiss will not
excuse the neglect of it.

And this I advise all scrupulous and timorous persons in this case to possess
their minds in the first place with the steady and serious belief of; as a
thing that will go a great way toward silencing all their exceptions against
coming to the Holy Sacrament: where scruples and fears may at any time arise in
their minds, let them remember this is a necessary duty, and it will be a good
answer to them all. I may sin in coming to the Lords Table, but it is my
necessary duty to come: I fear I shall eat unworthily, but God has expressly
commanded me to eat. What then? What, shall I resolve to stay away? I am sure
that is to sin against a plain command of my Lord, and to neglect that which he
has made my necessary duty. What then shall I do? Why the way is plain, and
the solution is easy. I will resolve by Gods grace to do my duty, and
endeavor with his help to do it as well as I can: this is the true conclusion
from these premises, and the only safe way to take in this case.

For if it be a necessary indispensible duty, it must engage our care to do it,
and to do it as well as we can; its being necessary must engage our obedience,
and care to do it; and the danger of doing it amiss must engage our utmost
caution and care to do it as well as our poor power will enable us. The
possibility of doing it amiss will not excuse our neglect of it; only it should
engage our utmost heed, that we do not contract a guilt, nor incur a danger by
any voluntary failing, or wilful carelessness in the doing of it.

CHAP. V.
The second Consideration that I named as an Argument for the Truth of our
Collection is this, The possibility and guilt of doing this service of our
Religion is no greater, than of doing others amiss, which yet we count
necessary to be done, and our selves do keep up the exercise of.

THis will be a considerable addition to the former, and I shall endeavor to
drive it to an issue, by an induction of several dependent propositions.

1. Men are as incident to failures in doing other duties of Religion, as in
doing this; every whit as apt to do them amiss, as they are to do this so. I
will instance in the two most stationary and common, I mean prayer, and hearing
Gods word: we are as subject to failures in these, as we are in this; and if we
consider ourselves, shall soon confess we are so.

The truth is, the thing is too evident, and others may see it as well as our
selves. I am not very willing to enter upon this theme, because I would not
indulge to any thing that may but look like reflection; but certainly if any
will but observe our common carriage in the Church both at Prayers and Sermon,
he will be tempted to think our zeal and devotion is but small, nor our selves
very much concerned whether we discharge these duties as we should or no.

Those that so commonly set themselves to gaze, and look upon others, as if
they had no other errand hither, but to see how others are dressed, and who is
the finest; and those (on the other hand) that lay themselves down to sleep,
and perhaps can sooner do it in Gods house than in their own. Surely, both
these sorts are far enough from that devotion and zeal, that serious and close
application of mind, that all the services of Religion should be performed
with, and need not be told how grossly they fail of discharging these services
of Religion as they ought.

If I might be allowed to argue from plain evidence, and matter of fact, I
think I might cast the odds on this side; and adventure to say that men do not
so commonly fail in doing this duty, as they do in others. I never yet saw a
man sleep at the Holy Sacrament, or need to be awaked when the Holy Symbols
were to be administered to him. Men are then generally serious and thoughtful,
earnest and zealous, and closely intent upon what is before them. So that if we
may judge by appearance and plain fact, the Service of the Holy Sacrament is
performed with fewer failures, than other services of Religion commonly are:
but if upon experience we find, that Men fail as commonly in other services of
Religion as this, it will serve my turn at present.

Let me beg a Man to consider himself well, and then to give me in the sum of
his own experience, whether he do not find himself as incident to failings in
other services of Religion as this. How hard a matter does every man find it,
to keep his heart close to God, and his thoughts from rambling abroad, even
when he is upon his knees in prayer! who is there so intent, and servent in
spirit, upon whom some vain and wandering thoughts do not break in, even in the
time of his most solemn devotion? It is the common complaint of all good men,
and I never yet discoursed with the best man of this case, who did not bewail
it.

Or where is the man that so reveres the Word of God, and is so awfully and
religiously intent upon the hearing of it, who is not many times diverted by
idle thoughts, and vain avocations and sallies of mind? and who sees not, that
there are but few, that can hold out watching with Christ one hour? I am very
confident I shall have experience on my side, and ready to subscribe to this
truth, that men are really as incident to failures at other times as this, and
find it as hard a matter to pray, or hear Gods word so as they should, and so
as to have hopes of divine acceptance in doing of them, as it is to do so in
the Holy Sacrament, yea perhaps (as I said before) much harder.

And as I dare appeal to common experience, so I think I can produce some good
reasons for the truth of this observation.

For first the aids and assistances of Gods good spirit and grace are as ready
for us, and may as reasonably be expected by us, in this service of Religion as
any others. So that if we cry out as S. Paul did, who is sufficient for these
things? and declame never so tragically and passionately upon our own utter
inability to do any thing that is good; yet we may encourage and comfort our
selves with the hopes of the divine grace, that is ready to assist us, and can
be sufficient for us, and that in this service of Religion as well as others:
or if there be any difference, it may be in this it may be more ready, and
plentiful than in others: for upon the same reason that S. Paul calls this a
drinking into the same spirit. 1 Cor. 12.13. upon the same may men expect more
plentiful effusions of that spirit in this, than in other ministries of
Religion.

And Secondly, there are the same holy qualifications of mind and temper
necessary to the discharging other services of Religion, as to this, the same
zeal and fervor of spirit; the same devotion and height of soul; the same
sequestring our minds from all other employments and thoughts; the same high
thoughts of God and his goodness; the same close attention of mind; the same
care to free our selves from all injustice, wrath, uncleanness, and every thing
that might render us unfit to converse with our God, and to receive blessings
from him. All these things, and the same measures and degrees of them too, are
equally necessary for us when we pray, as well as when we Communicate in the
Holy Sacrament. You will find the Scriptures still speaking thus; and requiring
all these things, as necessary to endear us to God, and to recommend any of our
performances to his gracious acceptance. And if so, upon what reason can we
suspect more difficulty in the acceptable performance of this service, than in
others?

I cannot think of any appearance of a reason, unless it be that all these
divine qualifications were more natural and easy in others than in this; or
something in them that is more naturally effective of them there than here. Now
this is so far from being true, that all good men find the quite contrary to be
so; there is no service in Christian Religion that carries our souls higher in
raptures of love, and makes them mount in brighter flames of gratitude and
praise, than this, nay none like it; when we see our Lord crucified before our
eyes, behold and taste the sensible pledges of his bleeding and dying love; it
is now that our souls are ready to break their earthly Mansions: it is now that
our hearts burn within us, and that our thoughts burst into pure flames of
devotion and love, which unite us to our God, and render our services as
acceptable to him, as the brighter flames of Angels and Seraphims above.

So that if the comparison between this and other services of Religion, be made
either upon experience, or reason, this should be accounted the easiest, rather
than most difficult of all.

SECT. I.
2. THE guilt of failing to do this duty so well as we should, is no greater,
than what it is in failing to do others so; and we are not only as incident to
failings in doing other services of Religion amiss, as well as this, but we
contract as great guilt in them, as in this.

Some men make a mighty stir, and others perplex and puzle themselves with
fears of an extraordinary guilt, if they do not receive the Holy Sacrament,
just as they should do; and this guilt they dread much more, and think it to be
much more terrible, than the guilt of the like failure in other services of
their Religion: but for my part, I could not understand any true reason for
this: it happens here (as it usually does in panick fears) there is no real
ground or cause of them, and nothing that I know of, besides words, and a
prejudicated opinion, to incline us to think that there is.

It is doubtless a great sin to Communicate unworthily, without due respect and
reverence, and without care to demean our selves as becomes so sacred a service
of our Religion: but so it is also to pray, or to hear Gods word, carelessly and
regardlesly; to rush into the divine presence rudely and profanely, and to
behave our selves in Gods House as irreverently, and far from any sign of
devotion as in our own: to say over a few prayers, without any due regard to
the majesty of Him we are praying unto; without any just sense of the
importance of the things we are praying for, and without any close intention of
mind to what we are doing: to lay our selves down to sleep, when God is
speaking to us, and when a message is delivered unto us out of that divine
word, by which we shall be judged at the last day.

I am sure these are sins of a very grand guilt, and I am sure the Holy
Scripture always speaks of them as such. I would to God men would soberly
consider that they are so, we might then hope to see the public worship of God
performed at another rate, than generally it is. And I add that according to
the common language of Scripture, they are sins every whit as big, of as deep a
dye, as grand guilt, as Communicating unduly in the Holy Sacrament is, or can
reasonably be thought to be: when any man will undertake to make out the
difference upon any sound reason, we may begin to question this: but till then
should not let our own make surmises and fears prevail upon us to the contrary,
and fill our minds with unreasonable apprehensions and perplexities in this
matter.

It Is a bad sign when men are scrupulous only one way: mighty timorous in one
thing, but hardy and regardless in another; and it is a shrewd sign it is not
true conscience that makes men so mighty shie and fearful of communicating
unworthily, but never concerned at hearing unworthily, or praying unworthily;
the guilt is really the same in one case, as it is in the other, and therefore
equally to be dreaded and avoided in both: and if it be an honest true dread of
sin that is upon us, it will startle us, and render us afraid of it in one
case, as well as in the other.

It Is a stale cheat that the Enemy of souls has too often put upon men, in
rendering them mighty tender and scrupulous in some things, but careless
altogether in others; as if care in one instance of our duty, would atone our
wilful regardlesness in another. S. James I am sure tells us another story,
Jam. 2.10.11. where in his judgment, he that wilfully indulgeth himself in the
breach of one precept of the Law, is guilty of all, because the same authority
of God is contemned in one, that is in another, or in all: for he that said do
not commit adultery, said also do not kill, etc.

I heartily wish, that men would not put the same fallacy upon themselves: sin
and guilt is to be dreaded in one thing, as well as another; and if it be not
so by us, if we be scrupulous only one way, but not the other: if we be so very
fearful of sinning, in doing of one service of our Religion amiss, and not
another; it is too plain, the devil, or our own deceitful hearts put a trick
upon us: it is some other reason that governs us, and keeps us from our duty,
and not an honest conscience and fear of doing it amiss: for that fear will
make us afraid of the same sin in doing other duties amiss, and if it do not,
it is not that only which prevails with us.

I would willingly press this Consideration more home upon all men's thoughts,
and beg them to take heed of a superstitious fear of greater guilt and danger
in doing this service of their Religion amiss, than in others: this is a very
dangerous temptation and a snare, and there are two evident ill purposes, that
Satan intends to serve by it.

First to keep men in the neglect and disuse of this duty, which besides that
it is a very great sin, as being the omission of a necessary indispensable
duty; is the neglecting of a thing that is so highly advantageous to all the
great purposes of salvation, and consequently so very destructive to that
malicious and spightful design that he has against all men. I am very
confident, there is not any one service in Christian Religion that the Devil
has a greater spite against, and dread of, than the Holy Sacrament; nor any
thing that it is more his endeavor, and interest, to prejudice men against,
and hinder them from.

Now of all the Stratagems that he can use to this purpose, this is the most
specious, and with all men of any honesty the most taking; for to seem fearful
of sin and guilt, and very shie of any thing, in which they fear to incur it,
is a very specious thing, it looks well, and is certainly in it self a
commendable thing, easily embraced, and readily swallowed. Yea and let me add,
is as hardly removed when men have once given way to it: when men can appeal to
their own minds, and be able to say, that they are afraid of Communicating
amiss, and sinning greatly in doing so, and that nothing but this keeps them
from the Holy Sacrament; it is a very hard thing to persuade them to it; they
think they are on the surer side, and it will not be an easy matter to make
them change.

I am the more earnest therefore, in begging men to take heed of entertaining
this opinion: it is a dangerous temptation and a snare, and that which this
subtle enemy (under the semblance of a friend) puts upon them, on purpose to
hinder them from an absolutely necessary, yea and most advantageous duty; by
the sin and folly of which he will ruin and destroy them more fatally and
successfully, than they would be ruined by any sin and guilt in Communicating
in the Holy Sacrament, though they did not Communicate so well, and becomingly
as they should do.

Endeavor therefore I beseech you, to clear your minds from this superstitious
unreasonable fear, that men have so generally in this age; and to which (I wish
I could not say) the doctrins of some men have been so contributive. Fortify
your minds with the steady and assured belief, that there is no more guilt in
doing this service amiss, than in doing others so: nor any reason (as I shall
endeavor to prove hereafter) to apprehend God more inexorable and severe, or
less merciful and ready to pardon our failings in this, than in others. You
would find this a great ease and relief to your minds, and that which would
enable you to address to this service of Religion, with as much cheerfulness
and comfort, with as good hope of divine mercy, acceptance, and blessing, as in
any others.

But 'till you do endeavor this, and get your minds in some good measure
cleared from this dreadful apprehension, you will never attain to any
considerable cheerfulness and comfort of mind in it: but there will be some
trembling and dread upon your spirits, some anxious misgivings and abodings of
mind, which will make this service unpleasant, and uneasy to you, and at last
go near to cause you to sit down in a total neglect of it.

A second evil design that the Devil has in this, is to render men careless
and negligent in all others; for by causing their zeal and care to be so great
about this, he will go near to make it the less in them, and by magnifying the
guilt of doing this unworthily, he will cause the guilt of doing others
unworthily to grow less.

Men may possibly imagine it will not be thus, but it is almost certain, and
ever seen in experience to be so: men shall seldom or never appear so
extraordinarily zealous and careful in one thing, but they may be trap'd, and
found careless in others: and it may be it would be found upon observation to
be so in this very instance; observe it, and you shall find abundace of those
very men, that seem so over-fearful of sin and guilt in this case, to be very
careless of it in others, and easily surmounting the sense and fear of it: and
therefore I once more caution men against this opinion, it is of very dangerous
effects, and is intended to serve the very worst, and most mischievous designs
against them.

SECT. II.
3. THis equal possibility of sin and guilt in doing other services of Religion
amiss, is not counted by us a sufficient reason to abstain from the doing of
them upon.

That we judge truly in this case, and that this possibility of sin and guilt
is not a good reason in it self, appears clearly upon these two reasons among
many others. First, that it would discharge a man from all services of
Religion. And Secondly, that it is much better to do a duty as well as we can,
though not so well as we should, than to disregard and neglect it altogether.

1. If this reason were good, it would discharge a man from all services of
Religion, as well as the Holy Sacrament; for there is not any one of these
which we are not as apt to fail in doing of, as this; and none in which a
failure is not in it self as offensive and provoking to God: both these I have
made good already; the one relies upon too true experience, and the other upon
plain Scripture.

We need but observe our selves, and our own temper, to see how often we offend,
or rather to convince us that we cannot tell how often we offend and do amiss in
our best performances: in many things we offend all, says S. James Chap. 3.2.
and truly in all things we offend some: we cannot discharge any duty of Religon
so exactly, and so truly as we ought, but should God be extreme and strict to
mark our failings, he might most justly reject us, and our best performances
too.

Should God deal with us in strict proportions, or by those measures that he
did with the Jews of old: should he refuse to accept any sacrifice, in which
there were the least imperfection and blemish; it were woe with us: our hearts
might justly tremble within us, as often as we came into his presence, and with
the men of Bethshemesh might cry out with terror and dread, who can stand
before this holy Lord God! we should like our guilty protoplast run away from
the divine presence, rather than come with any comfort or hope into it, and
always be afraid to offer any sacrifice to him.

For the reason is equally true in all; and if it be good in one case, it is so
in another; if aptness to do amiss, and danger to incur Gods displeasure
thereby, be a good reason to keep men from the Holy Sacrament, it is good also
to keep them from all other services of their Religion, since they are as apt
to transgress, and offend God in them, as in this.

2. This cannot be a good reason, because it is much better and safer to do a
duty as well as we can, though we sin in it, by not doing it so well as we
should, than wholly to neglect it, and not endeavor to do it at all.

This is so evidently true, that the universal reason of mankind will readily
subscribe to the truth of it: it is much better to do a duty as well as we can,
than not to essay it at all; so that should we sin in doing our duty amiss, and
provoke God in strictness of justice to punish us; yet we should sin more
heinously, and more grievously provoke him, by wholly neglecting, and
disregarding that duty altogether.

You need but consult your own breasts for this; you would much rather the
children or servants, etc. should do what you command them, though they do it
imperfectly and amiss, than that they should not go about to do it at all; and
you can much more easily pardon their errors in executing your commands, than
endure that they should wholly slight them, and disregard what you give them in
charge.

It argues some respect to God, and some sense of a man's obligation and duty,
to do what he has commanded, though he do not do it so well as he should, and
perhaps might: but it is next to extremity of profaness to neglect his duty
altogether, under a pretense that he cannot do it so well as it ought to be
done: and certainly God will bear rather with a bungler in his service, than a
neglecter of it; and pardon an honest endeavor, though attended with many
failings, much easier than him who never tries, nor endeavors at all.

It is our happiness and comfort, that God has assured us, he will deal with
us by these measures, and accept or reject men's performances by these rules of
grace and mercy; for so he has assured us in the old Testament, that he will
not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax: and so the Apostle
has let us know in the New, that if there be first a willing heart (an honest
endeavor to do as well as a man can) it shall be accepted according to what a
man has, and not according to what he has not. Now this must needs be a
mighty encouragement and comfort to us; and sufficient to set us right in this
matter: to make us think it much better and safer to do our duty as well as we
can (though we be too sensible that many errors attend our doing it) than to
sit down in a total disregard of it.

SECT. III.
4. OUr own confession and practice is evidence also in this case; as we do not
count this a good reason to abstain from the services of Religion upon, so we
do act contrary to it; whatever errors and failings attend men's holy things,
yet generally they keep up the practice of them; the sense of sin or guilt in
doing them, seldom prevails upon them to that degree, as to cause them wholly
to intermit, and lay aside the care of them.

Those men that are most conscious to themselves of their errors in hearing
Gods word, or in praying to him, yet think it their duty to come to Church, and
join in the public service of it; esteeming it much better to do something of
their duty, than nothing at all; and judge it a lesser guilt to err in the
manner of doing their duty, than wholly to neglect all doing of it. I appeal to
our common practice: these are the measures that we act, and judge by in all
other instances; we do not think we may safely neglect our duty, because we
fear we shall do it amiss; nor do we think our selves discharged from the
services of Religion, upon a fear of sinning, and offending God in the doing of
them.

SECT. VI.
NOw from all these premises the Conclusion methinks should follow very
plainly, viz. that since this equal sense of danger and guilt in doing other
services of our Religion amiss, does not detain us from doing of them, that
therefore it ought not to do it in this.

In the doing other duties and services of Religion, men do so far surmount the
fear, and danger of sinning in them, as to keep up the regular and unconstant
practice of them; they do not suffer these fears so far to prevail upon them,
as to cause them wholly to cast off the care of them; but they judge it much
better to do something of their duty, than nothing at all; and a much less
degree of guilt to do their duty, though they fail in it, and fall short of
that exactness and care that it should be done with; than to sit down in the
total omission of it; to live and die in the neglect of it, as I fear a great
many of men do in this.

Now in these cases men judge aright, and have both the universal reason of
Mankind, and their own minds to acquit them therein, and certainly they do
choose the much safer side of the question. I ask then why they should not
proceed by the same measures, in our present case? why the same reason that is
so evident to us, and so effectual upon us in all other cases, should not be
equally so in this?

I wish men would soberly consider things, and judge righteous judgment, and
not make differences where there are really none. I told you before, it is an
ill sign when men are scrupulous only on one side, and when that reason which
prevails so easily upon them in one case, shall not at all affect them in
another; in such a case, it is plain men's wills and passions make the
difference, and not their judgments.

And to deal plainly, I am afraid it is just so in our present case; men have
no mind to come to the Holy Sacrament, and therefore let every little shadow of
a reason keep them from it; it is not because they have any true arguments
against it, but because they have no inclination to the thing it self. This I
take to be the main reason, why all our reasonings with men in this matter, are
so insuccessful; they encounter prejudices, and contrary passions, which too
commonly are obstinate and blind, and men will not be persuaded to quit them,
no not when their reasons are convinced, and all their exceptions and arguments
satisfied.

It is not in this case only, that men believe with their wills and affections,
more than with their judgments; and choose, or refuse things, not as they have
true reason and argument for them, but as they have inclinations to, or
prejudices against them. The main fault of men's being more careless to come to
the Holy Sacrament, than to other ministries of Religion, lies in their wills,
more than real judgment; otherwise the same measures would be observed in both,
and the arguments that prevail with them to act regularly in one case, would
engage them to do so in this too.

I need not inveigh against this temper, men's own reason (would they but hear
it) would make them ashamed of it; at present I only add, that this argument
which keeps men from a necessary duty, instead of encouraging them to it, can
never be divine or true, nor can it be safe to rely upon it; so that although
men were not able to see, or answer the sophistry of it, nor show wherein the
falsehood of it did lie, yet it would be its own confutation; for that argument
can never be of God, which persuades men to live in the neglect of a duty, that
his commands have made necessary.

And therefore when we come to weigh arguments in this case, we should always
incline most to those, which teach us our duty, and encourage us in it, because
this is certainly the safer side. Nay, I add further, that were our minds
purely pendulous, were there arguments on both sides of the question, that
appeared equally true and concluding, so that we were not able to put a
difference between them, nor knew which to incline unto; yet this alone were
enough to turn the scales. One does invite and encourage me to do my duty, what
I see the plain command of God for, the other does discourage and fright me
from it; and therefore if I were not able to discover by any internal
signatures on which side the truth does lie; yet this external consideration is
sufficient to determine my choice: for it is certainly more safe to do my duty
as well as I can, than wholly to neglect it; and that argument which
encourageeth me hereunto, is certainly on the surer and safer side.

And therefore (to conclude this period) since we do proceed by this rule in
all other cases, we should proceed by it also in this; since we do not permit
the possibility, and fear of doing other duties amiss, to detain us from them,
we should not suffer it to keep us from this.

CHAP. VI.
The third Consideration that I proposed as an argument for this second
Collection is this. The Punishment threatened to eating and drinking unworthily,
is no greater, than what may be feared upon our doing other services of our
Religion amiss, and is threatened thereunto.

THis is an argument that ought clearly to be proceeded upon, because it comes
up directly to that which some men make the chief exception against coming to
the Holy Sacrament, and which they commonly urge this place in defense of; they
tell us, they are loath to be damned, (and I readily grant they have good reason
to be so:) but they are much more unwilling to damn themselves, (and for this
they are not to be blamed neither.) Now both these (they say) they are greatly
afraid of, if they come to the Holy Sacrament unworthily: for damnation is here
expressly threatened to him that does thus, yea, he is said to eat and drink his
own damnation.

Now what I have already said before, might go a great way toward taking off
this exception; and if Men remember the true notion of eating and drinking
unworthily in this place, it would go near to relieve wholly their fear in this
thing: for I have showed, that it is not every failure in receiving the Holy
Sacrament, that brings a man within the reach of eating and drinking
unworthily, in the sense of this Text: but only that gross and scandalous
profanation of it, that the Corinthians were guilty of, or something that in
true proportion answers to it.

And consequently, that it is not every such failure that brings a man within
the danger of that damnation that the Apostle speaks of; men need not presently
fear being damned upon every error and little failure in doing their duty: they
have a more merciful God to deal with, who does not weigh men by grains and
scruples, but rates their services, as he does their lives, by the general
frame and bent of them, and provided that men do their duty, and honestly
endeavor to do it as well as they can, has promised to accept them, though
many imperfections stick to them; and such as (should he deal in strict
justice) might cause him to reject and abhor them.

In short, it is only that monstrous profanation of the Holy Sacrament which
the Corinthians were guilty of; that makes a man to eat and drink unworthily in
the sense of this Text; and therefore only that, or something as bad, that
brings him in danger of that damnation which is here threatened; so that unless
men be guilty of the same sin, they have no reason to fear the same punishment.

But I shall not put the satisfaction of this scruple only upon this; but
consider it in it self; and examine whether there be any thing in it fit to be
made an exception against this service; in order to which, I shall endeavor to
do these two things.

1. Give the true sense of the phrase, and show how men mistake in their
apprehension of, and deductions from it.

2. I shall show that if men did not mistake the meaning of it, yet they do not
deal justly and fairly in neglecting the Holy Sacrament upon that reason.

SECT. I.
THE first thing to be performed to our present purpose is to give the true
meaning of this phrase, and there are two expressions which will need
explication. First, Damnation, and Secondly, eating and drinking damnation to
himself.

The first word to be explained is damnation, a word that makes a dreadful
noise, and carries terror in the very sound of it; it indifferently signifies
any judgment, or punishment whatever: but it is commonly appropriated and
restrained to signify that terrible punishment in Hell, which God has
prepared for all obstinate, and impenitent sinners.

Now the thing chiefly incumbent upon me, is to show what the signification of
it is in this place; and to inquire whether the circumstances of it do require
us to restrain it to this dreadful punishment, as those that make this
objection always understand it: for if men mistake in their understanding it
thus, then they mistake in their exception too, and the reason of it falls to
the ground.

I shall need to do very little more, than repeat what I said in the literal
exposition of the Text, to my present purpose: where I showed,

First that the Greek word (...) is of a very general and indefinite
signification; and is indifferently used to express any judgment or punishment
from God or man; temporal or eternal; upon the body, or the soul, or both; and
accordingly is used in Scripture also, sometimes for temporal, sometimes for
eternal punishment, for any external chastisement in this world, as well as
those eternal ones in the next; it were easy to instance the places in which
it is used in both significations, were the thing necessary, or not well known.

From this signification therefore of the word, we cannot infer any thing
certain here; it may signify the one, or it may signify the other; and from
any thing in the bare word, or use of it in Authors sacred or profane, we
cannot restrain it to eternal damnation only; because it is used by them to
signify temporary chastisements and punishments as well as that; and therefore
as in other like cases, we use to find out the sense of an Author, when he
uses words of an indefinite signification, by considering the circumstances of
the discourse in that place; so we must do here, fix the sense of this
indefinite word damnation, by considering the circumstances of the Apostles
discourse in this place.

Which if we do, I have showed secondly, that we shall soon find the Apostle
does not use the word damnation here in the terrible dreadful sense of it; nor
intend eternal damnation in hell by it: and consequently that men argue amiss,
and wide of the Apostles sense, that fix that dreadful meaning upon it. There
are two things plain in the context, to warrant me in this assertion. First,
that the punishments inflicted for this crime are plainly temporal. And
Secondly, that they are said to be inflicted on purpose to prevent this final
damnation.

First, all the punishments that he instanceth in are plainly temporary; this
you may see evidently in the following Verse: for this cause many are sick, and
many are weak among you, and some are fallen asleep. This sin of yours has
provoked God against you, and he has inflicted several judgments upon you for
it; sundry sorts of diseases (as our Church speaks) rage amongst you, and some
are actually cut off by them.

Where (you see) there is not a word of eternal damnation in hell; nothing like
it, nor any thing that can be interpreted to that meaning; only sicknesses, and
diseases, and (at most) death: and that you may not think it means eternal
death, or spoken of as a preface to it, as it is to all those that are finally
damned; it is expressed by the mild and gentle phrase of falling asleep, a
phrase that is always used in holy Scripture in a good sense; for the death of
good men, and men capable of mercy, and not of those upon whom the wrath of God
abides, and whom he will turn into hell.

Secondly, all these punishments are spoken of as medicinal; inflicted by way
of commutation, and on purpose to prevent this final damnation; this is plain
from verse 30, 31. for if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged,
but when we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. The plain meaning of all which is this, you might by
judging, and calling your selves to account for this sin, prevent Gods
punishing of you with these judgments; and his inflicting of them, though it be
just, and justly due to so great a miscarriage, yet it is in his mercy, to
bring you to reform this error, and to prevent the being further punished for
it.

Where these two things are very plain: First that these punishments were (as
almost all the divine judgments in this world are) purely medicinal: i. e.
intended to amend and reform those vices in them that suffered them, and in
them that beheld them: they were not wrathful excisions, and revengeful cutting
men off in their sins, without all hope of pardon, or space given for
repentance and amendment; as God sometimes deals with great and notorious
offenders, sore sicknesses, lingering diseases, and great weaknesses, wherein
they had time to recollect themselves, and amend their faults, and over and
beside had a Preacher sent on purpose to instruct them in these things.

And Secondly, that where the wrath fell heaviest, and the judgment proceeded
furthest, even to death it self; yet even there that death was in commutation;
and the merciful justice of God satisfied with it, so as to proceed no further
in punishing: we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the world.

From both which observations, it is plain, that temporal punishments are all
that the Apostle instanceth in, or relates unto in this place; and these
without any the least reference to eternal damnation. Yea these plainly in
opposition to it, exchanges for it, and means finally to prevent it.

These things (I think) sufficient to our understanding the meaning of
damnation in this place; and that it signifies only Gods judging men, and
punishing of them with some temporary afflictions in this world: so that though
the word damnation do signify, and in some places of Scripture intend
damnation in the worst and most terrible signification of it; yet it does
neither intend, nor signify it in this place, and therefore they that so
understand it, and argue from it, do both these quite beside the sense and
meaning of the Apostle in it.

SECT. II.
BUT there is another expression here that startles some men, and will need
explication; and that is eating and drinking damnation to himself: by this some
ignorant people think that something extraordinary is certainly signified, and
some such meaning intended, as if a man were more accessory to his own
damnation, or more immediately damned himself by this miscarriage, than by any
other sin.

To drink damnation to a man's self sounds harshly, and is a terrible saying;
and no man needs be blamed for being unwilling to damn himself. And truly (by
the way) I heartily wish every man were so, in all other cases as well as this:
but why men should be shie and fearful of damning themselves in this instance
and not in others, or why they should think they do it in this, more than
others, I understand not.

In order to the giving satisfaction in this, I shall first explain the phrase:
and secondly, show that it intends not to signify any greater or more
immediate influence upon a man's damnation in this, than in other sins. Thirdly,
to which I shall desire may be taken in what I have said before, that no
greater guilt is said to be contracted in this, than in many other sins.

1. As for the phrase of eating and drinking damnation to a man's self; it is
but a common phrase, and intends no more than exposing a man's self to the wrath
of God, and making himself obnoxious to divine punishments. I have showed
already what damnation signifies in this place, and what the Apostle refers it
unto, viz. not eternal damnation in hell, but external, corporal castigations,
and afflictions in this world. And then eating and drinking damnation can
signify no more, than exposing a man's self to those punishments, and provoking
God to inflict them upon him.

So that in the true intendment and reference of it in this place, it does not
respect eternal damnation at all; nor is there any reason (that I know of) to
dread it more in this, than other transgressions and sins: The form of speech
is but answerable to those well known, and often used phrases in other places
of Scripture. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self. And why will ye die O
house of Israel? etc. in which no more is intended but this, you do by your own
follies and faults expose your selves to the wrath of God: you provoke him, yea
you even force him to afflict and punish you, who is otherwise merciful and
gracious, unwilling and slow to punish the work of his own hands.

2. But I add Secondly, so do men do by other failures and miscarriages as well
as this; and there is no more immediate or direct influence upon a man's own
misery or destruction, in one case than in the other.

It is most certain every man's destruction is of himself, and there are many
ways by which men incense God against them, and provoke him to punish them; and
amongst those this is one: they do in this miscarriage, as they do in many
others, draw down the divine judgments upon themselves; but they do in this,
but just what they do in others; and for my part, I know no reason to make any
great difference upon.

I know too well that some men who had designs to serve, by scaring men from
the Holy Sacrament, have invented terrible phrases, and used frightful ways of
speaking in this matter: but I do not know what reason there is for them, nor
whether it be worth my stay to examine them.

Those that have so commonly called the Chalice a cup of poison, and compared
unworthy drinking the one, to a wilful drinking of the other; I think stand
accountable to God for a disparagement and dishonor to the blood of Christ
next to blasphemy; and are highly concerned to consider how they can answer it.

Those that talk so dreadfully of men's stabbing their own souls in this, and
becoming self-murtherers, etc. use words of fancy, which signify nothing but
by a figure; and nothing in this case more than all others, where men heedlesly
or wilfully prevaricate their duty, and incense God against them.

And those that tell us, that men do in this seal their own damnation, and even
covenant with God to be damned, beside that they speak only of their own heads,
speak it upon a great mistake of the reason, why the Sacraments are sometimes
called Seals by Divines, and by the Holy Scriptures too.

I know Circumcision is once called by S. Paul a Seal, Romans 4.11. but I do not
know, whether this be presently a good warrant, for calling all the Sacraments
of the New Testament Seals or not. But if I do allow this Holy Sacrament to be
a Seal, I must have it remembered that it is a Seal on Gods part, and not on
ours, and that Divines mean thus, when they thus speak: God Almighty is pleased
to ratify and confirm the truth of the everlasting Covenant to us, by these
Symbols, and Seals of it (if you please to call them so) and in some sense to
Seal^ the Truth of his own gracious promises; but I do not so well understand
how they are Seals on our part, or what we can be said to Seal unto, in any
other than a metaphorical and borrowed way of speaking.

It is very true, Gods Covenant and the Promises of it are made to us upon the
conditions of faith and obedience; and though these are not only supposed in
them that come to the Holy Sacrament, and may in some sense be said to be
promised and adstipulated unto by them at such times, yet that is but a
collateral, and secondary design of the Holy Sacrament: the prime design of it
is to confirm our faith in God, and not to Seal our obedience unto him; and the
Sacraments are but just such arguments and engagements upon us to become good
men, as our faith in the divine promises is, which are all made to us only upon
that condition: and he that testifies his belief of those promises, does oblige
himself to that condition, or else he believes like a fool, and upon no reason
at all.

But had I not said one word of this matter, I might safely have replied, that
whatever men may be said to Seal to in the Holy Sacrament, it is not to their
own damnation. Why yes say some, but those that eat unworthily do so: for he
that Seals with God for life and salvation, upon the condition of faith and
obedience, does in effect Seal to his own damnation, upon his failing to
believe and to obey.

But I say still this is a great mistake, for the Contract or Covenant is only
about salvation, and the incurring damnation no part of it at all, but only by
consequence, and by reason of men's failing to make good the conditions thereof:
infidelity and disobedience will as certainly forfeit salvation with the
Sacrament, as with it; and I do not see that an ill man is in a surer way to
damnation after the Sacrament, than he was in before it.

I do not speak thus to lessen the obligation, that receiving the Holy
Sacrament lays upon all to dead good lives; nor in the least to insinuate, that
breaking our promises then made to God is not a very great sin, and that which
must be severely accounted for; but only to extenuate, or take off that dread
of coming to the Holy Sacrament, which is brought upon men's spirits, when they
hear such terrible things said of it.

But still this is a matter besides our present question; for whatever guilt or
damnation a man may contract and incur by failing to perform the promise that
he makes to God, and seems to Seal in the Holy Sacrament, it is a thing which
respects his failing to live as he should after it; and not his eating and
drinking unworthily in it; the guilt is contracted after his receiving the Holy
Sacrament, and not at it: and whatever damnation he may incur by his fault
afterward, yet he did not Seal to his own damnation in it.

I might add another consideration pertinent to our present purpose here (but
that I have said it already) that there is no reason to dread any such
extraordinary guilt in eating and drinking amiss, above what may be justly
feared in doing other duties of Religion amiss. But this I have considered, and
(I hope) sufficiently made good before; and therefore must refer to that place
for it. And only consider two short surmises, that may be entertained against
this assertion, and explication of this phrase.

1. That this is really a greater profanation of Christian Religion, than
failure in other services of it is; this is counted the most high, sacred, and
venerable service in our Religion; and has always been so esteemed and called
in the Christian Church.

I confess it has: and such a gross profanation of it, as the Corinthians were
guilty of, is certainly a very heinous sin: but that does not render every
imperfection and failure in Communicating, the greatest sin that may be; or
higher presently than men can commit in other services of their Religion.

2. But the Apostle seems plainly to say so, Verse 17. Whosoever shall eat this
bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord.

But whatever that expression may seem to imply, it does really signify no
more, than the expression in this Text, that I am all this while considering;
it means only this in plain English, that such persons are guilty of a great
disrespect, and dishonor to the body and blood of Christ, of which the Bread
and Wine in the Holy Sacrament are the representatives and Symbols: for a
profanation of these reflects upon him whom they represent, and was ever
interpreted and thought to do so.

The sense is well expressed in this Text, not discerning the Lords body; i. e.
not considering what a sacred and venerable thing they represent, and signify:
and therefore using them with as little respect, or religious regard, as men do
common bread, and wine in their own houses. This I have showed the Corinthians
did, and something worse; and the truth is, the guilt of such a gross
profanation cannot well be represented in too terrible a phrase.

So that still for any thing either said in this Text, or that can reasonably
be deduced from the phrase of it, my argument stands firm: viz. that there is
no greater punishment threatened to a failure in this, than may be dreaded upon
the like failure in other services of our Religion.

Damnation signifies here only divine judgment, and punishment at large; and
there is no reason to restrain it only to that tremendous punishment in hell.
Yea, there is that plain in the context which is evidently against that sense
of it: for when the Apostle had spoken of damnation here, he presently
instanceth in temporal inflictions, being sick and weak and falling asleep, all
which he not only calls being chastened in this world, but being chastened that
they should not be condemned with the world.

And then consonantly to this, the eating and drinking this damnation to a man's
self, signifies no more than exposing a man's self, and becoming obnoxious to
these punishments, and chastenings of the Lord.

These things (I think) are plain, sufficient to make out the truth of my
argument; and in consequence of that to show how much wide of the Apostles
meaning here, those men argue, that talk so dreadfully of everlasting
damnation, being eminently due to every failure in men's receiving the Holy
Sacrament; and that they stand accountable to God, for a greater sin, and an
higher profanation of Religion in this, then they do by their miscarriages in
other duties and services of it.

SECT. III.
WEll, but because it may yet be objected against the purpose of this argument,
that whatever the minute and prime signification be: yet eating and drinking
unworthily cannot but be accounted a great sin, highly affrontive to the body
and blood of our Lord, and therefore a high provocation of God, and a fault
that he may most justly punish with eternal damnation. Therefore I proceed to
the second thing that I proposed on this argument, that whatever the meaning of
damnation be in this place, yet men do not deal fairly in urging it against
coming to the Holy Sacrament, or staying from it upon that reason.

And this I shall endeavor to make good upon these two reasons amongst others.
First, because if it should mean eternal damnation, yet it is not threatened to
every degree of eating and drinking unworthily, but only to that gross and
monstrous doing this, that the Corinthians were guilty of. And Secondly,
because this damnation does not restrain men from other sins, which they must
acknowledge to be as damning as this.

1. The first of these I need but just name, because I have insisted upon it
largely already: here I shall only add two short Considerations further,
relative to this matter.

First, That it is not fair dealing with Scripture, to extend the signification
of it beyond the proper intendment and meaning; or to take a liberty of
frighting people with the danger of eating and drinking unworthily, upon every
failure, when the Apostle used that phrase only in the case of such a
prodigious profanation of the Sacrament, as the Corinthians were now guilty of.
I have already said, their miscarriage might well be counted eating and
drinking unworthily indeed; but therefore to infer that every failure to eat
and drink so reverently, so fitly, and so becomingly as men should, is
presently eating and drinking unworthily in proportion to them, is putting our
own sense upon Scripture, and judging the things of Religion by our own
measures only.

And Secondly I add, that it is unreasonable, as well as uncharitable, to
affright men with danger of the same punishment, when they are far enough from
the same sin. It is Gods prerogative to apportion punishments unto sins, and
not ours: and as much our duty, as it is our interest, to make a difference
there, where it is plain the divine mercy does. It is greatly for our comfort,
and the ease of our guilty minds, that we have a God to serve, who transacts
with us by the measures of a great mercy, and an infinite goodness; that weighs
us not (as I observed before) by grains and scruples, but rates our services
and our lives too, by the general frame and bent of them; and provided we be
industrious, and honest in the main, and sincerely endeavor to do our best,
will accept them, and not be extreme and rigorous to mark every thing that is
done amiss, or every little imperfection that may attend them.

This is the great comfort and support of our hopes; and to rob us of this, is
certainly a mighty injury and disservice to us: and yet this in their
proportion they do, that alarm and frighten men with danger of damnation upon
every little failure in this matter, though never so short of that, to which it
is only threatened. I have showed you it is not an easy thing for any Christian
to be guilty of this sin, related to in the Text; and I verily believe it: and
therefore why they that are really so far from it, yea who tremble at the very
thoughts of it, should be so amused and perplexed with apprehensions and fears
of the punishments due to it, I know not. I am sure in all other cases men
desire we should bend the bough rather the other way, and think themselves
severely judged, and hardly dealt with, if we do not: and therefore to teach
men to believe, and fear so in this, is to make them sad whom the Lord has not
made sad: and to bring an evil report upon the divine goodness, yea justice too.

SECT. IV.
THe second thing upon which I charge men with unreasonableness, in urging the
danger of damnation in coming to the Holy Sacrament, and pretending to stay
from the one upon a fear of the other, is this, because this fear of damnation
does not restrain them from other sins, which they must confess are as damning
as this can be. There are other sins in which men incur the danger of eternal
damnation, as really as they can be thought to do, in failing to Communicate so
worthily as they should; and yet it is too notorious, that this fear of
damnation does not restrain them from them.

It is a hard saying, but it is too true, those very men that are so very
scrupulous, and so very fearful of damnation in this, yet appear openly
regardless, and proof against all fear of it in other things, wherein it is as
reasonable and necessary to be feared.

There are too many men on one hand, that can live and persist obstinately in
plain Schism, allow themselves in rebellions and the most factious courses:
opposing government, speaking evil of dignities, pride and uncharitableness;
judging and rash censuring of their brethren, fraud and hypocrisy, injustice
and knavery, and all sorts of such spiritual vices as these, without the least
remorse.

And I would to God I could not say as truly, that there are too many on the
other hand, that will allow themselves in open debauchery: make no conscience
of raillery and profaness; of intemperance, and uncleanness; of whoredom and
drunkenness, and that cursed humor of Swearing, which has obtained so among
us to the shame of the Nation, and for which it mourns.

There are too many (I say) of both sorts, that live without any apprehension
or fear of damnation in these things, who yet when invited to the Holy
Sacrament, or reproved for the neglect of it, seem wonderful scrupulous, and
fearful of damnation if they should come to it, and think to excuse the neglect
of one, with their fears of the other, which they always plead in vindication
of it.

Now I appeal to the reason of all men, whether this be fair and honest
dealing, or whether it be not plain collusion and subterfuge: were there any
true reason to fear damnation here (which yet I have showed there is not) yet
men were not just and fair, in pretending so much fear of it in this, and yet
surmounting so easily that fear in others.

I have told you before in this discourse often, and I shall have occasion to
tell it you again, that it is a bad sign to see men scrupulous only in some few
things; and there is not a plainer mark of an hypocrite, than to be shie and
fearful of sin and damnation in some lesser things, but venturous and
regardless of it in others, that are perhaps far greater. It was this which our
Savior so often charged upon the Pharisees, and for which he so sharply
condemned them as a pack of fulsom errant hypocrites; and men had need to look
to it, for they will draw upon themselves the same imputation, if they be of
the same temper and practice.

If the fear of damnation therefore influence you in this one, let it in Gods
name do so in other instances that are more gross and obvious. If the fear of
damnation in this be true and sincere, it will do this (for damnation is still
the same thing, and equally to be dreaded,) but if it do not, it is plain you
use it as subterfuge, and artifice: you proclaim your own insincerity and
hypocrisy in it; and the excuse it self not only aggravates, but becomes part
of the crime.

I have added this Consideration only ex abundanti, and to argue with some men
even upon their own pretenses; and if they will honestly reflect upon it, it
will hardly fail of some effect on them: but to others that are really
scrupulous and fearful of damnation, upon every failure to receive the Holy
Sacrament so well as they should, and argue their fears upon the reason of this
Text; to these (I say) the former Consideration will be sufficient, since it is
not this eternal damnation that the Apostle means in this place. And let me
add, that if eternal damnation be not threatened to the Corinthians here, who so
shamefully and grossly profaned this holy service, much less is it presently to
be feared by those, who receive it as well as they can, though not so well as
they should; if so extreme gross and scandalous a profanation be not threatened
with it; surely every small failure needs not fear it.

CHAP. VII.
I advance now to the fourth Consideration, which I proposed for the truth of
our present Collection, viz. That whatever sin or guilt there is in eating and
drinking unworthily, there is the same, yea there is greater in not eating and
drinking at all.

THe truth and reasonableness of this relies upon a reason that I have made
good already; and that is, that eating and drinking in the Holy Sacrament is a
necessary indispensible duty, tied immediately upon all Christians by the
command of their Lord; and that upon a reason, which will ever have effect upon
all those that have any love and respect to him: yea which will still improve,
and in every age grow stronger and stronger. I shall not, and I hope I need not
resume this argument, because I have discharged it pretty well already; and
therefore shall little more than give in the heads of what has been more fully
represented.

1. First, Then I have observed that the command for this duty is as positive
and express, as any command for any other duty either is, or can be; and this
we shall be satisfied of, if we look into the story of it is institution. This
is related by three Evangelists, and almost in the very same words. Mat. 16.
from 26. to the 29. Verse. As they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed it,
and brake it, and gave to the disciples, and said, take eat, this is my body:
and he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying drink ye all
of this, for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for
the remission of sins. The same you have also in the other two Evangelists, S.
Mark Cap. 14.22, 23, 24. Verses, and in S. Luke also, Cap. 22.19, 20. Verses,
in all which places our Lord does not only Addminister this Holy Sacrament
himself, but expressly commands them to do so likewise. Do this in remembrance
of me. This that you have seen me do, do you take care to do also, after that I
am gone from you; in which words it is plain, that our Lord institutes this,
and enjoins it to be a standing service in his Church, and to be observed and
practiced by all the members of it.

For First, The Apostles were at this time Christ's little flock, the first
fruits of that Church which he was going to plant in the world, and it is plain
in the story, that he administered it to them all.

And Secondly, If we are to respect them here peculiarly as Apostles, whom he
designed to be the first and chief Pastors and governors of the Church: the
argument is equally concluding still; for making it their duty to Consecrate,
and Administer the Holy Sacrament, he does make it the duty of others also, to
partake of it, and to have it administered to them.

And if we take in part of the Ecclesiastical story to this, Acts the second
Chapter at the latter end, we shall see that the Apostles did thus understand
this Command of their Lord, and did practice accordingly, as soon as ever they
had gathered the face of a Church, for they continued in breaking of bread, as
well as in prayer; and as constant and daily in one, as in the other.

This must needs be to our great satisfaction in this matter. Our Savior did
institute, and command this service to be in his Church: and his Apostles
understood him so, and accordingly did practice it, and keep it up as a
standing Service in the Church, as soon as ever they had gathered one; and the
members of this Church continued daily in the observance of it, as well as
prayer; from all which if any thing can be plain, this is so, that Christ
intended the Holy Sacrament to be a constant standing Service in his Church;
and that the Apostles and Primitive Christians did accordingly observe, and
keep up the practice of it, and this too as carefully and constantly as the
public Prayers. And if this be not enough to evince it to be every Christians
duty to observe it, yea to observe it as well as any other public Service of
the Christian Church; nothing is, and nothing can be so.

And since we are engaged again on this Subject, let me add S. Paul's
representing of this matter to the same purpose: 1 Cor. 11.23. 24, 25. I have
received of the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus
in the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given
thanks he brake it, and said take eat, this is my body which is broken for you,
this do in remembrance of me: after the same manner also he took the cup, when
he had supped, saying, this cup is the New Testament in my blood, this do ye,
as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

This S. Paul, and the other Apostles were all that our Lord immediately and by
himself consecrated, and appointed Pastors and Governors of his Church: and
it is well worthy of observation that he gives this in charge equally to both,
and takes care that S. Paul should no more go out uninstructed in it, than his
own immediate Apostles, but that he should set up the practice of it among the
Gentiles, as well as they in the Churches of the Jews: i. e. in plain terms,
that all both Jews and Gentiles that should embrace his Religion, should
equally practice this, as a standing and constant Service in the Christian
Church: and it is certain, that both these Churches did accordingly observe and
practice the same.

SECT. I.
BUT then lest it should be thought a temporary transient institution only,
which was to continue only while the Apostles lived, or some little time after,
as some few other things were. Therefore I observed in the second place, the
reason with which this institution of Christ is backed, and what our Lord has
declared to be the great end and purpose of it: now this is expressed in these
words, in remembrance of me, this do in remembrance of me; which reason does
clearly show this precept to be no temporary one only, but to be even morally
and perpetually obliging.

1. I think I may say morally; for the pious, grateful, devout, and joyful
remembrance of our Savior, and of his great love in what he undertook, and
underwent for our sakes, is an instance surely of moral justice; and as
indispensibly, and everlastingly due from us, as gratitude is to a great
benefactor, or any instance of natural Religion is to God: and certainly he
that thinks otherwise, dishonours, and disparageth this love, and makes himself
for ever unworthy of it. If ever any love were worthy to be remembered; if ever
any thing that God did for man deserved, and might in justice challenge our
highest gratitude and praise, this certainly does; and I would to God, that
some men would remember this, and remember this too, how they can hope for the
benefit of it, and yet neglect to remember it, and to remember it by that,
which himself has appointed to be the solemn rite of that commemoration.

2. I said perpetually obliging too; and this I say now, not only upon the
former reason, that its end is a moral good; and what is morally good is
unalterably and eternally obliging: but I speak it upon a particular respect to
the reason of its institution, which is so far from wearing out, that it will
improve upon our hands, and grow stronger in every succeeding period of the
Church than other: there will always be the same reason to remember the love of
our dying Lord; for that love will always appear the same, and the benefits of
it will continue the same too; so that the reason of this service will in every
age continue the same.

But there is another Consideration which will make it to improve and grow
stronger, and stronger; for time is a grand consumer and waster of things: and
the memory of the greatest kindness and blessing in a long tract of time is apt
to decay, and wear off of men's minds; so that the further that men live off
from the time of our Saviors passion, the more danger they are in of
forgetting it, and the more need they have of something to fix it the more
deeply and indelibly upon their minds.

So that this reason will still improve, and we therefore that live at this
distance of sixteen hundred years from it, had need to be more observant of
this institution to refresh our memories, than they that lived but a very few
years, or days after it; and so every age that shall succeed us, will have more
need still, till the final dissolution, when the Lord shall come (as S. Paul
speaks) when we shall see him, whom we now commemorate, and have all our pious
acts of remembering him superseded, by the blissful vision of, and attendance
upon him for ever.

SECT. II.
I Might take in some other Considerations to add to the strength of these, all
which combine to render this precept more effectual, and obliging, if it were
possible than the former. I will little more than just name some of them.

First, This was the last institution of our dying Lord; and the thing that he
gave us in charge, just when he was going to suffer, and die for us.

Secondly, It is the peculiar precept of the Gospel; and that which may be more
truly called the command of our Savior, than any other.

And Thirdly, it is plain, and easy to be obeyed, not in the least chargeable
or burdensome, as some such institutions before were; nor in any measure more
difficult than any other service in our Religion is.

But I will not enlarge upon these here, because I have done it formerly in
another place; and in truth, I only mention them, and what has preceded on
purpose to make good the ground of my present Argument; to let men see that it
must needs be a sin, and to convince them (if it be possible) that it must
needs be a very great and heinous sin, too, to live and die (as I fear too many
do) in the neglect of such a duty, and total disregard of such a command of
Christ Jesus.

I cannot tell what notion some men may have of sin; but I think if any
omission, and neglect of men may be called a sin, this may: if sin be (as the
Apostle tell us it is) a transgression of the Law, then certainly a
transgression of such a law must be a sin; and the more arguments there are to
enforce this law, and the more reasons to press us to the observation of it;
the more heinous and provoking must it certainly be, to live in the constant
disregard of it.

Now if these things be so, they must convince us of thus much at least; that
whatever the sin and danger of eating unworthily can be, it must needs be
acknowledged to be a great sin, and great danger not to eat at all.

But I said something more, and that is that what sin soever eating and
drinking unworthily can be thought to be, neglecting and refusing to eat and
drink at all must needs be a greater; the reason of this is plain from what
has been said before, for one is only failing to do a duty so well as men
should, and ought to do it, but the other is refusing the duty altogether, and
chosing rather to live in a total disregard of it. And men that do their duty,
though not so well as they should, yet certainly are more excusable, than those
that altogether disregard and neglect it.

The universal reason (as I hinted before) of all the world will allow this:
every man judges by this measure himself, and we are assured that God will do
so too: if I am a Tutor, or a Master, or a Parent; I can much easier forgive my
Scholar, or Servant, or Child, that out of some regard to my authority, and
command, goes about what I bid him, though he do it awkardly, and far from that
exactness that I might expect; than I should if he altogether disregarded my
authority, and never took any care at all to do what I commanded him.

And God himself has told us, that he will rate men's services by the same
rules; that if there be a willing mind and endeavor to do our best, the will
accept it according to what a man has, and not according to what he has not.
Wilful designed failures in duty are extremely provoking, I confess, and he
that eats and drinks unworthily in that sense, I am far from excusing, or
extenuating his crime; but failings that are almost unavoidable, the effects of
human infirmity and frailty only, or defects only of knowledge and skill, are
greatly pitiable, and scarce ever severely reckoned for, by God, or man.

SECT. III.
THese premises being now laid, I advance the Conclusion that results from
them; that therefore the sin and danger of eating unworthily, can never excuse
a man from not eating at all.

1. For first one sin can never excuse for another, and much less can the
possibility of sinning become a good reason for actually doing so: apply it to
the case before us, and the thing is plain; a man may sin in eating and
drinking unworthily, but he certainly does so in not eating at all; and
therefore deserves something a worse character than a fool only, if he can
think that the possible danger of the one, can expiate, and atone for the
certainty of the other; he does ill enough that commits one sin, but he that
commits another upon the reason of the first, does much worse.

2. Secondly, It is altogether unreasonable, and unjust to be moved by the fear
of sining in one thing, and yet to surmount the certainty of sining in another;
if sin deserve to be dreaded and shunned in one case, it should so in the other
too; and if it be not, men deal unequally, are partial in the law, and (as the
Apostle speaks in another case) instead of being doers of the law, they become
unjust Judges, and perverters of it.

3. Nay Thirdly, It is plain fraud, and fulsome hypocrisy, to be shie and
fearful of that which is certainly a lesser sin, but regardless of that which
is greater: this is to strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel; and with the
Pharisees to be scrupulous of every appearance of evil in some things, but to
live without all sense and dread of the greatest and grossest sins in others.

The whole world must cry out of fraud and pageantry in such dealings; it
cannot be conscience, and honesty that governs men in them; and they had best
look to it, that while they think well of themselves, for being tender and
fearful of sin in one thing, they be not condemned as gross and wretched
Hypocrites, for being without any sense of it in others: this is a
consideration, that ought to stick close upon some men's thoughts, who cry out
so much of the sin, and danger of eating and drinking unworthily, and value
themselves for tender conscienced men upon that reason; but all the while live
in a total neglect of the Holy Sacrament, never thinking what a grievous sin it
must needs be, to live in the neglect of that, which the laws of Christ has
tied upon all Christians, and that upon such a reason as can never fail of
having effect upon every honest man.

For shame let us consider better, and show our selves men, and not like weak
men and fools, delude our selves with such silly and fulsome pretenses as
these: can we think we deal sincerely with God, or our own souls either, in
making such a noise with our scruples and fears of sin in doing our duty, but
live securely and without all remorse in the great sin of wholly neglecting it?
if we can believe this, we may believe any thing that we please: we have more
need of physic, than instruction; we may easily be cheated into destruction,
nay we supersede all need of that, for we miserably cheat and deceive our
selves.

CHAP. VIII.
I add a fifth Consideration to confirm the reasonableness of our second
Collection, viz. That this danger of eating and drinking unworthily is caused
by our own only default, and is what with competent care we may redress.

THe plain English of what I mean is this, if men be unfit for the Holy
Sacrament, or in any danger of Communicating unworthily in it, it is their
fault, and it is such a fault as they both should, and may redress; and
therefore they cannot reasonably expect to be excused from coming to the Holy
Sacrament upon the reason of it; it is not fit to be admitted for a good reason
of their staying from the Sacrament at any time, much less for their constant
staying from it at all times; it will easily be apprehended how much this
consideration will contribute to the Collection we are upon; for nothing can
well be more unreasonable than to think that will be a sufficient excuse
against doing a duty, which men have contracted by their own only fault, and
which with any competent care they may remove.

But because this is an argument that may afford some things very pertinent to
be observed by men in this case; I shall branch the purport of it into some
distinct propositions, which when I have confirmed, I shall briefly remark the
influence that each has upon the conclusion, that I contend for. I shall
comprehend all I purpose to say in these four that follow.

1. That men are in danger of eating and drinking unworthily, is purely and
solely their own fault; so that they cannot be excused from eating upon the
reason of it.

2. This danger ought to be removed, and care taken to put themselves into
better circumstances: otherwise it is wilful and affected, and so instead of
excusing their not eating, it will highly aggravate the same.

3. An ordinary competent endeavor and care with Gods grace may remove it; so
that upon that reason also, their neglecting of it, becomes highly culpable,
and inexcusable.

4. Though men may have been careless, and slipped their opportunity at one
time, yet they may and ought to use more care against another; for pretenses of
continual unfitness, or unworthiness cannot excuse them.

SECT. I.
THe first proposition is this; this danger of eating and drinking unworthily,
in any sense of unworthiness like this in the Text, is purely and solely men's
own fault; and therefore they cannot hope to be excused upon the reason of it.

I put the proposition here in the largest sense that can be desired; and do
not confine it only to the sense of eating and drinking unworthily intended in
this Text. I believe I need not stay proving, that the Corinthians fact was a
gross, and inexcusable fault, owing to their own ignorance and intemperance:
nor that any Christian that should be guilty of the like now, were more
inexcusable than they. This will readily be acknowledged by any that considers
what has been said before, viz. that all Christians are in such circumstances
now, and so fully instructed in the nature and design of this service, that
such a profanation of it now would become the most impardonable thing in the
world.

But therefore I propose the case more indefinitely, let what men please to
think eating and drinking unworthily in any proportion to this in the Text, be
allowed to be so: yet still I say this is owing purely to their own fault, if
it be upon them, and incurred solely by their own carelessness.

There are (I confess) some little imperfections and failings incident to men,
which it may be their utmost industry and care (while in this lapsed state)
cannot get free from: but these are such as need not come into our present
account; for they neither put men's persons out of Gods merciful favor, nor
their services out of his gracious acceptance. These shall never be put upon
our account but pardoned upon the merits of our dear Savior, and that general
repentance, which God has promised to accept, in that covenant of mercy and
grace, which he has sealed to us in his blood.

But over and beyond these, whatever we can think brings us into the danger of
eating unworthily, it is occasioned only by our selves, and our own fault. As
for example, let it be the looseness and unholiness of men's lives; their
impenitence, uncharitableness, worldly mindedness, intemperance, sensuality, or
their being disturbed and cumbred with the business and cares of this life, or
any other vice whatsoever in proportion to these: yet surely all these are our
own guilts, and we have none but our selves to charge them upon.

I know too well how forward men are to excuse their faults, and willing to
transfer their guilts upon something beside themselves; but besides that at the
great day all mouths will be stopped, and all vicious men become palpably and
inexcusably guilty before God: I say beside this, I never yet saw the man, whom
I could not make sensible of his own interest in his crimes, and whose own mind
has not convinced him that he might have done better.

Were our transgressions necessary, and unavoidable, they were not sins: for
necessity is subject to no law, and where there is no law, there is no
transgression; and to argue that men cannot but do amiss, is to argue them
innocent in doing so; for what men cannot avoid, they cannot help, and where
there is no liberty and choice, there is no more sin, than there is in a stone
that falls down, and kills a man.

It will not seem perhaps very pertinent or proper here, to reflect upon the
doctrines that have given men any reason or encouragement to think otherwise of
their crimes. I look upon them but as so many desperate shifts that men have
been put upon to shake off the remorse and anguish of their own accusing minds:
the uneasiness of which has made them willing to charge every thing, yea God
himself, rather than endure the torment of their own reflections; such for
instance is the doctrine of absolute, fatal, irresistible decrees in God, by
which some men are concluded under an inevitable necessity of sining: the
irresistible inclinations of humane nature to sin; the insuperableness of those
temptations to evil, that are continually urging and soliciting of us.

These are doctrins that are either plain blasphemy against God, or
impardonable reflections upon his justice, or the highest affronts to his
grace, in derogating from the sufficiency of it. I am sure God is holy, and
cannot tempt any man to sin, much less force and necessitate him to it; and how
urging soever the inclinations of nature, or importunate the temptations to sin
may be; yet the divine grace is stronger, and sufficient (if men be true to it)
to enable them to surmount both: and I appeal to the experiences of men,
whether they do not feel their own minds sting, and gird, and convince them
they might have done better than they do.

So that after all the endeavors and wrestlings of men in this case; and after
all the doctrins that others have propagated to help them in them: men must lay
their hands upon their mouth, and take the guilt and shame of their sins upon
themselves only; and I think most assuredly, that man would sin grievously, and
make the heap of his guilts much greater, that should not confess sincerely,
that whatever was amiss with him, or done so by him, was purely and solely his
own trespass and fault.

Now if this be so, and whatever danger we can be in of eating unworthily must
be cast only upon our selves, and must be acknowledged our own indiscretion and
folly only; then it will undeniably follow that it cannot be a sufficient
excuse for not coming to eat in the Holy Sacrament: for I hope men do not think
that one fault can excuse, or atone for another; nor imagine that because by
one sin they have brought themselves into an unfitness for their duty, that
therefore all the duties they neglect, and the subsequent sins they commit in
consequence of it, shall be excused: this is to add sin to sin, and to mend one
thing amiss, with that which is really much worse.

Thou art in danger of eating unworthily at the Lords Table, if thou come to
it; well, but whose fault is it, that thou art so? and what besides thine own
folly has brought thee into that danger? and what now, would thou neglect
thy duty, because thou have made thy self unfit to do it? thou may do so,
but then know thou have now a double crime to answer for; one for thy first
sin, and another for the neglect of that duty, it indisposed thee for.

Consider what the Apology would be, that in this case thou could make to
God; and how finely it would sound in thy mouth, to tell the plain truth. I
come not O Lord to the Holy Sacrament as thou have commanded me, but it is
because I have unfitted my self for it. I know it is my duty to come, and a
great sin to neglect it, but I hope thou will pardon me, because I have
committed another sin, that causes it. I came not to thy Table, but it was
because I was drunk, or as bad, when I should have come. Be thine own Judge,
does this sound well? would thou be pleased thy self with such an excuse as
this from a careless Child or Servant? and do thou think God will take it
from thee? or can thou hope, that he will pardon thee one sin, because thou
did it in consequence of another? This is so abhorrent to all sense and
reason, that (one would think) no man could rely upon it, or could choose but
be utterly ashamed of it: nothing can be madder than to commit one sin upon the
reason of another, unless it be hoping that the first sin can expiate and
excuse the second. So that (to conclude this period) if men stand accountable
to God for unfitting themselves for the Holy Sacrament, their neglecting of it
can never be excused upon that reason.

SECT. II.
THe true consequence from that Concession is, what I have remarked in the
second proposition, viz. that care therefore ought to be taken, to remove this
indisposition and danger, and to put our selves into fitter and better
circumstances.

We are strangely apt to stand idly lamenting, and whining over our own
unfitness and unworthiness, and as apt to think that will become excuse for us
before God for it, and atone for the neglect of that duty that we therefore
disregard: but can any thing be more idle and unaccountable than this? for
still it is our own wilful fault that we are thus unworthy, but it will be our
greater fault, if we continue so: the consequence naturally draws the other
way, viz. that being sensible of our unworthiness, and sorrowful for it (as we
seem to be) we speedily endeavor to remove that unworthiness, and in good
earnest set about it.

When that great misfortune befell Israel before the City of Ai, (of which you
have the story, Josh. 7.) and Joshua and the Elders of Israel lay lamenting it
before God one whole day: you may see how God bespeaks him, Verse 10.11, 12,
13. And the Lord said to Joshua, get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus upon
thy face? Israel has sinned, and taken the accursed thing: they have stolen
and dissembled, etc. therefore they could not stand before their enemies,
neither will I be with you any more, unless you destroy the accursed thing from
among you. Up, sanctify the people, and say, sanctify your selves against to
morrow: it was not an acceptable thing to God to hear them howling and
lamenting their miscarriage, nor available with him to redress the same: the
true and acceptable way was to bestir themselves, set to their own duty, and
clear themselves of that guilt that occasioned their overthrow.

The present supposed case is much like this, but the measures of our
proceeding in it, ought to be exactly the same. To set resolutely and
vigorously about our duty: about bettering our circumstances, reforming our
Lives, and those vices especially that cause this unworthiness, and not stand
fruitlesly lamenting and bewailing our unworthiness, with our Arms folded up,
without either hope or care to remedy the same: vainly thinking it will become
excuse for us with God, for neglecting our duty, which he has commanded, but
we foolishly indisposed our selves for.

Men's duty in this case lies very plain, and they themselves can easily
prescribe what ought to be done in all others like it. If our circumstances be
dangerous, and we unfit to do our necessary Duty, we need not consult what we
should do, we can direct our selves if we please, and think it much better, not
to sink under our indisposition, and wear away our selves and time too, in
fruitlesly bewailing, of it; but do what we can to help our selves to get rid
of our distemper, and to remedy the evil that hangs upon us. For if things be a
miss, they ought to be amended. And what evils Men have brought upon themselves
by negligence, they should endeavor to remedy by diligence and care.

Thus the whole World acts in all common cases like this, if a disease amongst
them, or a wound or bruise happen to their Bodies, or any Limb of it, they
presently consult how to remove the one, and heal the other. And at this rate
they act in all other like cases; as soon as they are sensible of an Evil, they
endeavor to redress it, and their feeling of it, quickly excites their care
against it.

And surely then they ought to so do in this case too, and so much the rather,
as the Indispositions of the Soul are more fatal than those of the Body, and
what is prejudicial to our Spiritual and Eternal welfare, much more
considerable than what affects our temporal only; and I think of all things
that affect and endanger that, those are most dangerous, that betray us into
Sin, and then hinder us from attending to our necessary duty. If Men therefore
have any due regard to the Everlasting happiness of their Souls, and any sense
of their Duty, upon their doing which, that happiness does depend; they will
not, they cannot suffer such indispositions to remain upon them, which so much
endanger the one, by keeping them from the other.

But I have some things yet to urge further, against our neglect in this case:
which will follow as the undeniable consequences of it, and become great
aggravations thereof.

1. That Men's unworthiness and unfitness is wilful.

2. That it is very probable if not certain to increase upon them.

3. That their Sense of it, and sorrow for it can never be sincere, if they
endeavor not to redress and remove it.

SECT. III.
1. IF Men that complain of their unfitness, and unworthiness to receive the
Holy Sacrament, and urge one as an excuse to the other, do not carefully
endeavor to remove that unfitness, and whatever it is that renders them so
unwrothy; it is plain, that unworthiness is wilful and affected.

He that being Sick seeks not after his cure, or will not use those remedies
that are prescribed in order to it, stands responsible for all the pain that he
feels, and all the miseries and evils that attend his sickness; and he that
being in thraldom endeavors not his enlargment, hugs his chain, and is in love
with his Prison. And it is certainly thus in the present case. He that has
made himself unfit to receive the Holy Sacrament, and takes no care to remove
that which brings that unfitness upon him whatever it be; stands doubly guilty
before God, and his latter error is much worse than the former.

Whatever of Inprudence, or Carelessness, or Temptation, or Surprise there might
be in the first, there can be nothing but wilfulness and obstinacy in the
second; there may possibly be something to extenuate the Guilt of the one; but
the other is plainly wilful and presumptuous. Whatever I will not strive to
remedy I plainly choose, and it is a plain sign I am reconciled to that which I
willingly lie under. If I bore mine Ear, it is a sign I love my Master, and
court Slavery; and how much soever I may afterward regret the consequences of
this, or how many inconveniences may ensue upon it, yet I am only accountable
for them all, and they are really mine own choice, and there is as much of a
Man's will in continuing quietly under an evil, as there was at first in
choosing of it.

Nay we may go something further yet, and avow this unfitness, upon a Man, to be
improved now into artifice and design. Whatever the unfitness and unworthiness
may be in it self, or whatever it was at first, it is now used and cherished,
as subterfuge and plea; it rendered him unfit for hit Duty at first, and now it
shall be improved into argument and excuse against it. I cannot aptlier
illustrate this, than by the practice of those Beggars that either make
artificial Sores, or cherish and keep open real ones, that they may use them as
motives to Charity from others, and indulgences for Idleness in themselves.
This (they say) is a common practice among such Persons; and certainly as they
are the worst of Beggars, that beg under such umbrages, and of all vagrants
those most worthy of correction that choose to be so, rather than work to
maintain themselves in an honest calling: so those Men that make improvement of
their Sins, and cherish them upon design, and plead them to exempt and excuse
from Duty, are of all other Sinners the most fulsom, the most abominable and
furthest from the Charity and Mercy of God.

Upon which plain reason it must needs appear evident, that unfitness to
receive the Holy Sacrament in such a case, can never excuse the neglect of it,
but will rather greatly aggravate the Guilt of that neglect; how sufficient a
reason soever it might be in it self, for Men's staying from the Sacrament, yet
it ought not, and it reasonably cannot be pleaded by them, because they have
both volentarily brought it upon themselves, and refuse to be relieved from it.
It is plain artifice and choice, and kept up on purpose to exempt, and excuse
them from their Duty.

2. Secondly such a Man's unfitness to receive the Holy Sacrament, will by
being neglected, increase still upon him. I suppose Men's unfitness to receive
the Holy Sacrament must arise from some Sin, that sticks fast to them, and
which they live in. I know nothing but Sin, that unfits any Man for the Holy
Sacrament, nor any thing but neglect to repent of it, and reform from it that
gives it that effect.

This I take to be certain, and I make it the Foundation of what I am going to
say, on this Argument; for therefore care ought to be taken, to get rid of this
Sin, in some competent measure, by repenting of it, and resolving against it,
and begging Gods Grace to enable us to do so; for otherwise I ask what a Man
can expect or think of? Thou art unfit to receive the Holy Sacrament, by reason
of such a Sin, or such a miscarriage: Well, but would thou have this
unfitness to continue on thee, or be redressed?

If thou art resolved still to continue so unfit, by indulging thy Sin, and
living in it, and obeying all the motions of it; then I have nothing more to
say to thee, but that thou may as well cast off all regard to other services
of Religion as this. Thy Religion is contradiction and nonsense, and thy Life
is open defiance to it. But if thou would have it removed, and become fit for
this Holy Service, then the only way to this purpose, is to set thy self
vigorously and in earnest about the redressing of it, by care to repent, and
reform from it, and not to sit still idly pining, and bewailing of it.

For otherwise, first, thy Indisposition will certainly still continue, and
dwell upon thee. No Man can reasonably expect that Sin should pass off of it
self, and leave him of its one accord; it sticks too fast, and roots too deep,
when it has once taken hold of us. It is just like weeds in a rank soil, it is
well if our utmost industry and care can keep them down or clear on it. But
without that care they will certainly grow, and spread, and in a little time
overrun all. And he that finds it too often a very hard matter, with all his
industry and care, his watching and praying, and striving to master a Sin, and
subdue a vicious inclination, may easily presage the fate of that Man, that
sits still under his Sin, and never strives against it, but foolishly expects
it should leave him of its own accord.

Nay secondly, such a Man's unworthiness will still increase, and grow upon
him. For vice like other things is of a growing nature, and seldom sticks at
the same stay; human nature (as I said but now) is a very rank soil, and vice
is a seed too suitable and agreeable to it; and when we consider how subtle and
industrious the Devil is to cherish this seed, and cultivate this Ground, we
may well conclude to what a monstrous extremity it will in time grow, if great
heed and care be not taken against it. So that if Men be in earnest when they
plead their unworthiness to receive the Holy Sacrament, and keep from it upon
that reason, then the natural consequences of that should be the using all
possible and speedy care to get that unworthiness removed, otherwise they must
be content, that it continue and grow upon them, and that themselves perish
everlastingly under the effects of it.

And then there is a third thing to be considered to this purpose, viz. that
among all the arts and methods of redressing our unworthiness, and becoming fit
for the Holy Sacrament, the Communicating in it is one of the chiefest; no Man
in the World ever became more worthy and fit by staying away from it, but many
have become so by going to it. One of the best ways that I know of, for a Man
to come to the Holy Sacrament as he should, is to come to it as well as he can.
This is that advice that I would give to every timorous Person in this case: if
thou fear thou can not go so well fitted as thou should, be sure to go as
well as thou can; I am very confident, by this means thou will still grow
better and better: the truth of this has been attested by the happy experience
of many a good Man; and it relies upon very good Reason too. For besides that
God is always ready to accept, and cherish the Day of small things, and to give
more Grace and strength to him, that really and honestly does his best,
according to the present proportions and measures that he has. I say besides
this, this Holy Sacrament is that very means that he has appointed to confer
this Grace upon us in, and the means which we are to use in order to our
receiving it from him. So that if Men want Power and Strength to master their
Sins, and to get clear of their present unworthiness; I know no better course
for them to take, than to lie at this Bethesda, where Angels attend, and where
the Communications of the divine Spirit and Grace are always ready, for them
that accept them, and step down into these Holy Waters for them.

3. But there was a third thing that I proposed to consideration here. And that
is, that without this care to redress Men's present unworthiness, all their
pretenses of sorrow and regret for it are plain Hypocrisy and fraud. And this
I argue upon these two plain reasons. First, because it shows them to be in
love with their disease, to hug their unworthiness, and to cherish it to be
excuse and dispensation from duty.

And secondly, not to deal truly with God, and their own Souls, in staying from
the Holy Sacrament upon the reason of it; for either they think coming to the
Holy Sacrament to be their Duty, and what they have a mind unto, or not; if
not, then they may stay away, without alleging their unworthiness, as well as
by doing so. But if they be sincere in their acknowledgment, then they should
be as fearful to neglect their Duty, as to come unfitly to it; there must
necessarily be as great a Sin in that, as there can be in this, yea there must
needs be so much the greater, by how much it is better to do something of our
Duty, than nothing at all, to do it imperfectly, than to disregard and neglect
it altogether. It Is almost a certain sign of a Hypocrite (as I have often said)
to be very shy and fearful of sining in one case, but regardless and bold in
another: and he that is not as fearful of Sin, in staying from the Holy
Sacrament, as coming unfitly to it, is fearful only on one side, and shall
never have that pretense accepted, or counted sincere, and therefore (to
conclude this period) if Men be unworthy, they should endeavor to become
worthy, otherwise they are hypocrites in that pretense, and instead of excusing
their not coming to the Holy Sacrament, it shall greatly inhanse and aggravate
the Guilt thereof.

CHAP. IX.
The third thing proposed to Consideration on this head, is this, An ordinary
competent endeavor and care (with Gods common grace) may suffice to remove
this unworthiness, and put men out of the danger of it.

THis consideration I lay down on purpose to meet with a further exception that
Men make in this case, for Men may grant this unworthiness to be their own
fault, that care ought to be taken to redress it, and that it were well if it
were so; and yet be discouraged from advancing further, because of the great
labor and difficulty, which they think is necessary to the redressing of it.
Many Men labor under this prejudice, and are frighted and discouraged from
fitting themselves for the Holy Sacrament, by the mighty difficulty that they
think there is in doing so. There is so much time to be allowed, and so much
labor and pains used to this purpose; and some cannot spare so much of their
one, and others are loath to be at the trouble of the other, and upon this
reason sit still, and are discouraged from ever undertaking or going about it.

Now in order to the satisfying this exception, I propose this consideration,
that an ordinary competent care will be sufficient to this purpose; it is no
such difficult a matter to render a Man competently fit for the Holy Sacrament,
and so to get above the danger of Eating and Drinking unworthily, that he seems
so fearful of.

In the managing of this Argument, I shall proceed in this following method.
First, I shall premise a consideration to prevent all prejudice or mistake in
what I am going to say. Secondly, I shall consider what the Apostle prescribes
to these Corinthians in this place, by way of remedy against Eating and
Drinking unworthily. Thirdly, Examine it upon the reason of the thing, consider
what is necessary to Eating and Drinking worthily, and what time or labor is
sufficient by way of preparation thereto.

SECT. I.
THe Consideration I would premise is this, that I am not going to lessen any
Man's esteem of the Sacredness of this Service, or his care to prepare and fit
himself for it as well as he can.

I said in the beginning of this discourse, how very apt Men are to run out of
one extremity into another; and how hard it is to reform one error of Men, so
as that they shall not fall into the extremity on the other side, and I observe
that Men are very incident to the same error in this matter; it is a hard matter
so to speak against Men's being too scrupulous, as that they shall not take
occasion thence to become careless, and so to reform the error of thinking
every preparation for the Holy Sacrament too little, as not to give them some
encouragement to think, that any preparation at all is enough.

My business at this time is against the first of these Errors, upon which Men
are, or appear to be mighty scrupulous, and fearful of coming to the Holy
Sacrament, even to superstition, upon an opinion that so very great and exact
preparation is necessary to fit Men for it, and that upon no less a danger than
Damnation. So that they are really frighted from any thoughts of coming to it.
The danger of coming unprepared is so amasing and frightful, and the pains and
labor of preparing a Man's self so very great, that they choose to stay away,
rather than incur so great a danger, or take so very much pains to avoid it.

This (I say) is the great Error that I am now to reform, and therefore have
need to caution the Men I speak to, and desire them to consider, that while I
endeavor to cure this superstitious fear and dread on one hand, I do not
encourage them to run into carelessness and presumption on the other, or from
thinking that no preparation is enough, imagining that any though never so
slight is sufficient. I would not encourage any Man in his superstition, but I
would as little encourage his negligence and profaness. I would not willingly
scare Men from their duty, by telling them stories of the difficulty of doing
it, and the danger of not doing it aright, but I would be as loath to discharge
their care from doing it as exactly and well as they can.

There are some pious and tender Persons in the World, that think they ought to
set apart so much time, and use such a method of preparation for the Holy
Sacrament, and constantly do it. And for my part, supposing them to live in
such circumstances, that they can easily spare so much time, without
intrenching upon other necessary Duties, and without rendering Religion tedious
and a burden to them; I discourage them not: they do well, and in Gods Name
let them go on. Some time is absolutely necessary for the great affairs of Men's
Souls, to set all things (so far as they can) to rights, between them and God;
and no time can be more opportune, and proper for such a care, than when they
are going to the Holy Sacrament, and to partake in the greatest manifestations,
and pledges of God's dearest love to Sinners, in giving his own Son to Dye for
them.

But now I would neither have these Persons to impose this their practice upon
all others, nor those others to think presently, that such things are
absolutely necessary, and that unless they come up to them, they ought to stay
from the Holy Sacrament, as being utterly unworthy, and unfit for it.

For I consider that the Primitive Christians received the Holy Sacrament every
Day, and in times of Persecution twice every Day, as seems very probable from
some passages in Antiquity; and I can easily consider, and satisfy my self,
that therefore these Persons did not, yea could not set aside so much time, and
be so curious in their preparation every time that they received it.

The plain truth is, they accounted the Holy Sacrament to be as necessary, and
standing a part of their Daily Devotions, as their Prayers, or any other
public service of their Religion; and as in truth no greater preparation is
necessary for one, than for the other, so it is plain, they thought there was
not, but went to it as constantly and with just the same devotion, as they went
to their Prayers; they thought a Christian good Life, an habitual preparation
for the Holy Sacrament, and a Pious Devotion of Spirit the best way of
Receiving it. And I am very sure they thought right in this matter, and as we
ought to think too.

Would Men endeavor really to approve themselves good Men, by leading regular
good Christian Lives (as they did, and as those Persons that seem so scrupulous
and fearful pretend to do) a very little time, an ordinary endeavor and care
would suffice to render them fit for the Holy Sacrament. Holiness (as I said
but now) is the best preparation for this service, a good life is an habitual
preparation, and Christian devotion and reverence with it is always an actual
one, and with these two no Man can be unfit to Communicate in it: for what
those good Men did, we may do also, would we endeavor to imitate, and come up
to them in their life, we need fear offending God in this service, no more than
they did; it is a very little matter that will fit a good Man for the Holy
Sacrament, and it is not a little thing that can cause him to receive it
unworthily.

But still I speak not this, to supersede or lessen any Man's care to fit
himself for this service, as well as his time, and skill, and care will give
him leave; the better and more exactly that any Man is fitted for it, the
better it is for him: and he can never be too well prepared. And therefore I
enter this caution, that no Man think the contrary of me, from any thing that I
am going to say on this Argument. I am concerned to encounter the contrary
extreme, and therefore while I go to show, that with an ordinary care, a Man
may render himself fit to communicate, I desire that no Man do presently think,
that he may be fit, without any endeavor or care at all.

SECT. II.
ANd now having premised this, which I must beg Men's remembering of as we go
along, I proceed directly to make good the assertion. viz. That it is no such
mighty difficult a matter, to render a Man's self fit for the Holy Sacrament,
and so to remove, and get above the unworthiness that he seems so afraid of,
which I have proposed to do by three plain arguments.

The first is by considering what the Apostle here prescribes to these
Corinthians, to remedy and prevent that their Eating and Drinking unworthily
which be blames them for. It is not easy to imagine any Men more unfit to
receive the Holy Sacrament than they were, or to receive it more unworthily
than they did. And therefore the same measures that he observed with them, will
be proper for us also, in our present case, and what was thought sufficient by
him to redress this unworthiness in them, may be sufficient for us to the same
purpose.

Now all that he says to this purpose, is contained in v. 28. and 31. Let a
Man examine himself, and so let him Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup.
And if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. This is
all that he prescribes in this case: for what he says in v. 33. and 34. does
concern the manner of Eating in their love feasts, and not in the Sacrament, as
is plain to any that reads them. So that in order to our satisfaction in this
matter, we shall need only to consider what the sum and import of those two
Verses are.

I begin with the latter, both because it is the sooner dispatched, and because
I do not well know whether it so truly intend any thing to be done by them in
order to fitting themselves to receive worthily, or rather prescribe the way of
expiating, and attoning for the Guilt of their having Eaten and Drank
unworthily; but if it do imply something of this nature, then the meaning of it
is only this: Let us judge our selves for our errors, and failings, that we may
anticipate and prevent God's Judging of us. Now in this sense it respects and
injoyns only the matter of Christian repentance, by which we reconcile our
selves to God, assoil our selves of our Sins, and so become fit to receive the
pledges of Divine Grace and pardon offered to us in that Holy Sacrament.

But I put this but only upon supposition, and that I might not be thought to
conceal any thing, that can be supposed to be prescribed by the Apostle to this
purpose; for I am apt to believe, that this (as I said before) does not so much
respect any thing to be done by way of preparation to the Holy Sacrament, but
rather to be added by way of advice, how to atone for the Sin of having Eaten
and Drank unworthily; and to prevent those punnishments, that they might expect
and fear upon having done so. The Apostle had convinced them of their Sin in
this, and let them know that the judgments which they lay under, were the
effects of that Sin, and having told them in verse 28. how to reform and
prevent the Sin for the future, he tells them in this how to escape the
punishments that were due to it: viz. by anticipating God's judging of them,
becoming Assessors upon themselves, and by their own remorse and sorrow
inflicting that punishment upon themselves, which otherwise they might expect
from God; this I think is the truest account of this passage, and of what the
Apostle means in it.

So that the great matter of preparation, that he prescribes in order to their
Eating and Drinking fitly, and becomingly, i. e. worthily in the sense of that
word, is comprehended under that examination that he advises to verse 28. Let
a Man examine himself, and so let him Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup.
And therefore this is the great thing to be explained, by which we may see what
a reasonable measure of consideration and care the Apostle thinks sufficient to
this purpose.

I do very well know, and as readily acknowledge, that some considerable Men
understand this so, as to comprehend all that strict and critical examination
of a Man's self, that may be needful to the understanding exactly the state of
his Soul, with respect to his Religion, Faith, Charity, etc. i. e. whether Men
be Christians indeed or not, and whether they resolve to continue so, whether
they have truly repented them of all their Sins, both in general, and
particularly, and whether their purposes of reforming from them be real and
sincere.

Yet I think I have reason to differ from them a little in this: for whatever
may be the meaning of the Greek word (...) in other places of the New
Testament, yet I think it is not the meaning of it in this; and by considering
wherein the error and guilt of these Corinthians consisted, we may pretty well
understand the meaning of what he prescribes in remedy of it.

This I have considered at large already in this discourse, and the truth is
the Apostle expresses it plainly enough, to be not discerning the Lords Body.
i. e. putting no difference between this and common bread, and therefore Eating
with as little Reverence at the Lords Table, as they did at their own, in their
own Houses.

This was the Sin, and by considering that it was so we may easily collect the
meaning of that examination which he prescribes against it, to be primarily no
more than this (which I shall borrow the words of a great Man among us, to
express) let every Man among you consider well with himself, what a Sacred
action that is, which he is going about, and what a devout and reverent
behavior becomes him, that is going to Celebrate the Holy Sacrament, which
Christ has instituted to represent and commemorate his own Body and Blood,
broken and spilt upon the Cross for Man's Redemption.

This is what the Apostle prescribes as a remedy against that profanation of
the Holy Sacrament that they were guilty of, and what he thinks sufficient to
preserve them from it, for the future; to consider well what a high mysterious
service of Christian Religion it is, that the Bread and Wine are therein
consecrated into the symbols of our Lord's own Body and Blood; that they are no
longer common Bread and Wine, but changed into a great mystery, and in a
Sacramental sense the very Body and Blood of Christ.

This is discerning the Lord's Body, and this is the import of a Man's
examining himself that he may discern it; and he that does this, can never be
guilty of such unworthy eating and drinking as these Corinthians were guilty
of; for he will see clearly what a mighty respect and deference is due to this
service, and what a profound veneration and reverence becomes those that eat at
the Table of the great God, and are admitted to a participation of his own
Son's most Sacred Body and Blood: upon this reason Antiquity used to call these
(...), the most Sacred and dreadful mysteries; and no Man that considers them
as such, but must put a difference between them, and common food, and can
hardly but partake of with a Sacred dread of Spirit, and a most profound
reverence and devotion. I only add what I undertook this notion for; viz. That
this self examination is therefore no such difficult thing as Men imagine it to
be: it is what all Christians know, what they can easily consider, and what it
is indeed the greater difficulty for them not to consider, and be affected
withal.

But then suppose that it did imply something more, and what some Men (as I
hinted before) do extend it unto, i. e. all that examination of a Man's self,
that is necessary to the true understanding the state and condition of his
Soul; with respect to his Repentance, Faith, Charity, and the quality of his
life. First, I say, I will by no means discourage any one from care of this,
and setting apart some time for it, in order to his eating and drinking
becomingly at the Lords Table. This is a thing upon many accounts very
expedient and fit, and especially in order to our understanding with what
qualification we ought chiefly to come to this Holy Sacrament, which may, and
ought to vary according to the variable circumstances of our Spiritual
condition.

Besides this examination of a Man's self is a thing highly necessary to the
great purposes of Religion, and because no time can well be pitched upon for
it, more fit and proper than when Men are preparing themselves for the Holy
Sacrament; therefore it may be very prudent to take that time to do it in: some
time is necessary for it, and that time may be as fit for it as any other; and
those that will so employ it, do well, and are by no means to be discouraged.

But then Secondly, I say, this examination is but just necessary then as it is
at other times, for I see not, why it may not be thought as necessany to
examine our selves, and consider what the state of our Soul is, when we go to
pray, and when we go to hear God's word, that we may both know what especially
to pray for, and how to apply that word to our selves, as it is when we are
addressing to the Holy Sacrament. So that whatever it signifies, it is no more
necessary to the Holy Sacrament, than it is to other services of Religion, nor
ought to fright us from the one, any more than it does from the other.

And Thirdly, I add, that surely there is no such mighty difficulty in it in
this sense, nor any such long time necessary to the performance of it. Every
Man does know, or atleast easily may know his one temper; and what the general
bent and course of his life is, what he loves and what he hates, and whether
Religion be the matter of his care or not; a Man can no more be ignorant of his
one temper, if he will consider, than he can fly from himself, nor can any
great Sins or wickednesses which require a particular repentance, escape his
notice, any more than the visible actions of every day: and how then can any
Man be a stranger to, or need any tedious difficult inquiry and search, to know
those things, which he daily feels, and is sensible of?

I do not at all doubt but that some wicked Men use arts to divert their minds
and thoughts, from any reflection upon their spiritual condition, and study to
live strangers to themselves; but I am sure there is real difficulty in this,
and perhaps after all such endeavors, their minds will sometimes emerge above
their pressures, break loose from these sensual restraints, and force them to
understand their condition whether they will or no; it is natural for a Man to
understand himself, and to reflect upon his own actions, and much more easy
than to arrive to such a pitch of brutish carelessness, insensibleness, and
inconsideration, as to be perfectly a stranger to his one state; it is not in
this case as it is with a Merchant, who may run on, and undo himself, before
ever he know how his accounts stand; for his Books lie out of his sight, or he
may be careless, and neglect to look into them, but in this case a Man's Books
are always open, always present and under his view, and he must wilfully shut
his eyes, or look upon them, and suspend the natural, and even necessary
exertions of his mind, not to think of them.

So that whatever examining a Man's self can signify, it can be no very
difficult thing, nor require much time for the performance of it. No wise Man
lives without it, and no Man of the most ordinary observation and reason can be
such a stranger to his own affairs, as to need much time, or pains in the
examination of them.

The great things of our Souls, and what relate to the condition of them, are
always obvious and plain, and there is no great difficulty (that I know of)
relating to this matter, but only to bring our minds to pronounce, and judge
honestly, and impartially of them. In this I must needs confess there is some
difficulty, for self-love is prevalent in all Men, and they are not very
willing to condemn themselves; of all things in the world, the falling under
the reproach and censure of a Man's own mind is the most irksom, and therefore
Men study arts, and all possible ways to avoid it; and in this it is, that the
deceitfulness of a Man's own heart does chiefly, if not solely consist.

But still this difficulty arises not from the difficulty of knowing, or
examining our own state, but from the difficulty of being honest, and just in
judging of it; the case is always open, and plain: but the fault lies in
partiality to it, and in bribing a false opinion, and judgment of it.

SECT. III.
ANd now having considered what it is the Apostle prescribes in this case, and
seen what this examination of a Man's self does signify, and what little
expense either of time or labor is needful for it; I proceed to the second
thing, i. e. to examine the reason of the thing, to consider what is necessary
to eating and drinking becomingly (i. e. worthily) in the Holy Sacrament, and
what that preparation is, that is needful in order theirto.

As for the first, what qualifications are necessary to our communicating fitly
and becomingly in the Holy Sacrament, I mean with what tempers we ought to
come, and how to behave our selves there when we are come; for these I think we
need look no further, than the exhortations of our Church in the Office for the
Communion: they are in our Common Prayer Books, and I wish every one would
often read, and consider them, they most plainly and fully instruct us in these
things. I shall reduce them to these four heads.

1. Repentance, as it includes a hearty sorrow for our sins, an humble
confession of their guilt to Almighty God, and a resolution by the help of his
grace, to reform for the future from them.

2. A steadfast humble faith in God's mercy, through Jesus Christ for our
pardon, and acceptance.

3. A grateful sense of God's mighty love to Mankind, in sending his Son to die
for us, with a thankful remembrance of his death.

4. Love and Charity to all Men, forgiving those that have offended and injured
us, being reconciled (or endeavoring to be so) to all that we have offended;
and bearing love, and good will to all, so as to be ready and willing to do
them good according to our power.

These contain the sum of all those qualifications, with which we should come
to the Holy Sacrament. Now as these things are absolutely necessary to our
being Christians, and therefore necessary for us to regard, and take care of at
all times, so there is no more difficulty in them, to fright us from the Holy
Sacrament, than from other services of our Religion. If the difficulty of them
be an ^^ception against the Sacrament, it is so against Christian Religion in
general, and we may throw off wholly the one, as well as the other, upon the
reason of it; but as their is no great difficulty at all in them, nor any
reason to accuse Christian Religion, as a heavy yoke in requiring of them, no
more is there any cause to make them an exception against coming to the Holy
Sacrament: these are the conditions of our being Christians, and with the help
of the divine grace they are possible and easy too, and as easy in order to
this service, as to any other purpose.

And then if we inquire how we ought to behave our selves at the Sacrament, the
same exhortations will direct us in that also, which we may reduce to four
heads, as we did the former.

1. A most profound reverence and humility; such as becomes creatures, when
they approach the immediate presence of the great Creator, when they engage
into the most solemn and mysterious service of their Religion, when they
dolefully reflect upon their own unworthiness and demerits, and when they
humbly supplicate, and beg for the pardon thereof, and which most certainly
becomes all Chistians, when they are set in the most affecting prospect of the
death and passion of their Lord and Savior.

2. A most affecting exalted joy, and rejoicing in Gods mercy and our Saviors
love to us, who has remembered us in our low estate, given us such reason to
hope for his favor and pardon; and in this Holy Sacrament, lets us feed upon
the sensible pledges of this love, and visibly seals unto us the assurance of
the same.

3. The most devout and raised affection, the most hearty and exalted praise to
God, for all this; the magnifying the astonishing love of our God; and rendering
the most devout praise to our dear Savior for this miracle of his kindness to
us.

4. Earnest prayer to God, to accept our prsent poor service, and mean return
for this mighty favor, and to enable us by his grace to live for the future,
in some competent measure suitable to these mighty obligations.

The four former qualifications render us fit to partake of those Holy
mysteries; and these other make us actually to do so, and I pray you but to
recollect them, and then tell me what great difficulty there is in them: the
truth is, they are all so natural to Men at such a time, that I should think
the great and only difficulty were, so to resist our present impressions, as
not to be affected into them. Who that considers what he is then doing, and
what benefit and honor he is receiving from the great God, can be otherwise
than devout and humble? whose heart can choose but burn with love unto God and
Christ, and flame out into the most hearty adorations and praise to them, when
he commemorates this amazing instance of their love? and who can be affected
thus and not break out into most sincere and earnest prayer to God for his
grace, to enable him to live in some measure answerable to the same?

I appeal to the experiences of all pious Communicants, whether there be
difficulty in these things; or rather whether they feel not such a mighty
strong energy, and power upon their spirits at such a time, as causes them
readily to break out into them. How naturally do tears of sorrow and joy flow
from our eyes! how do our Souls lick the dust in humble prostrations! how are
we swallowed up with rapturous contemplations of our Lords love! and what
bright flames of praise and love ascend from our exalted Souls at such a time!
So that we are for the present even all wonder and all love, and taste what the
joys of the spirit, and the enravishing sweetnesses of Religion mean; the Holy
Spirit, and the divine grace do so strongly seize and pervade our spirits then,
that these things become natural and easy, and Men must offer a certain
violence to themselves, and unreasonably resist the strong motions of Gods
grace and Holy Spirit, or they cannot neglect, or fail of them.

And then as to the second sort of things that I mentioned, what are the best,
and most effectual means and methods to be used in order to these preparations,
and seize, I think I may reduce all the voluminous prescriptions and
advices of Men, and the many Books that have been written to this purpose, to
these three plain heads.

1. To consider seriously and truly what our spiritual condition is, that we
may know what manner of preparation either of repentance and sorrow, of faith
and hope, of love and joy, we are especially concerned to make and come with;
for though all these ought still to be conjoined, and are necessary and
becoming every Communicant; yet some seem more peculiarly necessary and proper
for some, than for others, according (as I said before) as their circumstances,
and conditions chiefly are. Repentance is not improper for the best Men living:
but it is more absolutely necessary for them, who have great sins to answer,
and beg pardon for; love and joy and praise become bad Men, and are mighty due,
for the hopes of mercy and pardon that God has given them: but they are more
becoming and just from those good Men, who live in the blessed sense and
fruition of this love, and goodness to them, and there receive the actual
pledges, and assurances of it.

So that though all these be fitting and proper, yet some are more so than
others, according as Men's conditions are better or worse, and by seriously
considering how our Spiritual circumstances stand, we shall easily know, what
preparation is most proper for us to make, and what tempers of mind chiefly to
come with.

2. Sober and solemn meditation, upon the great things of Religion, especially
upon this mystery of our redemption by the sufferings and death of the Son of
God, by which we shall affect our Souls with a deep sense of our own
unworthiness, and vileness, of the evil and danger of sin, and of the immense
and astonishing love of God and Christ to us.

3. Humble and devout prayer to God, to assist us, and help us in these
Preparations, and addresses; for besides that prayer in it self has a strange
efficacy and power to effect in us all these excellent dispositions and
tempers, it is the most certain way to receive those assistances from God, that
will help us to the attainment of them; for these are offered freely to all,
and are always ready for those that will ask them, that will accept them, and
that will be true to them. For every one that asks receives, and every one
shall find that seeks, and to him that knocks it shall be opened.

And then (to conclude this period) if there were any difficulty in these
preparations, considering our own single unassisted strength; yet considering
how we are backed, and may be assisted with this almighty grace and spirit of
God, there can, and there ought to be nothing of difficulty imagined or feared
to be in them.

SECT. IV.
BUt because I have a mind to clear this point to the utmost, I shall consider
this matter of preparation yet more distinctly, both with respect to a good
Man, and to one that has too much reason to doubt himself, or conclude that he
is evil, and under the power of sin; show what preparation is necessary for
each of these, and that a reasonable portion of time and care will easily
dispatch it.

1. And first for a good Man's preparing of himself for the Holy Sacrament, a
very little matter will dispatch it. Holiness (as I hinted before) is a
constant habitual preparation, for this, or any other Service of Religion, and
a good Man hardly will be at any time unfit for it.

Those Virgins that have Oil continually in their Lamps, and those Lamps
constantly burning too, can quickly awake, and soon trim them for the
Bridegroom's coming, and he whose heart keeps a vestal fire of love always
alive, can easily fan it up into an actual flame, and make it fit either for
sacrifice, or incense. Such a Man's Soul is always well inclined, and stands
continually the right way; so that when an opportunity of actual devotion
offers it self, he readily closes with it, and God no sooner calls upon him to
seek his face, but his heart eccho's to the call, and readily answers with the
devout Psalmist, Thy face Lord will I seek.

When we have said all that we can on this subject, a good life is the best
preparation for the Holy Sacrament, and he that lives such a life can never be
unfit for it, he is always habitually fitted, and whatever curious dress he
should at any time be in, his constant pious and devout temper will easily be
improved and heightened into it. He that has a Wedding Garment always ready,
and clean kept, can easily put it on, and he whose loins are always girded, and
Lamp burning may be sooner ready to wait upon his Lord, whenever he calls.

Or if we should suppose the worst of such a Man, and that he should through
the violence, or surprise of a temptation have let down his Watch, and
indisposed himself, yet a little matter will recover, and set him to right
again; a light that is newly extinguished may soon be kindled again, and an
habitual goodness though it have been disordered, will easily recover its
temper; a little matter will dispatch the business of a good Man's repentance,
and no great labor is needful to wash off that spot, that is the stain of a
Child, and that some external accident has cast upon the outside only.

2. But the more material thing, is to consider the case of a wicked Man, who
upon examining his condition finds too much reason to conclude ill of himself,
and to state that preparation that is necessary for him to make in order to
this service.

For first I do not think this Man unconcerned in it, but as much obliged to
come to the Holy Sacrament as another, if not rather more; the command for the
observation of it is general, and no Christian is excepted; or dispensed with;
our Lord administered it to all his disciples, to Judas as well as St. Peter;
St. Paul when he comes to give directions about the same matter, excepts none
but rather includes all, he commands indeed every one to examine himself, but
having done so, then to eat and drink: yea he commands those Corinthians to do
this, that of all Men (one would think) were the unfitest to do it.

And upon the whole matter, there is so little reason to keep such a Man from
the Holy Sacrament, because he is in an ill condition, that there is therefore
the greater need why he should come; it is very ill arguing as some do, I fear
my condition is bad, therefore I must stay away, the true reasoning holds just
the other way. My condition is bad, why therefore come that it may be made
better; there is but own thing to be supposed to the truth and safety of this
arguing, i. e. that such a Man desires his condition should be amended; if he
resolve to continue wicked, then he may stay away, but so he may from all other
services of Religion too; for such a Man's Religion is all contradiction and
nonsense, and he may throw off all care of it, as well as neglect the Holy
Sacrament.

But this case I have argued before, and need determine no more upon it now, I
only add one observation more at present, and that is, that the great and main
qualification that the Church requires in them, who come to the Holy Sacrament,
is repentance, and the greatest part of the service she appoints in order to
it, consists in humble confessions, in sad and passionate deprecations of the
divine wrath, and most earnest imploring Gods pardon, all which is to me a
plain argument, that she thinks no Man unfit to come to the Holy Sacrament,
that does repent of his former sins, how great soever they may have been, and
that does desire, and resolve with Gods help to lead a better life for the
future.

I am sure no Man has more need to come, than such a Man, nor is any Ministry
in Religion more proper for him to apply to; which is so peculiarly fitted to
his needs, so efficacious to fasten his pious purposes and instituted on
purpose to be a means of conferring that divine grace, which is necessary to
enable him to live up to them.

I know the Church in some cases advises some to stay away, and commissions
her Priests, to suspend, and keep away others: but the first are only those,
whose consciences are yet perplexed, and troubled for some grievious sin; and
the second are such as living notoriously in gross sins, are become a public
scandal unto others; but neither of these are either to keep off themselves, or
be kept off by others, but only till the one by repentance, prayer, and
consulting their spiritual guides, get their consciences relieved and eased,
and the other by some public testimony of repentance reconcile themselves to
the Church, and give some hopes of their amendment; so that repentance, and
promises of amendment is thought by the Church sufficient to qualify even bad
Men for the Holy Sacrament.

This then being cleared, we may proceed readily in the second place to
consider that preparation which is necessary for such a Man, and inquire
whether any such long time, or mighty labor be necessary for it; and what has
been said just now, will be of use to us in this inquiry, for repentance is the
great thing that such a Man has to regard, viz. with sorrow and grief to
confess his sins to almighty God, to implore and beg his mercy for the pardon
of them, and his grace to enable him to reform from them.

To this there is nothing necessary to be added, but faith, as it implies a
great and grateful sense of Gods mercy, in sending Christ to die for us, and
giving repentant sinners such hope of pardon and salvation in him, and upon his
merits; and as it implies hope too of the same mercy and pardon to us, upon our
repentance, together with an humble and steady reliance upon Gods grace, to
enable us to repent and reform.

These things comprehend the sum of that preparation that is necessary for the
worst Men to make for the Holy Sacrament, and I pray consider, what great
difficulty there is in these, or whether any such great deal of time be
necessary for them, that Men should except against coming to the Holy Sacrament
upon that reason; if Men make them an exception against this service, they may
as well make them an exception against Christian Religion in general, for they
are the great and necessary postulata's of Christianity, and the only reasons
upon which it promises salvation to any; and therefore are no further any
exceptions against the Holy Sacrament than they are against our whole Religion,
and upon the same reason that we abstain from it because of them, we may
renounce our Baptism, and the name of Christ by which we are called.

If Men charge the Holy Sacrament to be severe, and a hard service because it
requires these preparations, we may charge our Religion as well to be
unreasonable and hard, for they are made necessary by the one, as well as
required in order to the other. So that if it be difficult to communicate
because they are required, it is difficult to be a Christian upon the same
reason, and as because we count them necessary to Salvation, we surmount all
the objections and pleas of their being difficult or hard, so we ought to do in
this case also, especially since we know how to have them become light and
easy, and where to have that assistance which will render them truly so to us.

So that I may conclude safely upon the whole matter, that this preparation
that is necessary to be made for the Holy Sacrament, is neither such a mighty
great matter in it self, nor so very difficult unto us, but that a competent
endeavor and care may suffice for it, and therefore the more easy the
preparation to be made is, the more inexcusable are those Men that neglect it,
and cry out against coming to the Holy Sacrament, because of the difficulty of
it. And I may make use of the reasoning of Naaman's servants with him, and
apply it to our present case. My Father if the Prophet had bid thee do some
great thing, would thou not have done it? how much more when he says wash
and be clean? if there were really some very great difficulty in that
preparation that is necessary to the Holy Sacrament, and if some considerable
portion of time were needful for it to be made in; yet since God has made it
our necessary duty, and necessary to such mighty purposes of gain on our side,
we should, and we ought in duty and wisdom too, to take care of it; how much
more then, when neither much time, nor great pains are needful to it? and how
inexcusable are those, that plead want, and difficulty of preparation to excuse
them, when such an ordinary endeavor would suffice against both?

Surely the regarding such a necessary duty is a matter of greater necessity
and importance, than to be baulked upon so very frivolous and vain an excuse,
and there depends more upon it, than will permit Men to think that every little
pretense will be dispensation from it. In such cases Men pull off the vizard,
and through all the thin pretenses the true reason may be seen. It is not
because Men cannot prepare themselves for the Holy Sacrament, but because they
will not, it is not because there is any such difficulty in the thing, but
because Men have no mind to it, and would gladly upon any pretense be excused
from it.

CHAP. X.
I go on now to the fourth thing that was proposed on this head, viz that
though men may have been careless, and indisposed themselves for the Holy
Sacrament for one time, yet they ought to be more careful to prepare themselves
against the next, for continual indisposition can excuse no man; so that if
some present indisposition be upon a man now, yet care ought to be taken for
its removal, that he may be fitted and prepared to Communicate the next time
that providence calls him to it.

BEfore I proceed to the direct purpose of this period, I shall take occasion
by way of premisal, to speak something to the supposition of it, and to examine
a case that we see often happens upon the reason thereof; it is too common a
thing, for Men that make some conscience of communicating in the Holy
Sacrament, yet frequently to intermit it, and to stay from it upon the reason
of some present accidental indisposition, whether real or pretended I examine
not, I will suppose it in their estimation to be real, because I will not think
that any good Man will, or can stay from the Holy Sacrament upon any but what
he thinks to be so. I would fain hope this is the reason, why many good Men,
regular steady Christians, do indulge to themselves the liberty of neglecting
the Holy Sacrament, so often as we see them do; I would fain hope (I say) it is
upon the reason of some fancied indisposition that is upon them, and not either
out of any disrespect to it, or opinion, that it is at their choice, when to
observe it, or when to turn their backs upon it; the practice is too common,
but the reason of it worse, and such Men must be let know, that it is not left
to them when to come to the Holy Sacrament, and when not, and that a present
indisposition will not warrant or excuse their staying from it. I think it a
very necessary thing to offer something in cure of this opinion and practice,
and to that end beg the consideration of these following things.

1. It is greatly questionable whether the supposition of the case be
allowable. viz. whether any thing can so far indispose a regular good
Christian, as to bring him into any guilt or danger in coming to the Holy
Sacrament; I do really believe, that if a Man be fit for other services of
Religion, he is fit for this, and ought no more to stay away from one, than he
does from the other. I cannot but wonder upon what reason it is, that Men that
abstain not from other services of Religion because of that present
indisposition, do yet abstain from this, or conclude themselves unfit for the
one, when they think they are fit for the other. I am sure the Primitive Church
thought otherwise, and by Canon made it necessary for those that joined in the
other public services of the Church to communicate in the Holy Sacrament too.

But secondly, if we should allow the supposition, and grant that such a Man
has contracted some indisposition, that does render him unfit to communicate
for that time, yet he must be told, that that indisposition whatever it be,
cannot so warrant his staying from the Sacrament as to excuse him from sin in
it.

I hope I need not tell you that I speak of moral indispositions now, and not
of natural: sicknesses, and diseases, mischances and hurts, etc. supposing them
not to be caused by our own follies and vices, do not come into our present
account, or fall under this consideration; they are our miseries indeed, but
not our sins, and the not performing the services of Religion because of them,
is not our guilt; in all such cases that of the Prophet holds true, that God
will have mercy and not sacrifice.

But I speak here of moral indispositions, such as either through carlesness,
or humane infirmity, or the surprise and violence of temptation, or the cares
of the World, and hurries of business, Men have fallen into, or from what other
cause soever it may arise; and I say, howsoever those things may indispose a
Man for the Holy Sacrament, yet they do not excuse his staying from it. So that
Men should take great heed in this case, and not think that they may presently
stay away from the Holy Sacrament, as often as they find themseves indisposed,
or unfitted for it.

No Man needs propose the question to me, whether it be better to come in that
condition, or to stay away, for neither is so much as good, and it is
impertinent to inquire which is best; and there is no necessity of either in
the present case, there is a happy medium between these two, which always is
open, and should always be taken by Men in this case. viz. to do their duty,
and do all they can to remedy that which would indispose them for it. A Man may
be sensible of his indisposition and sorry for it, he may endeavor and pray
against it, implore the divine mercy for the pardon, and grace for the removal
of it; and this he should do, but by no means sit down under it, and neglect so
necessary a service of Religion by reason of it. I think it much better, and
therefore should advise a Man rather to go to the Holy Sacrament, though some
present indisposition were upon him, than so far to yield to the one, as to
neglect the other. I am sure a necessary duty ought to be done, and it is much
better to do it as well as a Man can, then wholly neglect it, because he is at
present unfit to do it so well as he should.

Now if Men would consider this, and remember that they never do well in
staying from the Holy Sacrament upon this reason, and that they are not
innocent in it, did they believe that every time they stay away from it, they
sin in doing so, it would perhaps give some check to that liberty, which they
commonly take in this case; and that they ought thus to believe, and thus to
consider, will appear plain upon these two reasons which I but just name,
because I have considered them already.

First that the Holy Sacrament is a necessary service of Religion, and it is a
Christians indispensible duty, to partake of it, when he may. The
Administration of the Sacraments is on all hands granted necessary to the being
of a Christian Church, and the partaking of them necessary to the being a true
member of that Church; God has neither left it to our liberty and choice,
whether we will receive it at all or not, nor whether we will receive it at
this time, and not that; it is our necessary duty, and it is our standing
constant duty, at least every time that the Church does call us unto it.

So that upon the same reason that Men think themselves obliged to go to
Church, every Sunday, and join in the public Prayers and Service of it, and do
not count every little indisposition upon them a discharge from it, upon the
same they ought to think it their duty to go to the Holy Sacrament, every time
the Church administers it, and that every accidental indisposition can no more
excuse them from the one, than the other; for the neglecting it at any time, is
neglecting a duty, and neglecting a duty is a sin, and whatever any present
indisposition may do toward the extenuating of it, yet it can never warrant or
justify the same.

And that secondly, because that indisposition whatever it be, is our own only
fault. This I have proved before; whatever indispositions may be upon us,
whatever it is that we think renders us at present unfit to communicate, it is
come upon us by our own only carelessness and neglect: we should, and with the
help of God's grace we might live so, as to be reasonably fit for this service
at any time, and it is our own folly and fault if we be not. And if this be
true, it will soon satisfy any Man in this matter, unless he be so gross, as
to think that one sin can excuse another, or that a Man's sins not in
neglecting that duty, which his own folly and vice has indisposed him for.

SECT. I.
ANd now I resume the purport of this fourth consideration which is this.
Suppose some present indisposition and unfitness be upon a Man, and suppose it
could be a sufficient excuse for his not receiving the Holy Sacrament, yet it
would be so but for that own time only; speedy care ought to be taken against
it, and all endeavor used for the removal of it against the next time; for
continual unfitness cannot possibly excuse any Man from it.

I lay down this against those that are always complaining of their unfitness
for the Holy Sacrament, and upon that reason stay always from it, hoping to be
excused in so doing. Few things are more common than this; and we see it
instanced almost every Day: there are some careless negligent persons on one
hand, that care not to come up to the full communion of the Church, and there
are some disaffected persons on the other that are prejudiced against it; but
both sides when pressed to the Holy Sacrament, have the same plea of their
unworthiness ready to make, and think to be excused upon the reason of it. One
sort of Men plead it honestly, and upon real scruple, but it is to be feared
another sort plead it upon design, and use it as an artificial excuse against
that which they have no mind unto. I shall not consider these sorts of people
distinctly and separately, but apply my self to the removal of this evil, and
argue the unreasonableness of it, upon such considerations as may be proper for
the cure of it, from what cause soever it may arise.

1. And first I desire to know, whether such Men count their unworthiness, and
unfitness a Sin or not, and I ask this question, because I really fear a great
many do not.

Men talk of their unworthiness, and complain of unfitness, and I fear count it
a piece of humility to do so; and an acceptable thing to confess it, without
ever reflecting sorrowfully upon it as their great guilt, and that which they
are obliged to reform. It Is no new thing to hear some Men declare tragically
against themselves, and to seem mighty exact in confessing of those Sins, which
they are far enough from hating, or resolving to amend, and we know too many
that count it enough to confess their Sins, without any care to forsake them.
And I am very much afraid, it is so with too many in our present case, they
call themselves unfit, and unworthy for the Holy Sacrament, but I do not see
them much concerned or troubled that they are so, no nor condemning or thinking
worse of themselves because of it.

And therefore to any that pleads this in bar of his coming to the Holy
Sacrament, I would make this inquiry in the first place, whether they look upon
this unfitness as a crime, as a Sin in them or not? and one would be ready to
think, that Men could never impose so far upon themselves, as not to think so,
and that they must be under some great delusions, if they do; let us agree
therefore upon this in the first place, and we shall better go on to what
remains; this is really a great fault, which Men ought to be sensible of, and
to grieve for, and not to look upon with indifferency, and unconcernedness,
much less to value themselves upon.

2. Since then it is, and ought to be acknowledged to be a Sin, and a very
grievous fault, I desire they will please to consider, and tell me if it ought
not to be reformed and amended? one would think there were no need to ask this
question, nor to doubt whether Men should amend their faults or not, this is a
thing not to be so much as deliberated about, by any that consider what an evil
Sin is in it self, what a train of mischiefs it draws after it, and what a
dreadful thing it is, to live in that, which exposes a Man to the wrath of an
Almighty God; and such a thing unfitness for the Holy Sacrament is, if it be a
Sin.

I would therefore have Men as sensible and fearful of Sin in this, as they
appear to be of it on the other side, and then they would no more dare to
continue in this, than be guilty of the other. We see some Men mighty sensible
of the Sin of eating and drinking unworthily, and very fearful of being guilty
of it. Now I would fain have them as sensible of the Sin, of being unworthy,
and unfit to eat, and as much afraid to continue in it, the guilt is the same
in both cases; and therefore if they be afraid of Sin upon a true reason in
one, they will be so in the other also. I have often said (and some Men cannot
be told it too often) that it is a bad sign to see Men scrupulous and tender
only on one side, and it is an unaccountable thing to see Men so fearful of
sinning in coming to the Holy Sacrament, but never to scruple or be afraid of
sinning in staying from it, and being unfit to come. Starting and trembling at
the thoughts of Sin in the one, but being regardless and insensible of it in
the other.

3. If it be then a Sin, and what Men ought to amend, I ask in the third place,
when Men intend to set about it, and endeavor to become fitter? must it be
postpon'd, and put off as many other good and necessary things are, to
hereafter, and to a time to come no body knows when? this is that unaccountable
folly, that Men are so ready to condemn all others for in other cases, and
therefore should not allow in themselves here.

All the great arguments, that combine against the folly and danger of
procrastinating in repentance, and putting off good purposes to hereafter,
unite against this; and Men that can urge them so readily to others in those
cases, should not resist them themselves in this. Besides all which, there is
one consideration which seems peculiar in this case, and ought to be of effect
in it, and that is, that coming to the Holy Sacrament is one good means to
become fit, and to redress the unworthiness that Men complain of. I said once
before in this discourse, that few Men become more fit by staying from it, but
many have by coming to it; the longer Men stay away, the more unfit in all
probability they will be, and one good way of coming fitly, is to come as well
as they can.

So that it is not only here as it is in some other cases, the sooner Men set
about redressing the unfitness, the easier the doing it will be, but the very
setting about it, is a good part of it; and I not only say, that the longer Men
continue unfit, the more guilt they contract, and the heavier will the burden
of their Sin be; the greater hazard they run, and put their duty upon the
greater uncertainty and chance; but they aggravate their unfitness, enhanse
their indisposition, and contribute to the difficulty of removing the same.

4. Having got thus far then, that this is an evil, that it ought to be
reformed, and the sooner the better in all respects; it will easily be
considered, that if Men do sit down under their unfitness, it is plainly wilful
and affected. Men that know their faults, and how greatly they are concerned to
reform them, and yet do not show themselves to be greatly in love with them, or
enslaved to them; and Men that will not strive against their diseases, seem
pleased with them.

Now in such a case the evil of the indisposition doubles, and whatever guilt
results from it, swells in the same proportion: he that wilfully indulgeth to a
Sin, enhanseth the guilt of it, and he that neglects a duty, because he
cherishes that which unfits him for it, has a double guilt to answer for;
involuntary, unaffected indispositions that come upon Men by surprise, by the
violence of temptation, or upon the score of unavoidable infirmity, are
pitiable, and capable of mercy, but he that cherishes them, to excuse him from
duty, stands doubly guilty before God.

5. To all which considerations I only add this one more, that whether Men do,
or do not endeavor to redress their present unfitness for the Holy Sacrament,
they must be let know, and they ought seriously to consider, that continual
unfitness can never excuse them from it.

The receiving the Sacrament (I have showed) is a necessary indispensible
Christian duty, for which nothing that I know of, but natural incapacities can
excuse Men, much less such moral indispositions as both should, and easily may
be removed; a present accidental indisposition (how fair soever it may bid) yet
can never excuse a single omission of the Holy Sacrament; and if so, then I am
sure no indisposition can excuse the total continued neglect of it.

And of all things certainly it were most strange, if Men should hope to be
excused in the continual neglect of their duty, upon pretenses of continual
unfitness to do it, this is so abhorrent to human reason, that it cannot be
believed. No Man living will allow it in a Servant, in a Child, or in any that
owes duty to him, and therefore has no reason to hope that God will allow it
in himself, especially when he considers, that that unfitness has come upon
him through his own fault, and might be redressed by some competent care.

CHAP. XI.
We are now come to the third and last Collection which was made from this
Text, viz. That the true and only design of the Apostle in these words, and in
this form of speaking, was to engage the Corinthians to that reverence and
devotion in the Holy Sacrament, that became so solemn a service of Religion, as
that is. I shall not need to stay long on this Argument, for I design but two
things only upon it, and a little will suffice to dispatch them both.

1. I Shall endeavor to prove that this is really the sense of these words,
and the Apostle's great design in them.

2. I shall represent the reasonableness of the thing, and show how fit and
necessary devotion and reverence is, for them that approach to the Table of the
Lord.

1. That this is really the design and purport of the Apostle in these words, I
shall endeavor to make good from these three considerations. First, what the
crime of the Corinthians was that these words were intended to reform.
Secondly, the phrase of the Text in which he endeavors that reformation. And
thirdly the things that he prescribes in order to it.

1. Of the first of these I have given account already, and showed that this
crime of the Corinthians, which he so sharply taxes, was a monstrous shameful
disrespect, and irreverence to the Holy Sacrament, to which I shall only add
that it was occasioned by these two precedent errors, and miscarriages. First,
their not discerning the Lords Body, Secondly their intemperance in eating and
drinking in the love-feast that preceded this Service.

1. They did not discern the Lords Body, they did not know, or they did not
consider that this was a solemn service of Religion, and that there was a
mystery in it, they did not understand the reason of its institution, that the
Bread was Sacramentally the Body of Christ, and the Wine in the same sense his
Blood, that both were to represent his Sufferings and Death, and that our
partaking of them was religiously to commemorate and gratefully to adore the
love of God to sinners therein.

In plain terms, as both the Sacramental Bread and Wine was part of what they
had eaten and drank in the love-feast just before, so they looked upon them to
be still the same, and but only a concluding morsel, and a grace Cup, with
which that feast was to be ended; for that (as we ought to know) was the common
custom among the Jews, and these Grecians too; to conclude their feasts with a
Loaf, or small parcel of Bread, of which every one took a little piece, and a
Glass or Bowl of Wine, of which every one drank, in token or in pledge of that
unity and love, that then was, and afterward should continue among the ghests
that had then feasted together.

Now being so ignorant and uninstructed (as it seems they were) in the reason
of the Holy Sacrament, they might easily slip into this mistake, and knowing
that their former feast was called (...) a feast of love, and instituted to be
a means of creating and continuing love among them, they might easily take the
Sacramental Bread and Wine, (being a portion of what they had eat and drank
before) to be but a tessera cheritatis, such a pledge and token of love among
them, as was used at their other feasts.

This is the true state of this matter, and it gives us one plain account of
the irreverence and profanation of the Holy Sacrament, which these persons were
guilty of, and how strange soever the thing may appear to us, yet when these
circumstances are considered, the wonder cease, and the reason is plain.

2. And yet this was not all, nor the worst in this matter, for their
intemperance was worse than their ignorance and would more fatally prejudice
their reverence and devotion; intemperance in eating and drinking is the
greatest hinderance of devotion possible, and plain gluttony and drunkenness
utterly inconsistent with it.

Now this you find the Apostle charging them roundly and plainly with, at least
the richer sort of them, v. 21. one is hungry, and another is drunk; which
though it may seem very strange, and one would think incompetent to a
Christian, yet we have a plain account given us also how this happened.

For these love feasts were upon a common stock, to which every one contributed
his single portion; the poor (you may well think) could bring little or
nothing, but the rich brought more, every Man (says the Apostle) according to
the ability which God had given. And perhaps among these Corinthians (than whom
no Grecians were more vain and proud) every one might strive to exceed the
other. Now hitherto all was tolerably well, only bating that some vanity might
mingle with these contributions; but here was the first fatal miscarriage,
these richer persons instead of casting in their symbols to the common stock,
feasted upon their own single portions, and having much to eat and drink, did
eat and drink accordingly, and commonly to that excess, as to be downright
drunk, by that time they came to the Holy Sacrament, which was always
celebrated at the end of these feasts, of such a portion of Bread and Wine, as
was separated out of the public offertories.

Now coming to the Holy Sacrament in this sad condition, no wonder if they
profaned it indeed, and showed so little reverence and regard to it: a drunken
Man is every way as unfit for devotion as an ignorant Man can be; but when Men
are both these, no irreverence can seem strange, that they are guilty of.

These two things occasioned this terrible irreverence and profanation of the
Holy Sacrament, that our Apostle charge them with, and from which these words
are intended to reform and affright them for the future, and by considering
this, we may surely collect what the great purpose of them was: for as when we
know a disease, we can guess easily what the design of the Physic prescribed
in cure of it is; so by considering what the errror and miscarriage of these
Corinthians was, we may conclude what the design of the Apostle is in these
words, which he uses in remedy of it; and therefore since the great fault of
them consisted in their horrible irreverence, and want of respect to this
service, we can assure our selves, that what he intended was to reform that
fault, and bring them to that reverence and devotion that became a service of
Religion, and that so solemn too, as he had instructed them the Holy Sacrament
was. So that since their eating and drinking so irreverently and profanely, was
that eating unworthily that he speaks of; their doing this worthily, would be
by communicating with that Religion, reverence, and devotion that became a
service so sacred as that was.

This (I am confident) is really the sense of these words, and a true account
of the Apostle's intent and meaning in them; the consideration of which would
be a great relief to scrupulous and timorous persons in this case, and let them
see how much others pervert, and they themselves mistake the sense of this
Text, who conclude every error and miscarriage in communicating, to be that
eating and drinking unworthily, which the Apostle so sharply blames, and so
severely threatens in these words.

I conclude by only adding this observation, if eating and drinking
irreverently and profanely, be that eating and drinking unworthily which the
Apostle means in this place, then eating and drinking with that reverence and
devotion that becomes such a service of Religion, will set Men above the danger
of that unworthiness; and if to bring Men to this was the only thing he aimed
at, then Men do very ill to put other senses upon this Text, and to fright
themselves and others, with the sound of words that do not concern them.

SECT. I.
THere is a second thing also (I told you) to confirm us in this account of the
Apostle's meaning here, and that is the phrase of the Text, both that in which
the Sin, and the cause, and the punishment of it too, is expressed.

1. The word expressing the Sin is unworthily, which cannot signify strictly,
according to the literal sense of the word, nor ought to be extended to every
indisposition, and to every failure to eat so worthily as Men should; for then
neither could any Man living eat worthily, nor with his utmost care avoid doing
it unworthily; this is a state of insuperable imperfection, and while we are in
it, some stains will stick to our best performances, our best and most devout
services will need the merits of Christ to expiate, and the mercy of God to
pardon the failures of them. And had we not such a compassionate mediator to
interceed for, and such a merciful God to pity and pardon us, we should have
little reason to hope, that any of our services should be accepted by him.

And therefore if this were the sense of eating unworthily, there might be
reason to fright Men from the Holy Sacrament as some teachers have done; nay
and the command of our Lord to keep up the practice of it in his Church would
be strangely unreasonable, it would be a hard thing to tie up his votaries to
the observation of that, which they could never do so, as to hope to be
accepted in the doing of, but must most infallibly incur a certain danger of
very great punishment.

And therefore unworthily in this place must signify indecently, unbecomingly,
i.e. in other words irreverently and profanely, just as if Men were about
common things; for the great indecency in performing services of Religion, is
to do them carelessly, rudely, irreverently, as if they were, or we looked upon
them to be common ordinary things, things which by our behavior we were not to
distinguish from the common services of life, and upon which we were not to
believe that the momentous concerns of the divine favor and eternal happiness
did depend upon. This the word does signify, and when both the nature of the
thing, and the matter of fact related to, do require that signification; then I
am sure we have all to justify that exposition of it, that in reason can be
desired.

2. The words also in which the cause of this miscarriage is expressed,
conclude for this exposition of the Text also; now those are not discerning the
Lords Body, which (as I have often showed) signify the not understanding the
reason, purpose and design of this service, looking upon it as a common thing,
and taking the Bread and Wine, to be but just like those, with which their
common feasts used to be concluded with.

So that by considering what the cause of this miscarriage was, we are as
planily showed, what it was, and wherein it did consist, as can be wished; for
if they did not understand that this was a Solemn service of Religion, and if
because of this they did eat unworthily, then that unworthiness must mean
irreverence, common behavior, want of devotion, that being the most natural
and immediate effect of not discerning the Lords Body; the cause plainly points
us to the effect, and gives us to understand what it was.

3. And the word in which the punishment threatened to the miscarriage is
expressed, combines with the other also in assuring this exposition, now that
is this startling word Damnation; which (as the next verse shows plainly,)
signifies here temporal punishments; inflictions of sicknesses and diseases,
and at most but corporal death.

Now I observe that these were those chastisements with which profaning Sacred
things, and the Services of Religion used to be punished under the Law;
instances of these are frequent in the old Testament, and well known to those
that have considered it.

Thus Nadab and Abihu being drunk (as the circumstances of the story plainly
show) and in that disorder, and that mistake which it caused offering strange
fire, are immediately slain, Levit. 10. and thus Corah and his two hundred Men
with him, that durst usurp the Priests office, and presume to offer incense, as
if it had been a common or ordinary thing, are destroyed by fire that came from
God, Numb. 16.35. Thus when the Men of Bethshemesh had ventured to rifle the
Ark of God, and to look temerariously into it, they are smitten with diverse
punishments and Death, 1. Sam. 6.19. And thus when Uzzah being a common person
put forth his hand to touch it, he is smitten dead upon the place, 2. Sam. 6.6,
7. And so when King Uzziah in his wrath and pride would perform the Sacredotal
office, and presume to offer incense, the Leprosy presently broke out upon
him, 2. Croni. 26.18, 19.

By which and many more such it appears that this was the punishment, with
which profaning the Services of Religion, and Sacred things used to be punished
among the Jews, and this being the punishment threatened, and actually inflicted
upon these indevout Corinthians, it is a fair presumption, that as their Sin
was a profaning the Holy Sacrament, as a common thing, so the design of the
Apostle was to correct, and prevent that profanation for the future, and engage
them to that devotion and reverence that became so Sacred a Service, and
institution of Religion.

The punishment plainly points to the Sin, and by knowing one, we may judge
pretty well what the other was, and by considering what both were, we may
conclude what the Apostle's design was in these words. viz. to prevent that
Sin, and that punishment too for the future, and to bring them to Communicate
with that Religion, awe and devotion, that such an institution of Religion
might expect, and challenge from them.

I think these circumstances observable in the Text to be fairly argued from,
and to conclude strongly for that account and exposition that I have given of
it.

SECT. II.
ANd yet there is a third thing observable to unite with these to warrant the
present argument, and that is to consider the things that he prescribes to this
purpose, and to remedy the precedent evil. I shall need to mention only these
three following, all which are plain in the following part of the chapter. The
first is the difference that there was, and ought to be made between their one
Houses and that of God. The second is his instructing them in the nature and
reason of this Service; and the third is his pressing the serious consideration
of these things; there is a fourth that may be of some use to consider also,
though it more immediately relate to the love-feast that preceded.

1. The first thing I observe used by the Apostle to remedy this fault among
them, is to consider that difference that there was, and ought to be between
their own Houses, and that of God, v. 22. what have you not Houses to eat, and
to drink in? or despise ye the House of God?

The plain meaning of which is this; you have Houses of your own to perform the
common acts and services of life in; but God's House is appropriate to the
service of Religion, and all things that you are required to do there, you
ought to esteem as such, and consequently to look upon them as things that
require great reverence and devotion, and a very differing respect and
carriage, from what those things to be done in your own Houses do.

From whence as it is evident, that eating and drinking in Gods House, with as
little reverence and Religion as they did in their own, was the fault; so what
he designed in this discourse, was to bring them to that reverence that became
the House of God, and those sacred Services of Religion that it was set apart,
and appropriated unto.

2. The second thing that he uses to the same purpose, is instructing them
fully in the nature and reason of this service, which it seems they were so
ignorant of; this he does from v. 23. to 27. where he lets them know, first
that it was the last institution of our Savior a little before his being
betrayed. The Lord Jesus in the same night that he was betrayed took Bread, and
when he had given thanks he brake it, and said take eat, this is my Body which
is broken for you; after the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had
supped, saying this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood. And therefore this
was a great deal more, than that common concluding morsel, and draught, which
they had taken it to be; it was a solemn Service of Religion, an immediate
institution of Christ, and therefore to be observed with another kind of temper
and carriage, than they had profanely treated it with.

3. And the sober and serious consideration and remembrance of all this, is
what he prescribes in the third place, as the most effectual cure of this
miscarriage, v. 28. Let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cup, let him examine himself whether he understand
these things, whether he know and consider wherefore this Service was
instituted. Let him consider what a sacred Service of Religion this is, and
what a measure of reverence and devotion becomes him, who does approach the
Table of the Lord, and there partake of the symbols of his most precious Body
and Blood.

The consideration of all this will most effectually cure and restrain from all
this rudeness and profanation, and powerfully engage to that awe and reverence,
that must needs possess all those that discern the Lords Body, and understand
what they are doing, when they eat that Bread, and drink that Cup.

From these three things I think it sufficiently plain, that rudeness and
irreverence toward the Holy Sacrament was the great fault of the Corinthians,
which the Apostle so taxes here, and endeavors to reform, and that therefore
to bring them to reverence, devotion, and a sense of Religion in it, is his
great design in all this discourse.

4. There is a fourth thing that perhaps may be pertinent to observe here to
the same purpose, that is what he advises verse 33, 34. Wherefore my Brethren
when ye come together, tarry one for another, and if any hunger let him eat at
home.

This I confess seems more directly to concern the love feasts, and to respect
the redressing those faults that they were guilty of in them; but yet they do
ultimately refer to the Holy Sacrament: for feasting together charitably like
friends and Brethren, and eating and drinking at home that they might not do so
then to intemperance and excess, would preserve them in the fitter temper for
this Service, and from that intemperance and disorder, that was one great cause
of their scandalous irreverence and profanation of it.

But I need no artificial and collateral arguments in this case; the matter is
made plain by the former considerations which are all pertinent, and direct to
this purpose, and render what I am contending for evident. So that it is really
a wonder why many Men should make such a pother and stir about the sense of
this place, and the meaning of eating and drinking unworthily; to the
perplexing the minds of scrupulous Persons, and frighting them from such a
necessary part of their duty, as communicating in the Holy Sacrament certainly
is.

CHAP. XII.
And now there is only the second and last thing remaining upon our hands. For
having showed that to bring them to devotion and reverence in the Holy
Sacrament was his design; it will be proper now to show how reasonably he might
undertake that task, and how becoming it is for them, and us, and all that
engage into that service.

A very little may suffice on this, because the reason of the thing is plain,
and because it is the common practice; of all the services in our Religion this
is commonly revered most, and how indevout and careless soever Men are in
others, yet they are always seen serious and devout in this: the truth is Men
rather offend on this hand, than the other, I do not mean in being too devout
and reverent at the Holy Sacrament, for that they never can be, but I mean in
thinking so highly and awfully of it, as to be possessed with even a
superstitious fear of it, which the great design of this discourse has been to
remove, and in order thereto to rectify some mistakes of Men, that may have
contributed to the same.

So that it is only to prevent that roving extravagant fancy of running into
extremes (which I told you in the beginning of this discourse giddy minds are
so incident unto) that I add this in the conclusion of this discourse, let Men
see that I do not encourage any Man's light opinion or disesteem of the Holy
Sacrament, but contend for it as earnestly as any Man, and to that purpose go
on to remark the reasons upon which the becomingness, and necessity of it does
rely; I shall need little more than just to name them.

SECT. I.
ANd first I desire it may be considered, that this is an immediate Service of
Religion, it is an institution of our dear Lord, and the observance of it an
immediate act of worship, and expressiono four Homage and duty to our God.

How much soever Men may indulge to carelessness and indifferency in common
matters, yet the universal reason of all Mankind consents in this, that
Religion is a serious thing, and that the profoundest reverence and devotion
becomes them, who engage into the services of it, and worship their God. Common
sense teaches Men to distinguish between a Temple, and a common House, and
that Men's carriage in the one should be very different from what it is, or may
be in the other, and those persons that can behave themselves as lightly, and
irreverently in the Church, as on Stage, etc. affront Religion and the service
of it; give the open lie to their one pretentions in engaging into it.

Keep thy foot when thou enterest into the House of God, and be not hasty to
offer the Sacrifice of Fools, says Solomon, Eccle. 5.1. and they that do not
both keep that, and their whole Man too, do not possess themselves with an
awful reverence of that great God they come to adore there, and whose
immediate service Religion is, will not only offer the Sacrifice of Fools, but
of something worse, not only defeat the end, and acceptance of their worship,
but turn it into guilt, and an argument against them.

2. It is not only a service of Religion, but the highest, and most solemn
service of it; so it has been always accounted in the Christian Church, and
for that reason she has used to consummate and end all others with it; it is
her most august and Solemn Sacrifice, the great and chief rite of Prayer, and
her most devout and solemn Eucharist, and expression of praise.

And let me add (if it may signify any thing with this Generation) it is the
only band and testimony of our full communion with the Christian Church: our
Baptism admits us into the Church, gives us a right to all the privileges and
blessings of it, and our going to Church and engaging into the standing
Services of Religion may procure us the Name of Christians, and cause the World
to repute and take us for such; but it is this Holy Sacrament that makes us to
be in full Communion with Christ's Church.

It is a vain thing for Men to say, they are no Papists, no Sectaries, etc.
they are Protestants of the Church of England, when they do not communicate in
Sacraments with her, they may be of any Church, or of no Church for all they do
without this; and for any thing I know to the contrary, they do as actually cut
off themselves from the communion of the Church, by the neglect of the Holy
Sacrament where they may have it, as they can do so by Heresy, Apostasy,
schism, or can be cut off by the highest censures of the Church herself.

This is a thing that ought to stick fast upon some Men's thoughts; for if there
be no Salvation out of the Church of Christ, and those be not in this Church
that do not join in her communion, and those do not do this, who do not
communicate in her Sacraments, then some Men's conditions must be very
hazardous, and then we may assert the necessity, as well as duty of the Holy
Sacraments in order to Men's Salvation: the necessity I mean of them, where they
may be had.

Nay I know not why I may not say more, viz. that the neglect of this Holy
Sacrament does as really forfeit Church membership as the want of Baptism does
hinder it; and those that live and dye amongst us, without receiving the Holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, are no more true members of our Church than they
that dye unbaptised; those that have been admitted into the Church, and come
not up to the terms of its communion, may forfeit that membership as truly, as
they who were never admitted into it, cannot pretend to it. For though Men may
enter their names into a society, yet unless they submit to the Laws, and
usages of it they will neither be accounted members of it, nor suffered to
enjoy the immunities and privileges thereof.

3. I add it not only is, and has ever been accounted the highest service of
the Church, but that in which we are thought to have a nearer access unto, and
a more intimate communion with God than in others.

I do not urge its being so lively and visible a representation of that which
is the most affecting meditation in Christian Religion, and that upon this
reason the Apostle tells the Galatians, that Christ had been set forth before
their Eyes, and Crucified among them, Gall. 3.1. though that alone were
argument enough to engage Men to all reverence in it.

But I argue it upon another reason, namely that herein we are admitted to the
Table of the Lord, where we not only feed with him, but feed upon him; we eat
his Flesh and drink his Blood; we partake of him, and are incorporated into
him: we are made one with him, and he with us; we dwell in him, and he in us;
as our Church speaks.

I do not here undertake the dispute about Transubstantiation; that hard word,
and that worser thing, which the Church of Rome has taken upon her to teach as
an article of necessary faith, contrary to the nature of a Sacarament, to the
plain sense of Scripture, to the doctrine and belief of the Primitive Church
and Fathers of it, and to the common sense and reason of all Mankind. It is a
doctrine that came forth with the doctrine of their infallibility, and methinks
'twas very fit those two monsters should be born together, to let the World see
how Gigantick the faith of a Romanist is; and I will say, those that can
believe the infallibility of their Popes, after so many instances of their
having erred, and contradicted one another, may believe the doctrine of
transubstantiation, contrary to all, and the plainest evidences of things, that
it is possible for Mankind to have.

But I am not for admitting dispute, or controversy into this discourse, and
therefore let that Doctrine pass, as a thing more monstrous, and abhorrent to
humane reason, than any that is to be met with even in the Pagan Poetic
Theology.

And yet notwithstanding all this, I add, and still assert, that we do as
truly, and to all real effects partake of Christ in the Holy Sacrament, as if
we did literally eat his Flesh and drink his Blood; our advantage is as real
and true by the one, as it could be by the other.

The Church of England is for a real presence of Christ in the Holy Sacrament,
but it is that real presence which the Primitive Church and good Fathers of it
were for, and meant, when they spoke to that purpose, viz. a real Spiritual
presence, a conferring all the great effects and benefits of his Body and
Blood, as truly as if they themselves were actually present there. A Spiritual
presence is as real a presence, as a Bodily, and the effects and benefits of
Christ's Body and Blood are real things too. So that the Body and Blood of
Christ may be said to be really and truly there, where all the effects and
Blessings of them are really bestowed; and the Church of England does truly
say, that they are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the
Lord's Supper; when all the real benefits and effects of them are taken and
received by them.

This (I am pretty well assured) is all that the Primitive Church and Fathers
meant by the real presence, and this is sufficient both for our faith, and
comfort too; and while we are satisfied and assured of this, we neither need
more, nor are obliged to puzle our selves about any further questions.

Now this surely is such an argument and obligation to reverence and devotion
in this service, as can never miss effect upon them that entertain the thoughts
of it.

For if we do thus discern the Lords Body and take the Bread and Wine in the
Holy Sacrament, not only to be the signs and symbols of our Lord's Body and
Blood, but in a Sacramental sense the very Body and Blood themselves; and by
the grace and blessing of God upon them, to convey to us all those effects and
benefits, which the very Body and Blood, and our feeding upon them could do.
Then certainly we cannot but pay all possible adoration to Christ when we
partake of them, nor partake of them, without the profoundest reverence, that
our Souls are capable off. And as I may well think, that those who can be rude,
irreverent and profane, when they partake of these Holy Symbols, would be so to
Christ were he visibly and corporally present: so I may safely say, that upon
the same reasons that we would pay respect and reverence to our Lord, were he
so present, we may, and we should pay it, when we partake of those things,
which he has instituted, and commanded us to observe as representations and
memorials of him.

The truth is, the argument in this case, is rather too great, than any way
defective, and upon every good Heart the effect must be according. It can
scarce fail of running our devotion into rapture, and our reverence into
ecstasy and transport, to consider that the great God should put such an honor
upon poor creatures, not only entertain us at his own Table, but give us his
own Sons Body and Blood, and all the blessed effects and benefits of them to
feed upon.

Lord! what is Man, that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of Man that
thou so regardest him! and what name is bad enough for that Man, whom such love
and condescension, such Majesty, and such Blessing, will not engage, and strike
into the profoundest reverence and devotion, when he actually communicates in
the Blessed Pledges of them all?

CONCLUSION.
ANd now I have brought this discourse to its designed conclusion, and have
little more than to beg of God, that it may have at least some part of that
effect upon Men, that was designed in it.

I do think a scruple of this nature necessary to considered; and I have
endeavored to satisfy it as well as I can; and I hope no Man will blame the
undertaking, how defective soever he may think the performance to be.

Is it not great pity that any scruple should keep Men in a total negligence of
a necessary duty, and cause them to think themselves innocent in it?

Is it not a strange thing, and lamentable, that Men should lie under such
fatal mistakes, as to think themselves at liberty, whether they will obey the
last dying command of their dear Lord? or that their love and homage to him can
consist with a constant disregard of it?

Is it not pity that Men should be easily persuaded to slight that, which is so
mighty advantageous to all the great purposes of the Spirit and Salvation? and
in which the greatest kindness and honor is offered to Men, that God can put
upon them?

Is it not pity and a shame that so many should call themselves Christians, and
of the Church of England too, and yet neglect that which is the highest duty of
Christianity, and the great band of communion with the Church?

Is it not a shame for a Church to be without Sacraments, or for that Church to
have members that never communicate in them?

If any things in the World can be pitiable, these things are so. And if any
thing can be necessary, it must be to consider, what that thing is that is the
great cause of them. Now this I would fain hope, is a fear that Men have taken
up upon the reason of what is said in these words; I would gladly hope that it
is neither obstinacy in some, nor carelessness in others that keeps them from
the Holy Sacrament, but only fear and scruple in all, fear of coming
unworthily, and incurring that Damnation, that is threatened by the Apostle to
all that do so come.

If this be the case of Men, they are really pitiable, and it is for the sake
of them, that this discourse has been undertaken, in which I hope something
has been offered, that may be considered to good purpose, and Men may find
their account in.

1. For first Men by attending to it, may understand what the notion of eating
and drinking unworthily is, and upon what reason the Apostle charge the
Corinthians with it. viz. their not discerning the Lords Body, their being
drunk at the Lords Table as well as their own, and putting no difference
between these and common things, and that no Christians now can be guilty of
the like Sin, but by something that sets them as far from discerning the Lords
Body, and paying due respect to it, as they were.

2. And secondly, by considering this, Men may perceive both how far they
themselves are from the Sin, and how little they need to be afraid of the same
danger; if they find that by the grace of God they are secured from the one,
they may confidently hope, that his mercy will secure them from the other.

3. They may hence also learn what a reasonable measure of knowledge, devotion,
and care will most certainly set them above all possibility of this
unworthiness, and of that damnation threatened to it.

4. And fourthly by considering that it is their necessary duty, and the
mercies and compassions of God as great, and ready to pardon, the common
infirmities of humanity in this as in any other Services of Religion, they may
learn to slight, and surmount all their fears in this, as they do in them, and
to come with as much cheerfulness, sense of duty, and hopes of divine
acceptance in this, as in others.

5. This discourse may be of some use, to the directing, and encouraging Men in
their preparations for this Holy Sacrament, and not fright them by the labor,
difficulty, length of time, and curiousness of preparation, that some have
accidently done.

The effect of all which should be the ridding Men's minds of those unreasonable
and superstitious fears that they have too generally taken up, in prejudice
against the Holy Sacrament, and addressing themselves conscionably and
cheerfully unto it.

And I have nothing more, but to beg them to give it this effect, to take heed
that they shut not their eyes against clear light, that they pretend not
scruples to keep them in the neglect of a known necessary duty, and that they
cherish not those scruples, and wilfully retain them, against all reasonable
ways of satisfaction; there is not a worse, nor a more dangerous temper of mind
than this, and he that considers that for this cause God gave up the Heathen to
a reprobate sense, to vile affections, and left them at last to follow things
which reason and nature did abhor, had need to fear transcribing the same
temper of mind lest he succeed in the same dreadful punishments.

It were certainly much better to look upon our scruples of this sort to be, as
they really are, diseases of our minds, and be as desirous and ready to have
the cure of them, as we are of the diseases of our Bodies, to give God Almighty
thanks, whose providence orders us these helps for the one, as well as the
other. That so (as the Apostle speaks) both he that sowes, and they that reap
may rejoice together. The one for that they are satisfied and relieved, and the
other for that God has honored him so far as to be an instrument in it. Which
I pray God almighty grant may be the issue of all at last. Amen.

FINIS.

