Great Men's Advantages AND Obligations to RELIGION: Represented in a SERMON
Preached before the KING, IN The Chapel at St. JAMES's, JULY the 17th. School.

By HENRY HESKETH, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Printed by the King's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Walter Kettleby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1699.

JER. v. 5. I will get me to the great men, and will speak unto them: for they
have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God.
IT was at a time of the greatest Degeneracy of the Jewish Church and Nation,
and a little before the Babylonish Captivity, that these words were spoken by
our Prophet: And the Occasion was this;

The most merciful and good God, to show how willing, and even desirous he was
to spare that wretched and rebellious People, condescends to such a Condition
to do it upon, as (I am persuaded) the most compassionate Man living could
hardly have had the face to propose to him: Run ye to and fro through the
streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad places
thereof, if ye can find one man, if there be any that executes judgment, and
seeks the truth, and I will pardon it, ver. 1.

It was and will be for ever celebrated and adored, as a mighty Instance of
God's Mercy, and readiness to spare Sinners, that he offered to spare Sodom and
Gomorrha, if Ten righteous Persons could be found therein; and it was as much
as even Abraham (when so much encouraged in his Applications for Mercy) had the
confidence to beg of him.

But surely it was much more, to offer to spare a whole Nation, if but One such
could be found in it: And it is not easy perhaps to say, whether the Mercy of
God in the Offer were more surprising, or the Demerits of that People, that
could not come up to so easy a Condition, the more astonishing. However it
were, God's Mercy is highly exalted in the one, and his Justice sufficiently
vindicated even in his sharpest Inflictions upon the reason of the other.

We may reasonably suppose the good Prophet thought this a most gracious Offer
in God, and conceived some good Hopes upon the reason of it, that his People
might be saved, and the impendent Judgment averted; and therefore he undertakes
the Inquest, in hopes that he might find some One Person to stand in the gap,
and whose Righteousness might save his Nation from Destruction and Ruin.

To that end, he begins his Search in the Streets, and in the Broad places, in
the places of common concourse, and in the crowds of the populace; and what the
success of his search was there, he tells us, ver. 2, 3. Falsehood and Perjury,
Injustice and Fraud, and an obstinate course of Wickedness, without fear,
remorse, or any hopes of amendment.

This, no doubt, was a great mortification and grief to the good Man: but yet
he comforts himself under it, by considering that these were poor, and so
wholly immersed in worldly Business, that they had little regard to Religion,
little knowledge of God, and much could not be expected from them.

But he seems to have greater hopes of succeeding in his search among the
Honorable and the Noble; I will get me to the Great Men, and speak unto them:
for surely they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God.

This is the Connection of these words, and this the Occasion upon which they
were spoken: And I have chosen to speak to them at this time, not to frighten
any Man by telling stories of our present Danger, and parallelling our case
with that of the Jews at this time; nor take occasion to make any Tragical
Outcryes against the Degeneracy of all sorts of Men among us at this day, much
less of Those to whom I have now presumed to speak. This, perhaps would be
deemed too rustic an Address for a Court, and (as it was said to Amos) that
which a King's Chapel would hardly bear.

I would much rather choose to imitate (though I can never hope to equal) the
Rhetoric of St. Paul to King Agrippa, who counted it the most becoming way to
persuade him to believe the Prophets, to seem confident that he did; and, with
the Prophet in this place, to presume upon the Religion of those that hear me,
rather than seem so much as to think there is any reason to reproach them with
want of it.

Thus far I hope I may be allowed to go without offense, and enquire what
probable Reasons the Prophet had, for his hope to find one good Man, at least,
among the Jewish Nobility; and what better reason I have to hope to find, not
only one, but many, even all such among those to whom I have the Honor now to
speak.

The Probability of this, I shall found upon these Two General Reasons:

I. The Advantages that Great Men enjoy, to the Purposes of Religion.

II. The Obligations that they lie under to regard it, above those that plod in
the streets, and crowd the broad places.

And if I may beg the Patience of this Great Audience, while I instance Three
Particulars of each of these, I shall not presume to put it to any greater
stress at this time.

First, I begin with the First; The Advantages to Religion that Great Men enjoy
above others. I shall only instance (as I said) Three of these, among many
others. (1.) That of Natural Temper and Constitution. (2.) That of Generous,
Timely Education. (3.) That of Time and Leisure, from the necessary
Encumbrances and Cares of other Men.


1. The First Advantage to Religion that I have named, is that of Natural
Temper and Constitution: Which though it may seem a little mean thing to some,
yet is perhaps as worthy of consideration in this case, as any other.

Every Man is wonderfully and curiously made, as the holy Psalmist has
observed long since: but perhaps Great Men may be said to be so in some
respects above others, their Blood being generally said to be more refined, and
their Bodies of a finer Mould than those of meaner Men.

There is more sense in that common Adage ( nasci a principibus, etc.) than is
commonly taken notice of; and it may be, happiness of Natural Temper may be one
reason upon which it has been spoken, as well as some others.

The Issues as well as Flights of Eagles and Jays (says the Greek Proverb) are
very different: And we see it true, all Creatures naturally instance the
Seminal Virtues and Properties of their Progenitors; and it is commonly seen to
be so in the present case of Persons honorably extracted; their very Natural
Tempers and Humors are more tender, soft, and ductile, than those of a courser
grain.

Now sweet and good Nature is a mighty apt Disposition to Religion; and in
truth, one is but the Perfection of the other. The great purpose of Religion,
is to refine and sublimate Humane Nature, and to reduce it to its primitive
Standard; in which the First Adam was as Eminent for all the Sweetnesses of
Nature, as for Innocence, and therefore one, because he was the other.

And it is worth observing, That the Second Adam, who came to restore us to the
true state of our Nature, as well as to reconcile that Nature to God, was
himself the brightest and most matchless Instance of Goodnature that ever
shined in the World: So sweet and obliging in his Deportment, so kind and
courteous in his Conversation, so affable and easy of Address, so exorable and
ready to do good when solicited to it, so obliging to all, and so sharp to
none; unless it were to those Fanatic Zealots, the Pharisees, a Sect of the
most peevish, morose, proud, supercilious Persons that ever pretended to
Religion in the World; all whose Religion consisted only in a starched
Formality, in extolling themselves, and censuring and condemning all others,
who indeed were the shame of Religion, and their Lives the sharpest Satyr
against it; and who (together with all of their rude, boisterous, uncharitable
Temper) are the unfittest of all Men to pretend to Heaven, where nothing but
Love and Peace dwells; that is to say, where Goodnature shines in its
Perfection, and is advanced indeed to the Image and Likeness of God, that
Universal Source of Sweetness and Love, who is kind to all, and whose tender
mercies are over all his works, whose Catholic Bounty like his own Sun shines
upon all, and embraces in its arms of love the whole Creation.

This is that happiness of Nature that is not only so aptly and nearly disposed
to Religion, but is indeed the very anticipation of it: That soft, mellow, and
well-prepared Ground in which those tender Seeds of Religion and Virtue easily
grow, and happily flourish, that would be lost and die in the rugged and the
churlish.

2. Another Advantage to Religion that Great Men enjoy above others, is that of
a Timely, Generous Education; which when it is joined with the former, is such
an Advantage to Religion as can hardly be defeated.

The care of Educating Children in some becoming measure, can hardly be
supposed to be neglected in such a Place as this, where the Obligations of
Nature are so strengthened by the Sanctions of Religion, and where to fail is
counted such a scandalous Degeneracy from both.

But yet it must be confessed, that some Parents lie under such narrow and
pinching Circumstances, that their Care cannot extend far: And it is not to be
thought, that those who are so hard put to it to provide Necessaries for their
Bodies, should do very much toward cultivating and adorning their Minds.

But where the Inclinations of Nature are advantaged with all the supplemental
Aids of Fortune, so that Parents are every way able to do that for their
Children, which they feel themselves so strongly prompted by Natural Affection
to do; yea, and where giving a Man Generous Education, is even an instance of
Gentility it self, and one thing by which a Gentleman is distinguished as much
from, as he is exalted above others of a meaner Character, there to be wanting
in this, would be as great a blemish to Himself, as an injury to his Children.

And how far soever the Age may be thought to be degenerated, yet (God be
praised) it is not so wholly sunk into Brutality, but that there is so strong a
sense of the Excellency of Virtue, as well as meanness of Vice, upon the worst
Men's Minds, that he that is the lewdest Prostitute to Wickedness himself, yet
would willingly have his Children better principled, than to follow his loose
Example.

It is a very common thing to see those that have but very little regard to
Religion themselves, yet to be as careful to give their Children good and
generous Education, as those that are the strictest Votaries to it. How much
soever Men indulge Lewdness and Debauchery in themselves, yet they love not to
see it in others, much less in such dear and near Relations.

Now under a Generous Education, I comprehend a Care of their Souls, as well as
of their Bodies; a cultivating the inward part, as well as adorning the
outward; a framing them to act becomingly in their Moral, as well as to be
accomplished in all the Modes of Civil Conversation. For this is that principal
part of Education, which respects them in their principal Interest, and to
which our Respects to our Children to do most indispensibly oblige us.

This, we know, is done by informing their Understandings with all useful
Knowledge, by instilling into their Minds the excellent Precepts and Rules of
Good-living, and by backing these with all those charming Arguments and Motives
that may affect their Wills, and influence their Affections, and set that noble
Machine into that regular and harmonious way of Acting, which was intended by
that God that so curiously framed it.

Now this is so mighty an Advantage to Religion and Virtue, that there wants
nothing but that Grace of God (which is extended to all) to fasten and make it
effectual. This is indeed the forestalling Vice, and prepossessing as well as
fortifying Nature against the Insinuations of it. It is making Virtue even
connatural to the Soul; and laying such powerful Obligations to it upon the
Mind, that a Man must offer force and violence to himself, before he can break
through them.

And certainly were there not some strange Magic and even plain Fascination in
Lewdness and Vice, it were hardly to be thought, that a Gentleman of Generous
and Virtuous Education could so unravel the whole contexture of his Nature, act
so contrary to his own imbibed Principles, stifle the Sentiments and clear
Light of his own Mind, break through the Checks and Restraints of his own
Conscience, and offer a plain Rape to his own Virgin-Modesty, as to turn
Prostitute to Vice; for he must do all these things, before he can allow
himself to become the other.

The wise Men of all Ages have thought good Education the surest way to fix
young Persons in the prepossessions of Virtue, and prescribed it as that which
would hardly miscarry. And Solomon, not only the Wisest of Men, but that was
guided by a Divine Spirit too, recommends it upon this Reason, Prove. 22.6.
Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old, he will not
depart from it. The truth is, he hardly can depart from it, and he must offer
great violence to himself before he can.

Humane Nature (notwithstanding all the cries of its Degeneracy) is not so
depraved (God be praised) but that it is capable of good impressions as well as
bad; and at first, to be sure, it is as a fair Paper, upon which Good may be
written as well as Evil: And when virtuous Inclinations are fixed by prudent
Institution, it will not be easy to act contrary to them. However, let what
violence will or can be laid upon them, they will ever and anon be felt, and
still be struggling to regain their freedom, and reduce the Man to the first
sweetness and innocence of his Nature.

And still the more generous and careful that the Education has been, the
stronger will these good Dispositions be; and (but that we sometimes see the
contrary) such as might well be thought morally impossible to be suppressed.

And this is thought so generally true, that whenever a Youth miscarries, it,
is commonly imputed to some fault in the Parent, and to some defect in his
Education: But when there is the miscarriage of one whom all Men know to have
had all due Care bestowed upon him by the other; the Strangeness of it as much
surpriseth with Wonder, as the Misery of it extorts the Compassion and Tears of
the sad Spectators.

3. Another great Advantage that Great Men have of knowing the way of the Lord,
etc. above other Men, is Time and Leisure to inform themselves in it.

Time is one of the most valuable Treasures that God has entrusted Mankind
with; though (like other of his Blessings) Men seldom know how to esteem it,
till they come to want it: And though it be certainly true, that all Men enjoy
so much of this, as is absolutely necessary to all the great Purposes of Life,
and the discharge of all the necessary Affairs of their respective Callings;
yet it is evident, that (like other Gifts of Providence,) it is differently
dispensed, so that some enjoy more, and some less.

The Generality, and Common Sort of Men, that the Prophet was to search among
in the broad places, lie under the burden of Adam's Curse, and in the sweat of
their faces must eat bread; and most of them are forced to tug hard, some in
one way, and some in another, before they can get it to eat: So that the common
Excuse that is made for Men's neglect of Religion, because of the Hurries and
necessary Avocations of Worldly Business, sounds better in their mouths, and is
more reasonably admitted from them.

But Great Men are in a great measure exempted from this common tribute of
Humanity: Their Bread is got to their hands; and that Time which others are
forced to spend in getting of it, lies upon their hands, and is as a
Ready-Stock to be employed to Nobler Purposes: They are manumitted from the
Labor of the Field, or the Attendances of the Shop; so that that Time which
others do and must expend in these, is to them a surplusage for the Study, or
the Closet, and for improving their Minds by Reading and Meditation in the one,
and by Devotion in the other.

The truth of this is notorious to all, and I should but be impertinent, and
waste Time my self, in insisting further on it. Time is a Treasure that Great
Men enjoy in measures above the Populace, as eminently as any others.

Now it is little less notorious, what an Advantage it is to all the great
Purposes of Religion, to have such vast portions of Time, which they can easily
spare to the Exercises of it, or which they will spare to worser purposes.

And it would be a woeful thing, and that which must one day be sadly accounted
for, if this precious Treasure should be wholly misspent and squandered away,
if the Comb and the Glass in the Morning, or the Stage and empty Visits in the
Evening, should ingross that Time which God has allotted to one Sex for
Devotion in the Closet and the Church; or Sports and vain Recreations, or much
worser Entertainments, should ravish away all that spare Time, which the other
Sex has allotted them to the same purposes.

A wise Man, that has never so much Business incumbent on his hands, yet may
so adjust the portions of his Time, as to reserve enough for the Exercise of
Religion: And he that has learned in any measure how to redeem his time, can
easily spare enough for the Service of his God, without intrenching at all upon
his secular Necessities.

But Great Men need not study this Art, nor be put to any difficulty in
accommodating those Interests, between which there is no competition at all. It
is but a little Time, that surveying their Estates, and taking the necessary
Accounts of them, or serving their King and Country, does necessarily employ;
and he that is mostly confined to these, yet has great portions of Time, which
he not only may reserve from them, but which do indeed lie upon his hands, and
therefore not only may be employed to the purposes of Religion, but great part
of which must be so, or else the mis-spending of them must be answered for
another day. And as for others that are not yet called to these high Stations,
they have commonly so much Time as seems to lie as a burden upon them; so that
they are rather put to study how to pass it off, than have any cause to
complain of being straightened in it.

These, and many other great Advantages to Religion (which might easily be
instanced) Great Men enjoy above others; and the Prophet might reasonably hope,
that Men thus advantaged, might know the way of the Lord, though the Populace
were scandalously ignorant and neglective of it.

Secondly, And yet this was not the only Consideration that ministered to that
Hope: For their Obligations to Religion are in proportion to their Advantages;
and the guilt of failing to answer these, would be as great, as the indecency
of defeating the purpose of the other. -- This is the Second thing that I have
undertaken to give some Account of; i. e. the Obligations to Religion that lie
on Great Men above others.

For it is a wild Conceit to think that Religion is only proper for Cottages
and Cells, or that Great Men that are exempt from the Cares of this World, are
priviledg'd from all regards to the Interest of the next. The Reverse to this
is the great Truth; Religion is as becoming Courts as Colleges, and Virtue as
needful for Great Men as any below them; and if there be any difference it lies
really on this side, there lying stronger Obligations to Religion upon them
than upon others.

I shall reduce what I intend to consider on this part of my Argument, to three
Heads only, as I did on the former. 1. Their Obligations to Almighty God. 2.
Their Obligations to Men below them. 3. Their Obligations to themselves.


Great Men's Obligations to Almighty God are above other Men's.

It is certain all Ranks and Orders of Men, (yea, every particular Person in
any of these) owe so much to God, as the acknowledgment and utmost Service of
their whole Life can never answer.

How unequally soever the Gifts of Providence are dispenss'd to Men, yet he
that receives least, receives more than he can be answerable for; for that
there is no cause for any one to complain, but rather to be thankful.

But yet it is plain there is a sensible difference, and if he that receives
least, owes the utmost Service of his Life for what he receives, and yet can
never discharge the Obligation; sure they that receive much more must owe
proportionably more, if it were possible to pay it.

Our blessed Lord speaks of it as an allowed Rule of Equity among all Men, that
to whom much is given, of him will much be required; and to whom men give much,
of him they will require more, Luke 12.42. And if God Almighty will observe the
same Rules in expecting Duty from Men (as he shows in that place he will) then
the easiest Reasoning will infer, that Great Men's Retributions should be in
some proportion according to the divine Donations; and their returns of Duty as
much exceed those of meaner Men, as the rich Man's Offerings under the Law,
were to exceed the Pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons, which were to
be accepted from him that was poor.

It was the great Stagyrite's Opinion, that Great Men and rich Men must needs
love God: And truly if we judge by the Rules of Ingenuity and Duty, we may
think so too; and certainly they must act in defiance to both, that fail in
that Duty to which they are so signally and transcendently obliged. And surely
if any Land that brings forth nothing but Briars and Thorns be nigh to cursing;
that which after so much cultivation does the one, must needs be thought much
nigher to the other.

He that had been obliged with the trust of ten Talents, was expected to make
greater Returns of Improvement, than he that had received but half so many, and
still the Returns were expected in proportion to their Receipts.

And if in the true Reddition of the Parable, Great Men be those that God has
put such an Honor upon in the Surplusage of his Gifts above others, then the
Parable will be found a true Story in the Subsequent part of it too, and the
Rewards or Punishments will be proportionably greater or less, according as
they have answered, or as they have failed to answer what was so justly
expected from them.

If they are bound to walk in the way of Righteousness that find it stuck with
Thorns, sure they to whom it is strowed with Roses, and endeared with all
possible Allectives, should do so much more; and if he should bear precious
Seed, that goes to sow it weeping, certainly he that has not only hope of
the same sheaves hereafter, but whose Seed-time is so every way pleasant and
inviting, should more cheerfully do so.

Many a good Man serves God conscionably and cheerfully in the want of many
things; but one might think none should fail to do this, who may do it in the
abundance of all things. And if the Children of Jacob were bound to serve God
in a dry and barren Wilderness, sure their Obligations to do so in a fruitful
and pleasant Canaan were much stronger.

2. Another mighty Obligation to Religion that Great Men are under above
others, results from their Respect to others below them; who are so apt to Copy
from them, and to square their Lives by those Measures which they give them.

A mean Man's Life commonly passes off without Observation: And as if he be
Righteous the Benefit is his own, so if he be the contrary the harm is to
himself; few are benefited much by the one, or prejudiced the other.

But Great Men move in a higher and more conspicuous Sphere; and the Blessing
or Contagion of their Example spreads much further. When a great Tree falls the
whole Vicinage of Underwoods is bruised by it, as well as it is guarded from
the Winds, and shadowed from the Heat by its standing.

It were a Commonplace subject to treat of the Power of Example, or stay
showing what force it has in forming the Manners of Men, even above Precept
and Law. There is Experience to attest the Truth of this in Fact, as well as
there are Reasons to give in the account of it. And if so, then the more
conspicuous and eminent that the Person is, the more Operative will his Example
be, which way soever it moves.

The Examples of Parents, Tutors, and Masters have a strong (though secret
Power) upon Children, Pupils, and Servants; and therefore they are obliged to
take great care of their own Lives and Actions, for their sakes as well as
their own.

The good Life of a Clergyman is said by all to be his best Homily, and his
good Example more effectual to persuade than all his Preaching. And Woe be to
him whose Life is a Confutation of his Doctrine, and who prejudiceth more
against Religion by the one, than he can ever hope to endear it to them by the
other.

And yet alas Clergymen are but little things now, and Men have learned to
regard them but as such; they move but in a little compass, and make but a
small Figure in the World, in comparison of the Great and the Noble. These are
the Men truly now that are the Lights and Cities upon a Hill, that are depended
upon on by many, and observed by all. And as their Example will almost
constrain the one sort, so it will strongly induce the other to Imitation.
Interest will engage some, and their Eminency will incline others to transcribe
their Practice into their own Lives.

And give me leave to speak a few plain words, now that I am upon this
Argument. We may talk of reforming a vicious Age by good Instruction, and by
wholesome Laws; by telling Men the danger of Sin and Vice, with respect to the
Interest of another World, and by threatening to let them feel the Smart and
Punishment of it in this. But alas, we are sad Spectators of the Inefficacy of
both; the Prophets may cry aloud till their Lungs crack, and Senators may make
Laws as Penal as they can; and yet the Effect be far from answering the
Intendment; few will believe the Report of the one, and almost as few regard
the other.

Living Sermons, and living Laws would do something, but the Dead will be found
(like other dead things) to be cold and unactive.

I am apt to think that if the wise Sanctions of Laws against Profaness were
duly executed by the Guardians of Law, it would have some Effect upon some Men.
I am Glad to have these Laws awakened, and Magistrates put in mind of their
Duty by Solemn and well Penned Proclamations, and I think God Almighty ought to
be praised that puts it into the Heart of the Supreme Authority of the Nation,
to think the suppressing Vice and Profaness, a Matter worthy of their greatest
Care. But surely it is a mean thing, and that which looks little better than
like mocking of God and the World too, to make good Laws, and put forth
Proclamations for the Execution of them, and yet never to regard or think of
them more. It is worthy enough of Blame, to see those that should be the
Prince's Hands, to put Laws against Vice in Execution, to connive at the daring
Committers of it in all places; but it is worse to see those very Persons
openly and Scandalously commit it themselves, which yet I doubt may be seen in
some.

But I withdraw. I was saying that if the wise Sanctions of Laws were duly
executed, it would have effect upon some; but I say now, if the Virtues
recommended by Laws, were recommended too by the Lives of the Lawgivers, it
would certainly have effect upon all.

Moses and his Successors had the Holy Unction upon the Head, as well as Aaron,
and those that Succeeded to him; and if that Ointment did not only stay there,
but reach the next adjoining Parts, and thence descend even to the Skirts of
his Clothing, it would be found Sanative indeed, and soon Imprint a Divine
Character upon all.

And (to go on with the Allusion in the same Psalm) if that prolifick Dew which
falls upon the top of Hermon, did both Water the Hills of Zion, and the next
adjoining Exaltations, and thence descend even to the lowest Valleys beneath
them; the Prospect would show lovely indeed; the Top would look beautiful and
verdent, the Declensions would be adorned with Trees and Fruit, the Valleys
would even laugh and sing under their Burdens of Corn, and the whole be happy
as a Hill, or as a Field which the Lord had blessed.

When the Sun shines clear, and enlivens the World by its warm Rays; and when
the Stars regularly impart those Balsamic Influences which they receive from
him, to the lower World, we see how comfortable and happy the Effects are. But
when black Clouds obscure that Sun, Storms and Showers soon follow; and when
shaggy Comets climb up into the Region of the Stars, and by their preternatural
Corruscations, or noxious Contagions infect the Air, then all Men dread the
Omen, and Plagues, and Blasting, Scarcity and Droughts usually follow, and
justify their Fears.

It is thus in the moral World, my Brethren, as well as Natural, when the
superior Orbs move regularly, all things below act Harmoniously to their
Motions. When Kings become nursing Fathers to the Church, and by their own
Conscience and regard to Virtue and Devotion, bring it into Credit and Fashion:
When the great Mountains having brought Peace, the little Hills shall teach
Righteousness to the People; then we may begin to hope well; then there may be
some likelihood of the Kingdoms of the World becoming the Kingdoms of God and
his Christ, and then we may talk more reasonably of a Millennium.

Happy are they that live under such Divine and Heavenly Influences; but thrice
happy are they that transmit them: The blessed Effects will be visible upon
Earth, but their Reward is with their God: And that opens the way to.

3. The third and last great Obligation upon Great Men to Religion, which I
shall mention at this time, and that is, the Obligation to themselves, and the
respect they ought to have to their own Interest.

It is certain, Religion and Virtue is a thing of universal Advantage, and all
Ranks of Men would find their Accounts in it, whatever is really the Interest
of any Man, with respect either to the present, or future state of things would
certainly be found by a due regard to it. So that in truth, every Man is so far
regardless of his own true Happiness, or so far consults for it by improper
means, as he is regardless of Religion, or acts contrary to it.

But perhaps there may be reason to say, that Great Men's Obligation to
Religion (even upon this Reason) may be more pressing, than that upon other Men.

In this World it is plainly seen to be thus, for they have Honor and Grandeur
to consult for more than others, which to them ought to be as dear as their
Lives; it being the only Firmament upon which their Distinction from others is
Founded. And truly I see not why their Interest as to another World, may not be
thought so too, I mean their Happiness and Glory if they be Religious, or their
Punishment and Misery if they be not, greater than that of others. Let me crave
leave to represent these two distinctly in a few words.

1. Their Obligation to themselves, with respect to this World, and all their
valuable Interests in it; it is certain Religion and Virtue is the only Telesme
to secure all these; Godliness has the Promise of this World, as well as that
to come, (says St. Paul;) and it can be demonstrated upon true Reason, that it
is the surest Expedient to whatever is any true part of Man's present Happiness.

I will Instance but in one of these, because it is peculiar to Great Men, and
that is true Honor. This, (as I said but now) is the great darling Interest of
Great Men, and ought to be dear to them above all things, next to their God. So
that a Protestation upon Honor from a Nobleman, is counted as Sacred and
Obligatory, as an Oath immediately to God from other Men.

Now it is certain the only true Foundation and Support of this is Religion and
moral Goodness; this makes a Man really what he should be; yea, and causes him
to be Esteemed, Valued and Honored as such by all others.

Great Men's high Titles, Offices and Stations may justly challenge external
Respect from others below them; but it is Enamelling those Characters and
Titles by real Virtue, that engages their inward Respect and Reverence, and we
need but consult common Observation to justify this. A Great Man may be star'd
at, and Conju'd to by some for his glittering Garb, his Retinue, or his high
Character; but a Great good Man is Loved, Adored, and Honored by all. Let me
have leave, without Offense, to show the difference in a single Instance or two.

What a vast difference is there in the Esteem and Honor Men have for those
Noblemen, at whose Gates Troops of the Poor and Needy are daily Relieved, from
what they have for those at whose Gates as great Crowds of poor Creditors are
daily waiting and crying? What Complaints and Curses are the one persued with,
while the others are followed with Blessings and Prayers?

The difference is as visible in all other particulars of Virtue and Vice, as
well as these. One dead Fly causes the Ointment to stink, (says King Solomon)
and we see it true. What a Stain does our known Vice bring upon their Names!
and what a Rebatement is it of their Glory! what a Lessening is it of Great
Men, what a Debasement of the Noble, to see them compassed about with the
Wickedness of their Heels, and Sullied with the Vices of Grooms and Porters!

We may conclude how it is at present while they live, by considering how it is
with those that are dead; how have the Great, the Valiant, the Virtuous and
brave Men Embalmed their Names, and with what Honor are they remembered in the
Records of Time! Their Monuments are beheld with Reverence, and passers by
Salute them, with a Peace be upon him, as the Jews did, and all Eastern Nations
do to this day, while the Name of the Wicked shall rot, (says the Wise King)
their Ermins are stained, and their Memories often detested, they fix a Blemish
even upon their Posterity; and if their Names be found Written in the Annals of
their Nation, there is almost always some Note of Infamy sticks upon them.

2. And yet there is a greater Interest that this Obligation results from, and
that is the Happiness or Misery of another World; for even those that are
called Gods must dye like Men, and Princes must fall as well as the People, and
then they must enter upon an everlasting State, and be happy and blessed, or
miserable and punished as truly as other Men.

Now the great God has assured us, that Religion only makes the distinction,
entitling Men to one, and securing from the other, and every Man finds
something in himself that attests to this Truth; the highest of Men feel
Presages and Boadings of this in their own Breasts, as sensibly as those below
them. Greatness is so far from securing Men from a Sense of Guilt, that it sets
it on more sharply; and even those are haunted with Fears of a future
Punishment, that are set above all Fear or Danger of any now.

And the Holy Scriptures represent this most fully, according to those
Jealousies or Hopes of Men's own Minds, assuring us that the Holy and Good, the
Charitable and Just shall see God, while the Wicked shall be turned into Hell
with all that forget God.

And it is worth observing, that it makes no difference, or shows any Respect
of Persons; it does not tell us that God has appointed different Terms of
Salvation, or made it possible for Great Men to be saved upon easier Conditions
than others; it seems rather to determine the Case the other way, and (as I
said before) to require more from them who have received more, rather than to
be content with less.

Now this surely is a Consideration of great Weight indeed, and that which
ought to have Effect accordingly, supposing their Case but equal with others;
for it will be a woeful thing, when those that have received their good things
in this Life, shall receive none but Evil in the next; and those that have been
Exalted almost above Men in the one, shall be depressed as low as Devils in the
other.

But if the Cases be really different, then it should strengthen the
Consideration, and make it more affecting, for then the greater Blessing and
Reward on one hand, or the greater Damnation and Punishment on the other, is to
be expected or feared.

For as it may reasonably be supposed, that the Religion and Virtue of Princes
and Great Men, that after all that has been said (it must be confessed) does
break through many Temptations, and some Difficulties, and Benefits so many
beside themselves, is more acceptable to God, and shall accordingly be rewarded
above that of others: So it may upon the same Reasons be concluded, that their
Irreligion and Profaness is more detested, and shall proportionably be more
severely Punished.

And then it will be a woeful Case indeed, when the good Things shall not only
be Converted into Evil, but even into worse, because they have been good; and
the Suffering and Damnation be intended and heightened hereafter, in proportion
to the Blessings that were enjoyed here; when those that were so much raised
above other Men in this World, shall be sunk as much below them in the next;
when the Poor and Mean, the Despised and Contemned shall enter into the Kingdom
of God, while the Noble and the Great shall not only be shut out, but cast into
eternal Horror and Darkness.

This is a Condition that it highly concerns all that can consider things to
beware of, and much more those who are so much Advantaged with Abilities and
Parts to consider, if the Mean and Grosser sort of Mankind, who are thought to
be but one Degree above Bruits, if the Poor and Needy that are broken with
Thoughts and Cares of providing Bread, if the Laborious and Bustling, who are
Condemned to perpetual Labor and Drudgery for a Subsistence: If any of these,
(I say) lived regardless of another World, and the Interests of it, the Wonder
were less.

But if those whose Minds are Refined and Polished both by Nature and Art, and
are under none of those pressing Necessities which hinder the Operations of the
Mind, should be as Regardless and Stupid as they: If they that have every thing
needful for the Conveniences and Comforts of this Life provided to their Hand,
so that they have nothing in comparison to take care of but that to come;
should yet live insensible of it, and so as to forfeit for ever the Happiness
thereof, it would be strange indeed, and such a Reflection upon their Reason
and Prudence, as we want a Name to set forth the Greatness of.

And (to conclude this sad Reflection) if the poor Prophet should miscarry in
his Search for a good Man among these, no Tears were sufficient to bewail the
Disappointment.

But I am resolved this Discourse shall not set in a Cloud, nor proceed to tell
any Stories of such a Disappointment. I hope better things of those that hear
me, and this solemn Religious Appearance Ministers to that Hope.

Those that show so much regard to Religion, as thus becomingly to attend these
solemn Services of it, I hope retain a suitable Respect to it in their Minds,
and are sensible how much it concerns them, to Govern their Lives in some
competent Degree by the Holy and Divine Measures of it.

Those that know the way of the Lord, I hope walk in it. And those that have
learned the Judgments of their God, I still hope will live according to them.
Which may the Grace of God ever incline, and enable them to do in this World,
and may the same Grace everlastingly reward them in that to come. Amen.

FINIS.

