A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE Honorable Col. Francis Collingwood,
And of his LADY: Who were both Interred in St. John's Church, in the Island of
Nevis in America, May the 29th and May the 31st, 1699.

By THO. HESKITH, A. M. And Chaplain to the said Colonel's Regiment.

Durum, sed laevius sit patientia,
Quicquid corrigere est nefas.
Hor. lib. 1. Ode 24. LONDON; Printed for Richard Wilkin, at the King's-Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of Col. Collingwood, and his LADY.

ISA. lvii. 1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to Heart; and
merciful men are taken away; none considering, that the righteous is taken away
from the Evil to come.
It Is probable, that the Prophet in his passionate but pious expression of
these Words, had a peculiar regard to the Babilonish Captivity, and to those
frightful Judgments, and Destructions, which were the Forerunners of it. For
these being general, the Good and Bad had one common fate; they were all
involved in the same Calamities, all harassed and oppressed by the same Enemy.
The Prophet was mightily concerned, to see the Good and Bad to be equal
Sufferers; to see those that were Worshipers, and Obeyers of the true God, to
be treated at the same rate with those that contemned his Person and dispis'd
his Laws. This at the first sight one might suppose would reflect upon the
Goodness and Wisdom of God's Providence; which in Justice one might think,
could not be guilty of such unequal Distributions. But if we look narrowly into
the end of things, we shall find that it was a wise contrivance of Providence,
who can never be surpised nor do a foolish thing. The Good indeed perished,
but it was only with respect to this World; they were taken away, but it was
from the Evil to come. The outward face of things was black and dismal, but the
end was Joy and Triumph: It was to bring them to a more steady and perfect
Happiness. The righteous perishes and no man lays it to heart; and merciful
men are taken away. The 70 translate it (...), and just men are taken away,
none considering that the just are taken from amongst the unjust. For thus I
find it rendered by the Septuagint, (...).

In speaking to these Words I will make this following Attempt.

First, I will endeavor briefly to rescue, from any Misinterpretation, the
sense and meaning of those Words, The righteous perishes.

Secandly, I will show you, that God does not always use the same method, in
taking away the Good and Virtuous; for sometimes he sweeps them away with the
common Herd, (i. e.) permits them to fall in the common Judgment; and sometimes
he singles them out (as it were) and brings them to their Graves in Peace.

And in the Third Place, I will go on to add some Reasons, why God is pleased
to take away good men from the evil to come.

Fourthly, and Lastly; I will consider the Character of that Honorable
Gentleman and his Lady, which are lately taken away; and conclude, with an
Application of the whole, to our present Circumstances.

First then; I will endeavor briefly to rescue, from any Misinterpretation,
the sense and meaning of these Words, The righteous perishes. Now, perish, in
a large Acceptance implies properly, Destruction, Ruin, and Death: and that
not only temporal, but eternal. In this Sense the Psalmist is to be understood,
when he says, The way of the ungodly shall perish; and again, in the 37th
Psalm, at the 20th ver. But the wicked shall perish, and the Enemies of the
Lord, they shall consume like Smoke, they shall consume away: i. e. they shall
be miserable in this, and in the other World. Again in a stricter Sense, the
Word perish is taken for temporal Judgments and Death. And in this Sense is
that threatening Expression of Joshua to be taken, in the 23d Chapter of his
Book, and at the 13th Verse, Know (says he) for a certainty, that the Lord
your God will no more drive out any of these Nations from before you; but they
shall be Snares and Traps unto you, and Scourges in your Sides, and Thorns in
your Eyes, until you perish from off this good Land which the Lord your God
has given you. And in this Sense David expressed himself when he said, I shall
perish one Day by the Hand of Saul: (i. e.) I have reason to believe, that one
time or other God will suffer that Man to take away my Life. Now, it is
impossible that that Phrase (The Righteous perishes) should be taken in that
large and high Sense. No this cannot be, because this would quite overthrow
Divine Revelation concerning a future Happiness; and all the precious Promises
(of Christ's gracious Gospel) made to Believers, concerning a glorious
Immortality. So that it will be much easier (for any considering man) to admit,
that the Heavens and Earth shall be dissolved, than to suppose that one Jot or
Title of the Divine Promises, should fall unaccomplish'd. The First, our
Savior has told us is possible; but it is purely impossible that the other
should ever be. Let not therefore profane Persons flatter themselves with such
unreasonable Thoughts, that the Righteous perish as well as they. Let not the
Wicked think, that when the Righteous die, that they perish either as they, or
as the Brutes do: for though the Wiseman intimates, that Men according to
outward appearance, in the time of Death, have no pre-eminence above that of a
Beast; that all go to one Place, and are reduced to the same common Dust: yet
the Consequences of their dying are vastly different. When Brutes die they go
to the Earth, and there is an end of their Existence and Being; of all their
Pleasure and of all Pain: but when good or bad Men die, their Souls survive the
Earthly Particles; they ascend to the higher Regions. For thus the Wiseman
makes the Distinction, The Spirit of a Man goes upward, and the Spirit of a
Beast to the Earth. But yet we must distinguish between the Souls of Good and
Bad Men; for though they both ascend, yet to different Places; the Souls of
Good Men to a Throne of Immortal Life and Glory; but the Souls of Wicked Men
ascend to Chains of everlasting Darkness; it is to the Prince of the Air, to
that wicked Power, which reigns in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience.
I must confess, it would be well with wicked Men, if when they die they might
be like the Beasts that perish; i. e. have no after-Sence, or Suffering. But
alas! they live that they may die for ever; and they die eternally, because
they live.

But then Secondly, I must show you, That God does not always use the same
method in taking away the Good and Virtuous; for sometimes he sweeps them away
with the common Herd; i. e. he permits them to fall by common Judgments: and at
another time he singles them out (as it were) and brings them to their Graves
in Peace. Amongst the many inexplicable Mysteries of Providence, this is not
the least; That God oftentimes makes use of diverse methods, in order to
translate good and pious men to another State. Sometimes Providence commissions
a Destroying Angel to draw his Sword, and to make whole Kingdoms desolate: Thus
the Angel of the Lord, in one Night, slew of the Assyrians, a hundred forescore
and five thousand. And it is not to be doubted, but that in such a vast. Number
there were a great many moral good men; who, though they never had the
advantages of Divine Revelation, yet they wisely managed their Lives, according
to those natural Principles writ upon their Minds. And thus God was pleased to
suffer a great many of his faithful Servants, to fall by the cruel and the
bloody Sword of the insulting Babylonians. And thus it happened in that last
and great Destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus the Son of Vespasian; when all
were met together, to worship before, and to sacrifice to the Lord their God;
Commissioned Death made no distinction betwixt the clean and the unclean,
between him that served God, and him that served him not: all sunk in the
common Calamity. And thus we find God has dealt with Mankind in these latter
Ages; in the burning of Cities, and in the plundering of Countries, in all
those Ruins made by Inundations and Earthquakes, there has been no distinction
made between good and bad: for we find that they have been all equal Sufferers.
And indeed to speak reasonably it cannot be expected otherwise, without a
Miracle. For when Judgments are universal (without a distinguishing Providence)
all must partake of the same Fate. The Righteous and the Wicked they are all
mixed, whether it be in City, Town or Country. And therefore, if the
Neighborhood suffer, some good Man or other must have a share in it. The
mixture of the good and bad in this Life is excellently represented by that
Parable of the Wheat and Tares. Where ever there is one, there'll be the other;
for there is no seperating these two. Now, the Wheat and Tares signifying unto
us good and evil Men, and this World, the spacious Field wherein they are both
sown: we can never suppose any part of this Field to be destroyed, but we must
conclude that some part of the Wheat must sink in the common Fate. Thus we find
in that Parable, that when the Servants of the Household asked their Master, if
they should go and gather up the Tares? that he answered Nay; and he gave them
this Reason, least that whilst they gathered the one, they should destroy the
other. And therefore his Opinion was, that they should grow both together until
the time of Harvest; and when that came, he would order each to be gathered to
their proper place, the Wheat to his Garner, and the Tares to be burnt with
Fire.

But then again, sometimes we find Providence picking out the good from amongst
the bad, with a mighty caution, and surprising Silence; taking them away as it
were by stealth, and undiscernably; until there is not One left that does good,
not One. This I must confess looks Judgment-like, as if God had a Controversy
with that place and people; resolving to destroy them. Thus we find that God
brought Abijah, the Son of Jeroboam, to the Grave in Peace; because in him
only, of that Family, there was found some good thing toward the Lord: And
therefore, upon that Score, God could not destroy that Race, until he had
removed the pious Youth. And this was the case of that godly Prince King
Josiah; God was resolved to take him away from that evil which he had
threatened, and denounced against the Kingdom of Judah; that he might neither be
a Partaker, nor an Eyewitness of their Ruin. I will gather thee unto thy
Fathers, and unto the Grave in Peace, and thine Eyes shall not see the Evil
which I will bring upon this Place. So that God seldom or never takes good and
pious Men out of any Place, or Country, but when he resolves to destroy and
ruin the same: And surely, were but this great Truth seriously considered, it
would make this infidel and unbelieving Generation look about Them; it would
engage them to set a greater value upon Piety and Religion; and to receive and
caress the Ministers of Christ's Gospel, with a greater warmth and zeal than
they have done. But I am afraid I must say of thee, O Nevis! as our Savior in
tears said to Jerusalem. O thou that ston'st the Prophets, and those that are
sent unto thee! How often would I have gathered thee, under my Protection and
Government but thou would not! for Thou do not believe, and consequently
wilt not practice, those things which belong to thy Peace.

But then Thirdly, I shall go on to give some Reasons why God is pleased very
often, to remove good and virtuous Men out of this Life, that they may neither
see, nor partake of the approaching Evil.

And First then, It Is very reasonable to suppose that God sometimes takes away
the Good from the Evil to come, lest they should be destroyed by those
Judgments which He Is resolved to discharge upon the Wicked. This Truth is very
evident from that Parable of the Tares: for the Master of the Household was well
satisfied that it was an impossible Attempt to root out the one, without
prejudicing the other: Good and Bad Men being so mixed together in this World,
joined so near in their Habitations, in their Lands and Interests, in their
Relations and other mutual Dependencies: It Is impossible without the expense of
a Miracle, for God to save the one, whilst he destroys the other. But we find
that this is God's usual method, never to make use of Miracles for the
accomplishment of his purpose, whilst ordinary means will serve the turn. God
can easily execute his Wrath upon the Wicked, to their utter Destruction,
without any detriment to the Good and Pious, by removing them out of the way by
Death or otherwise. Thus God saved Noah and his Family, from perishing by
Water, when he resolved to destroy the whole Race of Mankind. And thus God was
pleased to remove Lot to little Zoar, that he might the more effectually
destroy Sodom. Not that we ought to suppose that God's sparing the Righteous,
and punishing the Wicked in this Life, are all, and the only proper Rewards
and Punishments of Virtue and Vice: No, but God is willing to preserve the good
from perishing with the bad; left Piety should be disregarded, or lest the
Wicked should triumph and say, Surely, there is no Reward for the Righteous.

But then Secondly, Another Reason why God takes away the good from the Evil to
come, is, lest that by the power of Example, and the growing Wickedness of the
place they live in, they should be tempted to desert Religion, and a godly
Life. The best of Men and Women here, are but imperfectly Holy: As the Apostle
says, We know and see but in part: And therefore, if we keep not a strong
guard upon all our Passions; if we pray not daily for the assistance of Divine
Grace, and for the conduct of God's Holy Spirit, it is a thousand to one but we
fall from our Integrity and Virtue: For a little Leaven, (our Savior tells us)
leavens the whole Lump. And that Saying of St. Paul is an experimental Truth,
That evil Communications corrupts good Manners. Vice and Irreligion are of an
infectious nature, and they will as certainly destroy the Life of Godliness, as
the Plague will destroy the Body. For without that Sovereign Antidote of
assisting and confirming Grace, 'twill be impossible to keep any considerable
Fellowship with the Sons of Wickedness, and at the same time not to be infected
by them. Let good Men use the greatest Cautions in this Case imaginable; let
them set the strongest Guards; let them put on the whole Armor of God; and
when they have done all they can, they will find it no small difficulty to keep
themselves unspotted from the World: i. e. from the evil Communications and
Corruptions of it. The best Men in the World, if they converse much in it, will
receive a Tincture from it. Thus we find that the Holy Patriarch, Viceroy of
Egypt, by conversing with that Court, had learned to swear by the Life of
Pharaoh. The power of Example's strong, especially when it is backed with
Earthly Grandeur, and Secular Interest: when those that fit at the Helm of
Government, love vicious and irregular Lives, their very Example is a
authentic Copy for the rest to write by. So that for this end, and for several
other Considerations tending to this purpose, God is pleased oftentimes to
remove pious Men out of this World, lest their Innocence should be sullied, and
their Virtue debauched by the wicked Practices of the Ungodly.

But it is high time that I should enter upon the last thing proposed; which is
to consider the Character of that Honorable Gentleman and his Lady, which are
lately taken away from us: and to conclude the Discourse with an Application of
the whole to our present Circumstances.

And to speak without Flattery, I do not know but that God has taken away a
great part of this Family, that their Eyes might not behold the Evil which he is
resolved to bring upon this Place: This I must confess is a weighty Saying; but
I wish that there were not so many Reasons as there are, to engage us to the
belief of it. Let us not flatter our selves; For that Government, or Body
Politic, whose Head and Members are unsound and sickly, must needs be near its
Grave, its Ruin and Destruction. Iniquity will certainly be the Ruin of any
People, if the Mercies of God, and a serious Repentance prevent it not.

But that I may do all possible Justice to the Memory of this deceased Hero;
it is needful that we consider him in all his Qualities. First, As he descended
from the Loins of an Honorable Family; a Family as ancient as most in the
North of England. But that which makes it the more illustrious, is, That it
has not wanted for some Ages, such Men as have been serviceable to the Crown
and Government of England. And I think I may say, that among all the Braves
that have sprung from that Family, this Hero, of whom I have the sad occasion
to discourse at this time, is none of the Least; especially if we consider him
under that Notion of a Soldier, or of an Officer. So soon as he left the
Schools, which was in his earlier Years, his Genius rather prompting him to
follow Mars than Minerva; the Camp rather than the College. He was sent with
very powerful Recommendations into the Army; where he had not been long until
he was Commissioned to have a pair of Colors: in which Post he behaved himself
with all that Affability and Sweetness of Temper, that his Society and
Conversation was courted by All; as if he had been the very Darling and Delight
of Mankind. And as he grew in Years, so his Conversation became the more
winning and obliging. And in every Step of Honor the King was pleased to
advance him to, he behaved himself in all respects as a brave and prudent
Officer. And which is very remarkable, the Advancement of his Honor never
altered the Sweetness of his Temper; he retained the same Modesty, the same
Humility, and Evenness of Mind, when he arrived to that Honorable Post in
which he died, as he did whilst he was in an inferior Capacity. What the Maiden
Queen made use of for her Motto might very properly be applied to our Hero,
Semper idem. No State or Condition of Fortune, whether prosperous or adverse,
could change or alter the Disposition of his Soul. He kept the same evenness of
Mind, and firmness of Temper, amidst the Rocks and Shelves, as he did when his
Sails were filled with a prosperous Gale. His Soul was too great to be sunk by
Adversity, too firm and steady to be turned away by the swelling Tides of
Prosperity. But I must not only consider him as a Civil or Moral, but as a
Military Person, as a man of bravery and honor: and to make good this part of
his Character, I shall only instance in two Particulars; (not but that upon
every occasion when he was called to it, he gave signal Proofs of his Conduct
and Courage.) And these two shall be in that of Landen and Namure; two great
and illustrious Instances indeed; both of them I am sure beyond the reach of
Malice; and probably the latter beyond that of Imitation. As for that of
Landen, notwithstanding the great Inequality and Number of his Enemies, he
bravely charged in the face of them, and as bravely maintained his Ground;
until at length being overpowered by their Numbers, he was forced to retreat,
in order to save the remains of a shattered Regiment: But as for the Latter,
when he was ordered to attack one of the Glacy's of the Town of Namure; With
what cheerful Countenance did he receive the Command? With what a pleasant Air
did he head that brave Body? And with what an unconcerned bravery did he march
through a field of Blood and Wounds? How lightly did he esteem the hazard, and
boldly despise all these Engines of Death that were planted against him for his
ruin? Nay, With what a fearless Presence of mind, did he endeavor to make good
his Post, when fifty fell at his right hand, and fifty at his left? The
Greatest Monarch in the World, I mean his Royal Master, beheld the Action with
these two contrary Passions of Delight and Fear: with Delight to behold the
unparalled bravery of such an Attempt; of Fear, lest he should be deprived of
so great an Officer. The truth of it is, the glory of that Day and Action, is
so much his own, as neither Time nor Envy shall be able to obliterate the Fame
thereof. The Maes and Sambre shall sooner leave their Channels, and the Sun and
Moon cease to be, than the glory of that Day due to him be obscured and
forgotten.

But before I dismiss this Head, I must consider him as a Christian; and though
some foolish men may think, that Religion is not consistent with, at least not
necessary to, a military Employment: and consequently, that men of that
Profession are not concerned about such matters. Yet in a late Discourse, I
have endeavored to prove the contrary, by showing that there have been, and
are such things called pious Soldiers; and detected the Vanity of that
Objection, that Religion debauches and effeminates the minds of Mankind. But
this Man of Honor, of whom we are now speaking, had contrary Sentiments, and
quite of another Opinion: he knew his Employment and Religion to be very
consistent; and for that end he endeavored to make it as much his business, as
the great and necessary Avocations of his Employment would permit. We cannot
reasonably expect, that those men who are placed in high and difficult
Employments, that they should be so warmly zealous, and so perfectly religious,
as those who are cloistered up, and sequestered from the World for that end
and purpose. But this I Will venture to say of this disceas'd Worthy: That
whereas, some Men's Religion consists in mean Appearance; that He was more
sincerely religious, than what he appeared to be. I am sure he was master of
two of the greatest Christian Virtues in the Gospel; (i. e.) Mercifulness and
Charity. How ready was he to pardon the Offense of an Enemy? And to treat those
generously, that had done him ill Offices: as he never raised an ill report of
his Neighbor, so neither did he entertain the malicious Whispers of those that
did: he was always ready to compose Differences, and to heal every Breach that
was made between Friends or Enemies. Whatever Failings therefore he might be
guilty of, (for the best have their Spots) I do not question but these two
Graces have atton'd for all; have over-ballanc'd the whole Account. I am sure
our Savior in that Discourse upon the Mount has told us, That the Merciful
shall obtain Mercy: And St. Peter speaking by the Spirit of God, tells us, That
Charity shall cover a Multitude of Sins. To be short, he was a tender Husband,
and an indulgent Father, a true Friend, and a generous Enemy: And indeed upon
this Score, our Loss is very great. The King has lost a brave, and experienced
Captain, a Good and Loyal Subject, the Regiment a kind and easy Commander, the
Neighborhood a just and humble Man, and the whole Land a Gentleman of the
sweetest Temper, and most desirable Conversation in the World.

But I must hasten to the Memorial of his Lady: and I shall be very brief in
what I say.

And first then, She was sprung from Pious and Religious Parents, who had made
it their business to instruct Her early in the ways of Virtue. I may say of
her, what St. Paul said of Timothy, That from a Child she had known the Holy
Scriptures: and as She grew in Years, She advanced in Understanding, until She
had arrived to such a Perfection in the Knowledge of Divine Mysteries, that few
(I think of her Sex) in the Kingdom of England, were better able to maintain
the Principles of the Protestant Religion than she was: but this was but the
least Part; for she only learned to practice; only read the Scriptures, that
she might be the better able, not only to understand, but to do her Duty: for
she knew very well, that the end of all Knowledge was Practice, and that
without this, all the rest was but Shadow and Appearance. I know indeed she had
many Enemies, and that of all Ranks and Qualities: But this is no wonder, if we
consider the Reasons why: she was a Woman of Retirement, of Religion and
Virtue; a Lover of God, of his Church, of his Ministers and Holy Offices. And
these you all know are hated by the World, are abhorred, ridiculed, and
undervalu'd. And therefore, when ever she met with those Despisers, and
Contemners of Religion, she always took up the Gauntlet in the defense of
Christ and his Gospel. She was not ashamed to own him before the greatest
Quality, nor afraid to reprove those Sons of Darkness, when occasion served. So
that I may say of her, what St. Paul said of himself in the like Case, That
many became her Enemies, because she told them the Truth. Week Eyes are
willing to behold the Sun, but when they cannot, they curse it is splendor; and
thus it is with wicked Men; they always malign and speak evil of that Virtue,
which they neither desire, nor are able to imitate. In one word, if we consider
Her in all respects, as a Wife, as a Mother, as a Friend, as a Neighbor, and
as a Christian. I think I may (without Vanity) make use of Solomon's Words:
Many Women have done virtuously, but thou excells them all. Therefore let us
give her of the Fruit of her Hands, and let her own Works praise her in the
Gates.

I shall now only beg leave to reflect upon what has been spoken; and so
conclude. Is it so then, that God usually removes the Good and Pious out of
this Life, that they may not behold those Judgments and Miseries that He Is
resolved to bring upon the Place where they lived? Let us then be concerned for
the loss of those that are good; and let us beg heartily of God, that he may
continue such amongst us: and for that end let us look upon all the Despisers
of Religion and Godliness, as Enemies to the Public Good; and as those that
seek the ruin of the Place they live in; and let us give all possible
Protection and Encouragement to Virtue and Religion, to the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, and to the Ministers of it. Let us not be like the foolish Gadarens,
that preferred their Swine before Jesus Christ, nor like the Young man in the
Gospel, who preferred his Temporal Possessions to Eternal Life: for let us
assure our selves, that whoever he be that denies Christ before Men, that
Christ will deny that Man in the Presence of God, and of his Holy Angels.

But then again, Religion and Piety are the Palladiums, the very Bull-work and
Safety of any Nation, Place or People. It was upon Jacob's Account that God
blessed Laban; and wicked Ahab, for the sake of Obadiah. There Is a wonderful kind
of Power that attends Godliness; such holy Violence, as even binds the hands of
Omnipotency. Thus Jacob wrestl'd and prevailed with God; and the Angels that
were sent to destroy Sodom, they could not do it, until holy Lot was entered
little Zoar. Every godly Man is a Moses, he stands in the Breach, and by his
Prayers prevails with God to divert his Judgments. In a word, pious and good
Men, they are the very Chariots and Horsemen of Israel: And in what place
soever they are, God commands a Blessing: Let us not therefore be of the Number
of those Fools, who say in their Heart there is no God; neither let us walk in
the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor sit in the Seat of the Scornful; but let us
meditate on Gods Law, and conform our Lives and Practices to the Rules of the
Gospel; so that when ever it shall please God to call us out of this mortal
State, we may all of us in some measure, have reason to say with St. Paul, The
time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my
Course, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day;
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the Only Wise God, be Honor
and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen. FINIS.

