Chaplyn Major.
Jovis XXXImo. die Janarii 1677. Annoque Carol. Secundi Angliae, etc. XXXmos.
This Court does desire Mr. Hesketh to Print his Sermon, preached yesterday at
the Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable Lord Mayor AND ALDERMEN OF THE
CITY of LONDON AT Guild Hall Chapel, ON JANUARY 30th 1677/8;

By Henry Hesketh Rector of Charlewood in Surrey.

LONDON Printed for Will. Leach, at the Crown in Cornhill, near the Royal
Exchange. 1678.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Epis. Land. a Sacris Dom.
Feb. 2. 1677.
2 SAMUEL 1.17, 18. And David lamented with this lamentation oover Saul, and over
Jonathan his son.

Also he bad them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow: behold, it is
written in the book of Jasher.


AMong all Nations in the World, that have been blessed with any sober sense of
things; we shall find this ever to have been a fixed and constant Custom, to
signalize times of extraordinary Occurrences with some special Marks and
Characters, which might commend them to more than common observation, judgeing
it very becoming and proper, that such Times should not pass only in the comnon
crowd, but that as the Accidents of them were extraregular, so men's
entertainments thereof should be according.

And on the other hand, Seasons of great sufferings, and signal disasters, have
been spent in, and afterward remembered by deep and afflictive resentments; and
these men have called Fasts, and marked them in their Calendars for Times of
public Mourning.

This is a Custom, which as it may serve to many excellent ends of Prudence,
and advance many great Purposes of public Good; so it seems to carry a good
tincture of Religion upon it, and to derive a sufficient warranty from it.

For since it ought to be the care, as well as it is much the duty of all good
men, that have a due veneration of God, and any becoming sense of a Divine
Providence superintending the World, and all the affairs of men in it, to
permit the passages of no day to pass unobserved, it will much more become
matter of their care, not to suffer extraordinary and signal Disposes of
Providence to do so: Especially since God intends all these things as Lessons
and Instructions to the World, to awaken men to due thoughts of Himself, and
more concerning regards to their own Duty.

It is therefore laid down in holy Scripture as a sure character of an evil
man, to be regardless and unobservant of Gods common judgments, but it is a
rank sign of Irreligion, and next to an Atheistical contempt of God, not to be
deeply affected, when his hand is lifted up in greater chastisements, and not
to entertain a very humble sense of his severer Inflictions.

It is the just Honor of this day, that its Institution is founded upon all
these great Reasons of Prudence and Religion, and warranted by Precedents among
all sober Nations of Prudence, to impress (by the observation of it) upon men
the deeper sense of the sad accidents thereof, and of Religion, in entertaining
such great afflictions with those humiliations and tears, which both they, and
the sins of this Nation, that occasioned them, do most justly call for. -- And
it will be no prejudice nor disparagement to it, to observe, that it stands
warranted by precedent, and may plead its vindication from the suitable
practice of the best and wisest, and most religious persons in all Ages of the
World, and particularly of one no less eminent for all these, then David, the
Prophet as well as King, who upon the sad news of the tragical death of Saul,
effected by the Arms of the Philistines, upon those unhappy plains of Gilboa,
lamented over him, with this lamentation following, Also he bad them teach the
children of Judah the use of the bow: behold it is written in the book of
Jasher.

In which words I take notice of these three principal Observables.

1. David's instituting a Form of Lamentation for the death of Saul, King of
Israel. And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul, and over Jonathan
his son.

2. His enjoining the people to be taught to join with him in it. Also he bad
them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow.

3. His recording of it for the Notice and Imitation of successive Generations.
Behold it is written in the book of Jasher.

Of all which three observables (I shall beg patience) while I speak something.

1. In their more independent and absolute sense, or at least only as they
relate to their own matter, and are a History to us of what is past and gone.

2. In their relative sense, and as they have an aspect upon us, and the
business of this day; in which sense we may call this, the Application of the
matter of them to our selves.

First, I begin with them in the first sense, and therein with

1. The first observable in them, David Instituting a Form of Lamentation for
the death of Saul. And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul, and over
Jonathan his son.

In speaking to which I do not desire to be interrupted with the clamorous
objection of this age, against all public Forms in any thing relative to
Divine Service.

It is very well, and a happy thing, that the great starters of the dispute
have sufficiently confuted their own Maxims: and the imposing a public
Directory, will make ridiculous all general Arguments against Liturgy.

It is sufficient; that the Institution of this stands warranted by, and may
claim a right in all those great Reasons for a standing Liturgy, which yet do,
and I am confident will stand unassoil'd, to the great dissolution. And if
there be any man that thinks otherwise, he has now a fair opportunity to
signalize himself, and gain the reputation of a daring Goliath, by challenging
all the Armies of Israel: and I little doubt, but he shall meet with the fate
of his great Denominator, and I am the more confirmed herein, because here is a
David that stands ready to take up the Gantlet.

And it may not perhaps be impertinent or unpleasant to observe, that, as if
there were some secret Magic or Charm in the name of David, all that relates
to him has never been controverted; and of all the parts in the Liturgy, the
Psalms, the Metrical composures of David (which are so great a part of it) have
least of all been disputed, and I cannot guess at a reason of this, unless it
be that their pretenses to the Spirit, would hence have received their own
confutation; and all men see it was not the Spirit of God that acted them; for
there is no doubt but that can indite Meter, as well as harangues in Prose, but
their fears of this, would never permit them yet to put it unto trial.

But I pass all this, and proceed to consider this (...) in the consideration
of which we shall meet with a complication of Reasons, every one of which might
justly occasion a lamentation.

1. For first to dye, to leave these splendid habitations for a cold grave, to
leave dear friends to converse with putrefaction and rottenness, to have these
beautiful Piles tumbled into confusion and dust, to have our vast Possessions
and Manors shrunk up into a few feet of Earth, a pitchy Sheet, and a strait
Coffin, are to most men living sad stories, and the thoughts of them rarely
entertained without sighs and a tear. Mourning is therefore one attendant
always upon Funerals: Amongst the Jews there was always a set of common
Mourners, that their mourning might be more solemn, and their lamentations more
affective, and I find it threatened as a judgment to Jehojakim, that he should
have an inglorious and contemptible Burial, and should have none to make formal
lamentation for him, Jer. 22.18.

And whoever consults the Genius of the Christian Religion, will find its
compassions are as great, its affections as quick, and its sense as tender, as
before; and all it designs in this case is not to dam up the Fountain, but take
care that it flow only in due measures; not that we sorrow not at all, but that
we sorrow in due proportions, according to the measures of faith, and with the
abatements and intermixtures of Christian hope, for that I take to be the
meaning of that limitation in the Apostolical Canon, That ye sorrow not as the
Gentiles, which have no hope, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.

But this is but a small matter, and the least of these considerations; for if
death be just matter of Lamentation, certainly the death of a King is much more
so, when the Tall Cedars bow, and the strong Oaks crack, and are made to stoop
low, and compelled to lie prostrate upon the breast of their common Mother,
then as the storm is more strong so it is more awakening, and summons the most
serious regards and most real resentments.

And so it is also in this matter, for when death knocks but at the common
door, the Mourners strike but the common key; but when it rifles Palaces, and
enters into the Chambers of Kings, and those that are gods die like men, and
fall equal Trophies to this rude Conqueror, and are dragged after the wheels of
his triumphing Chariot, there you shall see always the Scene is dressed with
all the solemnities of the deepest sorrow, the crowd of Mourners is great, and
the Herald's skill is needful to marshal the troops, and to preserve order in
the great confusion.

And this wants not good appearances of reason, to plead its justification, for
as the wise Jews accounted David worth ten thousand of them, and his life of
more value than the lives of thrice so many thousand of common persons. So
indeed have all wise and civilized Nations accounted after the same rate, and
as they have solemnized the Natalitia of their Kings with all expressions of
public joy, so they have observed the days of their death with as great
demonstrations of Mourning, when David in solemn manner lamented the death of
Abner, he gave a sufficient reason he thought for it, in saying, Know ye not
that there is a Prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel; and certainly
if the fall of a Prince, much more the fall of a King also will warrant
mourning, and if David might justly lament the death of Abner, he might more
justly do so upon the death of Saul.

But this also is much short of what yet remains unconsidered; for if the death
of Kings be just matter of sorrow, then the more untimely and violent, and
preternatural the death is, the more afflictedly ought it still to be resented.

When the Taper dies regularly, having consumed all its oil, and exhausted all
its store of moisture, it expires quietly, and no man is much concerned at it,
but when it meets with an interruption by the rude caresses of an impetuous
blast, then its snuff grows offensive, and all men take notice of it, and are
concerned at the disaster.

And so it is with Kings in this case, when they come into their Sepulchers as
shocks of corn fully ripened and in their season, as Eliphaz elegantly, Job
5.26. when they die the common death of all men, and go down to the grave in a
good old age, having honorably passed all the stages and periods of humane
life, there we pay them commonly but a common tribute, and drop a tear upon
their Hearse, and bewail them upon the stock of common frailty, and our grief
that they are gone receives a just abatement from the remembrance that God
spared them to us so long; but when these fall like untimely fruit shaken by an
unseasonable violent unkind wind; there the channels are full, the streams run
high, the Accents are deep, the Minstrels strike the dolefullest note, and (as
it is said of David here) men commonly ever exceed in their expressions of
grief, for so when good Josiah fell by the Arms of the Assyrians at the River
Euphrates, the people lamented the sad Accident at Megiddo, with a sorrow that
for the greatness of it became proverbial.

And yet the greatest of these considerations is behind; for if all these
things happen without any fault or concurrence of ours, then our sorrow even
from thence receives a great extenuation, but if we have any ways been
contributive to the mischief, or been negligent, and failing to do our utmost
toward preventing of it, then indeed our sorrow is much more just, yea it is
necessary.

I put these two together in one period and consideration you see; and truly I
do not know well how to part, or distinguish betwixt them, for though it be
certain that there is a difference betwixt them absolutely considered, and he
that actually embrues his hands in blood, is more guilty than he that passed
by, and did not endeavor to rescue, though even he be greatly guilty also. --
Yet in this case I am now upon, there is little or no difference at all, for
Subjects are as equally obliged to assist their Kings in all straits and
dangers, as not to resist, or rise up against them to bring them into the same,
and their failure in the first is as criminal as doing the second, and only
differs from it, as the cause from the effect, for therefore some men are
encouraged to attempt the latter, because others are negligent and failing in
the former, upon which reason it is certain if either exceed in guilt, it is
the former.

I take this occasion to discourse a little this matter, because of a great and
a most dangerous mistake that I observe to be Epidemical and common about it.
-- For as some men boast they obey the Law, if they quietly submit to the
penalty and pay the forfeiture, as well as he that performs the positive duty,
for the neglect of which the former penalty is threatened. -- So other men are
apt to commend their Loyalty as much for not resisting, as others do theirs,
for protecting their King.

But as the former of these is an Error, than which few are more dangerous as
to the honor and power of Laws, or more wholly defeating of the great end of
them, which is that their sanctions may be obeyed, and the things done that
they enjoin, for which cause it is that penalties are annexed, not as ends of
the Law, but as motives to engage to compliance therewith. -- From whence we
may take just occasion to detect the sophistry and vanity of that common
distinction of obedience into active and passive, upon the strength of which
many men hope to clear themselves from rebellion and disobedience. -- I have
many times wondered at learned men's accepting this distinction, but not at all
at their pains to solve these men's pretenses for themselves, when they have
admitted it; and therefore I think it needful first to detect the fallacy of
it, and then all the arguments from it, are their own confutations, and I
cannot but think a small matter may suffice to do it: for I do not know how
ever to trust my own faculties in judging of any one thing in the world, if
passive obedience be not a contradiction in the adjunct. -- And that both as to
the words themselves, about which plain evidence supersedes all dispute, and as
to the subrstate matter, or thing signified by them; for I would gladly be
told, whether any man suffer for obeying the Law, or violating it? No man can
pretend he does it for the first; and to confess the latter, and yet pretend
obedience, is to pretend that he obeys the Law, when he confesses he violates
i^; and I think a contradiction cannot be plainer in any instance.

This I take to be certain, the end of the Law is obedience, and the annexing
penalties, is but an Art to engage to it, and the suffering it consequential
only upon transgression; and for men to pretend that the Law is equally
fulfilled when the forfeiture is paid, as when the condition is performed, is
the same thing as to say, that he that is broken upon the wheel for Murder or
Parricide, obeys the fifth and sixth Commandments, as well as he that honors
his Father, and never did any kind of violence to his Neighbor.

Besides it will fix the most reproachful character upon all Legislators
whatsoever, and make them little better than so many Tyrants or Devils, in
making Laws which if those under them obey, they are pleased, but if they
transgress and suffer, they are still as well pleased. It was the just reproach
of Draco's Laws, that they were writ in blood, but this is greater to all Laws,
for it makes them to design blood. I confess it is necessary to vindicate the
honor of Laws, to inflict penalties for the breach of them; but I take it,
this is not at all the end of them. I have much more to say to this subject,
but that the digression would be too unbecoming.

Now the truth is, just such a mistake as this is about Subjection to Laws,
there is also about Loyalty and Subjection to Kings, and it is every jot as
pernicious to the safety of Kings, as the other is to the honor of Laws; for
some men are as apt to claim the honor of Loyalty, if they do not actually
resist their King, as others are that venture their lives and fortunes to
assist and vindicate them against those that do resist them -- But how
pernicious this is to the safety of Kings, and how contrary to the true notion
of Loyalty, will soon be made appear.

For if Subjects be only obliged to the first, and discharge their duty in it,
I would fain know how the safety of Kings shall be assured, and who shall be
obliged to assert them against violence and Treason? All Nations have ever held
the Persons of Kings to be sacred, and accounted it their duty to protect them
from all dangers, and therefore have judged it needful to have Septs and Guards
still about them. -- But according to this doctrine all this is needless; but
the Apologue tells us, who they were that would persuade the Sheep to discard
their Guard. And it is easy to see into the designs of all such persuasions.

Besides Loyalty sure is a nobler thing, and in what breast soever it breaths,
will put a man upon endeavoring when need is, to defend his King, as well as
forbearing to do him violence; and ^e that considers those Oaths that Subjects
bind themselves in to Princes, will clearly see that thereby they are obliged
not only not to do violence to them themselves, but to do all that in them
lies, that others also may not do it, and it is treason when the King sets up
his Standard for his defense, not to repair unto it. And where duty is tied on
men by Oaths, there to fail in it, is not only common guilt, but died with
perjury.

And if it were otherwise, we should make Loyalty a pitiful poor sneaking
thing, and give Kings infinitely less power over their Subjects, than every
petty Master has over his Servants; for thus much every such person expects
from him that serves him, that he should not only not do him wrong himself, but
to his power endeavor that none else may; and every man will condemn him for a
wicked servant, that fails to do thus: and why a Subject in the like case is
not equally criminal, will be hard to show.

Those famous Stories in the Annals of all Ages, of Subjects that have
interposed their own bodies, betwixt danger and their Kings, and received
wounds themselves, that were lighting upon them, and thereby purchased to
themselees a little kind of eternity, while the Records of time last, are clear
Evidences of thus much, that in all those Ages this has been counted the Duty
of Subjects, and those have been signalized for happy, that have had
opportunity of doing it.

Thus Abishai's succoring David against the intents of Ishbi-Benob the Giant,
is recorded in holy Scripture, and all the people congratulate the fact, and
vow never to permit their King to come again into the like danger, and will
rather fight his Battles without his Conduct, than expose him to any hazard at
all, and you shall scarcely meet with any considerable History, wherein there
are not many parallel instances recorded.

And whoever shall please to read the story of Antius Restio his Servant, when
his Master was proscribed by the Roman Triumvicate, as it is recorded by that
excellent Patrician Valerius Maximus, will be able to make this Observation,
that great harshness, and unkindness in a Master, do not discharge the Servant
from this Duty, for that Servant had received some extraordinary marks of an
undeserved displeasure; and yet for all that, thought it his Duty, when other
Servants were contriving for themselves, to contrive what he could for the
safety of his Master, which he happily effected by a very prudent stratagem.

And therefore it was a pitiful excuse, that a Gentleman made for his
disloyalty to the late King, by seeking to justify his treason, because his
Majesty once in haste switched him, for crossing his way, as he was riding hard
at Hunting. And yet his greatest Enemies could never pretend any such show of
unkindness; and I am confident in believing, he never did any man more harm.

But now according to the Doctrine I am opposing, all these stories should be
cancelled, and expunged out of History, the Honor of Triumph should be denied
to those Worthies, and their Merits equalled to theirs, who could unconcernedly
behold the danger of their Kings, and stand quietly by, with their Arms folded
up, and their Hands in their Bosom.

But it is too great an honor to so dull a Doctrine, to stay so long in its
confutation, any degree of Honor will detest and abhor it. And as the Loyalty
of those Persons, who were so happily instrumental in that Miracle of our
present King's strange preservation, will be remembered with Eulogies, and
Blessing, and Honor, as long as Loyalty rests in the Bosom of this Nation: So
it will be an evidence to the World, that all true Englishmen abhor such a thin
and base loyalty, as shall think it enough to abstain only from offending, but
not to interpose at all in defending their King.

But I return to the matter before us in the Text, and from what has been
said, we may safely infer, that if it were thus, David might well lament Saul's
death; that is, if he had either been contributive directly to it, or failing
in his endeavors to prevent it.

For all the former considerations made this matter but an infelicity; but this
renders it a great guilt, and therefore justly to be sorrowed for, we may
justly sorrow for our miseries: but when we pull down these upon us by our own
sins, we may much more do so; we lawfully may lament our infelicities, but we
needs must lament our sins.

Now thus (it is too evident) it was with David in this case, for first he had
been actually in arms against Saul, and though much may be said for it,
considering some circumstances, yet considering the whole matter, we may safely
pronounce of it, that it was certainly unjustifiable, for there were more safer
ways of avoiding the displeasure and anger of Saul, than by raising an Army of
outlaws and vicious persons, and appearing in actual rebellion against him.

Especially also if he used those arms directly against Saul, and that he
either did, or at least offered to do, we are assured from the proffer and
boast he made to Achish thereof, 1 Samuel 28.2. and it will fix a deep guilt on
the fact, whatever the intention was; for if he promised this, and intended not
to perform it, he was an hypocrite, and if he did, he was a Traitor and a Rebel.

But if none of this were true, yet the least evil that can be said, is, that
he yielded not that assistance unto Saul which he might have done, and by which
possibly he might have averted this sad fate; for who knows how far the arms of
David (in this juncture) might have contributed to the overthrow of the
Philistines? and who knows not but that this might have been a happy means of a
firm reconciliation betwixt him and Saul, and an occasion of more endearing
himself to all the people, and occasioning the Daughters of Israel once more to
sing his (...).

And there is little reason to doubt, but these considerations stuck close to
him, and gave a deep accent to every period, in his (...) for he whose
conscience was so justly tender, as to be touched with a sense of guilt when he
had but offered violence to the utmost Garment of Saul, may well be supposed to
be burdened now with that sense, when he could not but know, that he had
either been actually contributive to his fall, or at least had suspended that
assistance, which probably might have preserved him from it.

From all which Considerations it will appear too clearly, what great cause
David had to mourn on this sad occasion, and to lament with this lamentation
over Saul, and over Jonathan his son.

But it seems he thought not himself alone concerned in this matter, but judged
others also had cause to join in this Lamentation with him, and therefore
accordingly he takes care and gives order that they should. -- Also he bad them
teach the children of Judah the use of the Bow, which is the second General I
observed.

In speaking to which I shall be concerned to do these two things.

1. To assure this Interpretation, and Sense, that I have given of the words.

2. To account for the reasonableness of the thing.

1. Then that this is the true Import and Genuine meaning of this Parenthesis,
I can see no reason of moment to enduce me at all to doubt, but some very great
ones to make me confident in believing.

In order to the making of which to appear to you also, I must desire you to
consider, that it was a common thing among the Jews, to affix special Titles to
their Songs, whether they were Eucharistical or Hilasterial, i e. whether they
were designed to give praise for mercies, or whether they were intended to
bewail guilt, and depricate punishments; for of both natures you shall meet
with Songs in the holy Scriptures; and many of these with some particular names
and titles affixed to them, of which in the Book of Psalms we meet with many
Instances, i. e. of Psalms with such Superscriptions as these, to the chief
Musician, Neginoth, Shoshannim, Altashith, etc. just as this, to the chief
Musician, Kesheth, or the Bow; the plain meaning of which is this, he bad the
chief Musicians, such as Heman, Ethan, and Jeduthun, to teach the common people
to sing this Song of Mourning for the death of Saul.

And this name of the Bow is given to it, with respect perhaps to the
Philistine Archers, by whom this slaughter was made, as the precedent Chapter
tells us; but more especially with respect to the Bow of Jonathan, of which
mention is made in it also, and by three Arrows shot out of which, by that
truest of friends, David had notice of his danger, and warning given him to
provide for his safety. -- So that you see I make here the Bow to be the name
of a Song, and not to denote that piece of Armature, that is expressed by that
name, and so the learning the people the use of the Bow, is the learning them
to sing devoutly and Musically this Song.

And this Interpretation may be made good from these two Arguments.

1. The authority of some very considerable Versions, and Expositors.

2. The unreasonableness of the contrary Exposition.

1. By the authority of some very considerable Translations of this place: Such
is that of the 72 Interpreters, and the Vulgar Latin, i. e. in all the Ancient
Copies and Manuscripts of it, as the Learned Gregory from his own Observation
intimates in his Notes upon this place, from whom I am not ashamed to
acknowledge that I receive great help and direction in finding out this sense;
and such also is that not to be contemned ancient Translation of Tindal, in our
own tongue.

And consonant to this sense is it understood by some very Learned Expositors,
and would have been so by all, were it not that a fondness to follow some
trifling Rabbis, have betrayed them into the contrary.

I do not desire to be told (for I have hinted it my self) that some of the
Jewish Masters understand this place otherwise, I know it, and that they also
have understood many others very ridiculously, and have miserably trifled, and
said many very unreasonable things upon them. -- And none more so, than what
they have delivered with respect to Kings, and therefore something relative to
our present matter, as perhaps you may hear more fully by and by.

I do not speak this to disparage all Jewish Learning, I would have it
encouraged by some, but not therefore idolized by others. I would not bring an
Odium upon all the Rabbis, but I would not have their sayings made Oracular,
and the great Standard of Truth.

For when God has blessed us with a clear and full relation, and given us a
key by which to unlock more clearly all their mysteries, then ever they
themselves could. I do not know how to account it a due veneration of that
Revelation, to forsake it, to go and grope in Umbrages, and Shadows, and Types,
and in fabulous Traditions and Legends, such as most of their Books are stuffed
much with, if not wholly composed of.

Besides experience has attested the dangerous consequences hereof; it has
been made evident of late by a learned pen, how most of our Christian errors
have derived from an over valuation, and too great a fondness of Jewish
doctrines and customs; and truly I think it neither difficult, nor injurious,
to give the same Origin to our late woeful state rebellions, and to show the
doctrines of the late Usurpers, to be but the transcripts of what the latter
Jews do fabulously report of the power of their Sanhedrim over Kings.

But I must beg pardon for this digression and hasten to show the
unreasonableness of the contrary Exposition, and that not only, 1. From the
impropriety and inelegancy of the Speech, and the strangeness of the
Apostrophe, which is apparent, in bringing in David beginning a public
lamentation, and then breaking off with an impertinent command, to teach the
children of Judah the use of the Bow. -- But secondly and chiefly from the
improbability of the thing; for it cannot reasonably be thought, that the men
of Judah were now to learn the use of the Bow, or ignorant of it; it was the
common tactick practice over all the East. And both Saul and Jonathan were
excellent Archers themselves. And the use and knowledge of the Bow was so very
common, that as Bread in the Hebrew Dialect is commonly used to signify all
Food; so was the Bow, to denote all sorts of Armature.

This therefore now I take to be the granted sense of these words, and truly
cannot but wonder, if any one that hears it, do not presently see the great
consonancy of it, and therefore from the reasonableness of the sense I proceed

2. To account for the equitableness of the thing. And certainly if there was
reason for David's lamenting the death of Saul, there was so also for the
peoples joining in consort with him, and jointly singing this sad Expicedium.

For certainly, that man has a strange notion of Superiority and Government,
that thinks it not Instituted for the good and benefit of those that live under
it; but for the Grandeur and State of those that exercise it. Vain men that
judge by appearances and shadows, and look only on the outsides of things, are
apt to stare at the Port of Kings, admire the rich Embroidery of their Robes,
and those sparkling Diamonds that embellish their Crowns and Diadems.

But wise men that see those Thorns that are stuck in their Ermins, and those
great cares that their Crowns are lined withal, do very well know, and wisely
consider, for whom these heavy Crowns are worn, and who they are that reap the
benefit of all this state; and that is certainly the people, who therefore have
great reason to condole their death, and lament their loss, as being really
their own.

That Kings are great Blessings to their people, besides the concurrent sense
of all Nations, might be made evident, from those many great benfits, that
accrue to their Subjects from their Protection and Government, without which,
experience has too often taught the World what a scene of things would
presently take place; for the sight of which I would remit every one here, to
the four last Chapters, in the Book of Judges; but that our own fresh, and yet
bleeding experiences can tell more, and may justly supersede all other notices
of these things.

The wise Greeks took care to transmit the notice of these things, by those
very names, that Kings and Crowns were expressed by; for the Diadem is (...),
for the people, and (...) is (...), the Foundation that assures the peoples
safety; and experience has commonly attested the Wisdom of the Word, in
showing how tottering the common safety is still, when these are weakn'd.

And almost all Nations have used appellatives of analogous significations; for
therefore have they been called Shepherds, and Guardians, and Fathers, and
Gods, not only to denote the happiness of enjoying them, but to express the
exposed condition of these that want them.

And it will add mightily to our sense of this, to consider that God himself
has used every one of these appellations; yea, even the highest of them, for
Kings are commonly called Elohim in holy Scripture; and that not only because
they are Images of God's Power and Greatness, but because they are instruments
of his goodness, and convey blessings to people so great, as justly to be
entitled Divine.

There is a place in the Psalms (that I have offen admired) and it is pertinent
to our present matter: it is Psalm. 65.7. Who stilleth the raging of the sea, and
the noise of his waves, and the madness (or tumult in last translation) of the
people; as if the quieting of people, and preserving them in order, were as
argumentative of a Divinity, as the stilling the rage of the sea, and that as
both bespeak the same Power in effecting of them, so the happy consequences
bespeak the same goodness.

And for these reasons all Nations almost in the World have been studious to
pay the biggest Honors possible to their Kings; nay, have thought no mortal
honors big enough for them, but have ascribed them into the number of their
gods, and at their death contended for their Apotheosis. And this has been one
chief reason of idolatry, men thinking they could never enough honor their
Princes, unless they turned idolators of them; which though it were an ill
requital of God, by whom Kings Reign, and who confers such blessings on men by
their Ministry, yet it shows clearly, what a great sense they had of these
benefits. And this has been done not only amongst the rude and barbarous
Nations, but the most polished and refined, even by the wise and grave Romans
themselves.

Now these benefits of enjoying Kings, will be of use to give us the just
measures of our danger, when we loose them. I have seldom seen a tall Cedar
fall, but the subjacent Plants have been bruised by it, and the whole Vicinage
has been shaken, and smarted under the effects of it. And if the welfare of
the people do not always suffer, yet it is always greatly endangered, when
these changes come.

Besides, God has told us in his holy Word, that he often takes away Kings in
his wrath, and that their death, as it is the Index of a great displeasure, so
it is often the Prologue to many tragical miseries. And we shall find the like
intimations commonly in his providence, for he seldom calls Kings to these
Chambers of darkness, but himself hangs up Tapers to light them thither. Shaggy
Comets usually preceed the Funerals of Kings, and as they are always startling
and amasing Monitors, so they are almost always portentous, unless it be, when
the prayers and tears, and repentance of men interpose and obstruct their
malevolent influence.

From all which things I suppose it sufficiently intimated, what great reason
there is, that the people should lament the fall of their Kings, and the
children of Judah be taught the use of the bow.

But that is not all, it is not enough that the present Generation do thus, but
that succeeding ones also entertain the same sense of these things: for so
David here does not only cause the present Generation to be taught the use of
the bow: but he causes it to be recorded also, for the notice and imitation of
posterity: behold it is written in the book of Jasher: which

3. Is the third and last general Observable; in the understanding of which
there can be no other difficulty, but only what we are to conceive this Book of
Jasher to be.

That it is not the Bereshith, the Book of Genesis, which the Jews call the
Book of the just men, because it relates the lives of Enoch and Noah, and
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, those real just men, is so ridiculously plain,
that it is confutation enough to repeat it: The Learned Masius (I remember in
his Notes upon Joshua the 10. v. 13. where there is also mention of this Book)
only mentions this exposition of some Rabbis, on purpose to expose it, and let
the World see, what pitiful interpreters of Scripture they sometimes are.

And if we consider how they make out this sense, we shall see their trifling
plainer: For this they say is written in that Book of the Just Ones, because in
the Blessing of Jacob to Judah, it is said, his hand should be (or his Bow, say
they) upon the neck of his enemies: but (besides the force of explaining Hand,
by the Bow) the impertinency of it (if it were so) is very evident, for what
relation is there between that Blessing, and this Curse or Misery? because the
bow of Judah should prevail at last over his enemies, therefore Saul shall fall
by the bow of the Philistines.

But I stay too long upon such triflings. Josephus gives Learned Men a good
ground to interpret otherwise, i. e. of a Record that was deposited and kept in
the Temple, wherein several things of extraordinary moment were recorded for
the notice of Posterity.

But that which will yet bring the matter nearer, is the observation of Learned
Men, that nothing but metrical Composures, or Songs upon these extraordinary
occasions, were recorded herein. Some of the Ancient Jews have reckoned up ten
of these Songs, which it is probable were recorded in this Book before the time
of Samuel. Such was that of Moses and the Children of Israel at the Red Sea,
and of Moses before his death, that of Joshua when the Sun stood still, to give
perfection to the overthrow of the Five Kings (which is expressly said herein to
be recorded) and such was that of Deborah and Baruch at the discomfiture of
Sisera, etc. it is not material whether we know them all or not.

And to these doubtless in process of time, were added others, and particularly
this Epicedium, at the death of Saul.

And then I had just reason to say, that this was not recorded only for the
Notice but the Imitation and use also of Posterity; for these Songs being thus
recorded in a book kept only in the Temple, with directions how they were to be
sung (for that all learned men add too) is clear evidence that they were
ordered at some stated times to be sung and taken into the Common Service.

That this book is now lost, is no great wonder; so is the Temple it self, and
so is the book of Nathan the Seer, and so is the book of the large Chronicles
of the Kings of Judah, all which we know assuredly were written and extant a
considerable time among the Jews.

So that I am now clear of this obstruction, and the sense is plain: this book
of Jasher was a book in which David recorded this Lamentation, with directions
how it was to be sung by Posterity.

And indeed this is not done without good reason, for there are some great ends
both of Prudence and Religion served by it.

1. Of Prudence, for there will be few methods by which a deeper sense of this
great Judgment will be impressed upon men, then by thus appointing the memory
of it, to be attended with tears and a Solemn Mourning; for as all men believe
that men are not apt to mourn for nothing, so when they shall see wise and good
men commending things to be lamented, not only by the present Generation that
feels them, but transmit the same sad* Memory of them to Posterity, they must
needs apprehend them not to be any common or trivial evils, but very great and
mightily concerning.

And what excellent ends of Prudence and Government may be served, by this only
thing, i. e. begetting a through sense in men's minds of the great misery of
loosing Kings, is easy for any presently to observe.

For this will most effectually endear the blessing of having Kings, and teach
men highly to esteem and value it; and he that does thus, cannot possibly be
either disobedient to their Government, or traiterous against their Power and
Person.

2. But then the ends of Religion in this, are greater and more worthy of
consideration.

For if we suppose this loss of a King, barely as a great evil, without any
respect to the peoples sins that might have occasioned it. Why then by
commending it thus to the Lamentation of Posterity, men may learn both to be
more fearful of such an evil, and more awful of that divine wrath that does
inflict it, and more earnest in their prayers, that they may never come into
the sad circumstances of suffering it themselves.

But then if there be a great guilt occasioning this evil (as Religion teaches
us still to believe; for God afflicts not causlesly the sons of men, and great
judgments never proceed from God, but when great sins in men call for them)
Then indeed the ends of Religion in commending this Sorrow even to Posterity,
are great and importing.

For then this may serve as an excellent method to impress on men the greater
dread of all such sins, and the stricter care to beware of them, for so good
men set up marks where wracks have been made, to give notice that the next
Passengers may avoid them. And so wise Religion, by enjoining us to bewail the
sins of our Forefathers, does excellently contrive for the rendering us more
heedful of them.

And yet it will be religious upon another great score, i. e. in order to the
escaping the punishments due even to the posterity of such great sinners, for
some sins are of such great guilt, and so extremely facinorous, that they
cannot be expiated by the punishment of one only Generation, and in such cases,
what is defective in the sufferings of the Fathers, will be supplied in the
sufferings also of the Children after them, and the intayled curse cannot be
cut off, but by a signal sorrow, and eminent repentance.

But this Discourse will perhaps be more seasonable some Ages hence, when
innocent Posterity shall be told the story of these things, and find our
present most just Lamentation written in the Book of Jasher.

2. And now I have done with the words in that first sense I proposed to speak
to them, and shall (in hopes of your patience) proceed to speak to them
something in the second; in which I shall not need to be so long as I have been
in the former.

For I no way question, but your thoughts have already prevented much of what
might be said in the application of them to this day, and the sad business of
it.

I shall therefore content my self to tell you, that as we have the same thing
to lament, that David had in the Text; so all those reasons that stand strong
for the one, do so also for the other, and as they warrant this Lamentation of
his, so they will do the same thing for ours.

For we have the untimely death of a King to lament, as well as he, and for the
same reasons too, so that so far we are equal.

But there are two Circumstances in which our case exceeds this mightily, and I
name them, because they both make our Lamentation more just and needful.

1. The first is the great difference between the persons whose deaths are
lamented.

2. The second is the difference between the persons, by whom their deaths were
effected.

1. There was a great difference between the persons: it is not to me a
pleasure to rake into the imperfections of any man, much less to uncover a
Fathers nakedness; it is no way becoming to reproach Kings, nor strike them
with the tongue, against whom a secret thought can hardly be innocent. I do not
intend to advance the Honor of our King upon the ruins of Saul.

But yet as one Star differs from another in glory, though all be lucid and
glorious: so though there were many great excellencies considerable in Saul,
yet it will be no dishonor to his memory to say there were more in our King,
and which is more, these were never sullied by any one known vice, as they were
in the other.

I dare not venture at his character, nor go about to draw his Image before
you, lest it should suffer by so rude a hand, and lest I should Profane what I
purpose to Honor; for he that praises weakly and imperfectly, does in truth
dishonor and disparage.

It shall therefore suffice me to tell you, and I have reason to believe it,
that whatever was requisite to make him good as a Man, and honorable as a
King, God had bestowed upon him, in measures as great as humane imperfection is
well capable here of. -- And if one of his glorious Predecessors were
Canonized, and is remembered to this day, under the Honorable Title of
Confessor, he does justly deserve the same Glory, and will ever be remembered by
all good men, under the as glorious name, of the Holy Royal Martyr.

2 But secondly, there is a great difference between the Instruments, by which
their deaths were effected. I do not know how to make any comparison between
them, unless it be in calling both Amalekites; and truly it will concern them
to consider, if they do not deserve the name, and I pray God give them Grace to
consider, whether the curse of Amaleck be not justly their portion.

But here is the difference mighty and great: Saul fell by the hands of
strangers, from whom no better things could be expected, were it in their power
to do it. But our Martyr fell by the unnatural violence of his own Subjects,
from whom all the World might expect better, by men who must first offer
violence to themselves, martyr their own consciences, chase all remains of
justice and compassion out of their own breasts, before they could do this
murder, and cease wholly to be men, that they might commence Devils.

For truly I do not know, how they can expect any better name, whom no ties of
Laws, no bands of Conscience, no Obligations of solemn Oaths can hold, or
restrain from the greatest of wickednesses; If St. Peter were called Satan, for
but out of a mistaken expression of Love, endeavoring to save his Master from
running into danger; how much more justly must the cursed Iscariot be called
Devil, for betraying the same Master into that danger.

But my business is not to upbraid nor aggravate the guilts of these men; it is
rather to bury them in a Sea of Tears, and beg us, by our Christian Lamentation
and Sorrow to cast a Mantle over them, that they may no more come into Gods
remembrance.

And to excite us all to the most passionate doing of this, I shall beg the
Patience of this Honorable Assembly, whilst I endeavor to evinee the
becomingness and necessity of it, from these four great Christan Topics.

1. The vindicating the Honor of our excellent Religion from any Imputations
of being accessory to this fact.

2. The Expiation of that guilt, that it may dye the Nation in, and prevailing
with God for the full pardon of it.

3. The prevention of those punishments, that yet may be impending for it.

4. The deeper impressing a care upon us all, to prevent with the greatest
concernedness all incidences into the like heinous sin for the future.

First, for the vindicating our Holy and Excellent Religion from any
imputations of being accessory to this direful fact.

And truly among all the sad consequences of this day, there are few or none
that we should be more concerned for, than the dishonor that seemed to be done
to Religon by it, and none that we should be more zealous for than to clear it
of the same.

I shall most readily grant, that were it any way chargeable with this fact,
there needeed no other thing to be pleaded against it; this alone would bar all
its pretenses of being a Christian for ever.

For it is most certain, the Religion of the blessed Jesus can be chargeable
with no such thing; nay, it is most obvious, that it takes all possible care to
prevent them, that it secures subjection and cheerful obedience to Kings, by
the strongest ties possible, and makes it impossible for a true Christian to
become Rebel upon any pretense whatsoever, as should be showed at large, did
either the time allow, or my subject require the same of me.

And there cannot be a greater mischief done to it, than to give any just cause
to suspect the contrary; it must then never expect Kings to be its nursing
Fathers more, but rather that they should all combine to banish it out of the
World now, as they did to prevent its coming into it at first, upon the same
prejudice.

But it was its honor, that it cleared it self fully of all these unjust
imputations, and commended it self to Kings, and became dear to them, and was
nursed in their Royal Breasts, and was adopted into their Laws, as being the
greatest security of their Government, and of subjection to them.

And what ever Religion does contrary to this, is by that only Argument
detected to be perfectly Antichristian; and truly were it my business to
recriminate and retort calumnies, I would take this occasion to show how truly
unchristian all the different Factions amongst us at this day, are in their
Doctrines about these things. And I could easily make manifest, how very unsafe
all of them make the conditions of Kings, and upon what weak and slippery
grounds they found subjection to them.

In this the most distant parties and sections conspire and accord perfectly.
Gebal and Ammon, and Ameleck, and all. Rome and Geneva, the Classis and the
Conclave, Munster and Leiden, and what ever places have given denominations to
any of these Factions.

And I am not afraid to speak it with some confidence, that if some men had
power to act, and others durst but speak consonantly to their principles, the
late bloody Regicides would be Canonized in England, and the Murtherous Jaques
Clement, and Ravilliack's names would be writ in Rubric in the Roman Calendar.

But my business is not to calumniate others, but to vindicate our selves. And
it is the Honor of the Church of England, that her Doctrines in this case are
truly Christian and Primitive, and that ever hitherto she has been untainted
in her Loyalty, that she has had the same fate with her Kings, and not only
fell with, but was persecuted for her Loyalty to her Martyred Master.

And it is certain when she fails to be so, she ceases to be, degenerates from
her self, and does justly forfeit their protection. -- But if God please to
bless her, and Kings favor her till that time, there is little doubt but she
will remain till the great dissolution. And as the pious and religious
observation of this day may be one good means to prevail with God for this
blessing; so it will be a standing evidence of the injustice and malice of this
immerited imputation.

2. For the expiation of the guilt of this great crime, and prevailing with God
for a full pardon of it.

The shedding innoceot blood is one of the greatest of guilts, but the shedding
the blood of good Kings is next to impardonable, when one man rises up against
his brother and kills him, the Judge can judge him, and inflict a punishment
equal to the guilt, but when he turns Parricide, or Regicide, murders his
Father, and assassinates his Prince, his guilt becomes transcendent, and God
only can inflict an equal punishment, and therefore if any blood unjustly spilt
cry loud and fix a great guilt; surely the blood of an Innocent King so spilt,
must be supposed to cry louder and dye deeper.

I find a Law amongst the Jews, that when a man was slain, and the murderer
not known, the whole Land became responsible, and chargeable with the guilt,
and therefore was to be purged by a General Sacrifice.

But this comes far short of our case, and makes such a public sacrifice much
more needful for us; for if that were due in case of any common murder, it is
much more so in ours, where though some of the Murderers be known, and have
had the just reward of their crime, and it is to be hoped, God be in some
measure appeased: Yet all are not known, and some that are, are yet (by a mercy
next to divine) spared; upon which account a continued Sacrifice will still be
needful to supply what is wanting toward the full atonement.

This is certain, and a sad truth, the Land may be said to be defiled by this
blood, and almost all sorts of men more or less chargeable with it (as will
appear if you will please to recollect what has been before delivered) and
therefore it cannot be less than absolutely needful (unless we will still lie
in this guilt) to mourn publicly before the Lord still for it, and to
intersperse in our mourning (as the Church does piously teach us) this Prayer:
Heal our Land O Lord, and deliver it from blood guiltiness O God, thou God of
our Salvation.

3. For the prevention of those Judgments that yet may be impending for this
guilt.

Where guilts are transcending, there what is wanting in a single judgment
toward expiation, must be expected to be supplied in many, and what cannot be
sufficiently punished in a short infliction, will certainly be made up in the
length of it.

And truly we have just case to fear, God may proceed after the same measures
with us, and account this Sin too great to be punished in our Age.

That this Land has smarted under a series of many heavy judgments since that
black time, our yet bleeding experiences can too plainly tell us. And that some
of these have carried on them such clear signatures, as even point to this
their great cause, the only calling them to remembrance, will be clear
evidence. And those men that have used to be such bold Interpreters of
Providence, might do well to consider.

But yet whether our punishments have been in full proportions, and the voice
of that blood be quite stilled, and God fully propitiated, he only knows, but
we have just cause to be fearful, and therefore have as just cause yet to
continue our religious Mournings, as we had to begin them, the next night that
succeeded that Tragical day.

I do not desire to be counted a bold pryer into God's secrets in thus
ascribing those judgments to this sin. I bless God I have learned more
Christian modesty, and shall never (I hope) fall into that presumption, which
has added to the guilt of those men's sins that were the Authors of this
mischief.

Neither do I desire to be told, that we have other sins enough to deserve
these and worser Judgments, I know it too well and could wish mine eyes
fountains of tears to weep for them.

But then I say, it ill becomes penitents in their Humiliations and Mournings,
not to account for all known sins, especially if great and heinous. And it is a
sad sign, when those that would be accounted the only true Mourners in Israel,
and can be so exact in telling God their other crimes, should never think fit
to take this into their confessions, and yet I am sure they have most cause to
do so.

But because they do not, I am sure we should, and make up by our repentances
and mournings, what is wanting in theirs.

But I have something more to say to these men, I suppose they will not be
brought to say they suffered for this sin, before the Restoration. They were
then indeed those that made others suffer, and the sufferings of the King being
by them thought too little, they were made up, in heaping them upon all those
who either did, or could be pretended to have adhered to him -- And since that
time, it seems in these men's account all our sufferings have been for other
crimes. Therefore according to them, this sin has never been punished at all
yet, and perhaps they think never must. And yet they must either grant it to
have been a great sin, or else quit Humanity, and consequently expect the
punishment, or by Repentance seek to avert it, or else they must quit their
claim to Christianity.

If it be said (as I doubt not but it will) that our most signal Judgments
have been since the Restoration.

I readily grant it, but yet think it a great advantage. Indeed till then, we
were sufficiently punished by these men, they made our loads heavy enough, and
God was pleased in mercy not to make them heavier. And therefore since has
only been the time, in which these Judgments could well be inflicted:
Especially if we consider, that when the first means were used for the
expiation of this guilt, and Humiliations appointed to succeed them. Then the
murmurings of these men began, and just like as after the execution upon Corah
and his Accomplices, complaints were made, that the Lords people were slain, and
men lost the sense of their former sins, and began to contrive how to commit
them again.

So that it was then Gods time to step in, and let an unthankful Nation feel
his hand, and reckon with them for their former dismal great miscarriages: And
therefore we may thank these men's murmurings and unthankfulness, that this sin
was so signally, and yet is not sufficiently punished.

And because we have just cause to fear it is not, we have as just cause to
continue our most passionate Humiliations and Tears, if thereby we may
propitiate God, and prevail with him for a final suspention of what is behind.

4. For the deeper impressing upon us all a great care to beware of all future
incidences into the same Sins.

This is the end, and this is the effect of all godly sorrow, for men do not
sorrow in Gods account, when they sin and sorrow, and sin again; but when they
so sorrow, as to sin no more.

And to let this days Humiliation have this effect upon us, will render it
truly Divine, and procure Gods gracious acceptance and blessing.

But without this, it will be but pageantry, and and add hypocrisy to our
other guilts, and be but just like the Jews adorning the Sepulchers of the
Prophets, which their Fathers had slain, when themselves retained the same
Principles, and were designing to murder the greatest of all Prophets
themselves.

And truly, if we lament the death of the Father, and yet retain the same
rebellious principles against the Son, our very lamentations are but mocking of
God, aggravating our guilt, provoking his anger, and the more certainly
assuring our own plagues. Then only will our tears atone this guilt, when they
drown and take away those evil lusts that did occasion it.

And here I cannot but express my sorrow, that there is any need to mention
these things; and certainly it is a wounding reflection, that all our great
experiences should be no better improved, and should not have long ago
superseded all need of any addresses to us of this Nature. A man might
reasonably think, that English men had tasted too largely the bitter effects of
rebellion, to hanker after it again, and experienced the great blessings of
Loyalty and Subjection so fully, as to endear them to it, and fix them in it,
beyond all possibility of being removed -- And if it be not thus, it must needs
be very strange.

But so that sottish people the Jews grew quickly weary of the mild Government
of Moses, and in their hearts, (yea and words too) returned into Egypt, whose
bondage they so very lately groaned under, and above all things wished
deliverance from, and it will fix the same reproach of sottishness, or
something worse, upon those men, who grow weary and impatient under the golden
Scepter of a gracious King, and are fond of the Iron Rod of an imperious
Usurper. To all such I must take liberty to say as Moses did to his people in
much what a like a case, Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise! Do you no better know your own mercies? Have you so poor a sense of
those Miracles of kindness, that have blessed you with them? Do you wish with
the murmuring Jews, that you had died in Egypt? Take heed of provoking God, you
may have your wishes too soon.

But I would fain hope, that I am needlessly invective against these things; and
I am loath to have any thing to accuse my Nation of. I would fain (in spite of
the common proverb) suppose them men, that are able to apprehend and judge
truly of things that do so widely differ. And if so, it will soon appear a
great truth, that Loyalty is the interest as well as duty of English men, their
being true to Monarchy is their happiness, as well as their honor; past
experiences have attested how happy they have been under it, and late
experiences have demonstrated how impossible it is for them to live under any
other Government; and then the inference from both these, one would think were
easy.

And I cannot but congratulate the happiness of the English Genius in this, for
it is the just honor and prelation of Monarchy, that its safety consists in
the wealth and happiness of its Subjects, when few instances can be given of
any Common Wealths that have flourished much longer, than while necessity and
poverty were their ligatures and cements; and it is the good hap of a people to
be so naturally inclined to that, which is much their interest, and their
felicity.

But I am called this day to speak before this Great City, I would therefore
crave leave, to conclude with a short address to it.

I do not come to doubt the Loyalty of it, no, but to congratulate it rather,
and I take the so religious observation of this day to be a standing evidence
of it. And I can no way question but such wise men, that have signalized
themselves by their prudent Government of this City, and preserving Order in it
to such measures, that no such City in Europe can boast the like, and have
received just marks of honor for it from a King, that can never fail to reward
Merit, do very well understand their own duty, and know how to demean
themselves accordingly and will never sully the glory of these actions, and the
honor gotten by them, by any thing unworthy of either. It is justly to be
hoped, that as the late fire has truly refined this City, it rising up in a
splendour much greater than was before, so that it has melted down all faeces
and dregs of undutifulness that were formerly in the hearts of any of its
Inhabitants. And that as Justice seems written on your Gates, so Lonalty will
be the Imbellishments of your Palaces. And I am the more confident in my hopes
of these things, because all considering men will clearly see these three great
things to depend upon it, and be secured by it.

1. The honor and safety of the King.

2. The honor and welfare of this City.

3. The welfare and quietness of the whole Kingdom, all these (next to God's
blessing) will be secured by the Loyalty of this Capital City.

1. The honor and safety of the King; for as the honor of a King is in the
multitude of his Subjects, so his safety consists in the love and affection and
loyalty of these Subjects, and the greater the number of Subjects that are
embodied, is, the more conducive to his safety is the love of them, since they
can always be more ready as well as able to yield him assistance, and to strike
despair into any that would attempt against him.

2. The honor and welfare of this City it self, he that will search into the
causes of the decay or ruin of Royal Cities, will soon find their separating
from their King to be one great one. I cannot multiply instances (because I
have not time) of this. I shall only beg you to call to your remembrance an
instance in our next Kingdom of France, it will be hard for any man without
tears to read the misery of that City not very long ago, but the cause is
obvious, it was being separated from their King, by the Faction of the House of
Guise, and by the bewitching charms of a Holy League; if you will recollect
your own miseries in the late times (which I have seen some of you weep for)
you will be able to ascribe it to the same cause, effected also by the same
means, viz. the enchanting Sorcery of a Solemn Covenant.

Honorable and Beloved, this is a great truth, the safety of the King depends
upon the welfare of this City, and the welfare of this City depends upon the
safety of the King. And if men would look into the truth of things, they would
soon perceive that their interests are complicated, and indeed the same. The
safety of all Bodies (next ever to God's blessing) consists in the firm
cohesion of its parts.

And it is true in experience as well as speculation. And who ever will trace
either the ruin of the King, or subsequent misery of this City to their first
Origins, will soon find the Artifice of some men in separating them from each
other, effected both.

And you may see the same things plainly still; for these men that design now
the same things again, do pursue them still by the same method, it is here that
they first spread their Nets, and place their Engines, and their disappointment
here, will cause despair and unsuccesfulness ever to attend their mis-chievous
devices.

And therefore my assurance that I speak to wise men, gives me assurance also
of their great care still to disappoint these men. For as Solomon says, Surely
in vain the Net is spread in the sight of any Bird: So say I, if we permit the
same men, by the same methods, to trapan us again into the same crimes, and
make us serve to the same evil purposes again; we then make our ruin our own
guilt, as well as our misery, and must perish as unpitied fools for ever. But
God (I hope) has reserved us to better purposes, and will give us grace to
pursue wiser Counsels. A few days past have given good hopes that the Genius of
the English Nation is recovering it self, and your hearty compliance with those
great and (I hope) wise Counsels, will be mighty contributive in order to
giving effect to these hopes.

3. But the effects of your Loyalty will not be confined in so narrow a room,
but will be extended to the benefit also of all the Kingdom. It is you that
stamp the practice of all the Nation, by your carriage they take their
measures, and make your Actions their Presidents. So that you will not only save
your selves by your signal Loyalty, but you will be influential also, in saving
the many thousands of Israel. The seeds of Loyalty sown in this plot of ground,
will quickly spring up into a Tree whose branches will extend to the distant
shores, which together with the Royal Cedar, will make a Shadow, under which
your selves, and all the Nation may sit safely, and sing praises to God
cheerfully, and be happy in the Contemplation of your great Bliss.

And now I have done, but that methinks I see something in the countenances of
this Audience, which incourageth me not only to beg that you would, but
prophecy also that you will, exercise your selves in these Tacticks, sing this
Lamentation with such hearty accents of pious sorrow, as may reach even to the
Throne of God, and be accepted by him, and prevail with him for pardon of the
guilt of the death of the Father, and a Blessing to descend upon the head of
the Son, and that God will graciously please to add those years to the life of
this, which he was pleased to suffer to be subtracted from the life of the
other.

That we will all learn to shoot skilfully in this Bow, such Arrows as shall be
sharp in the experience, as well as midst of the Kings and our Enemies.

That as English Archers have been renowned for their Chivalry in earth, so
they may ever be blessed for their Loyalty, in Heaven. That all our names may
be recorded in the Book of Jasher, and be found written in that Book of the
Upright and Just Ones at the last day, and our portions of Bliss be eternal
with theirs in Heaven for ever more. Which God of his infinite Mercy grant for
Christ Jesus his sake. To whom, etc.


