SOME PLAIN LETTERS In the DEFENSE of Infant Baptism And of the Mode of
Baptizing, (Now generally used in the Church of England) By Sprinkling or
Pouring on Water.

Which may serve, For ^^^TUTATION of a small Treatise, ENTITLED, [ The Reason
why not Infant-Sprinkling, but Believers-Baptism ought to be Approved, etc.]

When you bring your Children to be Baptized, see that you do most sincerely
give them up to God, and devote them to his Service, with firm Resolutions to
bring them up in his Fear, if God spare your Lives and theirs; and earnestly
pray for his Grace to be given into their Souls. Christian Monitor, Page 37.

LONDON, Printed for R. Wilkin at the King's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1699.

TO THE JOINT-PARISHIONERS OF March, Doddington, Wimblington, and Benwick.
IT will not, my Brethren, it will not concern you to know the particular
occasion of these Letters; nor am I Licensed to Publish his Name who gave the
occasion; but this I will say, That he did very Fairly, and very Ingenuously,
and as it became a wise Man and a good Christian to do: For he did not (as some
have indiscreetly and loosely done) listen with both his Ears to the Objections
against Infant Baptism, and so rashly condemn it without any more a-do; No, but
he was very Concernedly desirous and forward to hear what could be said in the
Defense of it too.

As I remember I have read of that famed Conqueror Alexander the Great, that
when a Friend of his was Complained of to him, he stopped one of his Ears; he
lent but one Ear to the Complaint that was made against his Friend, and kept
the other to hear what his Friend could Reply in Answer to it.

And thus should we constantly do in the Case of Religion; when ever any Point
or Doctrine of our Religion is called in Question, we should always reserve one
Ear to hear what may be said in its Vindication and Defense.

And indeed the greatest, and plainest Truths are liable to be spoken against,
and even Jesuits, Socinians, Antinomians, and the other Adversaries of our
Faith, will raise such Objections against the clearest Articles of it, as are
not to be Answered by every one amongst us at the first hearing.

It was a Witty Fiction of Old, that once upon a time Truth came down to this
Earth from Heaven; but here among the Sons of Men, being but coldly received,
and finding no very welcome entertainment, she even took wing and was flying to
Heaven again; but in her flight she chanced to drop down her Mantle, which
Error immediately finding, took up and put on, and has worn it ever since. This
is the Fable, and the Moral of it is, That no Error does ever appear in the
World but it is clad in Truth's Mantle, and the disguise is not always so thin,
or so easily and readily to be seen through, as never to escape a discovery.

No, But indeed my Brethren, you ought to think more Modestly, than to think
every Objection unanswerable which you cannot Answer; it is not expected from
you, that you should be able to Defend every point of your Religion against all
Gainsayers.

But then, Will you presently Condemn what you cannot Defend? Or immediately
let go a Truth because of an Objection which you cannot Answer? Will any one
among you part with an Acre of Land upon the same account, Namely because he is
not himself able to Defend his Title to it?

And shall we not hold the profession of our Faith as fast as we do a clod of
Earth? shall we not take advice and counsel before we be persuaded to quit any
part of our Religion, as well as we shall be sure to do before we be persuaded
to quit our Interest in the least parcel of an Estate?

But how then will they answer it to God, and to their Consciences, who in the
great and weighty Cause of Religion, have taken the Advice only of her
Adversaries? And without any further Examination or Trial, have forthwith
condemned whatsoever it has pleased these Adversaries to pass their Sentence
upon? Was this fair Dealing? Was it to judge righteous Judgment? Or does it
look like Sincerity or any real concern for Religion, when the bare accusation
of an Enemy has been taken for good proof against her?

My Brethren, I doubt not but our Adversaries have told you that the Baptism
which you received in your Infancy was no Baptism; because Baby-Sprinkling (as
they vainly term it) is no Baptism; but pray be so just to your selves, as to
enquire of them whether any Person who has been twice Baptized be not a perfect
Anabaptist? Nay, be plain, be plain and ask them if you have not Sinned by your
second Baptism, if it be proved that your Infant Baptism was a right Baptism?
if they dare to confess the Truth they must tell you that you have, and that
you ought to Repent of that Sin, of that second Baptism, if your first Baptism
was rightly administered. Well, but then certainly you ought to have been very
sure that your Infant Baptism was no Baptism, before you had run the hazard of
Sinning by Anabaptism, or by your being Baptized a second time.

I have some hopes and earnest desires that (if you will give these following
Letters a fair reading) you may Consider what you have done, and what you ought
to have done, and what you ought now to do.

But I forbear, because I would not here be thought to reflect too much upon
any Person or Persons among us, no more than I have done in the following
Letters. God is my Witness, that I bear ill will to none of their Persons,
whose opinions I have here opposed; to confess the Truth, I have no cause: Nay,
but I will take this opportunity publicly to acknowledge that I have found
very great respect and civilities from the most and the best of them that I
know.

Besides I always endeavor to bear in mind the Apologue of the Sun and the
Wind contending for the Travelers Cloak. The Wind made a great bluster and
would have forced it from him. But this mad way of contending was so
notoriously in vain, that the stronger the Wind blew, it made the Man but hold
his Garment the faster. But then the Sun shone forth and Saluted him with a
cheerful Ray, and warmed him with a gentle Gleam, and so indeed was the Man
prevailed upon to suffer his Garment to fall from him. And thus the Sun did, by
fair means, what the Wind with all it is Bustle and Rage could not. The meaning
is, That Men will sooner be persuaded out of their Mistakes and Errors by
Candidness and fair Respects, than hectored out of them with Noise and
Roughness.

I have not, I hope, been Guilty of any such Roughness or Clamor, or
Bitterness, or Evil-speaking in these Papers, I have been careful not to give
any such offense.

And let me add that I have studi'd to speak plain too; Yea, I will not be
ashamed to confess that it is for their plainness only that I have been
persuaded to make these Letters public; I have not so much as made the Style
gaudy with any high-flown Strains. Ornament and Rhetoric was none of my aim,
but Sincerely, Faithfully, and to the utmost of my mean Abilities to show the
naked truth. and whether I have hit or missed my Aim, you may now be pleased to
examine and Judge. I am

(My very good Friends and Brethren) Your very much obliged, and most humble
Servant, T. Hewerdine.
From March, 7 Aug. 1699.
LETTER I.
SIR,
YOURS of the Third Instant has just now surpised me, wherein at the very
first dash of your Pen; you somewhat bluntly require, and charge me, as I will
answer it at the dreadful Day of Judgment, when the Secrets of all Hearts shall
be disclosed, to tell you freely and plainly whether I do in my Conscience
believe, That the way of Baptizing now used in the Church of England, namely by
Sprinkling or Pouring on Water, is a good and justifiable way of Baptizing.

Good Sir, You have known me some hundreds of times Baptize after this manner,
and I would sain hope that I have not by any practice of mine, given you the
least just Cause to suspect me of Hypocrisy. I don't say this with any intent
to give the Go-by to your Request and Charge, but since you have put me to it, I
do here solemnly protest, and would enter the same Protestation though I was
immediately to appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, That I do in my
Conscience believe, that the Mode of Baptizing now used in the Church of
England, by Sprinkling, or Pouring on Water, is a good and justifiable way of
Baptizing. And thus far I Am sure I am in the right, My Conscience bearing me
Witness.

But, Sir, You next pretty flatly put it upon me, to inform you how this Mode
of baptizing is to be defended and justified. Now in good Truth I could be very
well contented to save my self this Trouble, by referring you to those Books
and Pages of Books wherein this Matter is industriously debated, and the Mode
of baptizing (which you now seem to call in Question) sufficiently defended and
justified, so as not to be gainsay'd, but by the stiffest Obstinacy. But lest
you should construe this as a giving up the Cause, I will here venture to say
what you so earnestly desire to hear from me, namely upon what Grounds it is
that I my self am persuaded in my own Conscience, concerning the Validity and
Lawfulness of this way of Baptizing.

I will be very brief, and yet go to the Bottom, and rise by such Steps and
Degrees, as shall help to carry us over all difficulties, and show us the truth
of the Matter in some light.

And therefore I begin at our Catechism, in which we are well and truly taught,
that in the Sacrament of Baptism, there is The outward Sign, and The Thing
Signified.

The outward Sign is Water, wherein the Person is Baptized in the Name of the
Father, etc. And Sir, I will not here spend either Ink or Paper in the Proof of
this, presuming that we are still agreed thus far. But then,

The Inward part of this Sacrament, or the Thing Signified is the Holy Spirit,
or the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit, such as these mentioned in our
Catechism, A Death unto Sin, and a New Birth unto Righteousness, etc. for you
must know that wheresoever we read in Scripture of God's giving, or of Man's
receiving the Holy Spirit, by the Holy Spirit must be meant, The Gifts and
Graces of the Holy Spirit, and This I say is the Inward part, or Thing
Signified by the Water in Baptism.

And this was represented by the Descending of the Holy Ghost upon our Savior
at his Baptism, Matthew. 3.26. and there seems to be a plain Evidence of this in
those Words of John the Baptist, I indeed Baptize you with water, but He
(speaking of Christ) shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost. The Baptist, and (I
add) all the Ministers of Christ do but baptize with Water, It Is Christ himself
who does the Inward part, and baptizeth with the Spirit, and so says ours
Savior himself, A Man must be born of Water and of the Spirit. For as it is
said of Circumcision, That the outward Circumcision of the Flesh is as no
Circumcision, without the Inward Circumcision of the Heart too, Romans 2.28, 29.
So to complete the Sacrament of Baptism there must be the Inward part as well
as the Outward, For except a Man be Born of Water and of the Spirit, He cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, John. 3.5.

And thus St. Paul, in his description of Baptism, not only speaks of the
external Washing of Regeneration, but of the Internal Renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Tit. 3.5. And so again putting some of his Corinthians in mind of their
being baptized, Ye are Washed and Sanctified says He; that is, not only Washed
with Water, but Sanctified with the Holy Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.11.

And to mention but one place more for all, Be Baptized and ye shall receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost, says St. Peter. Act. 2.33. From whence it is very
plain, That when the Ministers of Christ baptize with Water, Christ himself
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost; which (as I have said before) is the Inward part
or Thing Signified by the Water in Baptism.

And with great Reason therefore do we pray in the Office of baptism, Give, O
Lord thy Holy Spirit to this Infant, that He may be Born again; and also Wash
him and Sanctify him with the Holy Ghost. For to clear this Matter to the most
Vulgar Capacity.

As when we pray in the Communion-Service, Hear us, most merciful Father, we
most humbly beseech thee; and grant that we, receiving these thy Creatures of
Bread and Wine, may be Partakers of Christ's most blessed Body and Blood. It Is
as much as to pray that we may not only be Partakers of the outward Part of
that Sacrament, the Bread and Wine, but also that we may be Partakers of the
Inward part or thing Signified likewise, which is the Body and Blood of Christ:
So when we pray for the Baptized, That He may have the Holy Spirit given him,
and that he may be Sanctified with the Holy Ghost; it is as much as to pray,
That he may not only be baptized with the outward part of Baptism, which is
Water, but also that he may be baptized with the Inward part or thing Signified
by Water, which is the Holy Spirit.

And hence it is likewise, that as the other Sacrament is sometimes expressed
with allusion to the Outward part, when we speak of receiving the Bread and
Wine, and sometimes with allusion to the thing Signified, when we speak of
receiving the Body and Blood of Christ; so Baptism is sometimes expressed with
allusion to its outward part, when we speak of baptizing with Water, and
washing with Water, as the Apostle calls it, and sometimes with allusion to the
Inward part or thing Signified, when he speaks of baptizing with the Holy
Ghost, or baptizing with the Spirit; for so says the Apostle again, By one
Spirit we are all Baptized, 1 Cor. 12.13.

I add, That it is no new thing for the Holy Spirit to be figured or
represented by Water, for thus in the Prophet of Old, when God had said, I will
pour Water on him that is Thirsty, He interprets himself immediately, I will
pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, Isai. 44.3. and again, when he had said in
Ezekiel, I will Sprinkle Clean Water upon you, he adds as the meaning of it, I
will put my Spirit within you, Ezekiel. 36.25, 27. And again with allusion to
Water is the promise of the Spirit expressed by pouring out, I will pour out my
Spirit upon all Flesh, Joel 2.28. and to clear this matter from all doubt, St.
John quoting these Words of our Savior, He that Believes in me, out of his
Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Water, This he spoke, says that Evangelist,
of the Spirit which they that believe in him should receive, John 7.38, 39.
Sir, If you would see more and larger proofs of this, you may read Mr. Mede's
Discourse upon Titus 3.5.

Indeed I could hardly have thought that there could have been any difference
among Catechetical Writers as to this matter, only I find in that same
discourse of Mr. Mede, that some would have the Blood of Christ to be the thing
signified by the Water in Baptism, as it is by the Wine in the other Sacrament.
To which he replies, That the Blood of Christ is not once mentioned by the
Fathers of the Primitive Church as the inward part of this Sacrament of
Baptism, no more than it is in our Liturgy; and he further adds, That the
Opinion is Novel, and That the Lutheran Divines make it peculiar and proper to
the Followers of Calvin.

But now, Sir, give me leave to observe to you, That Calvin himself seems not
to have been always of this Opinion; nay, but he plainly asserts, That the Holy
Spirit is the Thing signified by the Baptismal Water; For, complaining of the
Church of Rome, for feigning Confirmation to be a Sacrament, by which the
Spirit of Regeneration is conferred, he adds, That they transferred to
Confirmation what was proper to Baptism, meaning that they made the Spirit of
Regeneration, which is the Inward part of Baptism, to be the Thing signified by
the laying on of hands in Confirmation. Calv. in Heb. 6.1, 2.

And here, Sir, if I was minded to enlarge, I could confirm this Matter with
abundance of Testimonies out of the best Writers and Fathers of the Primitive
Church; but I forbear, being pretty confident, that there is no great need of
their Evidence in so plain a Case.

And now, my good Friend, are not your Eyes open? Don't you clearly see, from
what I have said of the Inward part of Baptism, how rightly the Outward part
may be administered, by Sprinkling or Pouring on Water? The Gift of the Holy
Spirit, the thing signified in Baptism, is expressed by Sprinkling or Pouring on.
And is there, or can there be any Reason given, why the Thing Signified should
be exceeded by the Sign? God himself thought it not necessary, but makes
Sprinkling, or Pouring on Water sufficient to represent, and signify his
giving or pouring on the Spirit; for when He, I say, promises his Holy Spirit,
he does not, no, not so much as once in the whole Bible, say, I will dip, or
plunge into Water, but I will sprinkle or pour on Water, Isa. 44.3. and Ezekiel.
36.25.

Dr. Towerson, who had once said something which was a little too harsh (as
himself confesses) against this way of Baptizing by Sprinkling, (whose very
words our Adversaries have caught hold of, and have boasted of him, as a brave
Man on their side) yet when he came to enquire more narrowly into the Matter,
he industriously defends it, and amongst other Arguments uses this very Text,
Ezekiel. 36.25. and proves from Maimonides, That the Words were spoken with
reference to the Times of the Messiah; and affirms, That they cannot be better
interpreted than of the Water of Baptism, applying them (as I have here done)
as very well expressing the Outward Sign of that Sacrament.

And shall Men be wiser than God? Or think it any Wit to mock at and deride his
Words? And be at the pains of making a Greek word English, to make their
mockery the plainer; Sprinkling, forsooth, out of Sport and Rallery, must be
called Rantizing; and Baptism, when administered by Sprinkling or Pouring on
Water, must be nicknam'd Rantism.

But let me tell you, Sir, and you may tell the Author of your little A little
Book, called, The Reason why not Infant-Sprinkling, but Believers Baptism ought
to be approved, etc.
Book you boast of; That when he so merrily calls our way of Baptizing,
Rantizing, and our Baptism, Rantism; He makes a mock of the very Words of God
himself; and according to his reproachful way of Speaking, when God promises to
Sprinkle clean Water upon his People, he must not then promise to Baptize, but
only to Rantize.

This puts me in mind how I had once the misfortune to hear a wild Wretch call
the Lord's Supper. He seemed to quarrel with my Friend for calling that
Sacrament the Supper of our Lord; A Supper, said he, A Bite and a Sip, you
mean. And he had as much to say for the Profane expression, as any one can
have, for calling our Baptism, Rantism.

Why, Sir, He urged that a Supper ought to be a full Meal, that to Signify our
receiving the Body and Blood of Christ, we ought to eat a piece of Bread as big
as his Body, and to drink as much Wine as he shed Blood. And is it not at a
like Rate, that some plead against Baptizing by Sprinkling? You have heard the
reason why That profane Wretch called our way of Receiving the Holy Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, a Bite and a Sip; and is it not for a very like reason,
that our way of Baptizing is by some called Rantizing?

I will not here say with the Psalmist, What shall be done to the false Tongue?
but rather with our most charitable Lord, Father, forgive them, for surely they
know not what they say or do.

But this it is to be so Zealous for Externals, when Men think that they can
never have enough of the outward Signs of the Sacraments, when yet perhaps the
thing Signified, which is the main and principal thing, is as much neglected.

But, Sir, When we receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, if we
Spiritually eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, which is the inward part of
this Sacrament; as to the outward part, it will not matter much how little
Bread we eat, or how little Wine we drink. So when any are baptized, if their
Souls are purified and cleans'd with the Holy Spirit, which is the Inward part
of this Sacrament; as to the outward part, it will not matter much how little
Water they are baptized with.

And if you, good Sir, resist not the Holy Spirit of God, nor receive his Grace
in vain, but be thereby renewed in the Spirit of your Mind, and cleansed from
all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, My Soul for yours if you enter not
into the Kingdom of God, though you was but sprinkled with Water, when you was
baptized.

Whereas they whose hearts are not purified, whose Conversations are not
cleansed, who wallow in foul Sins, I must and will pronounce them too unclean
to enter into the Kingdom of God, though they were never so much Plunged, or Dipped
into Water never so deep, when they were baptized.

But I must remember my self that I am not now writing a Book, but only a
Letter; and therefore I shall only further tell you; that I designed but in
this to open the way to a fuller Vindication of the thing in Question. And so I
conclude at present with this promise, That you shall (God willing) very
speedily hear again of this matter from,

Dear Sir, June 6. School. Your very Humble Servant, T. H.

LETTER II.
SIR,
THOUGH I concluded my Last with a Promise to let you hear from me again very
speedily, about the Matter in Debate, viz. Concerning the Validity and
Lawfulness of our way of Baptizing by Sprinkling, yet I had hardly time to
breath, or to take a little Air, before I was alarmed with your second Letter,
wherein you call out to me in great heat and haste, to let you hear what I have
to say to such and such Objections.

And, dear Sir, I Will be your humble Servant here again, and attend your Motion;
nor shall I be much out of my own intended way; for in answering the Objections
which you say seem to wound our Cause, I doubt not but to blunt, or to turn
their Edge so as to make them defend it, which is the very thing I aim at. But,

First, You say that the very Word ((...)) Baptizing, always signifies Dipping;
yes, and so they will very confidently and peremptorily say too, who yet never
understood one Syllable of Greek in their Lives, and above all the rest, the
Author of the little Book you sent me, is almost perpetually saying so from one
end of That book to the other.

But now to this I can give you a very short Answer; and such an Answer as, I
believe, will to you be very satisfactory and convincing; For I know you dare
depend upon Dr. Patrick, now Bishop of Ely, (whose Writings you so justly
admire) for the signification of a Greek Word, and therefore I will observe to
you what he has noted in the Margin of his most excellent Discourse, concerning
Baptism; Mr. Pocock, (says he) has largely shown, That ((...)) to be Baptized,
does not always signify among the Jews the Washing of the whole Body; which is
to be observed against those who now make it necessary. I may have occasion
before I have done, to consult Mr. Pocock himself, and then you shall hear more
from him.

And, Sir, if I might be Sophistical, and play with Particles, as it is the
manner of our Adversaries to do; I might here observe of our Pious and Learned
Translators, to whom we are obliged for our English Bibles, that they do not
seem to understand Dipping by Baptizing; for in our English Bibles, which they
have put into our hands, we usually read of Baptizing with Water.

But now, Good Sir, in all those places where we read of Baptizing with, I can
hardly think that they would have us there, by Baptizing to understand Dipping,
because Dipping with is not good Sense, to Dip in, or into Water, is good
Sense, but to Dip with Water is not. And therefore I say I might be persuaded
that it was not the meaning of those Translators, that we should always
understand Dipping by Baptizing; or that we may read Dipping with Water (which
is not good Sense) where they have Taught us to Read Baptizing with Water.

Yea to Baptize with Water, is the common Language of all English Authors, even
of our Adversaries themselves; but that they mean to Dip with Water when they
say to Baptize with Water, we may no more believe (I say) than we may believe
Dipping with Water to be good Sense. But,

It Is true we Read that there is but ((...)) one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. which is
an unanswerable Argument indeed for the only once Administration of it,
directly against Anabaptism, but then we are also told that there are ((...))
Diverse Baptizings, for so the Original word signifies, though translated Diverse
Washings, Heb. 9.10. which undeniably shows that the Ways and Modes of
baptizing are various and different; Yea and by the Diverse Baptizings here
mentioned must certainly be meant among the rest, those Sprinklings which we
read of Numb. 8.7. and Chap. 19.18, 19.

Again, It Is said of the Jews, that when they come from Market, they Eat not
except they Wash, Mark, 7.4. The Original Words are, (...), They Eat not except
they are Baptized; where, by Baptized, we are not necessarily to understand
Dipped, for, as Mr. Pocock has abundantly proved, Lavantes a foro totum Corpus
non Mersabant. The Jews at their return from the Market, did not always Wash or
Dip the Whole body. Not. Miscel. c. 9. p. 390.

And again, Luke 11.38. where we read that the Pharisee wondered at Jesus that
he did not Wash before Dinner, the Greek Words are, (...), That he was not
first Baptized. But now by Baptized in this Text, we cannot possibly understand
Dipped, for there was no such Custom among the Jews, as to dip themselves
before their common Meals, no not so much as to dip their Hands into Water. For,

Even in the Case of washing their Hands, Non Lavant Manus nisi e vase (affusa
aqua); They wash not their Hands by Dipping them into any Vessel of Water, but
by having Water poured upon them, says Mr. Pocock from their best Authors, Not.
Mis. c. 9. p. 365. and again p. 371. (Non Lavant Manus) says He, quoting
Maimonides, etc.) They wash not their Hands but with Water poured upon them.
And though some of their Authors allow of dipping their Hands into Water, yet
it is only (urgente necessitate) in Cases of necessity, for to do so ordinarily
they all forbid them.

And so in this Text where it is said that the Pharisee wondered at Jesus, that
he was not first Baptized before Dinner, says Mr. Pocock, though it be meant
according to Grotius's Note, that the Pharisee wondered that Jesus did not
first wash his Hands before Dinner, yet he disagrees with Grotius as to the
reason of the expression, and adds, That if our Lord's Hands had but been
Washed (aqua affusa) by having water poured upon them, there had been no cause
for the Pharisee's wonder, because the Pharisees themselves did not otherwise
wash their Hands, upon the like occasion. Idem, p. 398.

And the same Learned Author, after a very Nice and Critical Enquiry, into the
various Modes of Washing and Baptizing used among the Jews, he concludes
concerning the Word ((...)) to be Baptized; namely, That it was very frequently
and ordinarily made use of to signify, That Washing which was performed by
Pouring on Water; Quod forsan contra illos, qui vim verbi, ubi de Baptismi
Sacramento disputatur, morosius urgent, non inutile erit observare; And this,
says he, may be observed with great Advantage against those, who when they
dispute of the Mode of Baptizing, do with too much Stiffness and Obstinacy urge
the Word, as if it did always signify to dip into Water. Idem, p. 402.

And again, The Apostle says of the Israelites that came out of Egypt, that
they were all Baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea; but they were not Dipped
into the Cloud, or into the Sea, they were only Sprinkled or Dashed upon with
the Waters of the Cloud, and of the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. I know it is said that
this is but a Metaphorical Expression; but still, I hope, that it is a pertinent
Metaphor, and shows the signification of the Word Baptizing, viz. That it does
not always signify Dipping, which is all that I am Enquiring after at present.

Once more: Were not the Holy Apostles Baptized with the Holy Ghost? But how?
The Holy Ghost was poured down upon their Heads in streaks of Fire like unto
Cloven Tongues! The Holy Ghost did not descend like a River of Flame for the
Apostles to be Dipped into, but was only poured upon their Heads in streaks of
Fire; and yet it is said that they were Baptized with the Holy Ghost.

And though the Expression in 1 Cor. 10.2. be but Metaphorical, yet I hope that
this Baptism with the Holy Ghost, is a real Baptism, it is I am sure the Chief,
and Principal Baptism, and of which the Baptism with Water is but the Outward
Sign.

And here give me leave to add, That the Primitive Fathers called Sprinkling
with Water Baptizing with Water, as in the Case of Clinic Baptism, of which you
shall hear more by and by; here I shall only tell you of the Clinics, that they
were Baptized as they lay upon their Beds of Sickness; and it is well known that
they were only sprinkled with Water, and yet were said to be (...) Baptized
upon their Beds.

And now I hope it is pretty plain, as to the signification of the word, That
Baptizing does not always signify Dipping; nor consequently does it exclude
all other Modes of Baptizing.

But notwithstanding all this, we, the Ministers of the Church of England it
seems, amongst some Folks, must be great Dissemblers and Hypocrites: And why I
pray? Why? Because when we Baptize by sprinkling, we dare not speak as we act,
we dare not say, I sprinkle thee in the Name of the Father, etc. Alas for us,
poor Men! that we are no such daring Blades as some others are. But is it so
indeed? When they Baptize by Dipping, dare they say, I Dip thee in the Name of
the Father, etc. I am sure we may with as good Reason and Authority say, I
sprinkle thee, as they say, I dip thee.

Our Savior's words are, Go, teach all Nations, Baptizing them. Our
Adversaries ask us, Dare you Translate the words, Go, Teach all Nations
Sprinkling them; and to be even with them, we think it enough to ask them
again, Dare you Translate the words, Go, Teach all Nations Dipping them? But,
Sir, I Will endeavor to strike more light into this matter by a parallel Case;
Suppose then, that our Blessed Savior had said to his Apostles, Go, Hire all
Nations into my Vineyard, paying them such a Sum in my Name: And suppose
further, that some of them had paid the Sum in Silver, and some in Gold, Can it
be imagined that ever these different ways of paying the same Sum would have
proved a matter of Controversy? Truly according to the aforesaid way of
Contending and Arguing, They who paid in Silver might have quarreled with the
others for paying in Gold, and might have disputed their Quarrel after this
manner; Our Savior has said, Go, Hire all Nations into my Vineyard, paying
them such a Sum in my Name; but dare you Translate the Words, Paying them so
much Gold in my Name? How then dare you pay in Gold, when you dare not Speak as
you Act?

Now to this Argument, might not the others have replied and disputed, on the
other hand, against paying in Silver? Our Savior has Commanded us to Hire all
Nations into his Vineyard, paying them such a Sum in his Name, but dare you
Translate the words, Paying them so much Silver? If not, How dare you pay in
Silver, when you dare not Speak as you Act?

This Case, I think, sufficiently shows the Folly of our Adversaries, in daring
us to use the word Sprinkling for Baptizing.

Nay, and further, We may suppose, our Savior giving this Command to his
Apostles, to Hire all Nations into his Vineyard paying them such a Sum in his
Name; we may farther suppose him, I say at the same time, to have been in the
Indies, where Payments for the most p^^^ are made all in Gold: And Consequently
we may suppose that the Apostles hiring these India Nations into Christ's
Vineyard did pay them all in Gold, according to the General usage of these
Countries. Well, but then even upon this supposition, that none of the Apostles
had ever paid the aforesaid Sum in Silver, but had paid all in Gold, yet their
practice in this Case would not have made a general Rule, or made it unlawful
to pay the Sum in Silver; No, but their Successors, and other Ministers of
Christ (notwithstanding this Apostolical Practice of Paying the Indians in
Gold) might yet in other places have paid the Sum in Silver; Yea, and would have
been constrained and obliged so to do, had they come to hire such Nations into
Christ's Vineyard where Silver is the Current Coin; and they could not have
paid in Gold without great and manifold Difficulties and Inconveniences.

And thus, when Christ Commanded his Apostles to Baptize all Nations in his
Name, he was then in those Eastern-Countries, where, by reason of Excessive
heat, Washings and Bathings were very frequent, and a Customary practice; and
therefore when the Apostles Baptized in these hot Nations, though we suppose them
to have Baptized there by Dipping, yet their Practice in those hot Countries
cannot reasonably be urged as generally obliging us to the same way of
Baptizing, or making it unlawful to Baptize any otherwise; no, but their
Successors and other Ministers of Christ may yet in other places Baptize by
Sprinkling, yea, and are even Constrained and Obliged so to do, when they
Baptize in Cold Countries, where they cannot Baptize by Dipping without great
and manifest dangers and inconveniences.

In short, as in the aforesaid Case, had our Savior Commanded such a Sum to be
paid, it might certainly have been rightly and well paid in Silver,
notwithstanding the Apostles had paid all the Indians in Gold; so considering
the various significations of the Word Baptize, Baptism may well and rightly be
Administered by Sprinkling or Pouring on Water in Cold Countries, though it be
supposed, and, if it may please our Adversaries, even granted, that the
Apostles in Hot Nations Baptized all by Dipping.

And indeed I must here observe, that our Blessed Savior, using this Word
Baptize in an illimited signification, has thereby discovered to us not only
his great Wisdom, but his great Love and Tenderness to Mankind; for thus he has
Accommodated the Ordinance of Baptism to all Ages, to all Sexes, to all
Dispositions, and to all Climates. And truly the Apostles were to teach all
Nations Baptizing them, as well the Coldest as the Hottest Countries.

But now should an Apostle have Traveled into the most Northern parts of the
World, where the Climate is extremely Cold, and should have Preached the
Gospel, and Exhorted them all to take Christ's Yoke upon them, and should have
told them for their Encouragement That his Yoke is easy, and his Burden light;
And in Answer to their asking him how That Yoke was to be put on, should have
replied, Why, you must all be Dipped or Plunged in some Pond or River.
Certainly such a piece of hardship, in the extremity of their Cold Regions,
could not have been well thought on, nor would they readily have believed that
Yoke to be easy, which was not to be put on without endangering their Limbs,
and their Lives with Cold.

And so again, Should a Turk upon his Deathbed be converted to Christianity,
and earnestly desire Baptism, How could it be safely done, if there was no
other way of Baptizing but by Dipping?

Nay, but the aforesaid Clinic-Baptism, which we hear so much of in the
Primitive Writers, was most certainly received by Aspersion or Sprinkling; The
Clinici were they who received Baptism upon their Sick-beds, and their Baptism
by Sprinkling is sufficiently Vindicated by St. Cyprian, Ep. ad Mag. 76.

I know what some are bold to say, that God in such Cases is obliged to
preserve us, and to look to it, whatever the danger of Dipping may seem to be,
that no real harm shall come on it. But I Answer, That I never looked upon
Baptism as a Charm either against Colds or Diseases, nor would I dare to
Baptize a very sick Man by Dipping him in a Pond or River, upon this
Presumption, that God will save him from all harm by it, by a Miracle: It Is not
safe to trust to Miracles, or to tempt God out of the ordinary ways of his
Preservation. I Love not harsh Expressions, but Mr. Baxter says, This was the
Devil's Trick, who would have drawn Christ to have cast himself into danger of
Death, by encouraging of him to trust to a Miraculous preservation.

Well, but then, say some, if a state of Infirmity or a cold Season may make it
a little dangerous to Baptize by Dipping, may not a more Convenient and less
dangerous Opportunity be waited for?

And this indeed speaks the general practice of our Adversaries; you seldom
hear of a sick Man Dipped, or of any Dipped by them in the Frost and Snow time of
Winter.

But to such delay of Baptism upon any account whatsoever, you may be pleased
to hear what is said by the aforesaid Mr. Baxter, It Is (he says) quite contrary
to the constant Rule and Example of Scripture, and so he proves that the 3000
were Baptized without delay, Act. 2. and the people of Samaria, Act. 8. and
that the Eunuch was Baptized in his very Journey, Act. 8. That Cornelius and
his Friends were presently Baptized, Act. 11. and that so were they in Act.
19.5. and the Jailer, Act. 16. and that so were the Corinthians, Act. 18. And
said Ananias to Paul, why tarriest thou? Arise and be Baptized, Act. 22.16.

But Sir, If Baptism was not delayed upon any account whatsoever; no, not though
3000 were Baptized at once, what think you of those who when they have a few
Persons to be Baptized after their way, by Dipping, will (one would be tempted
to say, out of Vain Glory or Ostentation) make as long work of it as they can,
and will hardly Dip above One or Two at a time; that by their more frequent
Dippings they may make a greater Noise and Bustle in the World.

You, Sir, know what I mean, and therefore I will not rub any harder upon this
Sore place, but will leave you at present to consider awhile of what I have
said to your first and great Objection raised from the signification of the
Word ((...)) Baptizing.

You shall not be long without an Answer to your other Objections from,

Sir, Your very hearty and humble Servant, T. H.
June 13. School.
LETTER III.
SIR,
YOUR First and great Objection, against the Mode of Baptizing by Sprinkling,
was Answered in my last; and this comes to assure you, that I have not been
forgetful of your other Objections, but have thought on 'em again and again;
and, considering the Men's Principles who have taught you the Objections, I
find that they will be Answered in a Few Words.

For the Objectors you know are upon all occasions very Loud and Clamorous for
plain and positive Texts of Scripture, Deductions and Consequences will by no
means down with them; and therefore their Objections will be sufficiently
answered to them, if I show that the Scripture which they ground them upon,
will not maintain them after their own positive manner. And, Good Sir, Let it
be remembered, that I do in this Letter argue upon our Adversaries own
Principles and in their own way. For thus,

I need not tell you that their great Objection against Infant Baptism is this,
Where do you read in Scripture that any Infants were Baptized, or Commanded to
be Baptized? Which Objection, in its due time and place, shall have its full
Answer; but here, Sir, you must pardon me if I make use of this their own
Weapon against themselves, and ask them, Where did you read in Scripture of any
that were Baptized by being Dipped, or Commanded to be only so Baptized, and not
otherwise?

It Is true, you once indeed replied to this, that whether the Scripture was so
or no, yet that Antiquity was clear for Dipping; and I should be glad to hear
the same kind word drop from the Mouths or Pens of our Learned Adversaries: I
should be glad, I mean, to hear them appealing to true Antiquity in any case
whatsoever, and willing to submit to such good Authority; for then I should
hope that they would have some regard to it in the Case of Infant Baptism; yes
certainly, if they will plead Antiquity for Dipping, they must allow the Plea
to be good when it is made for Infant Baptism likewise.

And therefore to bring the Controversy before Antiquity, I would have them to
know, that they do not read in Scripture of any that were Dipped, or Commanded to
be so Baptized, and not otherwise.

Yes, say they, Our Savior himself was Dipped when he was Baptized of John in
Jordan, for the very Original Words ((...)) may be Translated, He was dipped of
John into Jordan, Mark 1.9.

To this it has been rightly answered, that the Word (...), does not
necessarily signify, He was Dipped, as I have clearly shown you in my last
Letter; and then as for the Words, (...), which our Adversaries would fain
translate into Jordan, they have been shown from several the like Expressions
in the New Testament, That they may as well be translated at Jordan; (...), may
be translated at Jordan, says Mr. Horn, just as (...), is translated at Azotus,
Acts 8.40. and just as (...), is translated at the City, Mat. 2.23. and just as
(...) is translated at Capernaum, Mat. 4.13. and as the like Instances may be
seen in Acts 4.5. and 20.16. and 21.13. and 25.15. See Mr. Horn's Cause of
Infants Maintained, p. 70.

But it is further Objected, That our Savior, when he was baptized, went up
straightway out of the water, Matthew. 3.16. and Mark 1.10. Sir, I wonder not
that these Texts are urged by the Common People of our Adversaries, as an
Argument to prove our Lord's being Dipped; but that any Man who has Learning
enough to interpret our English Bibles, (as they ought to be interpreted) so as
to agree with the Original, that any such Learned Man should take an Advantage
from the English Words, which he must needs know the Original will not bear;
This to me indeed is very wondrous.

But who then can sufficiently wonder at the Author of your little Book for his
wild Note upon Matthew. 3.16. Our Lord went down so far and deep into the River,
says he, that, the Text is express, when he was baptized, he went up
straightway out of the water: Mark, He went up Out of the Water is the Curious
Penning of the Matter by the Holy Ghost, to show the Considerable depth our
Lord went into the Water to be dipped: Thus your Author. But, Sir, I will leave
it to others to say, That his wrested Observation belyes the Holy Ghost, I will
only tell you, That he ought to have looked into the Original, before he had
presumed to make his Remarks upon what the Holy Ghost did Pen, for the Greek
Words were the Curious Penning of the Holy Ghost. And I do affirm, That the
Greek Words in both these Texts, Matt. 3.16. and Mark 1.10. only signify, That
our Lord went up From the Water, as every Man does who goes from the Waterside
only.

And thus our Savior's being in, or dipped into the Water, cannot be proved from
these Texts, by any one who can consult the Original Words, which in Matthew.
3.16. are, (...), He went up from the water; and in Mark 1.10. (...), Coming up
from the water, which I say can never prove him to have been in, but only by
the Waterside; for he who goes but from the Waterside, goes up from the
Water, because I think that Rivers do always run in the lowest Ground.

But, granting that our Blessed Lord went into the River to be Baptized, it
will not yet follow that he was dipped. For, good Sir, I cannot here but observe,
both of our Lord, and of the Eunuch (which is your next Objection) and of the
many thousands we read of to have been Baptized, that we never find the least
hint of any of their Clothes being put off. Certainly if they were dipped Naked,
as some say, (which I can hardly believe, because Men and Women were baptized
together) or if they put off but some of their uppermost Garments as others
contend, we should have heard something of it, for we are told of our Lord's
laying aside his Garment upon a far less occasion, John 13.4.

And therefore I say that we never hearing one Syllable about their Clothes,
whether any part of them, or all, or none were put off, is a good Argument, ad
hominem, that they were not dipped.

And now let me appeal to you, Sir, whether we may not give a good Account of
this Matter, by supposing them to have been baptized only by Sprinkling or
Pouring on Water. Why, you very well know, That it was their Custom in those
Countries, to go bare up to the Knees, only with Sandals upon their Feet, so
that they might conveniently enough step into their shallow Rivers to be
baptized, by having Water sprinkled or poured upon their Faces, without putting
off, or laying aside any part of their Garments; and therefore, I say,
considering that we never read of any such thing, not one Tittle about putting
off or altering their Garments, it is as good an Argument against their being
dipped, and as strong for their being sprinkled only, as we can desire against
our Adversaries.

In short, That when they were Baptized, they were stripped and dipped naked, I
cannot believe for the aforesaid Reason, because Men and Women were Baptized
together; or supposing that they were Baptized distinctly and separately, the
Men by themselves, and the Women by themselves; yet still they were Men who
Baptized; and had this been put upon the Apostles to Baptize Women naked, what
brave sport would their Enemies have made of it? To be sure the Devil with the
spightful Jews and Gentiles would have raised from such a practice as this, a
whole Volume of Lewd stories, as the Learned know they did from the Celebration
of the other Sacrament upon a far less Occasion.

But if the Baptized were dipped in their Garments, then what becomes of their
Objection which we hear of, from Heb. 10.22. where there is Mention made of our
Bodies being washed with pure Water? For how our Bodies can be washed with our
Clothes on, I do not well understand. But, Sir, I shall here add by the by,
that in that Text to the Hebrews there is no allusion to Baptism; No, but that
it plainly alludes to the Washing of the High Priest, mentioned Levit. 16.4. is
even demonstrated by Mr. Sydenham in his Exercitation on Infant Baptism, Cap.
16.

And for a Conclusion of this whole matter, I will here set down some of the
very Words of that Learned Author, If, says he, The Person Baptized be not
Naked, then this Baptism by Dipping is rather a Baptizing Men's Clothes and
upper Garments than their Bodies; but if he or she be Naked, how odious a
Custom would this be? I cannot but think that that part which is Baptized ought
to be naked, that the Water may immediately fall upon that place, or else
something else must be Baptized primarily, and the Flesh only secondarily and
by Consequence.

And this, says he, is the Reason why we only pour Water on the Face, because
it is the most Principal part, wherein the Image of God most appears, and the
Soul shines forth most Eminently; on which all the workings of Men's humors and
affections leave the most visible impression and symptoms; and it is Observable
that the same word in Greek ((...)) signifies both the Face and the Person,
because the whole Person is represented by the Face; and thus we Baptize the
Person in Baptizing his Face, which we can look on and wash Naked, and not be
ashamed. So that worthy Author Concludes his 15 Chapter of the abovementioned
Book.

And now, Sir, I come to your Last and Grand Argument, with which you make so
much Noise and Cry, and in which you do really Boast and Triumph; with what
Heat and Bravery do you repeat it to be Demonstration, perfect Demonstration,
that John Baptized by Dipping, and why, Sir, I pray? Why, say you, don't we
read that John was Baptizing in Enon, near Salem, because there was much Water
there? Well, and what then? You add that the much Water there, does certainly
imply, that all that John Baptized in that Water were certainly Dipped; Very
good; and before I Answer you as to this, I must here rejoice with you a
little, that your Stomach still serves to swallow Consequences, yea, and very
lusty ones too.

But now, Good Sir, This your high and mighty Argument, so Confidently and
Hotly proposed, is by no means to be Faintly and Coldly Answered, but I must
even force my self to put on a little warmth too, and be bold to Challenge all
our Learned Adversaries to contradict me whilst I say that the Original words
in that Text Signify, That John was Baptizing in Enon near Salem because there
were many Waters there. So that we must understand the much Water in our
English Bibles in no other Sense than as it may be understood by the Many
Waters, ((...)) which are the Original words.

And now you, Sir, who have not always lived within the smell of your own
Chimney, you know that in some Hill-Countries there are Multitudes of Springs,
and we may therefore say many Waters, and yet not Water enough in any one of
these Springs for a Man to be Dipped in.

And the Truth of this business seems to be this, John was The Voice of one
crying in the Wilderness, and he might have been in many parts of the
Wilderness; where, had he wanted but a drop of Water, he must have traveled
above Ten or Twenty Miles before he could have found it: but he would not
continue in any such place because of the Multitudes that daily thronged to him
to be Baptized of him; No, but He stayed near Salem where there were wany
Springs or Waters, because so long as he was thereabouts he had always Water at
hand to Baptize the People that flockt to him for that End, For there were
((...)) many Waters there.

And this (I say) may seem to be the True Account of this Passage: and now if
you can find any thing in it to prove that John Baptized by Dipping, pray let
me hear it in your next Letter, and you shall then know more of my mind.

In the mean time, having thus given you my Answers to all your Objections
which I have as yet heard from you, I shall here take leave to rest awhile,
till you may be pleased to shape out some more work for,

Sir, June 19. School. Your obedient and humble Servant, T. H.

LETTER IV.
SIR,
AT the very first sight of yours, I presently conjectured what sort of Task
you were setting me; and I am very glad to find that you are grown a little
cooler, and that your heat against our Mode of Baptizing is somewhat abated;
for you say very well, that if we can prove Infant Baptism, the very Weakness
and Tenderness of the poor Babes themselves will be some Plea for Mercy, rather
than Sacrifice; Nay, and you say that Infant Baptism once proved would put an
end to the whole Controversy, and there would be no further need of Quarelling
about Dipping or Sprinkling, because you are well assured that we will not even
in the Case of Infant Baptism refuse to Baptize by Dipping, if it be required,
and certified that the Child may well endure it.

And therefore you are pleased to say, that you are sorry for your beginning at
the wrong end of the Controversy, or rather where there is no occasion for any
Controversy at all: And now you ask leave (which Good Sir, you may freely
take) to call upon me for my Proofs of Infant Baptism; and for my Answers to
your Objections, which you have been taught to make against it.

Dear Sir, I doubt not but you have Read at least some of the many Books which
have been Written upon this Subject, by the very Learned Bishop Tailor, Dr.
Hammond, Dr. Featly, Dr. Towerson, The Author of the Case of Infant Baptism,
Mr. Walker, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Horn, Mr. Sydenham, and others; and I cannot
forbear telling you that it is an Argument of something which I will not Name,
that our Adversaries Objections should be so often Printed and Reprinted, as if
there had never been one Syllable said in Answer to them; whereas I will here
venture to say unto you, that no one can show you any one Objection in any of
our Adversaries Books against Infant Baptism, but I will undertake to show you
enough to Answer it in some One or more of the Books which I can produce in the
Defense of it.

And you must not, Sir, expect any new Discoveries in this Case from me; all
that I can aim at is but to speak plainer than some others have done, and this
indeed is all that you seem to desire from me; for you want a little light, you
say, being something in the dark as to this matter, because of the silence of
the Scriptures, in which you can no where find, either that any Infants were
Baptized, or Commanded to be Baptized.

Sir, In very few words, you have opened a wide Field of Discourse, and I think
that the Case of Infant Baptism may be pretty thoroughly Scanned and Canvas'd by
Considering your Objection, which I shall divide into these two Parts.

First, You find not in Scripture that any Infants were Baptized.

Secondly, Neither do you there find that any Infants were Commanded to be
Baptized.

To both which Parts of your Objection I shall endeavor to return you a very
plain and full Answer.

First, You Object and say, That you find not in Scripture that any Infants
were Baptized.

And here you take occasion to tell me what a Triumphant noise the Forty Texts
in your lit-Book have made; It Is the Common Boast among some Folk, you say,
that there is not One Text in Scripture to Countenance Infant Baptism, but
Forty that are Point Blank against it; I suppose they mean if the Author of
your little Book speaks the Truth in this Matter.

But whether he has done so or no, I shall have occasion before I have done,
still farther to Consider: For as fast as any of his Forty Texts come in my
way, I shall not be afraid to enquire into the meaning of them.

Nay, but the greatest Strength of that Book is spent against our Mode of
Baptizing by Sprinkling. Your Author has a Throw at this wherever he meets
with the Word Baptize, and takes it for granted all along, That to Baptize
signifies always to Dip, which I think has been sufficiently disproved; and
therefore if all that he has said and repeated again and again to this purpose
in his little Book was taken out, his Forty Texts would dwindle into a far less
number, and there would not be many of them left standing against
Infant Baptism.

Well, but in Answer to the first part of your Objection, That you no where
find in Scripture, that any Infants were Baptized.

First, I Will make an Impartial Enquiry, what I can find in Scripture to have
been done in this Case of Baptizing by Christ, and by his Disciples in his
Lifetime. And,

Secondly, What I can find to have been done by his Apostles after his
Ascension into Heaven.

I. We have no very large account in the New Testament of Christ's or of his
Disciples Baptizing in his Lifetime; not one word more than what you may see
in these few Texts, John 3.22, 26. John 4.1.2.

The First of which Texts says, that Jesus Baptized, but says not whom; not a
Syllable to exclude Infants, John 3.22.

The Second Text says, that Jesus Baptized, and all Men came to him. John 3.26.
But here, Sir, that our English Translation may not lead you into a mistake, I
must inform you, that there is no particular word in the Original that
signifies Men only; but the Greek word is (...), Jesus Baptized, and ((...))
all came to him: All without Exception.

And here I will do so much Right to the Author of your little Book, as to
suppose he had observed this to be the sense of the Original words in this
Text, and therefore he passes it over, as rather making for than against
Infant Baptism; He does not, I say, mention this amongst the Forty Texts in his
Book, because he knew the Greek Word here Translated All Men signifies as well
All Children, even all without Exception, All of all Ages.

I proce^d therefore to the Third and Last Text, which says, That Jesus made
and Baptized more Disciples than John, (though Jesus himself Baptized not, but
his Disciples) John 4.1, 2. And here the Author of your little Book would fain
gather from the word Disciples, that no Children were Baptized, but all that he
says is grounded upon a Gross Mistake, which supposes them to have been
Disciples before Baptism, whereas the Text says plainly, That they were made
and Baptized Disciples: That is, they were by Baptism made Disciples, and
accordingly that Baptism is the only ordinary way of making Disciples, I shall
take occasion hereafter very largely to prove to you.

And thus I have particularly and Impartially Considered those few Texts (which
yet are all we find in Scripture) which speak of Christ's or of his Disciples
Baptizing during his Lifetime; and the Sum of them is this, That Jesus's
Disciples Baptized, and made by Baptizing them, more Disciples than John. The
Words are not They were Baptized all that Believed, or all that Repented; Nay,
nor all Men only, but all in general, not a Child of Man excepted: And now,
Sir, whether the Scripture be thus far against, or for Infant Baptism, judge
you.

And here I will add one thing more, which would be a great Satisfaction to my
own mind in this Case of Baptizing Infants, though there was nothing more to be
said for it.

Know then, Sir, and I tell it you from undoubted Authority, that Children were
Baptized as well as Circumcised in the Jewish Church long before our Savior's
Coming in the Flesh.

The Jews report, says Dr. Tailor, That the World took up the Doctrine of
Baptisms in Remembrance that the Iniquity of the Old World was purged by Water.
Great Exemp. P. 175.

And indeed Noah and his Families being saved by passing through the Waters of
the Flood in the Ark, did Typifie and Pre-figure our being saved by passing
through the Waters of Baptism in the Ark of the Church, for so St. Peter, In the
Ark (says he) were Eight Souls saved by Water. The like Figure whereunto even
Baptism does also now save us. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.

And as for that Infant Baptism which was practiced of Old in the Jewish
Church, it is by their own best Writers made as Ancient as Moses, and deduced by
them (says Dr. Towerson) from that Command of God whereby Moses was Enjoined to
Sanctify the Israelites, and cause them to wash their Clothes against that
time that God declared from Mount Sinai, That Legal Covenant which they were
then to enter into. Dr. Towerson of the Sacrament of Bapt. Page 13.

And the Apostle himself, tells us, of these Israelites, That they were all
Baptized into Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. They were all,
Men, Women, and Children, so Baptized.

And you know, Good Sir, that when God did safely lead these Children of
Israel, through the Red Sea, he thereby figured his Holy Baptism.

And therefore as they, Men, Women and Children, were Baptized into Moses by
the Cloud above, and the Sea beneath, so (says Dr. Tailor) are all Persons now,
Men, Women and Children to be Baptized into Christ by the Spirit from above,
and the Water below; and the same Excellent Author most truly adds, That it was
the design of the Apostle in that Discourse, 1 Cor. 10. To represent that the
Fathers and We were equal as to the Privileges of the Covenant, and that as we
do not exceed them, so neither do they exceed us, nor their Children ours.
Great Exemp. Page 176.

And in short, When our Savior first Instituted his Baptism amongst that very
People who had then such an Ancient Custom to Baptize Infants, had he made any
Exception against that their Custom; had he excluded such Babes from his
Baptism as they admitted to theirs, we should certainly have heard something of
it.

I am sure that their Infant-Circumcision was not laid aside without great
Noise and Struggle, and therefore that their Infant Baptism should be so easily
quitted without so much as one word said either for or against it, is what, I
profess to you, I cannot easily believe.

Nay, but I am hereby very much confirmed in my Belief that Infants were as
well admitted to our Lord's Baptism when he Baptized in Judea, as they then
were and for a long time before had been Baptized in the Jewish-Church.

And thus, Sir, I have Briefly shown you what was done by our Lord and by his
Disciples in his Lifetime, in this Case of Baptizing. And,

II. I will (God willing) enquire again what we find in Scripture to have been
done in this Case by the Apostles after our Lord's Ascension.

But of this in my next, which shall be hastened from,

Sir, June 26. School. Your etc. T. H.

LETTER V.
SIR,
I Proceed to enquire what I can find in Scripture to have been done in the
Case of Baptizing by our Lord's Apostles after his Ascension into Heaven.

Now the first that we read of to have been Baptized by them were the Three
thousand Converts, Acts 2.41. But that none of these were Children is most
confidently affirmed, because it is there said of them that they gladly received
the Word, etc. which indeed is a very plausible way of Arguing; but yet it is a
very ill way, and not to be allowed of in our Interpretations of such
Scripture-Passages.

For there is nothing more common than for the Scripture to speak of Children
together with adult Persons, and yet to add such things as the Children will
not be thought capable of: As for Example.

St. Paul speaks of Infants as well as of Men and Women, when he assures us,
that We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and every one of us
receive for the good or evil done in our bodies; I say, St. Paul speaks of
Infants among the rest, though one half of what he there speaks, cannot be
understood of them, namely, That they shall receive for the good or evil done
in their bodies, who never lived in their Bodies to do either Good or Evil.

Sir, you argue, that none of the Three thousand baptized, Acts 2. were
Children, because it is said of them, That they gladly received the word, and
continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, which are things that Children
could not do.

And just at the same rate it may be argued, That no Infants shall appear at
the last Day before the Judgment Seat of Christ, because it is said of them that
shall then and there appear, that they must receive for the good or evil done
in their bodies; which are things that Infants could not do.

And again, I have not the least doubt but there will be Children and Infants
at the Last Day, placed among the Blessed Saints at the Right Hand of the
Judge, and yet I know what the Judge will then say to those on his Right Hand,
I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc.

But now, as you are pleased to reason the Case, That there were no Children
among the Three thousand baptized, Acts 2. because such things are immediately
added to have been done by them, as no Children could possibly do, viz. That
they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, etc. just after the same
manner it may be reasoned, That there shall be no Infants among the Saints at
the Right Hand of the Judge at the Last Day, because such things will
immediately be added to have been done by them as no Infants could possibly do,
viz. I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc.

But, good Sir, Infants will certainly make up a great part of the Blessed
Train at the Right Hand of the Judge, though the Judge cannot say to them, I
was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat: And so there might be many Infants among
the Three thousand that were baptized, though it cannot be said of them that they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine.

For so you plainly see that Infants may be spoken of together with adult
Persons, though some things may be added which the Infant-part of the Company
are no ways capable of.

And accordingly that there were Infants or Children among the Three thousand
baptized, as aforesaid, we have yet this further Reason to convince us; because
when they were there persuaded to be baptized with this Promise of having the
Holy Ghost given them, it is expressly added, The promise is to you and to your
Children, Acts 2.38, 39. But of this more largely before I have done

I proceed therefore to the next that we read of to have been baptized; and
They were the Samaritans, baptized by St. Philip, Acts 8.12. and there indeed
it is said, that They were baptized both Men and Women; and therefore surely,
say you, had any Children been then baptized, it would have been added, That
they were baptized Men, Women, and Children. No, Dear Sir, there was no need of
any such Addition; for consider, I beseech you, the Scripture-way of speaking;
Even all Ages of both Sexes, Children and Infants together with the Elder Sort
are expressed in Scripture by Men and Women, as Mr. Horn has particularly noted
in Joshua 8.25, 26. and Judges 9.49, 51. which Texts you may consult at your
Leisure, and I will take leave to go on.

The next we meet with in the Acts of the Apostles, to have been baptized, was
the Eunuch, baptized by St. Philip, Acts 8.38. and from their going down to the
Water, is there a great Objection raised against our Mode of Baptizing by
Sprinkling, or Pouring on Water; but this I have already answered.

In the next Chapter was St. Paul baptized by Ananias, and I think he was
baptized in the House of Judas; and you will not, I hope, from hence conclude
that he also was Dipped.

In the next Chapter again we find St. Peter commanding Cornelius and them that
were with him to be baptized; but pray, Sir, Observe the Reason, Can any man
forbid water that these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? Acts 10.47, 48. And may it not as well be argued, Can any
man forbid Water that Children should not be Baptized, who receive the Holy
Ghost as well as we? But of this more hereafter.

In the next place we read that Lydia was Baptized and her Household, Acts,
16.14, 15. Where I observe, that whatever qualifications are mentioned to have
given Lydia a right to Baptism, yet we read not any thing of any of her
Household, but that they were Baptized; Nay, and after their Baptism says Lydia
to the Apostles, If ye have Judged Me faithful to the Lord, etc. She says not,
if ye have Judged Us faithful, but only ME which implies (according to our
Adversaries best way of reasoning) That only Lydia, and that none of the rest
were Believers. So that thus far I am sure here is nothing against Infants
being a part of her Family. But,

Sir, I must admire the Author of your little Book, and the profound
discoveries he has made in his Notes upon this Text to convince us, that Lydia
had no Husband, and Consequently no Children. But this would not follow, unless
he could prove her to have been no Widow neither; and therefore by dint of
mighty Argument he will make us farther know that she was no Widow. And I must
not conceal his All-convincing Reason, which is this, She could be no Widow,
because she is called a Woman, whereas Widows in Scripture are called Widows,
as the Widow of Sarepta, etc. A most wonderful Argument indeed! But, Sir, When
I think on it again, The wonder ceases, because I find the very Widow of Sarepta
called a Woman, 1 King. 17.17, 24. Yea, I find in Scripture one called a Woman,
who had been seven times a Widow; for after she had Buried no fewer than Seven
Husbands, it is expressly said, That last of all Died the Woman also. Sir, I
should have despised to take notice of such Childish Reasonings as these, had I
not observed with what confidence they are written to impose upon Vulgar
Understandings.

In the 33d verse of the same Chapter we read of the Jailer that he was
Baptized and all his, The Original words are (...), and signify all that were
of him, or in other words his Offspring. But it is objected that they were not
Children, because it is implied in the next verse that they were all Believers
and rejoiced, The Jailer rejoiced, believing in God with all his House. To
which Mr. Horn has answered that the Original words may be interpreted as
speaking of none but the Jailer himself, and may signify Word for Word that he
rejoiced House-wholly ((...)) he having believed in God. He rejoiced
House-wholly that is, upon the Account of his whole House that all were
Baptized as well as himself. And certainly his thus rejoicing upon the account
of his House may persuade us that there were some in it that were very near and
dear to him, and These undoubtedly were (the (...)) his Offspring or Children
Baptized with himself. See Mr. Horn's Cause of Infants, etc. p. 58.

Again, Acts, 18.8. We find some Corinthians Baptized, and Acts 19.3, 5. It Is
said of some who had been Baptized unto John's Baptisms, that they were
Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus. And these last indeed were about Twelve
Men, but that all the Corinthians were Men and no Children will not so easily
be proved: It Is true it is said that they heard and believed, and yet there
might be Children among them for all that, as I have just now shown, there will
be Infants in the happy number at the Right Hand of the Judge when it shall be
said to them, I was an hungered and ye gave me Meat. Though Infants, I say, could
not do this, yet this will be said of the whole Blessed number whereof Infants
will be a part.

And so the Scripture very frequently ascribes such things to Companies, as are
not within the power of Children to do, and yet those very Companies may
consist of Children as well as of Elder People.

All Judah stood before the Lord with their little Ones, their Wives and their
Children, when Jahaziel said to them that they should do, yea and it is also
said that they did much greater things than could be affirmed of Children, 2 Chronicles. 20.13, 14, 15, 16, etc.

And thus, I say again, that Children may be in a Company even though such things
are said to be done by that Company as the Children in it are not capable of
doing.

Lastly, St. Paul tells his Corinthians that he Baptized none of them but
Crispus and Gaius and the Household of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1.14, 16.

And here I will observe that of all the Households that we find to have been
Baptized, there is not the least exception as to Infants or Babes, nor can I
believe them to have been all Barren and Childless Families, because there is
not the least Syllable or Circumstance denoting any such thing.

I know it is said, that there were no Children in this Household Baptized by St.
Paul, because no Children are mentioned; and may not I as well say, that here
was no Faith, no Repentance, nor any such thing as some contend for to qualify
for Baptism? viz. Because here is no mention made of any such thing; and again,
for the same reason that some deny there were Children, another may deny that
there were Servants, and another, that there were any Relations, and all by the
same Rule, and for the same reason still, and so at length, at this rate of
Denying any Children to have been in it, may the Household of Stephanas be
denied into an Household of mere No-Bodies.

And this, Sir, is all that I find in the New Testament to have been practiced
by the Apostles in this Case of Baptizing after our Lord's Ascension into
Heaven; and in so short an account as this is, we have as clear hints of their
Baptizing Children as can well be expected. For,

You, Sir, may venture to assure your self, that the Scripture has acquainted
us but with little, very little in Comparison of what was really done by the
Apostles in this Case, even by those very Apostles who had received the Command
to Baptize all Nations; Nay, but as St. John tells us, that over and above the
Scripture-accounts there are many other things that Jesus did, so I will add
that there were many other things which his Apostles did, which if they should
be written every one, I suppose that even the World it self could not contain
the Books that should be written, John 21, 25.

As in this particular case of Baptizing, we do not in all the New Testament
find the Hundredth part of what the Apostles did; so that if we must believe no
more in this matter, than what the Scriptures tell us of the Acts of the
Apostles, we must believe but very little, and not a word of above two thirds
of these Apostles; not a syllable of St. Andrew, or St. Thomas, or St. Simon,
or St. Jude, or St. James, or St. Bartholomew, or St. Matthias, or St. Matthew,
for of their, or of any of their going out into the world to Baptize we must
not speak a word, if we must say nothing but what we can quote Chapter and
Verse for.

And yet, Sir, Notwithstanding this profound Silence of Scripture, I verily
believe that no Man who has read Books can doubt but a credible account has
been, and may be given of the Travels of these Apostles, and of the Nations
Discipl'd and Baptized by them. The ancient Writers have some of them been
pretty punctual in these matters, and in the Histories of all Countries it is
seldom or never omitted by what Apostle, or by whom the Christian Religion was
first planted among them.

And unless all these Historians who agree in these matters can be supposed to
have laid their Heads together (though as far distant from one another as the
East is from the West) yet, I say, unless they can be supposed to have laid
their Heads together, to Cheat and Impose upon the World, we have no reason to
disbelieve their reports; But then, Sir, I add, that we have no reason to
disbelieve Infant Baptism, for we have the very same Histories, and the very
same Authors bearing witness to this, who bear witness to the other matters.

For Instance, it is generally agreed among Writers, that Christianity was first
planted in the Eastern Indies by St. Thomas, and it is very well known that the
Christians there are to this day called St. Thomas-Christians, and it is
altogether as well known that they do (as they have always done) practice
Infant Baptism.

I could trace the other Apostles into the many Cities and Nations, whither
they severally went Discipling and Baptizing, and everywhere find
Infant Baptism received and continued as an Apostolical practice. But I Will not
lead you too far into these Historical accounts, which yet we must be obliged
to, or else we shall know but very little of the Acts of the greatest part of
the Apostles, for what they did, into what Cities and Nations they Traveled,
what Disciples they made, whom they Baptized is not written in Scripture.

But now, Sir, suppose some wild Theist or Atheist, in pursuance of their
Mischievous design to discredit the Apostles, should come and tell you, that
the greatest part of them, were a pack of Lazy Drones; who, though they were
under the obligation of a Command to Disciple and Baptize all Nations, yet
never moved a Foot upon that great Errand, did not the least Hand's-turn in all
that weighty Business; pray, Good Sir, what Answer would you make? How would
you vindicate the Apostles from so black a charge? I am sure that all
Scripture-Evidence would here fail you; you could not quote Scripture in the
defense of one half of them; but how then would you stop the Mouths of their
Accusers? Why, Sir, You must be beholden to just the evidence we have for
Infant-Baptism's being practiced by the Apostles; for by all the Authority
whereby you could silence their Accusers, and prove to 'em the Apostles
Travels, and the Conversions that they every where made all the wide World
over, even by all that Authority, I say, do we prove Infants to have been
Baptized by them.

And further, suppose an Atheist should fly in the face of our Blessed Savior
himself, and Blasphemously tell you that he was a false Prophet, who pretended
to foretell such things concerning the Destruction of the Jewish Church and
State as never came to pass, though he positively prophesied that That very
Generation should not pass away till all these should be fulfilled. Suppose, I
say, an Atheist should say thus, Good Sir, I must beseech you to tell me what
you would answer, or how you would clear our blessed Lord and Savior from the
foul Aspersion, you could not in this case have any help from Scripture; No,
but you would be forced to appeal to the Historians of that and of the
following Ages, and particularly to that most admirable Historian, Josephus, to
show how these Predictions and Prophecies of our Savior were accomplished, and
most wonderfully and punctually fulfilled about forty Years after our Savior's
Crucifixion. Well, Sir, and we have altogether as good evidence in the first
Writers of the Christian Church for Infant Baptism, as we have for the
Accomplishment of our Savior's Prophecies; and as you must prove our Savior
to have been a true Prophet in that Case, even so do we prove Infants to have
been Baptized in the Apostolical Ages.

Once more, some deny that the Apostles Baptized any Infants, and suppose a
Quaker (who is against all Water Baptism) should deny that they Baptized either
Men or Women, I know you would say that we have sufficient Proof of this in the
Acts of the Apostles. Oh, but, Sir, You need not be told that these Quakers
(many of them) are a sort of unmannerly fellows, that disrespect and disparage
the very Scriptures themselves, and perhaps they will ask you, Who writ that Book
in the New Testament called The Acts of the Apostles? Of what Authority is it?
Was the Author of it an Inspired Writer? and what can you say, why we are bound
to believe what we find Written therein more than in any other Old Book? And
now, pray, Sir, should a morose Quaker thus put you to it to prove the Authority
of the Acts of the Apostles, how would you do it? Truly you must answer, that
we have the whole Primitive Church bearing witness to it, that it was written
by an Inspired Author, viz. by St. Luke, and that it has ever been received as
Canonical Scripture throughout the Universal Church of Christ, dispersed over
the face of the whole Earth. And this indeed is sufficient evidence to a
Wiseman. But then we have the very same evidence for Infant-Baptism's being an
Apostolical practice; we have the Universal Church of Christ bearing witness
thereto in all places, yea, and at all times, for the first fifteen Hundred
Years after Christ, without exception.

Sir, That Infant Baptism was the Universal Practice of the Holy Catholic
Church, and that no time can be showed on this side the Apostles when it began,
is so manifestly and clearly proved from the best and most Authentic Writers
of all Ages, that some of our learned Adversaries have had more Conscience
than to deny it.

Menno, One of the most Learned of the Anabaptists, (as the Author of the Case
of Infant Baptism tells us from Cassander) acknowledged Infant Baptism to be as
Old as the Times of the Apostles, and therefore he was forced in the defense of
his cause to invent the Story, That though Infant Baptism was first taught in
the Apostles Times, yet that it was then taught by false Apostles, and false
Teachers; which proof-less Story is Learnedly and largely answered by the said
Author of the Case of Infant Baptism, page 47, 48, 49, 50.

And our excellent Dr. Falkner has these Words The Christian Church, in the
first Ages thereof, and in a Continued Succession from thence to this time,
has admitted Infants to be Baptized, and thought it self bound so to do. And
this he proves by several plain Testimonies out of St. Austin, St. Cyprian,
Origin, and from the famous African Council, and concludes that diverse other
Fathers and Councils might be added, to manifest the Universal Reception of
Infant Baptism in the Catholic Church. But this, says he, having been clearly
and sufficiently evidenced by the Historical Theses of Vossius upon this
Subject of Paedobaptism, I shall refer him thither who would have more large
and ample Proof hereof. Treatise concerning Reproaching, etc. pages 285.286.

And now, Good Sir, have patience with me till I shall briefly sum up what I
have said in this long Letter, and I will conclude.

I have shown you how little we read in Scripture of what The Apostles did in
this Case of Baptizing, after they had received the Command to Baptize all
Nations, and likewise what clear hints we have even in that little of their
Baptizing Infants; but then I have added, that as we find larger accounts of
the Apostles Travels and of the Nations Converted by them in the primimitive
Writers, so, that from the same Writers we are more fully assured that
Infant Baptism was an Apostolical Practice.

And you, Sir, I hope will not be so vain as to despise this Evidence, without
which you can never prove that the greatest part of the Apostles Baptized
either Man, Woman, or Child. Without which you cannot prove to an Atheist that
our Savior was a True Prophet. Without which you cannot prove to a Sullen
Quaker the Authority of that very Book (in which we have so may Proofs against
them of Baptism in general,) viz. The Acts of the Apostles.

And thus I have enquired into the Apostolical practice in this Case of
Baptizing Infants, and, I thank God, that the more I have inquired, I have
found the more and greater Satisfaction in the Case.

In the next place I am to enquire what Authority they had for this practice of
theirs, that is, I am to enquire whether I can find in all the New Testament
that Infant Baptism was any where Taught or Commanded. But I presume you will be
Content to trust me for this, till I may have a farther Opportunity, and in the
mean while I am,

Sir, July 2. School. Your etc. T. H.

LETTER VI.
Dear Sir,
THE Second part of your great Objection against Infant Baptism is this, You
find not in Scripture that any Infants were COMMANDED to be Baptized.

Now to this I could give you this short Answer: When the Disciples of Christ
made and Baptized more Disciples than John, John 4.1, 2. Let any Man living
tell me where the Command is written in Scripture, which gave these Disciples
of our Lord Authority to Baptize at that time; and I will undertake to show
you, that the very same Command obliged them to Baptize Infants: This I do
affirm, that they had then as much Command to Baptize Infants, as they had to
Baptize either Men or Women: And do you, Sir, make the trial if you please. Go
and learn from Scripture where these Disciples had any Command then to Baptize
the Elder sort, and if you do not find the same Command obliging them to
Baptize Children also, I do here freely tell you that I dare yield you the
Cause.

But to give a more particular Answer to this (as I have done to the former)
part of your Objection.

First, I will enquire from Scripture whether Infant Baptism was taught by our
Savior in his Lifetime.

Secondly, Whether it was Taught or Commanded by him after his Death and
Resurrection, before he Ascended into Heaven. And,

Thirdly, Whether it was taught by any of his Apostles after his Ascension.

(1.) I will make it my business at this time to Enquire from Scripture whether
Infant Baptism was taught by our Savior in his Lifetime.

Sir, The Sadducees could not find in all the five Books of Moses so much as
one single Text which taught the Doctrine of a Resurrection, and therefore they
Confidently denied the thing, and warmly disputed it with our Blessed Lord and
Savior himself. And you may be pleased to see how our Lord confuted and
convinced them by a Text of Scripture which they had overlooked, Mark 12.26.

Have you not read, said he, in the Book of Moses, how God spoke unto him,
Saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? to
which he added; But God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living. And this
was our Savior's Scripture Proof of a Resurrection, and from these very words
by just Reasonings and Consequences did he make the Truth of that great Doctrine
appear to those very Sadducees themselves, who had so long and so stiffly
opposed it.

It must indeed be acknowledged, that it required a Piercing Eye to find out a
Resurrection in these words, I am the God of Abraham, etc. And yet so it was:
The Resurrection was a Consequence that our Lord Himself then drew from them,
and the Consequence was acknowledged to be good Scripture Proof, and the
Sadducees were wiser than to Object against it.

This I have observed to let you see, that there may be Scripture Proof of a
thing, though every Eye cannot discern it; and that though we cannot always produce
plain and express words of Scripture in the defense of a Doctrine, yet if we can
prove it by right and genuine Consequence, we do as much as our Savior himself
did in the Case of a Resurrection; and I hope that in good Manners and Civility
to our Great Lord, you will allow such Proof as he made use of to be good and
sufficient. But further,

There were a sort of Heretics of Old called Macedonians, (and a spawn of them
we have still amongst us) who denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, and their
great Cry was; Where do you read in Scripture that the Holy Ghost is God? And I
do assure you, Sir, that it was truly Confessed that there is no such
Scripture-Text, no such express words in the whole Bible; it is not expressly
asserted (in terminis) either in the Old or New Testament, that the Holy Ghost
is God; But what then? There are in Scripture such things said of the Holy
Ghost, as by undoubted Consequence prove him to be God; as to give you but one
Instance of an Hundred: The Holy Ghost is said to be Omnipresent, Psalm. 139.7.
and from hence it necessarily follows as a very plain Consequence, that he must
needs be God, because God only is Omnipresent.

And now, Sir, with a like manner of Proof I will fall upon the matter in hand.
Though we find not in Scripture any such express Command as this, That Infants
shall be Baptized; yet we find such things given in Charge concerning them, as
necessarily Imply, that they ought to be Baptized; that is to say, we find in
Scripture that Children ought to be admitted into the Church of Christ, and we
there likewise find that there is no other ordinary way of admitting into that
Church but by Baptism.

And to give you full satisfaction in this matter, I will here undertake
briefly to prove, That our Blessed Lord and Savior did in his Lifetime teach,
both that Children are to be admitted into his Church, and that they are to be
admitted by Baptism.

That Children were admitted into God's Church of old, is as well known as that
they were then Circumcised. And what, I pray, is the Christian-Church but that
old Church Reformed? The Root and Stock are still the same, though as for the
Branches, some, viz. the Jews, were lopped off, and others, viz. the Gentiles,
are graffed in, as you may read at large, Romans 11.16, 17, 18.

Christianity indeed (as one speaks very well) is Judaism explained into its
Spiritual sense and meaning, and hence it is that the Christians in the New
Testament are called Jews; that is, Reformed Jews, Rev. 2.9. and sometimes the
Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. and sometimes the Children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. And
hence it is that the Christian-Church is called the New-Jerusalem, because it
is the Old Jerusalem (or Jewish Church) renewed and enlarged. Rev. 3.12.

But now, Good Sir, suppose that our Church should be taken down to the very
Foundation, and built again a great deal larger and more Glorious than now it
is; What think you? Might we not then take our Children along with us to our
Church as well as we do now? Certainly the Re-building and Beautifying it would
take away no one's privilege of entering into it.

In a resembling manner, there was indeed a great Reformation made by our
Savior in the Church of God, a great deal taken away, and a great deal added,
and almost the whole every ways altered for the better; but what is all this to
any ones privilege of entering into it? Nay, but certainly as Children were
admitted into the Church before that Reformation, so are they to be admitted
still, unless it be a part of the Reformation to exclude them.

And thus, upon the whole matter, it is very plain, that unless our Blessed
Savior has FORBIDDEN Infants to be admitted into his Church, they are still to
be admitted whether he has COMMANDED their Admission or no.

And here I might fix the Controversy, and justify their Admission, till you
can prove that our Lord has Forbidden it, which I dare venture to say you will
never be able to do; Nay, but our Lord has not only not forbidden their
Admission into the Church, but he has expressly Taught and Commanded it. For,

First, That Children ought to be admitted into his Church, he has expressly
taught in that Celebrated Text, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Which Text was spoken by way of Reprimand to his Disciples, who would have
kept Children from him; and therefore when he reproved them and said, Suffer
little Children to come unto me, he must needs mean such Children as they would
have kept from him; but these were such as were brought unto him, and such as
he took up in his Arms, and were therefore little Children in a literal Sense.

The words indeed are, Suffer little Children to come unto me; and therefore
say some, let them stay then till they can come: But if this was our Savior's
meaning, might not his Disciples very readily have answered? Lord, we have not
hindered any such from coming that could come, all that we have done was only
to Rebuke those that brought their Children.

And thus if Children might not be brought to Christ, but if they were to be
kept back till they themselves could come to him, I cannot see what the
Disciples had here done for our Lord to be displeased at; and yet the Text says
positively, That he was much displeased, and said, suffer little Children to
come unto me, Mark 10.14. And therefore unless we have no more Grace or Wit
than to say, that he was displeased at nothing; we must allow, that the
Children whom he would have suffered to come to him, were such as his Disciples
would have kept from him, and these were such as were brought unto him, and
such as he took up in his Arms.

But perhaps you will say, What then is the meaning of the words TO COME UNTO ME?
Suffer little Children to come unto me: Sir, I find an Answer made to this by
Mr. Walker, viz. That to come unto Christ, signifies, to become a Disciple of
Christ; for so when our Savior says, Come unto me all ye that Labor, his
meaning is, become Disciples to me, Mat. 11.28. And again, when it is said,
Behold Jesus Baptizeth, and all Men come to him; The meaning is, that they all
become his Disciples, John 3.26. And again, Ye will not come to me, said our
Lord, That is, ye will not become my Disciples, John 5.4.

The same excellent Author has observed from Dr. Hammond, that we may read the
word Proselyte in the very Original Text, Mat. 19.14. For there the Original
words are (...), which turned into English do even Compose and make up the word
Proselyte; and so in St. Matthew, I say the Original words are, Suffer little
Children ((...), that is,) to be Proselytes to me, or to be my Disciples: For
to be a Proselyte, and to be a Disciple is the same thing. As when our Lord
said to the Scribes and Pharisees that they had Compassed Sea and Land to make
one Proselyte; the meaning is, that they had compassed Sea and Land to make one
Disciple.

And thus has our Lord very plainly taught us that little Children must be
suffered to become his Disciples; yea, and he farther adds, that they are not
to be forbidden, and then gives such a Reason for it, as may put the matter
beyond all Dispute, For of such is the Kingdom of God: That is, little Children
are not to be forbidden becoming his Disciples; because of such, even of such
as were brought unto him is the Kingdom of God; both the Kingdom of Grace,
which is the Church Militant here on Earth, and the Kingdom of Glory, which is
the Church Triumphant in Heaven.

And thus we have a plain Scripture Text, wherein our Blessed Lord has very
clearly taught us, that little Children are to be suffered, and not to be
forbidden being admitted into his Church.

And this is according to that ancient Prophecy, foretelling the Conversion of
the Gentiles to Christianity. Thus says the Lord God, I will lift up mine hand
to the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the People, and they shall bring thy
Sons in their Arms, and thy Daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders,
Isa. 49.22.

And this is no more than what our Lord himself did fortell, when he so plainly
intimated, that there should be Lambs in his Flock, as well as Sheep, John
21.15.

But, Sir, if you would see more, and larger Proof of this matter, you may
consult Mr. Baxter's Book called Plain Scripture Proof of Infants
Church Membership and Baptism, wherein he has proved that Children ought to be
admitted into Christ's Church by no fewer than Six and twenty distinct
Arguments.

Well: But then the next Question is, How are they to be admitted? I Answer by
Baptism, for ordinarily there is no other way of Admission, as I shall prove by
and by.

But here I will take notice of an Objection that I find has been often started
upon this occasion; If little Children are to be admitted into Christ's Church,
and if there be no other way of admitting them but by Baptism, Why then did not
our Lord Baptize those Children that were brought unto him? I answer, Because
our Lord never Baptized any with Water. But then it may be asked again, Why did
he not Command his Disciples to Baptize them? I Answer again, Because his Hour
was not yet come; for he never, that we read of, Commanded his Disciples to
Baptize any, or any to be Baptized by them till after his Death and
Resurrection.

But, Sir, Give me leave briefly to remind you of what I have observed in my
first Letter concerning the outward and the inward part of Baptism, for I
therein showed you that the Ministers of Christ do but Baptize with Water,
which is the outward part of that Sacrament; It Is Christ himself who Baptizeth
with the Holy Ghost, or with the Spirit, which is the inward part: And here I
will farther observe, that our Lord has not so tied up himself to the use of
outward means, but he can if he pleases, and will for just and wise Reasons
perform the inward part without them.

For thus, should an Infidel or a Jew be Converted to Christianity, and
earnestly desire Baptism, and should the Ministers of Christ, to whom he has
the opportunity of applying himself for that purpose, be all so unfaithful as
to refuse to Baptize him, yea though he sought and begged of them so to do with
Tears; In such a Case as this where the outward Baptism with Water was so far
from being slighted, that it was earnestly desired, and yet could not be had
upon any terms whatsoever; In such a Case as this (I say,) I cannot think that
the unfaithfulness of Christ's Ministers in dispensing the outward part of the
Sacrament would hinder our Lord from doing the inward part, which is to Baptize
with the Spirit.

And this seems to have been the Case of the little Children brought unto him;
His Disciples rebuked those that brought them, and would not by any means have
had them come unto Christ, or become his Disciples: And for this our Lord
((...)) was very much displeased.

And in this great displeasure he seems to have intimated thus much to them;
That though they or any other of his Ministers should at any time refuse to admit
such for Disciples, whom he would have admitted, and should therefore refuse to
do the outward solemn part of Admission as they ought to do, yet this would be
no reason with him that he should refuse to do that inward part which he does
himself perform.

And accordingly he took up those very Children in his Arms and blessed them,
viz. with Spiritual Blessings, and may therefore in some Sense be said to have
Baptized them; I mean, to have Baptized them with the Spirit, which is the
inward part of Baptism, and the only part that Christ ever did or does. But,

(2.) As our Lord himself Received and Commanded Children to be received into
his Church, so likewise has he plainly taught us that they are to be admitted
by Baptism; yea, and that ordinarily they cannot otherwise be admitted, For
except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, John 3.5.

In which Text, By the Kingdom of God, taken in its lowest Sense, must be meant
the Christian Church, for so is the Christian Church very frequently called in
the New Testament, The Kingdom of God, and the Kingdom of Heaven: And this is
that Kingdom of God, viz. The Church of Christ, into which there is no entrance
(ordinarily) but through the Gate of Baptism.

The Text makes no exception, for though the English words are, Unless a Man be
born again, yet by Man must be understood Mankind, no Sex or Age excluded; for
the Original word, Translated Man, signifies any one; ((...)) except any one be
Born again, etc. Whosoever, or of what Age soever they be, except they be Born
again of Water and of the Spirit, that is, except they be Baptized, they cannot
enter into that Kingdom of God which is the Christian Church.

And so says the Apostle very expressly, Namely; That we are all Baptized into
that one Body of Christ, which is his Church, 1 Cor. 12.13. And so again, we
read of being Baptized into Christ, that is into Christ's Body, his Church,
Gal. 3.27. Yea, it is there said, that so many as have been Baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ, that is, are incorporated into that Body whereof
Christ is the Head. And accordingly I have observed that there is nothing more
usual in Antiquity, than for Baptism to be called Ecclesiae janua, the Gate of
the Church.

Baptism, says our very Learned Bishop, is the Door whereby we enter into the
Church, the Gate that lets us into Christ's Fold, and the first step to
Fellowship with God, and with his People; and hence it was that the Font was
used to be placed at the Door or entrance of the Church, to signify that by
this we come into the Congregation of Christ's Disciples, Aqua Genitalis, p.
447.

But I Will say no more of this, both because it is so plain, and because that it
is not, that I know of, denied by our Adversaries; Mr. Tombs would not deny it
in all that Controversy between him and Mr. Baxter; Nay, but in his Apology,
p. 58. I grant, says he, that Baptism is the way and manner of Solemn Admission
into the Church; and says Mr. Grantham in his Friendly Epistle, Baptism is an
Ordinance of Christ, necessary to the Admission of all Men to the privileges of
his Church, p. 31. And the Author of your little Book notes upon 1 Cor. 12.13.
that we are by Baptism added to the Bride the Lamb's Wife, as he there calls
the Christian Church; And again in his Note upon Heb. 6.1, 2. He says, that
Baptism is an Ordinance for the Solemnization of the Soul's visible
Marriage-Union with Christ; that is, we are united and wedded to Christ by
Baptism, as we are thereby incorporated into, and United to that Church which
is his Spouse.

But now it being so very plain (our Adversaries themselves not denying it)
That there is no other visible way of Admitting into Christ's Church but by
Baptism, it necessarily follows, that if Children ought (as I have before
proved) to be admitted into that Church, then they must be Baptized into it.

Sir, Should the King Command you to carry your pretty little Child into his
Presence Chamber, you would not I think once ask or question, whether you must
carry him in at the door, you would not I am sure be thought over-wise, should
you say, My Lord, O King! Your Royal Command is that I shall bring my Son into
your Presence Chamber, but pray does your Majesty mean that I shall bring him
in at the Door?

Just so, Our Lord having Commanded that Children shall be received into his
Church, should any one question whether they must be received in at the Door
(which is acknowleg'd to be Baptism) what Answer could he reasonably expect but
to be laughed at?

And thus, Sir, wonder not that there is no such express Command in Scripture
as this, That Infants shall be Baptized; For Christ's Command to receive them
into the Church is sufficient; and there was no need of any such second Command
to receive them in at the door, or to Baptize them. In short,

Our Lord has plainly taught us, that little Children must be admitted into his
Church, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of
such is the Kingdom of God, Mark 10.14. And he has plainly taught us, that
there is no other way of being admitted into his Church, but by Baptism, Except
any one be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God, John 3.5. And from hence I frame this Argument,

There is no other way of Admission into Christ's Church but by Baptism; But
little Children must be admitted into Christ's Church; Therefore they must be
Baptized.

And this I am persuaded is very good Proof, because it is such Proof as our
Lord made use of against the Pharisees, to convince them of a Resurrection; and
such Proof as the Learned Defenders of our Faith are forced to make use of
against the Macedonians, to convince them that the Holy Ghost is God.

And thus I have inquired how Infant Baptism was taught by our Savior in his
Lifetime.

I should now in the Second Place Enquire, whether Infant Baptism was taught by
him after his Death and Resurrection, before he Ascended into Heaven.

But this shall be the Subject Matter of my Next, which you may expect by the
next opportunity from,

Good Sir, July 9. School. Your etc. T. H.

LETTER VII.
Sir,
I Go on (as I engaged my self in my Last) to enquire,

Secondly, Whether Infant Baptism was Taught or Commanded by our Savior after
his Death and Resurrection, before he Ascended into Heaven.

And all that he Taught or Commanded concerning Baptizing with Water, at that
time may be readily found in these two Texts, Mat. 28.19. and Mark, 16.15, 16.
Both which it is my design at this time very particularly to Consider.

Now the Words of the first of these Texts are these in our English Bibles. Go
ye therefore and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. But, Sir, Be pleased to know, that the
Word Translated Teach, expressly signifies Disciple; Go ye therefore Disciple
all Nations, etc. For (...) and (...) are the same thing, and are rightly
rendered to make Disciples John. 4.1.

For the understanding of which, you must know that our Lord (as himself has
told us) was not sent but to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, Mat. 15.24.
His first endeavors were to Disciple the Jews, and accordingly it was only in
Judea, that any were Discipl'd and Baptized by him or by his Disciples during
his Lifetime, as you may see by Comparing, John 3.22. with John 4.1.

Well: But now that he was a leaving the World, Now that the Partition Wall was
to be broken down, he enlarges his Commission to his Disciples, and they were
not for the future to Disciple and Baptize in the Land of Judea only, but they
were now to Disciple and Baptize all Nations, even the whole Gentile World, Go
ye therefore ((...)) Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.

Which Command and Commission was first given to those Eleven Apostles, Mat.
28.16. who were all by Nation Jews or (as St. Paul expresses it) Israelites
according to the Flesh, Romans 9.3, 4. But, pray now, good Sir, Let us here
Consider, what then was, and had always been the way of Discipling or
Proselyting these Gentiles to the Jewish Church.

Truly it is most certain that when any of these Gentile Nations were converted
to Judaism, that not only themselves but their Children, together with
themselves, were also Circumcised and received into that Ancient Church, when
the Door was opened to take in the converted Parents, not the least of their
Infants (being but Eight Days old) was excluded; Nay, but no sooner was the
Gentile Proselyte Circumcised, and made a Member of the Jewish Church, but by
the very Law of Circumcision were all his Male-Children at eight Days Old to be
Circumcised and made Members likewise.

Thus stood the Case between the Jews and Gentiles; then the Gentile-Children
together with their Parents were Discipl'd and Received into that Church of Old.

But then certainly, the Apostles who had so lately been of that very Church,
and knew no other way of Discipling the Gentile Nations, but this of Discipling
their Children together with their Fathers; Certainly, I say, these Apostles
could not otherwise understand the Command to Disciple and Baptize all Nations,
than as obliging them to Disciple and Baptize the Children as well as the
Fathers.

For, here was no exception to exclude them; The Command was general, Go,
Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. All Nations without exception, and
Children are a part of the Nations, Yea, and a very great part too, and
therefore why they should not be Discipl'd and Baptized as well as any others,
for my part, I can see no Reason.

Nay, but certainly, unless it was the will of our Lord that Children should be
Discipl'd and Baptized with the rest of the Nations, he would have said
something to except them; he would have told his Apostles that they must not
Disciple or Receive such Infants into the Christian Church, as were Received
and Discipl'd into their Jewish Church. No, he would have said, you must not
mistake me, though I have commanded you to Disciple and Baptize all Nations, yet
I hardly mean one half of the Nations; for I do not mean so much as one Child
or Infant belonging to them. And thus Indeed must our Lord be supposed to have
Interpreted his Command to his Apostles, had he excluded Infants out of the
Command.

And then again, had they been thus taught to Disciple and Baptize no Infants,
not one of all the Nations but the Adult and grown Persons, methinks some
Charitable Body or other in the Name of the Poor Children should thus have
lamented and condol'd their Case.

And is it the Christian Church that is now the true Church of God? Time was,
when the Jewish Church was only so, and then was the the happy time for us Poor
Babes and Children! For had our Gentile Fathers been then Converted,
Circumcised and Received into that old Church of God, We their little Infants
must not have been left behind: No, but the Door into which our Fathers must
have entered then, would likewise have stood open for us their Children too.
But now, in the Christian Church, it seems, it is otherwise; Alas, the Door is
now close shut, and barred to keep us poor Infants out; There is no place for
us in this New Church of God; No, but though our Fathers are Baptized and Grafted
into the good Olive Tree, (as the Christian Church is called) Yet We, God help
us, We must remain Branches of the Wild Olive still, (as the Heathen World is
termed.)

And thus when the Apostles Discipl'd and Baptized the Gentile Nations into the
Church of Christ, had they excluded such Infants and Children as with their
Parents were received into the Jewish Church of Old, the Case of these Infants
and Children might justly have been thus Condol'd.

But our Lord, who was once an Infant himself, and as such received into the
Jewish Church, he has not indeed forbidden Infants now to be received into his;
No, he has given no such occasion of Complaint against him, for the Command is
Plain and Clear for the Discipling and Baptizing all Nations, not an Infant
excepted that I can find.

But Sir, The grand Objection follows in the next Verse, Teaching them to
observe all things Whatsoever I have commanded you, Mat. 28.20. And from hence
our Adversaries very confidently argue, That none are to be Discipl'd and
Baptized, but such as are Capable of being taught too, which Infants and
Children they boldly say are not.

But to this I answer; First, It Is said of our Lord, That he preached Peace to
them that were a far off, and to them that were nigh, Ephesians. 2.17. But how did
he preach Peace to these Ephesians that were a far off? Why he preached Peace
to them, by Teaching and Commanding his Apostles to Preach to them.

And thus did the Apostles teach Infants and Children, by Teaching and
Commanding the Parents to teach them, and thus only it was, that they were to
Teach all Nations when they Discipl'd and Baptized them, viz. they were
themselves immediately to Teach the elder sort, and they were to teach Children
by Teaching their Parents, and others to teach them, as our Lord preached Peace
to those afar off, by Teaching others to Preach to them.

And, Dear Sir, I Will look the Objection once over again, The whole Command and
Commission given to the Apostles was this, Go, Disciple all Nations, Baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded you. From which last
words is the Objection raised, that none are to be Discipl'd and Baptized, but
such as may be taught.

To which I farther answer, That if None are to be Discipl'd and Baptized, but
such as are also taught, then none are to be Discipl'd and Baptized but such as
are also taught to observe all things whatsoever our Lord Commanded, for so
says the Text expressly, not only Teaching them, but Teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I have Commanded.

But I verily believe that our Adversaries themselves Baptize those to whom
they have not taught all things whatsoever our Lord commanded. Yea, I may
venture to affirm, that the Eunuch was Baptized by Philip, and that the Jailer
and his Household were Baptized by Paul and Silas, before they had been Taught
the Twentieth part of what our Lord Commmanded.

And hence it is very plain that the Apostles Discipl'd and Baptized, those to
whom they did not then Teach all things whatsoever our Lord had Commanded, so
that though these words, Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
Commanded you, are added to the Command of Discipling and Baptizing; Yet it is
not necessary that all should be so taught who are Discipl'd and Baptized.

But still farther to invalidate this mighty Objection, I Will here put a plain
and familiar Case to You. Sir,

Suppose You should Command your Shepherd, saying, Go, Take care to preserve my
whole Flock, Driving them from off the Starving Commons into a better Pasture;
and providing to have them well and carefully Clipped.

And then should your Shepherd thus reason with Himself, and say, my Master's
Command is to have his whole Flock preserved, and driven into a better Pasture,
and well Clipped; that is he means that none are to be Preserved and better
Pastur'd but those that are also to be Clipped; and therefore the Lambs that are
not to be Clipped, must all be left upon the starving Commons still, nor am I to
take any Care to preserve them.

Sir, should your Shepherd thus foolishly argue, I hope you see that his
Argument in this Case against taking any care to preserve the Lambs, would be
the very same with our Adversaries Argument against Discipling and Baptizing
Infants. For,

May it please you, Sir, to have them set together: Our Lord commanded his
Apostles, Go, Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you.

And in like manner, You are supposed to Command your Shepherd, Go, take care
and preserve my whole Flock, driving them from off the starving Commons into a
better Pasture, and providing that they be well and carefully Clipped.

And then, as our Adversaries argue, from our Lord's Command, against the
Infants of all Nations, that they are not to be Discipl'd and Baptized, because
not to be taught; even so is your Shepherd supposed to argue from your command
against the Lambs of your Flock, that they are not to be preserved or driven
from off the Starving Commons into a better Pasture, because they are not to be
Clipped. For thus, in one Word,

Our Lord's Command is, say our Adversaries, to have all Nations Discipl'd,
Baptized, and Taught; And therefore None are to be Discipl'd and Baptized, but
such as are to be Taught too, and consequently no Infants. And just so, Your
Shepherd may be supposed to say, my Master's Command is to have all his Flock
Preserved, better Pastur'd, and well Clipped, and therefore none of his Flock are
to be preserved and better Pastur'd, but such as are to be Clipped too, and
Consequently no Lambs.

And thus, This way of Arguing being so mightily insisted upon by our
Adversaries (this indeed being their great and most common Objection) I have
therefore taken leave by this very plain and easy Comparison to show you the
Vanity and Folly of it.

And I am persuaded that you will not countenance or justify this way of
Arguing, left deluded by the like way of Reasoning, your Shepherd should really
play you the Scurvy trick which I have only now supposed.

Again, This way of Arguing may be very injurious to the Poor and Needy
likewise, as I will here demonstrate to you by another very plain Case.

Suppose, Good, Sir, that you in your great Charity, should Command me saying,
Go, Feed and Cloth all the Poor of the Parish, at My Cost and Charge, Teaching
them the Duties of Poor People.

Now according to our Adversary's way of Arguing, though you should thus Command
me to Feed and Cloth all the Poor without exception, yet I ought not to Feed
or Cloth so much as one Poor Child in the whole Parish, because Children are
not to be taught the Duties of Poor People.

But really, Sir, I should not so narrowly interpret your Command, nor so much
as once doubt but your will was, that the poor Children should all be Fed and
Clothed as well as their Parents, though they could not then be so well taught
their Duties.

And in short, You, Sir, may try me with the Command if you please, and I will
certainly Feed and Cloth all the Poor of the Parish, even the small and great
together: Yea, and I will not only Teach all that are then to be Taught the
Duties of Poor People, but I will Teach them in due time to Teach their
Children the same, and so in Effect I shall Teach, as well as Feed and Cloth
all the Poor of the Parish, so as to fulfill your Command in the several parts
of it.

And this is so very plain that you must needs see, how the Apostles in like
manner were to fulfill our Lord's Command, to Disciple, Baptize, and teach all
Nations, just as I have now showed you I should fulfill your Command, To Feed
and Cloth, and Teach all the Poor of the Parish without any exception, as to
Children or Infants.

I will add one very plain Case more out of Scripture, which I have already
taken notice of upon another Occasion. It Is said Mat. 25.32. That all Nations
shall be gathered before the great Judge, at the last Day, and it follows, That
some shall be set on the Right, and some on the Left Hand of the Judge, and
that he will say to those on his Right Hand I was an Hungered and ye gave me
Meat, and to those on his Left, I was an hungered and ye gave me no meat, etc.

Now because none of this can be said to Infants, must I conclude that they are
no part of the Nations which shall be gathered before the Judge at the last
Day? Truly with as much Reason and Truth may Children be excepted against, as
not meant by the Nations to be gathered before the Judge, as they can be
excepted against, as not meant by the Nations to be Discipl'd and Baptized.

For thus, Our Adversaries will not have Infants to be meant by the Nations to
be Baptized, Because these Nations are to be taught too, which Infants cannot
be. And so it may be argued that Infants are not to be meant by the Nations to
be gathered before the Judge; Because it must be said to these Nations, When I
was an Hungered, You gave me Meat, Or ye gave me no Meat; Which to Infants
cannot be said.

But most certain it is that Infants are meant by all the Nations to be
gathered before the Judge, Mat. 25.32. and why they should not be meant by all
the Nations to be Discipl'd and Baptized, I must say again that I can see no
reason.

The Command is plain enough and large enough to reach Infants as well as
others, Go, ye, Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them. For if all Nations are to
be Baptized, then are Infants and Children to be Baptized among the rest,
unless you can show me that they are here excepted, which I am well assured you
cannot, for, That the following words (Teaching them to observe all things
etc.) are no exception to their being Discipl'd and Baptized, I hope that I
have abundantly cleared to you after a very plain and undeniable manner.

And thus, I am Heartily persuaded that I find Infant Baptism here taught by
our Savior, after his Death and Resurrection, before he Ascended into Heaven.
Go ye, Disciple all Nations (Infants not excepted) Baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, etc. But then,

At the same time, between his Resurrection and Ascension, we find that he also
Commanded his Apostles, to go into all the World, and to Preach the Gospel to
every Creature. He that Believes and is Baptized shall be saved; but he that
Believes not shall be Damned, Mark 16.15, 16.

And here, Sir, we have another very terrible Objection to be Answered, for
from these words, He who believes and is Baptized, our Adversaries are very
Hot and Noisy in their Assertion, That none but Believers are to be Baptized,
and therefore no Infants. But to this I Answer,

First, That Infants either have Faith according to the Sense of this Text, or
they have not; if they have such Faith, then they may be Baptized, as our
Adversaries themselves will grant: But if they have not Faith according to the
meaning of this Text, what shall I say then? Even the Lord have Mercy upon
them, that they may not Die in that Faithless Infant-state, for the Text says
positively, That he who Believes not shall be Damned.

Nothing can be plainer than that this Text speaks of Faith, in such a sense as
makes the want of it Damning; but that Infants want Faith, so as to be Damned
for the want of it, May my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my Mouth, rather than
say so.

Secondly, It might truly be said, that he who Repents and Believes shall be
saved, and yet it would not thence follow, that Men ought first to Repent
before they Believe, for that is impossible to be done: It Is Impossible that
any Man should Repent and turn unto God, but he must first believe that there
is a God.

And thus, As it could not be true, That Men ought first to Repent, and then to
Believe, though it should be said, That he who Repents and Believes shall be
saved; So neither is it necessarily true, That we ought first to Believe, and
then to be Baptized; because it is said, That he who Believes and is Baptized,
shall be saved.

Thirdly, I dare say, That he who serves God faithfully all the days of his
Life, and is Baptized, shall be saved.

But what then? You will not I hope from hence Conclude, That none are to be
Baptized till they have served God faithfully all the days of their Lives, or
till they are just a Dying. Even so, when it is said, He who believes and is
Baptized shall be saved, you ought not from hence to Conclude, that none are to
be Baptized, till they have Believed.

It Is indeed the very same Case. If none but Believers are to be Baptized,
because it is said, He who believes and is Baptized shall be saved; Then none
but dying Persons are to be Baptized, because it may as truly be said, That he
who serves God truly all the days of his whole Life, and is Baptized, shall be
saved.

Lastly, Though you and I were Baptized in our Infancy, yet at the day of
Judgment, that great day of Salvation, when the Judge shall ask what we have
done to be saved? I doubt not, Dear Sir, but we may then cheerfully Answer,
that we have Believed and were Baptized. And assure your self, that the
Merciful Judge will not then reply; But did you first Believe, before you were
Baptized? For, Good Sir, there is no such Condition of Salvation in the whole
Bible. It is not written in Scripture, That except you Believe, you shall not
be Baptized; or he who believes not, shall not be Baptized; or let a Man first
Believe, and then let him be Baptized. No, there are no such Texts.

Indeed, there is a Text which says, Except ye become as little Children, ye
cannot enter into the (Church, or) Kingdom of God; But it is no where said,
That little Children must first become Men, before they shall enter into the
(Church, or) Kingdom of God.

And now Sir, I presume that I may have your good leave to Conclude for this
time.

Having sufficiently Considered the Texts, wherein we find all that our Savior
Taught from his Resurrection to his Ascension, concerning Baptizing with Water;
and I am persuaded that in the two Texts put together, there is not one
Syllable against Infant Baptism, but clear Proof for it in the first Text: yea,
and the second Text does so far plead for the Baptizing of Infants, as it makes
Baptism generally Necessary, in order to Salvation. He who Believes and is
Baptized, shall be saved.

And now in the Third and Last Place; I am further to enquire, whether
Infant Baptism was taught or Commanded by the Apostles of our Lord after his
Ascension into Heaven.

But this shall be my business in one Letter more, which I design upon this
Subject, and which you may expect by the next return of this Bearer from,

Sir, July 15. School. Your etc. T. H.

LETTER VIII.
SIR,
I Am now to enquire in the Third and Last Place, whether Infant Baptism was
taught or Commanded by the Apostles of our Lord after his Ascension into Heaven.

And here the very first time that they taught and practiced Baptism, what
great Reason we have to believe that they then practiced Infant Baptism, I have
formerly showed you, and now again, by the good help of God, I will endeavor
still farther to show you, that Infant Baptism was taught and Commanded by
them, at the same time likewise. See Acts 2.38.

Repent and be Baptized every one of you, said St. Peter there, to such an
Assembly as can never be supposed to have been without Children; for it was a
Throng which was occasioned by a sudden Report of a very wonderful and
surprising thing. 'T was such a mixed Crowd as is wont to flock together when a
Fire happens, or any Fray is Fought, or Game is Played, or Show is Seen; as Mr.
Walker has represented that sudden Assembly.

And this indeed is not much or very heartily denied: But our Adversaries
Object and say, That though St. Peter spoke to such an Assembly, and bid them be
Baptized every one of them, yet He cannot be supposed to have spoken to the
Infant-part of the Assembly, because he bid them first Repent. Repent and be
Baptized, every one of you. To which I might Answer,

First, That he may very well be supposed to have spoken to Infants and
Children, even when he said Repent; for I find in Scripture that Children have
been concerned in the Exercises of Repentance, as in that great Fast Day
proclaimed by Jehosaphat, When all Judah gathered themselves together to ask
help of the Lord, you may meet with their little Ones, and their Children among
the rest, 2 Chronicles. 20.13. Yea, and when the Prophet Joel Exhorted to a general
Repentance, even to Sanctify a Fast, and to call a Solemn Assembly; he not
only directed that the Elders should be Assembled, but even that Children and
such as sucked the Breast should be so too, Joel. 2.16. But,

Secondly, Though it was true, that Children could not be concerned in St.
Peter's Exhortation to Repent, yet this would be no just Cause or Impediment
why they might not be concerned in the following Words, Be Baptized every one
of you.

For pray, Dear Sir, Had the Apostle then said, Sell your Estates and give to
the Poor, and be Baptized every one of you; Would you from thence have
concluded, that none but Landed Men ought to have been Baptized; none but such
as had Estates to sell? or would the Poor Man have been excluded from Baptism,
for want of Lands and Tenements to dispose of? No certainly. But had the
Apostle so said, Sell your Estates and give to the Poor, and be Baptized every
one of you: he could only have meant, that the Rich Men should Sell their
Estates and give to the Poor, but that they should be Baptized every one of
them, Rich and Poor together, and as well they who had no Estates, as they who
had.

And just so, When he said, Repent and be Baptized every one of you, he could
only mean, that they should first Repent who stood in need of Repentance; but
that they should be Baptized every one of them, not only the Penitent, but they
who needed not Repentance likewise.

Or suppose again, that the Apostle had said, Forgive your Enemies and be
Baptized every one of you, What think you, Sir, might not the happy Men who had
no Enemies have been Baptized, because they could not first forgive their
Enemies? Yes surely, though they could forgive no Enemies, who had no Enemies to
be forgiven by them; yet nevertheless they might have been Baptized as well as
they, who having Enemies did first forgive them.

For upon this supposition, that the Apostle had really said, Forgive your
Enemies and be Baptized every one of you, he could only have meant that Persons
qualified for Baptism ought not to be in a state of Enmity; and hence it would
have followed that they who were not at Enmity with any, were the very Persons
so qualified and fit to be Baptized, without any more ado. But they who were in
a State of Enmity, they indeed were first to get out of that State by forgiving
their Enemies, before they could be fit for Baptism.

And thus, as he has said, Repent and be Baptized every one of you; he can only
mean that Persons qualified for Baptism ought not to be in an impenitent State.
And hence it follows, that they who are not in an Impenitent State (as Children
are not) are the very Persons qualified and fit for Baptism without any more
ado; but they who are in an Impenitent State, they indeed are first to get out
of that State by Repenting, before they can be fit for Baptism.

And now, Good Sir, excuse the Repetition, whilst I briefly set these things
together.

Suppose St. Peter had said, sell your Estates and be Baptized every one of
you, he must needs have meant that all should be Baptized, as well they who had
no Estates as they who had, and only that they who had Estates should first be
obliged to sell them. Or,

Suppose he had said, forgive your Enemies and be Baptized every one of you, he
must needs have been understood as exhorting them all to be Baptized; as well
them who had no Enemies, as them who had, and only that they who had Enemies
should first be obliged to forgive them.

And so, As he has said, Repent and be Baptized every one of you, he must needs
mean that every one of them should be Baptized, as well the happy Part of the
Company who needed no Repentance, as the Part that did; and only that they who
needed Repentance should first be obliged to Repent. And accordingly our
Blessed Lord and Savior himself, who needed no Repentance, and therefore did
not first Repent, was yet Baptized, as well as they who did first Repent,
because they needed Repentance.

And thus, the way so far thus cleared, I will now venture on to the Promise
annexed to this Exhortation of St. Peter, whereby it will still more evidently
appear that he has here taught the Baptism of Children.

For to persuade them to be Baptized every one of them, Be Baptized, said he,
and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost; and least they should mistake
him as not meaning their Children together with themselves, he expressly adds,
For the Promise is to you and to your Children.

The Promise was the same to them and to their Children, and they were to
receive it by the same means, viz. by Baptism; for if the promise might have
been received without Baptism, in vain did the Apostles urge it as an argument
to persuade them to be Baptized.

So that it is very plain that Baptism was the Means whereby the promise of the
Holy Ghost was to be received, and therefore as their Children were to receive
it as well as themselves, it follows, that their Children as well as themselves
were to be Baptized, that they might receive it. And so says the Apostle, Be
baptized every one of you, and ye shall receive, etc.

But here perhaps you may be ready to ask, whether Baptism be necessary to our
Receiving the Holy Ghost, or whether none else do receive it but they who are
Baptized.

To which I answer that Baptism is as necessary to our receiving the Holy
Ghost, as a diligent Hand is necessary to make one Rich. The Diligent hand
makes Rich, says Solomon.

And therefore as Riches do sometimes indeed by God's overruling Providence
fall to the share, even of the Lazy and the Slothful, So by God's extraordinary
Mercy is the Holy Ghost sometimes indeed given, even to the Vnbaptiz'd. But
what then? shall a Man hope to be Rich without Diligence, because the Lazy are
sometimes so? In like manner, shall any one hope for the Spirit without
Baptism, because the Unbaptiz'd do sometimes receive it?

It would not be wisely argued should a Man thus dispute; Solomon tells us
indeed that a Diligent hand makes Rich, well and it may be so, but let them be
tied up to his Rule that will; for my part I shall hold my self excused, hoping
that Riches may be had in an easier way, even as I sometimes see the Slothful
have them.

And yet just such is his Argument who thus disputes. It Is the Apostles rule
indeed, Be baptized and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; well and
it may be so, but let them be tied up to his Rule that will; for my part I
shall hold my self excused, hoping for the Holy Spirit without any such
Condition, even as I sometimes see that the Unbaptized receive it.

But still further: It Is objected on the other hand, that if the promise of the
Holy Ghost was so annexed to Baptism; methinks we should see more and better
Fruits of it in those that are Baptized.

To which I answer, That though it be very true that a diligent Hand makes Rich,
yet it is not every diligent Man that becomes Rich, for want of a good Use and
wise Improvement, of what his diligent hand acquires and gives him a just Title
to. So though Baptism has the promise of the Holy Ghost made to it, yet the
Baptized do not all bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit, for want of a good
Use of that Spiritual grace and Influence, which their Baptism acquires, and
gives them a Right and Title to.

But though the Diligent do not all become Rich for the aforesaid Reason, yet
Diligence is still to be Exhorted to, as a great and necessary means of
becoming Rich; and so, though the Baptized do not all bring forth the fruits of
the Spirit, for the like Reason aforesaid, yet Baptism is still to be Exhorted
to, as a great and necessary means of receiving the Spirit: Be baptized, says
St. Peter, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.

And this indeed seems to have been the great and standing Argument of this
Apostle; It was his usual way to Argue from the Inward part of this Sacrament
to the Outward. For,

When the Holy Ghost fell upon Cornelius and them that were with him, Can any
Man forbid Water, said our Apostle, that these should not be baptized, who have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? Act. 10.47. So here in this Text, The
promise of the Holy Ghost, says he, is to you and to your Children, and
therefore be Baptized every one of you that you may receive it.

But Sir, Here is one Difficulty more to be Encountered still, for here it is
that our Adversaries have started an Objection, to which they Boastingly say,
that we can give them no Answer; but truly, Sir, the Reason is, because they
will receive no Answer, and we cannot help that.

And therefore to deal fairly both with you and them, you shall first hear
their Objection in its full force, and then our Answer, and you shall Judge
between us.

Their Objection is this, That Children are not capable of Receiving the Holy
Ghost, and that therefore it is all folly to Baptize them upon that account. And
farther, St. Peter's saying to that great Assembly, Act. 2.38. Be baptized
every one of you, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, makes it
very plain that he Exhorted none to be Baptized but such as were capable of
receiving the Holy Ghost; but of this the little Children were not Capable, and
therefore were not to be Baptized.

This, Sir, is their mighty Objection, and I am pretty Confident they will
acknowledge that I have not minced the matter, but have set it before you with
all its strength.

And now then, to give a satisfactory Answer to it: I shall make it my business
to prove to you that even Infants and Children are capable of receiving the
Holy Ghost, and this I shall endeavor to do with all the plainness, and
brevity, and closeness that I can. And therefore,

First, we hear it very often from our Adversaries in a Challenging and
Triumphant way, that if we could but show in all the New Testament any one
Infant to have been Baptized, they would no longer dispute that Case with us.
But, Sir, we can show them an Infant in the Old Testament; yea, and an Infant
in the New Testament too, that received the Holy Ghost: And why then will they
dispute this any longer?

We know that it is the Holy Ghost that Sanctifies us, and yet we read in the
Old Testament that the Prophet Jeremy was Sanctified even before he came out of
the Womb, Jer. 1.5. And if we will take an Angel's word for it, we are assured,
in the New Testament, that John the Baptist was filled with the Holy Ghost even
from his Mother's Womb, Luke 1.15.

And here I will add, what I before observed, of the little Children who were
brought unto Christ, and whom he took up in his Arms, viz. That he blessed them
with Spiritual Blessings, and therefore it is evident that even these little
Children did then receive the Holy Spirit; for we must mean nothing else by
receiving the Holy Ghost or Holy Spirit, but receiving the Graces and Blessings
of the Holy Spirit.

Secondly, The Holy Job has most truly taught us, That a Clean thing is not to
be brought out of an Unclean, Job 14.4. No, but all are conceived and born in
Sin, as well as he who said, Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me, Psalm. 51.5. But then if all our Children are so conceived
and born, and cannot be brought clean out of an unclean thing, I am ready to
tremble at the thought, what would become of them if they were not capable of
some Spiritual Cleansing! certainly, Dear Sir, they are, or else it is most
certain that no unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of God.

Again, Our Lord has told us, That that which is born of the Flesh is Flesh,
(sinful Flesh of sinful Flesh) John 3.6. and there he also teaches us, that
what is only so born cannot see the Kingdom of God, for says he ((...)) except
one be born again, that is, born again of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. And this therefore would be another hard saying for our
Children, if they were not capable of being born again of the Spirit.

And further, If Children are Holy, they must be made so by the Holy Ghost; For
it is that Holy Spirit which Sanctifies or makes Holy, and therefore must the
Children needs be so Sanctified who are said to be Holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. And
indeed, unless they are so, though their Angels may behold the Face of God; yet
how shall they themselves ever come to see that Blessed Sight? Since we are
expressly told, that without Holiness no one ((...) is the Original word, and
signifies no one, be it who it will, Man or Child, Without Holiness no one)
shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

Thirdly, Dr. Fuller has observed, That the great cause of Men's mistakes in
this matter is this, They make the Body the Standard of the Soul, and are apt
to think that the Soul grows bigger as the Body does; even as if our Souls were
very little things when we are Infants, in comparison of what they are when we
become Men: Which is a very gross mistake indeed; for our Souls are not capable
of any such growth, but as to that, are the very same when first infused into
our Bodies, that they are ever after; the same in our Infancy, that they are in
our Old Age; and therefore why our Souls, which as to their Substance are the
same in every period of our Life, why they should at any time be incapable of
receiving the Holy Ghost, or of being Sanctified thereby, Let them give you a
Reason, who can find out a Reason to give, for I can find none.

But some there are, who will not yet believe the Spirit of Sanctification to
be in Infants; no, not in Baptized Infants, because they can see no Sign or
Expression of it.

To which I farther Answer, with the admired Bishop Tailor, "That it is no good
Argument "to say, Here is no Seed in the bowels of the Earth, because there is
nothing green upon the face of it. Nor is it a good Argument to say, That an
Heir so long as he is a Child, is no Heir, because so long as he is a Child he
differs nothing from a Servant, or we see no sign of his being Heir, and Lord
of all; as the Apostle speaks.

Nay, and further, When a Branch is Engrafted into the good Olive Tree, it
receives from it a kind of new Life and Nourishment, though we do not immediately
see any fruits of its doing so. Even so when Infants are grafted into Christ by
Baptism, and made Members of that True Vine (as he calls himself, John 15.1.)
they are thereby made Partakers of a new Spiritual Life and Nourishment; though
we do not presently see the good fruits of their being so.

Again, Christ's Body is his Church, and the Soul of that Body is the Holy
Spirit; and when Infants are Baptized and Incorporated into that Body, they are
thereby put under the Communications and Influences of the Spirit, as every the
least Part or Cubit added to our Statures, is thereby put under the Influences
of our Souls.

For thus, Baptism, says Dr. Sherlock, is our Regeneration or New Birth, the
Beginnings of a New Life, because it Incorporates us into Christ's Mystical
Body, which puts us under the Influences and Communications of his Life and
Spirit; as when a Branch is Engrafted into a Stock, it receives nourishment and
life from it. Discourse concerning the Nature of Unity, etc. p. 24.

And says Dr. Scott (another of your justly Admired Authors) It is by his
Blessed Spirit that Christ has promised to be with us to the end of the World,
Mat. 28.20. And Christ himself has assured us that upon his Ascension into
Heaven, He would pray his Father, and he should give us another Comforter,
meaning this Holy Ghost, that he might abide with us for ever, Joh. 14.16. And
accordingly the Holy Ghost is vitally united to the Church of Christ, even as
Souls are united to their Bodies; For as there is one Body or Church, so there
is one Spirit which animates that Body, Ephesians. 4.4. So that when by Baptism we
are once Incorporated into this Body, we are Entitled to, and do at least, de
Jure, participate of the vital Influence of the Holy Ghost, who is the Soul of
it. Christian Life, Part 2. Vol. 2. Chap. 7. p. 76, 77.

Indeed we know not how every particle of Flesh that grows to our Bodies is
immediately enlivened by our Souls, and yet so it is: And just so, though we know
not how, every Member that is added to the Body of Christ, is quickened by that
Holy Spirit, which, as the Soul of that Body, Communicates all its Spiritual
Life to it.

And, Lastly, That the Holy Spirit may be where we see no signs or expressions
of it, is plainly taught by our Savior himself, The wind blows where it
lifts, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it
comes or whither it goes; so is every one that is born of the Spirit, John
3.8. And so is every Infant that is born of the Spirit: The Spirit comes upon
it though thou can not tell how nor whence.

And all this I hope is very sufficient Proof, that even Infants and Children
are capable of receiving the Holy Spirit, and then according to St. Peter's
Argument, who can forbid Water that they should not be Baptized, who can
receive the Holy Ghost as well as we? Act. 10 47.

And in short, Our Adversaries great Objection is this, when St. Peter said, Be
baptized every one of you, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; he
plainly taught that none are to be Baptized, but such as are capable of
receiving the Holy Ghost. But of this (say they) little Children are not
capable, and therefore are not to be Baptized.

To which I will now Answer, That when St. Peter said, Be Baptized every one of
you, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; he plainly taught, that
all are to be Baptized who are capable of receiving the Holy Ghost: But of this
I have now proved little Children to be capable, and therefore they are to be
Baptized.

And thus I am persuaded that the Baptism of Children is most certainly taught
by St. Peter, in this very Text, Repent and be Baptized every one of you for
the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, for the
Promise is to you and to your Children. The plain sense of which Text is this,
The promise of the Holy Ghost is to you and to your Children, and therefore be
Baptized every one of you, you and your Children, that you may receive it.

And thus I have finished the Task which you set me, and I hope you need not be
remembered that I have thus far been Answering your Grand Objection, That you
no where find in Scripture, either that any Infants were Baptized, or Commanded
to be Baptized. And therefore it must be considered, that I could not fairly
insist upon any other Arguments in the Defense of the poor Childrens Right to
Baptism, but such as fell in the way, wherein your Objection has been my Guide
to lead me; and yet I have some hopes that notwithstanding our Adversaries
great pretenses to Scripture, I have said enough to satisfy you, that there is
not one Syllable in the Texts which they allege against Infant Baptism, but a
great deal for it.

But, now then, Sir, I should hugely wrong the Cause, should I not here
admonish you that there are Twenty and Twenty more Arguments still for the
Baptism of Infants, which I have not so much as once touched or hinted at; for
they came not within the Compass of my undertaking: So that if you would be
furnished with all the Plentiful variety of Arguments in this Case, you must
consult the many excellent Writers upon this Subject, and particularly those
very Learned Authors mentioned in my Fourth Letter. I am not willing to take
their Arguments out of their hands, for I am not so vain as to think my self
able to mend them. And therefore I will here conclude, unless it may please you
to lay some further Command upon,

Sir, July 22. School. Your real and humble Servant, T. H.

LETTER IX.
SIR,
I Am very willing to take that One step more which you speak of, and at your
request to set before you, so far as I am able, a true Notion of Baptism as to
the Necessity of it, (which as you truly imagine) may give considerable Light
to some difficulties relating to this Sacrament.

And here I will lay down this as a Fundamental Rule; Namely, That when we have
done all, we are unprofitable Servants, we can never merit at the hands of God
the least of all his Mercies; but from whence then are all our hopes of his
greatest, but from his own gracious promises?

Well: But it is every where plain in Scripture that all his Promises are
Conditional, made to us by way of Covenant or Contract, upon Condition that we
do so and so, as he commands and requires us to do in his Holy Word

And thus the New Testement, which teaches us our whole Christian Duty, is
called in the Original, (...), the New Covenant; that is, It Is the Writing
which contains the Sum of all God's Promises to us, and of our Engagements to
him, which we are obliged to perform that we may obtain those Promises: And so
his Promises on the one hand, and our Engagements on the other, make up that
New Covenant which is the Sum and Substance of our Christian Religion.

And it is this New Covenant which gives us our great hopes of Salvation, of
Heaven, and Eternal Happiness; For though we can do nothing to Merit or Deserve
such infinite Blessings, yet as God has been pleased to Promise them upon such
and such Conditions, our performance of these Conditions may give us a good
Claim and Title to them.

For thus, Sir, should you Contract and Covenant with me, to let me have and
hold your Estate upon this Condition, That I shall yearly Pay you for it one
Pepper-Corn, though such a Payment would come vastly short of the worth of your
Estate, yet by Virtue of the said Contract and Covenant, it would give me a
just Claim and Title to it.

In like manner, God contracts and covenants with us to give us Heaven and
Happiness, upon the Terms of our Faith and Repentance; and so though our Faith
and Repentance come infinitely more short of the worth of Heaven and Happiness,
than a Pepper-corn does of your Estate, yet by Virtue of the Covenant which God
makes with us, to give us Heaven and Happiness upon these conditions of Faith
and Repentance, Our performance of these Conditions gives us a good title to
all That Heaven and Happiness, which are so graciously promised to us upon
these Terms.

In short we cannot by our Faith and Repentance deserve and merit Salvation, no
more than I could pretend to merit your Estate by paying a Pepper-Corn for it:
No; but as all the title which my Punctual payment of a Pepper-Corn could give
me to your Estate would be but a Covenant-Title; so it is no other but alike
Covenant-Title which our Faith and Repentance give us to Salvation; that is to
say, they entitle us to Salvation only as they are the Terms and Conditions
upon which God, in the New Covenant, has promised to save us.

And now, Sir, You very well know that no Covenant is of any force or Binding,
till it is first signed and and Sealed, till that Solemnity be first over we
have no legal Title to the things Covenanted for; No, but be the contract never
so advantageous, it must be first Sealed and Signed, before we can claim the
Benefit of it.

And thus has it pleased God after the manner of Men to ratify his Covenants
with Mankind (as it were) with Sign and Seal, for so was Circumcision a Sign
whereby the Covenant between God and the Jews was Sealed and Confirmed, Romans
4.11. and till the Covenant was so Signed and Sealed, it was of no force; there
was no benefit to be claimed by it, No, but the uncircumsised Man-Child was to
be cut off from God's People, that is, He was not to be reckoned with those
People who were in Covenant with God, Genesis 17.14

And as Circumcision was Then, So is Baptism Now, viz. A Visible Sign whereby
the New Covenant between God and Us, is Sealed and Confirmed; and consequently
till we are first Baptized, we are no more in Covenant with God, than was the
Uncircumsised Man-Child.

And now, Sir, I hope you see the Necessity of Baptism, as it is the Sign and
Seal of that New Covenant which gives us all our hopes of Salvation. For,

As Faith and Repentance are necessary to our Salvation, as the Conditions of
the New Covenant; So is Baptism necessary, as the Sign and Seal of that
Covenant, to make it of force, and to give us a legal claim to the Blessings
promised on God's part, upon our performance of the Conditions promised on ours.

And thus it is, that to obtain Remission of Sins and Salvation, we are
exhorted in the New Testament, as well to Seal the Covenant by being Baptized,
as to perform the Conditions of it, by Believing and Repenting, for so, He who
Believes and is Baptized shall be saved, says our Savior, Mark, 16.16. And
repent and be Baptized for the remission of Sins, says St. Peter, Acts 2.38.

But it may be asked; Will not the Conditions save us without the Seal? Or will
not Faith and Repentance save us without Baptism.

To which I answer, First, That in some extraordinary Case, the want of
Baptism, (as the want of Circumcision was in the Wilderness) may be dispensed
with, when by reason of Impossibilities or insufferable Inconveniences, the
hearty desire and will to be Baptized may be accepted of for the Deed.

And because I would not be misunderstood, I will here take leave to clear to
you my meaning after this plain manner.

Should a Gracious Prince covenant with his People to give them large
Possessions, great Freedoms and Privileges upon some very easy Conditions,
which he might therefore require that they should be severally obliged to the
performance of under their own Hands and Seals.

Now should any of his Subjects be any ways hindered from Setting their Hands
and Seals to such an advantageous Covenant, though they very much desired and
endeavored so to do; I cannot think but a gracious Prince would in such a Case
excuse and dispense with their not Sealing, and would by no means deprive them
of the benefits of the Covenant for an unwilling Omission which they could no
ways help.

But then, should any of them refuse to set their Hands and Seals to the
Covenant out of mere Wilfulness and Stubbornness, this sure would be
interpreted to be perfect contempt, and a downright rejecting of the Covenant
it self; and it is not to be imagined that the most gracious Prince in the
World would bestow the benefits of such a Covenant upon such wretched Despisers
of it.

And this is our Case; The most Gracious King of Heaven covenants to give us
all the Richest Blessings both of this World and the next, upon very easy
Conditions; which he therefore requires that we should be obliged to the
performance of by our Baptismal Engagements.

But now, when it so happens that Baptism is not to be had, though it be never so
much desired or sought for, I doubt not but our gracious God will hold us
excused in such a Case; nor will he deprive us of the Benefits of the New
Covenant, for want of that Baptism (which is the Seal of it) when we can no
ways have it.

But then, should we Wilfully and Stubbornly refuse so to Seal, or to come
under any Baptismal Engagements; This certainly would be looked upon as holding
the Covenant it self in despite, nor could it be expected that our Gracious
God, should bestow the benefits of such an advantageous Covenant upon them, who
should so dare to despise it.

And therefore, Secondly, They who are so Confident that Faith and Repentance
will ordinarily and always save us without Baptism: They seem to me either to
have too high thoughts of their Faith and Repentance, or too low thoughts of
Salvation.

It Is indeed a popular Argument to say, that sure God will never deny Salvation
to a poor penitent Believer, though he should refuse to be Baptized. But Sir, I
may as well say, that sure you will not deny your Estate to any One who shall
yearly pay you a Pepper-corn for it, though he refuse to Seal any Contract to
that purpose.

For, as a Pepper-corn, without a Contract, or by it is own pure worth and merit
can never be thought a valuable Consideration for your Estate, so Faith and
Repentance without a Covenant, or by their own pure worth and merit can never
be sufficient to purchase our Salvation. For pray, Dear Sir, what is our Faith
and Repentance worth in comparison with Salvation? Truly not so much (as I said
before) as a Pepper-Corn is worth in comparison with your Estate.

And therefore, as it is necessary that there should be a Contract to that
purpose, and that That Contract should be first Sealed, before your Estate can
be laid claim to upon the poor Terms of paying a Pepper-Corn for it; so it is
necessary, that there be a Covenant to That purpose, and that That Covenant be
first Sealed before Salvation can be laid claim to upon the poor Conditions of
our Faith and Repentance.

And yet it is true, I do not for all this, absolutely deny Salvation to a good
Man, for being Unbaptized, even when he might have been so; for God's Mercies
are Infinite, and he may do more than he has promised, and save even them, whom
he is not obliged by any Covenant to save. Just, Good Sir, as you may dispose
of your Estate to whom you please, though you be under no obligation of promise
or covenant so to do. But who can wisely or with any good assurance expect this
at your Hands? Such an uncontracted, uncovenanted bounty is more than can be
reasonably hoped for.

And certainly it is much a wiser Course to secure to our selves an Inheritance
by a Covenant-right and Title to it, than to depend for it upon any Man's
unknown Will and Pleasure. And so it is certainly much safer to have a
Covenant-title to the Kingdom of Heaven, than wholly to rely upon an uncertain
extraordinary kindness, and to depend for it upon God's unknown and
uncovenanted Mercies.

In short, the Sum of what I have now said is this; God will in some Cases
save us without Baptism; viz. when Baptism is not to be had though it be desired
and sought for; Yea, and for ought we know to the contrary, by his
extraordinary uncovenanted Mercies he may save some who might be baptized but
are not. But this is a great Uncertainty, such an Uncertainty as no wise Man
will rely upon, or venture his Salvation upon such a perilous hazard; nay, but
without the Covenant it would be Pride and Presumption in the best Man upon
Earth to pretend to an ASSURANCE of Salvation, or to claim any Right to be
saved, merely upon the account of his own worthless Performances.

But then, on the other hand, when the New Covenant has been sealed in Baptism,
God is even then obliged to fulfill his Promises made in that Covenant to them
who perform the Conditions of it: And as he is faithful in all his Promises,
and just in all his Dealings, he cannot, will not do otherwise. No, but though
our best Performances come infinitely short of Salvation in Worth and Merit;
Yet as God has covenanted to save us upon such worthless Conditions, we are
hence ASSURED that he will do so.

But now, Sir, let me ask, First, Who can dispose of your Estate upon any
Conditions, much less upon very mean Conditions, and seal Covenants to such
purpose in your Name? Who, I say, can do thus, unless you do your self empower
and commission him so to do; that is, unless it be some prime Servant or
Steward, whom you have your self first Authorized in that behalf?

But then, Who is it that in the Name of God may Contract and Covenant with us
to give us his Heaven and Happiness upon any such worthless Conditions as we
are Capable of performing? Who, I say, dares take this power upon him, unless
it be given him from above; that is, unless he be a Lawful Minister of Christ,
and a Steward of the Mysteries of God? 1 Cor. 4.1.

In a word, When we baptize we do in God's stead and in his Name Contract and
Covenant with the Baptized Persons, and so we take upon us to oblige God
himself to make good the Promises of that Covenant whenever the Conditions of
it are performed. But certainly then, when we take thus much upon us, even to
bring God himself into Bonds, and under Obligations, it infinitely Concerns us
to be thoroughly satisfied by what Authority we do this, and who gave us this
Authority.

You must needs understand this (says an excellent Author) that they who shall
pretend to act in any Office by the King's Authority without a true Commission;
The King will be so far from reckoning himself obliged to confirm what they
shall act in his Name, that he will punish the presumption of such Officers,
and those that adhere to them; and, Dear Sir, I will leave it to you to make
the Application.

But then, Secondly, Let me ask again, Are there any more New Covenants than
one? Or are not we and our Children to be saved by the same Covenant? And why
then may not our Children together with our selves be admitted to a Partnership
in it? It was their Ancient Privilege to be admitted with their Parents in to
Covenant with God, as you may plainly see, (and pray, Sir, take your Bible and
look the place) Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12.

And it is no strange thing for Children to be bound in Covenants as Copartners
with their Parents, For may not a Parent (says Mr. Baxter) take a Lease for
Himself and his Child? Yea (says he) it is a plain natural Duty of Parents to
Covenant for their Children, when it is for their Good. And he asks the
Question, Were it not a Sin in that Parent who would refuse to engage his Child
in an advantageous Covenant, when else the Child would lose the benefit of it?
And says our very Learned Bishop of Ely A Parent may Contract with God on his
Child's behalf, as a Guardian does in behalf of a Minor, or one under age;
which passage with more of the same Nature is in That his admirable Discourse
called Aqua Genitalis.

And now, Good Sir, That I may clear and conclude this whole matter very
briefly, I will only farther ask leave to exercise your Patience with this very
plain Case.

Should some great Person make the kind offer, to lease out his Estate to his
Tenants and to their Children upon Condition, that they shall be bound (as often
as they shall be required) to do some little Suit and Service to him.

Should you then ask me, What is required of such Persons as are to have these
Leases Sealed to them?

I could answer, That they are to promise and do some little Suit and Service
to their Landlord, whenever they shall be required so to do.

And should you ask again, But why then are Children bound in such Leases, when
by reason of their tender Age they can neither promise nor perform that Suit
and Service?

Now to this I could likewise answer, Because their Parents or Guardians
promise and engage for them, (which is a very usual thing) which Promise and
Engagement, when they come to age themselves are bound to perform.

And should you ask again, But how can Parents or Guardians promise truly for
their Children, that they shall do such Suit and Service, when perhaps they may
not live to do it; or else when they come to age, they may prove Undutiful and
Stubborn, and may refuse to do it.

Even to this I could likewise answer, First, That if they do not live till
they are capable of performing the Promises made for them; then it is most
certain that they do not live till they are capable of Breaking them; and so
far therefore all is well enough, I hope. And Secondly, If when they come at age
they prove Stubborn and Disobedient, and will not be persuaded to do the Suit
and Service which their Parents or Guardians promised in their Names; Well,
Sir, even in this Case of the Childrens disobedience, their Parents are still
blameless, nor do their Promises made for their Children become Lies and
Falsehoods, as some foolishly speak, for they were Covenant-promises, and all
the meaning of them was, that their Children should perform them, or else
forfeit their Leases; So that if their Children do not perform them, they must
even forfeit accordingly, and there is an end of that matter.

And thus, In the New Covenant, whereof Christ Jesus is the Mediator, Heb. 8.6.
and which was the purchase of his Blood, as is intimated in that saying wherein
his Blood is called the Blood of the New Covenant, that is, the Blood whereby
the New Covenant was purchased Mat. 26.28. In this New Covenant I say which
God, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ makes with all that will
enter into it, He obliges himself on the one hand to bestow Heaven and
Happiness upon the Conditions of Faith and Repentance, and they who enter into
this Covenant do on the other hand Promise and Engage to perform these
Conditions. And now Sir, If you ask, What is required of Persons to be Baptized
into this Covenant?

You have an Answer in our Catechism; Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and
Faith, whereby they steadfastly believe the Promises of God made to them in
that Sacrament.

And if you ask again, Why then are Infants Baptized, when by reason of their
tender age they cannot perform them?

The Answer follows in the same Catechism, Because (as in the aforesaid Case)
they Promise them by their Sureties, which Promise when they come to age
themselves are bound to perform.

And if you ask again, How can Sureties truly promise for such Infants that
they shall perform these Conditions, when perhaps they may not live to perform
them; or else if they live to it, they may prove Stubborn and undutiful, and
refuse to perform them?

To which I Answer as before, First, That if they do not live to perform, then
neither do they live to break them, nor consequently is there any breach of
promise thus far to be accounted for. And, Secondly, If when they come at Age,
they prove Stubborn and Disobedient, and will not be persuaded to perform what
their Sureties promised for them: Well Sir, Their Sureties may be still
blameless, nor do their promises become Lies and Falsehoods, as some Ignorant
Peoples are apt to speak; for it is here to be noted that they are perfect
Covenant-promises, and the meaning of them is, that the Children shall perform
the Conditions of the Covenant, or else forfeit and loose the Benefits of it.

And thus doubt not, Good Sir, but their Sureties may safely Promise for our
Children, That they shall serve God truly all the days of their Lives, for the
Enjoyment of Heaven and Happiness at the end of them.

And let us not say, that we dare not so Promise for them, lest they should not
perform, and so we become Liars; Oh let us not deprive them of the Benefits of
the New Covenant out of any such vain and foolish fear, for thus runs the
Covenant whereof Baptism is the Seal: God promises Heaven upon such and such
Conditions, and their Sureties promise for our Children that they shall perform
these Conditions for that Heaven; that is, they promise for our Children that
they shall perform these Conditions, or else forfeit that Heaven which is not
otherwise to be had or hoped for but upon these Conditions.

And this is the true nature and meaning of those Promises which are made by
Parents and Sureties in the Names of Baptized Infants, and you now plainly see,
I hope, that there is no such danger in them as some poor silly people (whom
you know and have heard) will be talking of.

And the danger would be less still, did but all Sureties strictly observe what
they are most excellently taught in the Exhortation made to them at the
Conclusion of the Office for the Public Baptism of Infants in our Common
Prayer-Books. And indeed,

When you have made an Advantageous Covenant for your Children, as you desire
that they should reap the Benefit of it, you must be sure to take care, that (
as soon as they shall be able to learn) they may be instructed in the Nature of
it, and be taught the Conditions required of them; together with the Advantages
which will accrue to them by their performance of these Conditions, as also the
great Damages which they shall sustain by their wilful neglect of them.

Even so, it is not enough for their Sureties to engage Infants and Children in
Covenant with God, but they must be sure to take care (especially in case of
the Parents Death or neglect) that the Children be taught (as soon as they
shall be able to learn) what they are bound by that Covenant to perform; and
what infinite Gainers they shall certainly be by a Conscientious observance of
the Conditions required of them, and what infinite Losers by their wilful and
continued failure in the performance of these Conditions.

Those for whom you stand as Sureties, you ought (says the Pious Author of the
Christian Monitor) to do your utmost toward their good Education in the
knowledge of God and Religion, according to the Charge given you, Especially if
the Parents Die, or prove negligent. Page 37.

And Dear, Sir, In case of the Parents Death, the State has provided that
Children shall not want Guardians to take care of their Temporal Inheritances,
and shall any blame the Church for taking as good care of their Souls, as the
State has done of their Lands and Possessions?

Or why may not, why should not the Church require that in case of the Parents
Death, their Children should have Sureties obliged to take care of their
Eternal Affairs, as well as the State requires that they shall have Guardians
obliged to take care of their Temporal?

Certainly, were we but as mindful and concerned what may become of our
Childrens Souls after our Decease, as we are concerned, what may become of the
Estates which we leave them; we should then be as willing and careful to
provide good Sureties for them, who are obliged to look after their Souls, as
now we are careful to appoint them good Guardians, who are obliged to look
after their Estates.

And, Sir, Let the Ill-advised World say what they please, there is as much
Popery in the State for requiring Guardians, as there is in the Church for
requiring Sureties for Children; unless the same care may not without Popery be
taken of their Souls, which may without Popery be taken of their Estates.

But perhaps you will say, That Sureties very seldom take this care of the
Children's Souls, which I am speaking of.

I Answer, That neither are all Guardians Faithful and Just as they ought to
be; so that you cannot still blame the Church for requiring Sureties, because
of that general neglect of their Duties which you observe among them; but you
must also blame the State for requiring Guardians, because of that too general
unfaithfulness, which among them likewise is both observed and lamented in this
Age.

And then again, in case of the Parents negligence. As it is at the Request of
those Parents that we become Sureties for their Children, we do thereby acquire
some kind of Authority over those very Parents themselves, as well as over
their Children; and we may roundly reprove even those very Parents, if they
bring not up their Children in the Practice of those Christian Duties, which
themselves desired and procured us to Promise in their Children's Names; and
much more may we Reprove and Rebuke their Children being grown to years of
discretion if then they neglect those duties.

And thus, if Sureties are bound thus to give such Reproof and Christian
Admonition to those Parents and Children for whom they have undertaken to the
Church, it is but a very necessary Duty that they are thus bound to, and which
all Christians are obliged to perform toward one another, as there is
occasion. Those very Duties which we are obliged in General to perform toward
one another, we are but more Particularly obliged to perform them toward those
Children for whom we become Sureties.

And therefore, They who shun the Charitable work of becoming Sureties for
Children, because they are thereby obliged to Advise, Counsel, Exhort, and
Reprove them as they find occasion; they may even as well refuse to become
Christians, because by their very Christianity they are obliged (if there be a
like occasion) to Advise, Counsel, Exhort, or Reprove all their
Fellow Christians.

And further, If some would have all Sureties at Baptism to be laid aside,
Because there are but few such Sureties that Conscientiously perform what they
undertake; might not the same reason persuade others to lay Baptism it self
aside, viz. Because there are but few who are Baptized that Conscientiously
perform their Baptismal Engagements?

For thus, Here comes a bold Man, and makes a Noise, and quarrels with the
Church, for Requiring that Children shall have Sureties to undertake for their
Instruction and Education in the Christian Religion; and all the Reason that he
can give against the use of such Sureties, is, because so few of them do as
they say, or perform what they promise. And, Dear Sir, May not another bold
Fellow be thus Encouraged to quarrel with the Church, for putting it upon all
Persons to Renounce the Devil, the World and the Flesh at their Baptism, viz.
Because but few who are Baptized do so Renounce these Spiritual Enemies in
their Lives and Practices, as by their Baptismal-Engagements they are obliged
to do.

Surely, if the general neglect of Sureties, as to the Obligations laid upon
them, be a good Reason why there should be no Sureties at all; then the like
general neglect of Baptized Persons, as to the Obligations laid upon them too,
may be thought a good Reason why there should be none Baptized at all.

But, Sir, When People have nothing to say against the use of Sureties, but
that the Duties which they take upon themselves are seldom regarded; These very
People may soon help to remove the Objection, Namely, by their undertaking for,
and performing these Duties toward Children; whereby the usefulness and
advantage of having such Sureties would be seen and felt, and the good and
Charitable meaning of the Church would be understood and applauded where she
requires, that there shall be for every Male-Child to be Baptized, two
Godfathers and one God-Mother, and for every Female, one Godfather and two
Godmothers.

Upon the whole matter, Let us take care that our Children as well as our
selves be admitted into the New Covenant by Baptism; For it is the one and only
Covenant by which both we and our Children are to be saved; and let us remember
how heavily God complained by his Prophet of some, who took away his Glory for
ever from little Children, Micah 2.9.

It Is true, When our Newborn Infants die Unbaptized before we can possibly
bring them to that Holy Sacrament, we may reasonably hope that in such a Case
the want of Baptism will neither be required of them nor us.

But when we refuse, or neglect to have them Baptized, when we neither want
time nor opportunity so to do; then whatever happens to the Innocents (says the
Seraphick Bishop Tailor) we may well fear lest God should require their Souls
at our hands. We know indeed (says he) that God is good, infinitely good, but
we know that it is not at all good to tempt his Goodness; and yet he tempts
God's Goodness, who expects to meet his Children in Heaven, when himself shuts
the Door (which is Baptism) against them; which, for ought he knows, is the
only Door that stands open.

And now, Sir, As you put it upon me to begin these Letters with a very Solemn
Protestation, so I will here take leave to Conclude them with one too, and
therefore in the Apostle's words 2 Cor. 1.23. I call God for a Record upon my
Soul, that I would not for all the World have any Child of mine die unbaptized
through my fault or negligence: Dear Sir, I say the Truth in Christ, I lie not,
as the same Apostle protests again. And you may assure your self that I speak
the Truth likewise, when I tell you that I am,

SIR, July 29. School. Your very sincere and faithful Servant, T. H.

FINIS;

