KEILIA 'EKKLSIASTIKA.

THE HISTORICAL AND MISCELLANEOUS TRACTS Of the Reverend and Learned Peter
Heylyn. D. D.

Now Collected into one Volume: I. Ecclesia Vindicata: Or, The Church of
ENGLAND Justified, 1. In the Way and Manner of her Reformation. 2. In
Officiating by a Public Liturgy. 3. In prescribing a set Form of Prayer to be
used by Preachers before their Sermons. 4. In her Right and Patrimony of
Tithes. 5. In retaining the Episcopal Government, 6. And the Canonical
Ordination of Priests and Deacons.
II. The History of the SABBATH: in two Parts. III. Historia Quinquarticularis:
Or, A Historical Declaration of the Judgment of the Western Churches, and more
particularly of the Church of England, in the Five Controverted Points
reproached in these last times with the Name of Arminianism. IV. The
Stumbling Block of Disobedience and Rebellion, proving the Kingly Power to be
neither Coordinate nor Subordinate to any other upon Earth. To which are Added
V. A Treatise de jure Paritatis Episcoporum: Or, A Defense of the Right of
Peerage of the English Bishops.


AND An Account of the Life of the AUTHOR: Never before Published.

With an exact Table to the whole.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, for Charles Harper at the Flower-de-luce over
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet, 1681.

THE LIFE OF The most Learned and Reverend, Dr. PETER HEYLYN.
TO Write the Lives of worthy Personages was ever accounted a most laudable
custom amongst the Heathens: For to perpetuate the memory of the Dead, who were
eminent in Virtue, did manifestly conduce to the public benefit of the
Living; much more the Ancient Christians in their time, both solemnly retained
this practice, and adjudged it an act of Piety and Justice to the Deceased. If
they were Men of Fame for Learning, or other Virtues, to Celebrate their
praises to Posterity, and by this means stir up Emulation in others, to follow
so noble precedents before them. For which cause S. Jerome writ his Catalogus
illustrium Virorum; before whom also Eusebius, with others, in short recorded
to future Ages, the holy Lives of those Primitive Fathers, who were signally
active or passive for the Christian Faith. Tacit. lib. 4.
Suum cuique decus posteritas rependit, says the Historian: Posterity does
render to every man the Commendation he deserves.

Therefore for the Reverend Authors sake, and in due Veneration of his Name,
which I doubt not is honored by all true Sons of the Church of England, both
for his Learned Writings and constant Sufferings in defense of her Doctrine and
Discipline established by Law, here is faithfully presented to them a true and
complete Narrative of his Life, before his Elaborate Works Reprinted; to answer
the common expectation of men in this case, who would read his Person (together
with the ordinary and extraordinary occurrences of Providence that befell him)
as well as his Books that were long before published to the World. To give
satisfaction in the former, here is nothing inserted but the Relations of
truth, which has been often heard from his own mouth spoken to his dearest
Friends, or written by his Pen in some loose fragments of Paper that were found
left in his Study after his death; upon which, as on a sure foundation, the
whole Series and Structure of the following Discourse is laid together, but
would have been more happily done, if he had left larger Memoirs for it.
Nothing was more usual in ancient times, than for good men, says Tacitus, to
describe their own Lives. Suam ipsi vitam narrare, In vita Jul. Agric.
fiduciam potius morum, quam arrogantiam arbitrati sunt. Upon a confidence of
their right behavior, rather than to be supposed any arrogance or presumption
in them.

First of all I shall begin with his Birth. In that Country above all other,
enobled with the famous seat of the Muses, to which he was a constant Votary;
Cambd. Britt.
by Cambden, Oxford is called the Sun, Eye and Soul of Great Britain; by
Matthew Paris, the second School of the Church; the present Author says,
co-eval to Paris, if not before it, the glory of this Island, and of the
Western parts; near which place, or noble Athens, Peter Heylyn was Born at
Burford, an ancient Town, of good Note in the County of Oxford, upon the 29th.
day of November. An. Dom. 1600. in the same year with the Celebrated Historian,
Quensted. Dialog. de pat. illust. vir.
Jacobus Aug. Thuanus, on both whom the Stars poured forth the like benign
influences; But the former, viz. Peter Heylyn had not only the faculty of an
Historian, but the gift of a general Scholar in other Learning, (...), as will
appear to any one that reads his laborious Writings.

He was second Son of Henry Heylyn Gentleman, Descended from the Ancient Family
of the Heylyns, of Pentre-Heylyn in Moungomery-Shire, then part of Powis-Land,
from the Princes whereof they were derived, and unto whom they were Hereditary
Cup-Bearers; for so the word Heylyn does signify in the Welsh or British
Language: An Honorable Office in most Nations, which we find in Divine as well
as Profane History, Neh. 1.11. Magni honoris erat Pincernae munus apud Persas,
says Alex. ab. Alex. And if Cambden Clarencieux be of good Authority, the
Reverend Doctor deriveth his Pedigree from Greno ap Heylyn, who descended from
Brockwell Skythrac, one of the Princes of Powis-Land, a man of so great
Authority with the Princes of North Wales, that Llewellyn the last Prince of
that Country made choice of the said Grono-ap-Heylyn to treat with the
Commissioners of Edward I. King of England, for the concluding a final Peace
between them; which afterward being broken by L'lewellyn, in him ended all the
Princes of North Wales, after they had Reigned for the space of 405. years; a
goodly time, that scarcely the greatest Monarchies in the World have withstood
their fatal period and dissolution. Yet the Family of Pentre Heylyn, from whom
the said Grono-ap-Heylyn descended in a direct Line, continued their Seat,
until the year Anno Dom, 1637. at which time Rowland Heylyn, Alderman and
Sheriff of London, and Cousin-german to Dr. Heylyn's Father, dying without
Issue-Male, the Seat was transferred into another Family, into which the
Heiresses Married; but if the Doctor had lived a little longer, he intended to
have repurchased that Seat, and bring it back again into the Name and Family.
His Cousin Mr. Rowland Heylyn, before his death, caused the Welsh and British
Bible to be Printed at his own Charges, in a portable Volume, for the benefit
of his Countrymen, which was before in a large Church Folio; also the Practice
of Piety in Welsh, a Book, though common, not to be despised; besides, a Welsh
Dictionary for the better understanding of that Language. One thing of chief
remark is, a Tradition among the Heylyns, deriving their Pedigree from
Brockwell Skythrac, in whose Family was ever observed that one of them had a
gag Tooth, and the same a notable Omen of good Fortune, which mark of the Tooth
is still continued in the Doctors Family. These and such like signatures of
more wonderful form, are indeed very rare, yet not without example: So
Seleucus, and his Children after him, were Born with the figure of an Anchor
upon their Thigh, as an infallible mark of their true Geniture, says Justin.
Origenis hujus argumentum etiam posteris mansit. Si quidem filii, nepotesque
ejus anchoram in semore veluti notam generis naturalem habuere. Just. Hist.
lib. 15.


The Mother of Dr. Heylyn was Eliz. Clampard, Daughter of Francis Clampard, of
Wrotham in Kent, Gent. and of Mary Dodge, his Wife, descended in a direct Line
from Peter Dodge, of Stopworth in Cheshire, unto whom King Edw. I. gave the
Seigniory or Lordship of Padenhugh, in the Barony of Coldingham, in the Realm
of Scotland, as well for his special Services that he did in the Sieges of
Barwick and Dunbar, as for his Valor showed in diverse Battles, encontre son
grand Enemy and Rebelle le Baillol Roy d'Escose and Vasial d'Angleterre; as the
words are in the original Charter of Arms, given to the said Peter Dodge by
Guyen King of Arms, at the Kings command, dated April the 8th. in the 34th.
year of the said K. Edw. I. one of the Descendants from the said Peter Dodge,
was Uncle to Dr. Heylyns Mother, and gave the Manor of Lechlade in
Glocestershire, worth 1400 l. per annum, to Robert Bathurst Esquire Uncle to the
Doctor, and Grandfather to that honest and loyal Gentleman, Sir Edw. Bathurst
now living.

In the sixth year of his Age, he was committed to the Tuition of Mr. North,
Schoolmaster of Burford; under whose instructions he profited so well, that in
a short time he could make true Latin, and arrived to an ability of making
Verses; to which excellency, together with History, his genius was so naturally
addicted, that at the Age of ten years he framed a story in Verse and Prose,
which he composed in imitation of the destruction of Troy with some other Books
of Chivalry, upon which he was then very studious and intent. I presume to
mention it as an argument of the prodigious pregnancy of those endowments which
God had bestowed on him; for he may be truly accounted one of the praecoces
fructus, the forward fruits of his Age, that was soon ripe and contrary to the
Proverb, was of lasting duration. It may be affirmed of him as it was of
Lipsius, Ingenium habuit docile and omnium capax: memoria non sine praeceptorum
miraculo, etiam in puero quae in senectute non defecit.

His old Master North dying, he was committed to another, who succeeded in the
same School, viz. Mr. Davis, a right Reverend and good man, by whom he was sent
to Oxford, in the beginning of December. 1613. at the 14th. year of his Age, and
placed under the Tuition of Mr. Joseph Hill, an ancient Bachelor in Divinity,
once one of the Fellows of Corpus Christi Coll. but then a Commoner of
Hart-Hall; Mr. Walter Newbery, (afterward a Zealous Puritan) was made choice of
to instruct him in Logic, and other Academical Studies, wherein he made such
good progress, that upon the 22 of July, 1614. he stood to be Demi of Magdalen
College, which he missed of at the first Election; but in the year after
succeeded, having endeared himself to the President Dr. Langton, and Fellows of
the same College, by the pleasantness of a Latin Poem upon a Journey that he
made with his two Tutors unto Woodstock. After his admission into that noble
Foundation, within the space of a twelve month, he was made Impositor of the
Hall; in which Office he acquitted himself so excellently, that the Dean of the
College continued him longer in it, than any ever before; for which reason, he
was called by those Scholars of his own standing, Perpetual Dictator. He then
composed an English Tragedy, celled Spurius, which was so well approved by some
Learned Persons in the College, that the President caused it to be privately
Acted in his own Lodgings.

In July 1617. he obtained his grace for the Degree of Bachelor of Arts,
according to the College Statutes, which requiring some exercise to be
performed by a Bachelor of Arts in the long Vacation, he began his
Cosmographical Lectures, and finished them in the end of the next August. His
performance of this exercise drew that whole Society into a profound admiration
of his great Learning and Abilities; insomuch, that before he had done reading
those Lectures, he was admitted Fellow upon probation, in the place of Mr.
Love. And that he might give a testimony of his grateful mind to them, he writ
a Latin Comedy, which he called Theomachia, which he finished and transcribed
in a fortnight space, on July the 19th. 1619. He was admitted in verum and
perpetuum socium, and not long before was made Moderator of the Senior Form,
which he retained above two years; and within that compass of time, he began to
write his Geography, accordingly as he designed when he read his Cosmography
Lectures; which Book he finished in little more than two months, beginning at
Feb. 22. and completing it on the 29th. of April following. At the next Act,
which was Anno Dom. 1620. he was admitted Master of Arts, the honor of which
degree was more remarkable, because that very year, the Earl of Pembroke,
Chancellor of the University, signified his pleasure by special Letters, That
from that time forward the Masters of Arts, who before sat bare, should wear
their Caps in all Congregations and Convocations.

He committed his Geography to the perusal of some Learned Friends, which being
by them well approved, he obtained his Fathers consent for the Printing of it,
which was done accordingly, November. 7. 1621. The first Copy of it was by him
presented to King Charles the First, then Prince of Wales, unto whom he
Dedicated it, and by whom, together with its Author, it was very graciously
received, being introduced into the Princes presence by Sir Robert Carre, since
Earl of Ancram, one of the Gentlemen of his Highnesses Bedchamber. In some
months after his Father died at Oxon, with an Ulcer in his Bladder, occasioned
by the Stone, with which he had been many years grievously afflicted. He was
conveyed to Lechlade in Glocestershire, where he was buried near his Wife, who
departed this life six years before him, and was solemnly buried in the Chancel
of that Parish Church.

September. the 15th. 1622. he received Confirmation from the hands of Bishop
Lake, in the Parish Church of Wells, and in a short time after exhibited a
Certificate to Dr. Langton, concerning his Age; by which means he obtained a
Dispensation, notwithstanding any local Statutes to the contrary, that he
should not be compelled to enter into holy Orders till he was 24 years of Age,
according to the time appointed, both by the Canons of the Church, and the
Statutes of the Realm. His fear was then very great, to enter upon the study of
Divinity, as well as undertake the profession of it; but afterward persuaded
thereto by a Right Reverend and Learned Person, Mr. Buckner, he seriously
applied himself to this Study, and holy Profession, receiving the Orders of
Deacon and Priest, (but at distinct times) in S. Aldates Church in Oxon, from
the Right Reverend Bishop Howson. And when he was Ordained Priest, he Preached
the Ordination Sermon upon these words of our Blessed Savior to S. Peter, Luke
22.32. And when thou art Converted, strengthen thy Brethren: What course and
method he observed in his Theological Studies, he informs us with his own Pen,
Theol. Vit. praef. to the Reader.
When I began my Studies in Divinity, I thought no course so proper and
expedient for me, as the way commended by King James, which was, that young
Students in Divinity should be excited to study such Books as were most
agreeable in Doctrine and Discipline to the Church of England, and to bestow
their time in the Fathers and Councils, Schoolmen, Histories, and
Controversy, and not to insist too long upon Compendiums and Abbreviators.

His Geography was in less than three years Reprinted: And in this second
Edition was enlarged, and again presented by him to the Prince of Wales, and by
him graciously received, with most affectionate commendations of the Author.
But it met with another kind of entertainment from King James; for the Book
being put into the hands of that Learned Monarch, by Dr. Young, then Dean of
Winton, (who designed nothing but the highest kindness to Mr. Heylyn thereby)
the King at first expressed his great value he had for the Author; but
unfortunatly falling on a passage, wherein Mr. Heylyn gave Precedence to the
French King, and called France the more famous Kingdom; King James became very
much offended, and ordered the Lord Keeper to call the Book in. The Dean gave
notice to Mr. Heylyn of his Majesty's displeasure, and advised him to repair to
Court, and make use of the Princes Patronage, as the best lenitive to prevent
the rankling of this wound. But he rather chose to abide in Oxford; and
acquainting the Lord Danvers with the business, afterward sent an Apology and
Explanation of his meaning: That the burden under which he suffered, was rather
a mistake than a crime, and that mistake not his own, but the Printers, which
was after corrected and amended.

In the year 1625. he took a Journey with Mr. Levet of Lincoln's Inn, into
France, where he visited more Cities, and made more observations in five weeks
time, for he stayed no longer, than many others have done in so many years. The
particulars of this Journey he reduced into writing, and some years after
gratified his Country with the publication of it, together with some other
excellent remarks made by him, when he went in attendance upon the Earl of
Danby to the Isle of Gernsey and Jersey, Anno Dom. 1628. Had King James lived
to have perused that Book, Mr. Heylyn had needed no other Advocate to have
restored him to his Princely favor and protection: For never was the vanity
and levity of the Monsieurs, and deformity and sluttishness of their Madams
more ingeniously exposed both in Verse and Prose, than in the account that he
gives of his Voyage into France.

On April the 18th. 1627. he opposed in the Divinity-School; and on Tuesday the
24th. following, he answered pro forma upon these two Questions, viz.

An Ecclesia unquam fuerit invisibilis?
An Ecclesia possit errare?
Both which he determined in the Negative. Upon occasional discourse with him,
he was pleased once to show me his Supposition, which I read over in his House
at Lacies-Court in Abingdon; but I had not then either the leisure or good luck
to transcribe a Copy of it, which would have been worth my pains, and more
worthy of the Press, to the great satisfaction of others: For my part, I can
truly say, that I never read any thing with more delight, for good Latin,
Reason, and History, which that Exercise was full of; but since, both it and
many other choice Papers in his Study, through the carelessness of those, to
whose custody they are committed, I suppose are utterly lost and gone, ad
blattarum and tinearum Epulas. In stating of the first Question, that caused
the heats of that day, he fell upon a quite different way from that of Dr.
Prideaux, the Professor, in his Lecture De Visibilitate Ecclesiae, and contrary
to the common opinion of other Divines, who generally prove the visibility of
the Protestant Church from the poor persecuted Christians, dispersed in several
places, as the Berengarians in Italy, the Waldenses in France, the Wicklifists
in England, and the Hussiets in Bohemia; which manner of proceeding being
disliked by Mr. Heylyn, as that which utterly discontinued the Succession of
the Hierarchy, which the Church of England claims from the very Apostles and
their immediate Successors: He rather chose to find out a continual visible
Church in Asia, Ethiopia, Greece, Italy, yea and Rome it self; as also in all
the Western Provinces then subject to the power of the Roman Bishop, when he
was the chief Patriarch, which Mr. Heylyn from his great knowledge, and more
than ordinary abilities in History, strenuously asserted and proved, to which
the Professor could make but weak replies, (as I have heard from knowing
persons, who were present at that Disputation) because he was drawn out of his
ordinany bias from Scholastical Disputation to foreign Histories, in which
encounter Mr. Heylyn was the invincible Ajax -- Nec quisquam Ajacem superare
possit nisi Ajax. But chiefly the quarrel did arise for two words in Mr.
Heylyns Hypothesis, after he had proved the Church of England received no
Succession of Doctrine or Government from the Berengarians, Wicklifists, etc.
who held many Heterodoxies in Religion, as different from the established
Doctrine of our Church, as any point which was maintained at that time in the
Church of Rome; that the Writers of that Church, Bellarmin himself has stood
up, as cordially in maintenance of some fundamental points of the Christian
Faith against Anti-Trinitarians, Anabaptists, and other Heretics of these
last Ages, as any our Divines, and other Learned men of the Protestant
Churches, which point Mr. Heylyn closed up with these words, Vtinam quod ipse
de Calvino sic semper errasset nobilissimus Cardinalis; at which words the
Reverend Doctor was so impatient in his Chair, that he fell upon the Respondent
in most vile terms, calling him Papicola, Bellarminianus, Pontificius, etc. to
draw the hatred of the University upon him, according to the saying, Fortiter
calumniare and aliquid adhaerebit, grievously complaining to the younger sort
of his Auditors, unto whom he made his chiefest addresses, of the unprofitable
pains he took among them, if Bellarmin, whom he had labored to confute for so
many years, should be honored with the Title of Nobilissimus. Notwithstanding
the Respondent acquitted himself bravely before the Company, ascribing no more
honor to Bellarmin than for his deserts in Learning, and Integrity in that
particular point before spoken of, which any generous man would give to his
Learned Antagonist. For many Lutherans and Calvinists I may say (pace tanti
viri) so angry at a word, have not grudged, much less judged it any crime to
praise the Cardinals Learning. Doctrinam and nos in ipso commendamus, says a
rigid Lutheran. Joh. Andr. Quenstedt. in his Dial. de pal. illust. Vir. S. Paul
would not stick to call him who was an inveterate Enemy of the Christians, Most
Noble Festus. And though Cardinals we know were originally but Parish Priests,
by Pride and Usurpation have made themselves Compeers to Kings; that which is
unjustly once obtained, by time grows common and familiar, that none will
refuse to give such their ordinary Titles of honor, although they come by
indirect means, and not by merit to them. Bellarmin also was of no poor and
base extraction, but better than his fellows; for which reason he was created
Cardinal by Clement the VIII. Hunc eligimus (says he) quia est nepos optimi
and sanctissimi pontificis, Quenstedt. page 327.
because he was the Nephew of Marcellus the II. who said, That he could not see
how any one can be saved who sat in the Pontifical Chair: Onuph. in vit. Marc.
Non video quomodo qui locum hunc altissimum tenent salvari possunt.

After these heats of Disputation were over, Mr. Heylyn took a Journey to
London, where he waited on Archbishop Laud, then Bishop of Bath and Wells, who
had heard of all the passages that had happened at Oxford, of which Mr. Heylyn
gave a more perfect account to his Lordship, who was pleased to read over the
Supposition, at which Dr. Prideaux was so highly offended; but the good Bishop
of the other side commended it, and encouraged Mr. Heylyn in his Studies;
saying, That he himself had in his younger days maintained the same Positions
in a Disputation, in S. John's College, that Mr. Heylyns Hypothesis could not
be overthrown in a fair way, exhorting him to continue in that moderate course:
and that as God had given him more than ordinary gifts, so he would pray to God
that he and others might employ them in such a way and manner, as might make up
the breaches in the Walls of Christendom. He being now admitted Chaplain to his
Majesty, the good Bishop instructed him with Counsel and wise cautions, how to
behave himself in all circumstances suitably to the calling and dignity of his
place; telling him amongst other things, That the King did not love Silk nor
Satin Chaplains, which Mr. Heylyn ever observed both young and old, never
ru^fling in Silks, like some of his Brotherhood, but went always in a plain,
grave, and decent habit. In November next following, he Preached in his course
before the King, on those words, Joh. 4. v. 20. Our Fathers Worshipped on this
Mountain, etc. In which Sermon he declared himself with such smart zeal, and
with as quick judgment against several errors and corruptions in the Church of
Rome, that his Sermon was better resented by the King than his Supposition by
the Kings Professor in Oxon; who though a Right Learned man for his place, yet
so dogmatical in his own points, that he would not abide to be touched, much
less contradicted by Mr. Heylyn -- Non aliam ob causam, nisi quod Virtus in
utroque summa fuit -- Hor. More especially being a great man, at that time very
popular in the University, profoundly admired by the Junior Masters, and some
of the Seniors inclined to Puritanism, his own College then observed to be the
Nurse of West-Countrey-men in Puritan principles, Mr. Heylyn could expect no
favor, nor fair dealing in the way of Disputation, when it ran contrary to the
Professors humor.

After these Academical contests, growing weary of Obs and Sols in Scholastical
Disputations, which was ever opposite to his genius, and for this purpose
unwilling to be always Cloystred up within the Walls of his College, where he
must be tied to such Exercises; besides a man of an airy and active spirit,
though studious and contemplative, would not perpetually be devoted to a
melancholy recluse life. Therefore he resolved to Marry, and try his fortune in
the World, Neque aliud probis quam ex matrimonio solatium esse, says the good
Author, Tacit. Hist. lib. 4.
Marriage is the only comfort of minds honestly given; accordingly a fair
Fortune was offered to him, viz. A Wife with a thousand pounds Portion, a
Gentlewoman of a very Ancient Family, and of as excellent Education, Mrs.
Leticia High-gate, third Daughter of Thomas High-gate of Heyes, Esquire one of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace for the County of Middlesex (who in his younger
days, whilst his Elder Brother was alive, had been Provost-Marshal-General of
the Army, under the Earl of Essex, at the action of Cales) and of Margery
Skipwith his Wife, one of the Daughters of that Ancient Family of the
Skipwiths, in the County of Leicester; which said Thomas Heygate the Father,
was second Son of that Thomas Heygate, who was Field-Marshal-General of the
English Forces, before S. Quintins, under the command of the Earl of Pembroke,
Anno Dom. 1557. and of Eliz. Stoner his Wife, a Daughter of the Ancient
Families of the Stoners in Oxfordshire. To this Marriage Mr. Heylyn was
induced, because he could not make better choice for the excellency of her
Person, Wit, and Friends, besides a considerable Portion, all concentring
together for his more happy contentment; and because Mr. Edward Heylyn, his
Elder Brother, had before Married a Sister of this Lady, another of the
Daughters of the said Thomas Heygate: His Seat was at Minster Lovel, in the
County of Oxford, where his Son (to whom Dr. Heylyn was Uncle) now lives, viz.
Hen. Heylyn Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for that County, an
ancient Colonel and excellent Commander in the Army of King Charles the First,
and a most accomplished Gentleman in all respects, to the honor of his Family.

Near which place of Minster, he had the Advouson of Bradwell, a very good
Living in Glocestershire, together with a Rentcharge of Inheritance, paid him
out of the Manor of Lechlad: He parted with his Title to Bradwell, resolving
to lay the foundation of his following Fortune by his own Industry, and not to
bury himself in the unimprovable way of a rural life, He found out an honest
Art, by which he might recommend himself to the Patronage of some noble mind,
and that was to assert the History of St. George, Patron of the most Noble
Order of the Garter; a business as he tells the King in his Epistle Dedicatory,
of so intricate and involved a nature, that he had no guide to follow, nor any
path to tread, but what he made unto himself. And it had never come to
perfection, had not so able an hand as Mr. Heylyn's undertaken it, whose
accomplishments and industry were superior to every thing but themselves.
Against this History Dr. Hackwel appeared in Print; of which the King hearing,
sent for Mr. Heylyn, commanding him to consider the Arguments of his
Antagonist, and withal sent him to Windsor to search the Records of the Order.
This occasioned a second Edition of the History, wherein were answered all Dr.
Hackwels Arguments and Allegations, to which there was never made a reply; but
on the contrary, in his Book about the supposed Decay of Nature, a Retractation
of the passages relating to S. George.

About this time he had a presentation given him by one Mr. Bridges to the
Parsonage of Meysie-Hampton, in the Diocese of Gloucester, unto the Bishop
whereof he made his Application, but found him already preingaged to further
the pretended Title of Corpus Christi Coll. in Oxon. However his Lordship
promised not to give Institution to any person till the title was cleared, and
therefore advised Mr. Heylyn to leave his presentation with him, and to enter a
Caveat in his Court. But he who was false to God, and his Mother Church, could
never be faithful to the engagements which he made to Man: The one he deserted
by turning Papist, being the only Bishop of the English Hierarchy, that
renounced a persecuted Church to embrace the Idolatries and Errors of the Roman
Communion. And the other he violated by giving one Mr. Jackson (who came from
C.C.C.) Institution so soon as ever he requested it, which occasioned a tedious
suit at Law after.

Neither was this the only disappointment he met with in the way of his
Preferment. For not long after, Preaching at Court in his second Attendance,
his Majesty expressed a very high opinion of him to many noble Lords about him,
and in a few months after gave him a Presentation to the Rectory of Hemingford,
in the County of Huntingdon. But this also missed of the desired effect, which
his Majesty's bounty designed, and Mr. Heylyns necessity after a long suit of
Law for the other Living, required. For the Bishop of Lincoln, unto whom he
made Application with his Presentation, would not allow the King to have any
title to the Living, so he was constrained to return back to London, re
infecta. The Bishop was much offended that a young Divine should have so great
knowledge in Law, (which was the beginning of all the following Differences
between them) for Mr. Heylyn made good the Kings Right upon the passages of the
conveyances of the other party. His Majesty presently understood the
entertainment he met with at Bugden, and sent him this gracious Message, That
he was sorry he had put him to so much charge and trouble, but it should not be
long before he would be out of his debt. And he soon performed his Royal
promise, for within a week after, he bestowed upon him a Prebendship of
Westminster, void by the death of Mr. Danel, to the extreme vexation of his
Lordship, who was then Dean of the same Church. And that which added to the
honor of this preferment, was not only his being initiated the very same day
into the acquaintance and friendship with the Attorney General, Mr. Noye; but
the gracious Message that came along with the Royal gift, viz. That he bestowed
that Prebendship on him, to bear the charges of his last Journey, but still he
was in debt for the Living.

Being possessed of this Preferment, the first honorable Visit that he
received in his new Habitation, was from the Learned Lord Falkland, who brought
along with him one Capt. Nelson, that pretended to find out a way for the
discovery of the Longitude of the Sea; the Captain had imparted his design to
many learned Mathematicians, who by no means could approve of or subscribe to
his demonstrations. But the King referred him to Mr. Heylyn, who told that noble
Lord, That his Majesty was mistaken in him, his skill and knowledge lying more
in the Historical than the Philosophical part of Geography; yet notwithstanding
he gave a full account thereof in writing, according to the best of his
judgment, which is too long to set down here.

His mind being intent rather upon useful than notional Learning, therefore
about this time he began with great diligence to read over the Statute Laws of
the Nation, and to compare them with the time and circumstances that occurred
in story, which he carefully perused, the better to enable himself for his
Majesty's Service, who then had the Smallpox appearing on him, but he soon
recovered from that distemper: Mr. Heylyn to testify his joy, turned Poet,
making a Copy of English Verses, which one of his Friends presented to the
King; and they were so well liked, that both their Majesty's gave him the
honor of their thanks.

But his Majesty found employment rather for the judgment, than fancy of the
Chaplain; and therefore upon Jan. 27. 1632. sent for him to the Council Table,
where he received his Royal commands to read over that Book of Mr. Pryns,
called Histriomastix, and to collect thence all such passages as were
scandalous or dangerous to the King or State, and to reduce them into method.
The Book was delivered to him, and a fortnights time assigned him to perform
that Task imposed. But he had learned from the wisest of men, that diligence in
business, and a quick dispatch of it, would qualify him for the service of
Kings, and not mean Persons. And therefore he finished what was expected from
him, and carried it to the Secretary of State in less than four days; for which
he had his Majesty's thanks, as also new commands to revise his Papers, and to
write down such Logical Inferences as might naturally arise from the premises
of Mr. Pryn: About this time, and upon this occasion he wrote a small Tract
touching the punishments due by Law, and in point of practice, unto such
offenders as Mr. Pryn. And this was observable in the trial of that Person,
that nothing was urged by the Council to aggravate his faults, than what was
contained in Mr. Heylyns Collections.

For the reward of which, and other good services, that with wonderful
prudence, as well as diligence, he faithfully performed; His Majesty was
graciously pleased to requite him, by bestowing on him the Parsonage of
Houghton, in the Bishopric of Durham, worth near 400 l. per annum, which
afterward he exchanged with Dr. Marshal, for the Parsonage of Alresford in
Hampshire, that was about the same value; to which exchange he was commanded by
his Majesty, that he might live nearer the Court, for readiness to do his
Majesty's Service. Neither was he envied for this, or his other Preferments,
because every one knew his merits, the only cause of his promotion. Into this
Living he was no sooner Instituted and Inducted, but he took care for the
Service of God to be constantly performed by reading the Common Prayers in his
Church every Morning, that gave great satisfaction to the Parish, being a
populous Market Town; and for the Communion Table, where the blessed Sacrament
is Consecrated, he ordered that it should be placed according to ancient
custom, at the East end of the Chancel, and railed about decently, to prevent
base and profane usages; and where the Chancel wanted any thing of repairs, or
the Church it self, both to be amended.

Having thus showed his care first for the House of God, to set it in good
order, the next work followed, was to make his own dwelling House a fit and
convenient Habitation; that to the old Building he added a new one, which was
far more graceful, and made thereto a Chapel next to the Dining Room, that was
beautified and adorned with silk Hangings about the Altar; in which Chapel,
himself or his Curate read Morning and Evening Prayer to the Family, calling in
his Laborers and Workfolks, for he was seldom without them while he lived,
saying, that he loved the noise of a Work-mans hammer: for he thought it a deed
of Charity, as well as to please his own fancy, by often building and
repairing, to set poor People a work, and encourage painful Artificers and
Tradesmen in their honest Callings. Yet after his death, his Eldest Son was
sued for Dilapidations in the Court of Arches, by Dr. Beamont, his Fathers
Successor; but the ingenious Gentleman pleaded his cause so notably, before Sir
Giles Swet, then Judge of the Court, that he was discharged; there being no
reason or justice he should be troubled for Dilapidations, occasioned by the
long War, when his Father was unjustly turned out of his House and Living.

In July 1630. he took his Degree of Bachelor in Divinity. His Latin Sermon
was upon these words, Mal. 4.19. Facim vos fieri piscatores hominum. Upon the
Sunday following, being the time of the Act, he Preached in the Afternoon on
Matthew. 13.25.

In Feb. 13. A. D. 1633. He took his Degree of Dr. in Divinity, an honor not
usually in those days conferred upon men of such green years, but our young
Doctor verified those excellent words of the Son of Syrach, That honorable Age
is not that which stands in length of time, nor that is measured by number of
years, but Wisdom is the gray unto men, and an unspotted life is an old Age,
Wisd. 4.8, 9. He entertained some hopes that Dr. Prideaux his animosities in so
long a Tract of time, as from 1627. to 1633. might have cooled. In his first
Disputation he had insisted on the Churches Visibility, and now he resolved to
assert and establish its Authority, and to that purpose made choice to answer
for his Degree upon these three questions, viz.

An Ecclesia habeat Authoritatem In determinandis fidei controversus. An
Ecclesia habeat Authoritatem Interpretandi S. scripturas. An Ecclesia habeat
Authoritatem Decernendi Ritus and Caeremonias.
All which he held in the Affirmative, according to the Doctrine of the Church
of England, in the 20th. Article. But Dr. Prideaux was as little pleased with
these questions, and the Respondents stating of them as he was with the former.
And therefore to create unto the Respondent a greater odium, he openly declared
that the Respondent had falsified the public Doctrine of the Church, and
changed the Article with that sentence, viz. Habet Ecclesia ritus sive
caeremonias, etc. which was not to be found in the whole body of it; and for
the proof thereof, he read the Article out of a Book which lay before him,
beginning thus, Non licet Ecclesiae quicquam instituere quod verbo Dei scripto
adversetur, etc. To which the Respondent readily answered, That he perceived by
the bigness of the Book, which lay on the Doctors Cushion, that he had read
that Article out of the harmony of Confessions, published at Geneva, A. D.
1612. which therein followed the Edition of the Articles in the time of King
Edward VI. A.D. 1552. in which that sentence was not found, but that it was
otherwise in the Articles agreed on in the Convocation, A. D. 1562. The
Respondent caused the Book of Articles to be sent for out of the Booksellers
shop, which being observed by the Doctor, he declared himself very willing to
decline any further prosecution of that particular. But Dr. Heylyn was resolved
to proceed on no further, Vsquedum liberaverit animam suam ab ista calumnia, as
his own words were. At the coming in of the Book, the Respondent read the
Article in the English Tongue, viz. The Church has power to decree Rites and
Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith, etc. Which done, he
delivered the Book to one of the Standers by, who desired it of him, the Book
passing from one hand to another, till all men were satisfied. The Regius
Professor had no other subterfuge but this, He went to prove that not the
Convocation, but the High Court of Parliament had power of ordering matters in
the Church, in making Canons, ordaining Ceremonies, and determining
Controversies in Religion. And he could find no other medium to make it good,
but the Authority of Sir Edward Coke, in one of the Books of his Reports. An
Argument that Dr. Heylyn gratified with no better answer than, Non Credendum
est cuique extra suam artem. For these things, and the Professors ill words in
the former Disputation, Dr. Heylyn caused him to be brought before the Council
Table at Woodstock, where he was publicly reprehended. And upon the coming out
of the Kings Declaration concerning lawful sports, Dr. Heylyn translated the
Regius Professors Lecture upon the Sabbath into English; and putting a Preface
before it, caused it to be Printed; a performance which did not only justify
his Majesty's proceedings, but took off much of that opinion, which Dr.
Prideaux had amongst the Puritanical Faction in those days.

A. D. 1634. The grievances which the Collegiate Church of Westminster suffered
under the Government of John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, then Commendatory Dean
thereof, became so intolerable, that Dr. Heylyn, with Dr. Tho. Wilson, Dr.
Gabriel Moor, and Dr. Lud. Wemys, with other of the Prebends, drew up a Charge
of no less than 36 Articles against the Bishop, and by way of complaint humbly
Petitioned his Majesty for redress of these grievances. Whereupon a Commission
was issued out to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Earl of
Manchester, Earl of Portland, the Lord Bishop of London, and the two
Secretaries of State; Authorizing them to hold a Visitation of the Church of
Westminster to examine the particular Charges made against John Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, who afterward calling the Prebends to meet him in the
Jerusalem-Chamber, desired to know of them what these things were, that were
amiss, that so he might presently redress them. But to that Dr. Heylyn replied,
that seeing they had put the business into his Majesty's hands, it would but
ill become them, to take the matters out of his into their own. Amongst other
grievances, the Bishop had most disgracefully turned out the Prebends of the
great Seat or Pew under the Pulpit. Dr. Heylyn being chosen Advocate for his
Brothren, did prove before the Lord Commissioners the Right of Sitting there.
1. The Prebends Original Right. 2. Their Derivative Right; and lastly, their
Possessory Right. Upon hearing the proofs on both sides, it was ordered by
general consent of the Lord Commissioners. That the Prebends should be restored
to their old Seat, and that none should sit there with them but Lords of the
Parliament, and Earls eldest Sons, according to the ancient custom. After this,
there was no Bishop of Lincoln to be seen at any Morning-Prayer, and seldom at
Evening.

At this time came out the Doctor's History of the Sabbath, the Argumentative
or Scholastic part of which subject was referred to White Bishop of Eli, the
Historical part to the Doctor. And no sooner had the Doctor perfected his Book
of the Sabbath, but the Dean of Peterborough engages him to answer the Bishop
of Lincoln's Letter to the Vicar of Grantham. He received it upon good Friday;
and by the Thursday following discovered the sophistry, mistakes, and falsehoods
of it. It was approved by the King, and by him given to the Bishop of London to
be Licensed and Published under the title of a Coal from the Altar. In less
than a twelvemonth the Bishop of Lincoln writ an Answer to it, Entitled The
Holy Table, Name, and Thing; but pretended that it was writ long ago by a
Minister in Lincolnshire, against Dr. Cole, a Divine in the days of Queen Mary.
Dr. Heylyn received a Message from the King to return a reply to it, and not in
the least to spare him. And he did it in the space of seven weeks, presenting
it ready Printed to his Majesty, and called it Antidotum Lincolniense. But
before this, he answered Mr. Burtons Seditious Sermon, being thereunto also
appointed by the King.

In July 1637. the Bishop of Lincoln was censured in the Star Chamber, for
tampering with Witnesses in the Kings Cause; suspended a Beneficio and officio,
and sent to the Tower, where he continued three years, and did not in all that
space of time hear either Sermon or public Prayers.

The College of Westminster, about this time, presented the Doctor to the
Parsonage of Islip, now void by the death of Dr. King. By reason of its great
distance from Alresford, the Doctor exchanged it for Southwarnborough, that was
more near and convenient. At which time, recovering from an ill fit of
Sickness, he studiously set on writing the History of the Church of England
since the Reformation; in order to which he obtained the freedom of Sir Robert
Cottons Library, and by Archbishop Laud's commendation, had liberty granted
him to carry home some of the Books, leaving 200 l. as a Pawn behind him. The
Commotions in Scotland now began, and the Arch Bishop of Canterbury intending
to set out an Apology for vindicating the Liturgy which he had commended to
that Kirk, desired the Doctor to translate the Scottish Liturgy into Latin,
that being Published with the Apology, all the World might be satisfied in his
Majesty's piety, as well as the Archbishops care; as also that the perverse
and rebellious temper of the Scots might be apparent to all, who would raise
such troubles upon the Recommendation of a book that was so Venerable and
Orthodox. Dr. Heylyn undertook and went through with it, but the distemper and
trouble of those times put a period to the undertaking, and the Book went no
farther than the hands of that Learned Martyr.

In Feb. 1639. the Doctor was put into Commission of Peace for the County of
Hampshire, residing then upon this Living; into which place he was no sooner
admitted, but he occasioned the discovery of a horrid Murder that had been
committed many years before in that Country. In the April following he was
chosen Clerk of the Convocation for the College of Westminster, at which time
the Archbishop of Canterbury sending a Canon to them for suppressing the
farther growth of Popery, and reducing Papists to the Church, our Doctor moved
his Grace that the Canon might be enlarged for the Peoples farther
satisfaction, as well as the Churches benefit; what was done therein, and many
other notable things by that Convocation, may be seen at large in the History
of the Archbishops Life. Friday being May the 29th. the Canons were formally
subscribed unto by the Bishops and Clergy, no one dissenting except the Bishop
of Gloucester, who afterward turned Papist and died in the Communion of the
Romish Church, and was all that time of his Life, in which he revolted from the
Church of England, a very great Servant of Oliver Cromwell, unto whom he
dedicated some of his Books. But for his Contumacy in refusing to subscribe the
Articles, he was voted worthy of Suspension in the Convocation, and was
actually Suspended by the Archbishop of Canterbury; which being done the
Convocation was ended.

In November. 3. A.D. 1640. began the Session of the long Parliament, At the
opening of which, a general Rumor was spread abroad that Dr. Heylyn was run
away for fear of an approaching storm that was like to fall upon his head, as
well as on his Grace the Archbishop of Cauterbury; but he who was ever of an
undaunted spirit would not pusillanimously desert the Cause of the King and
Church then in question, but speedily hastened up to London from Alresford, to
confute the common calumny and false report raised on him by the Puritan
faction, that he appeared the next day in his Gown and Tippet at
Westminster Hall, and in the Church with the accustomed formalities of his Cap,
Hood and Surplice, employed then his Pen boldly in defense of the Bishops
Rights, when the Lords began to shake the Hierarchy, in passing a Vote, That no
Bishop should be of the Commit for Examination of the Earl of Strafford,
being Causa sanguinis; upon which the Doctor drew up a brief and excellent
Discourse, entitled De jure paritatis Episcopum, wherein he asserted all the
Bishops Rights of Peerage, and principally of this as well as the rest, That
they ought to sit in that Committee, with other Privileges and Rights
maintained by him, which either by Law or ancient custom did belong unto them.
A rare Commendation at this juncture of time, for which the Doctor is to be
admired, that he could command his Parts and Pen of a sudden, to write on this
subject, or any other, if there was need, that did conduce to the public good,
and above all, make a quick dispatch in accomplishing what he had once
undertaken and begun.

But for those quick dispatches the Doctor afterward endured many tedious
waitings at the backs of Committe-men in that Parliament, especially in the
business of Mr. Pryn, about his Histriomastix, for which he was kept four days
under examination, because he had furnished the Lords of the Privy Council with
matters out of that Book, which Mr. Pryn alleged was the cause of all his
sufferings. Great hopes had the Committee by his often dancing attendance after
them, to sift the Doctor if they could gather any thing by his speeches,
whether the Archbishop had moved him to draw up those exceptions against Pryns
Book, which he denied, or at least was not bound to confess; that as he was
faithful to his Sovereign, so he would never prove himself unfaithful to his
chief Minister both in Church and State.

But now John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, at this Session of Parliament, returned
from the Tower to the Church (after so long a time of his Suspension and
Indevotion) to say his Prayers, and hear his Brother Peter Heylyn Preach in his
course at the Abbey in Westminster, where notwithstanding the Holiness of that
place, (to which his Lordship had no regard or reverence, but only to the Name
and Thing of it) he was resolved publicly to revenge himself for old-done
deeds that ought to have been forgotten, by disturbing the Doctor in his
Sermon, before all the Congregation, contrary to the Laws of this Realm, and
with Reverence to his Lordship, against all good manners, and the common rules
of civility.

-- Mala men's furorque vecors,
In tantam impulerit culpam. Catull.
Strange! That a Bishop could not rule his passions for one hour, when no
provocation was given by the Doctor, whose Sermon from the beginning to the end
of it, throughout the whole discourse was pacificatory, exhorting Christians to
Moderation, Love, and Charity among themselves, for the preservation of the
public peace, although they differed in some opinions. For satisfaction of
the Reader, I will set down the Doctors own words, viz. Is it not that we are
so affected with our own Opinions, that we condemn whosoever shall opine the
contrary; and so far wedded to our own wills, that when we have espoused a
quarrel, neither the Love of God, not the God of Love shall divorce us from it:
Instead of harkening to the voice of the Church, every man hearkens to himself,
and cares not if the whole miscarry, so that himself may bravely carry out his
own devices. Upon which stubborn height of Pride, what quarrels have been
raised, what Schisms in every corner of this our Church (to enquire no further)
some rather putting all into open tumult, than that they would conform to a
Lawful Government, derived from Christ and his Apostles to these very Times. At
the speaking of which words, the Bishop of Lincoln sitting in the great Pew
(which was before the Seat of Contention) knocked aloud with his Staff upon the
Pulpit, saying, No more of that point, No more of that point, Peter: To whom
the Doctor readily answered, without haesitation, or the least sign of being
dashed out of countenance, I have a little more to say, my Lord, and then I
have done, which was as follows, viz. Others combining into close and
dangerous Factions, because some points of speculative Divinity, are otherwise
maintained by some than they would have them. Also regardless of the common
peace, that rather than be quiet, we will quarrel with our blessed Peacemaker
for seeking to compose the differences, though to the prejudice of neither
party. Thus do we foolishly divide our Savior, and rent his Sacred Body on the
least occasion, vainly conceiving that a difference in point of Judgment, must
needs draw after it a dis-joyning of the affections also, and that conclude at
last in an open Schism. Whereas diversity of opinions, if wisely managed, would
rather tend to the discovery of the Truth, than the disturbance of the Church,
and rather whet-our Industry than excite our passions. It was St. Cyprians
resolution, Neminem, licet aliter senserit, a Communione amovere, not to
suspend any man from the Communion of the Church, although the matter then
debated, was (as I take it) of more weight than any of the points now
controverted; which moderation, if the present Age had attained unto, we had
not then so often torn the Church in pieces, nor by our frequent broils offered
that injury and inhumanity to our Saviors Body, which which was not offered to
his Garments. At this, and all the other part of his Sermon, the Auditory was
highly pleased, but the Bishop in so great wrath, that his voice, and the noise
of his Pastoral Staff (if I may so call it) had like to have frighted the whole
Flock or Congregation out of the Fold. Considering the ill posture of affairs
in which the Nation then stood, overflowing with Seditions and Schisms, I think
a more seasonable Sermon could not have been Preached than to move men of
different persuasions unto Peace and Unity one with another, which is a most
Christian Doctrine. After the Sermon was ended, he took Sir Robert Filmore his
Learned Friend, with some Gentlemen of Quality that were his Auditors, out of
the Church along with him to his House, where he immediately Sealed up the Book
that contained this Sermon, and other Notes, to which they also set their
Seals, that so there might not be the least alteration made in the Sermon, nor
any ground to suspect it, which was presently after sent to the Bishop, who
kept it in his hands for some days; in which time his passions allayed, being
more calm at home than in Church, he sent the Book untouched back again to Dr.
Heylyn, in whose Study it had lain dormant for the space of fifteen years,
(when the danger of an old Sermon, of being called in question, must needs be
over) by my persuasion, and his consent, he was pleased to give me leave to
open that Apocalyptical Book, that I might read and see the mystery that lay
hid under the Seals for so many years, which indeed proved only a pious and
practical Sermon for Edification, to moderate the heats of those fiery spirits
that were like to make a Combustion in the whole Kingdom. The Bishop deserved a
sharper rebuke for his own Sermon, which about that time he Preached before the
King, when he made a strange Apostrophe from his Text to the Sabbath, falling
down upon his knees in the Pulpit at the middle of his Sermon, beseeching his
Majesty in most humble manner, that greater care might be taken for the better
observation of the Sabbath day, which was looked upon by many as a piece of
most grand Hypocrisy, who knew his opinion well by his practice; for he did
ordinarily play at Bowls on Sundays, after Evening Service, shoot with Bow and
Arrows, and used other exercises and recreations according to his Lordships
pleasure. The Bishop restored to his Dignities by means of that unhappy
Parhament, with whom he was in high favor, expected that the Doctor should
have submitted himself to his Lordship, and particularly acknowledge his error
in putting out the Antidotum Lincolniense, which he commanded him to call in;
to which Dr. Heylyn replied, that he received his Majesty's Royal Command for
the Writing and Printing of that Book, in which he had asserted nothing but
what he was still ready to justify and defend against the opposers of it.

No sooner was the Doctor out of the Pulpit, but he must come again before the
Chair of the old Committee, to Answer unto new Articles that Mr. Pryn had drawn
up against him; more especially for a Sermon that he had Preached many years
ago, which Mr. Pryn (who had then Ears) heard himself, and brought along with
him some other Auditors, who were a company of Butchers, to give Evidence
against the Doctor, supposing he would come bloodily off; but contrary to their
expectation, he got the victory of the day, and was dismissed with a Quietus
est from that Committee. And glad was he so to be delivered out of the Lions
mouth, telling his Friends that he would now go to Alresford, with a purpose
never more to come back to Westminster, whilst these two good Friends of his
abode in it, viz. The House of Common, and the Lord of Lincoln. Accordingly he
hastened down to his Family and Parishioners, to solace his soul with peace,
after his so long patience under Westminster troubles.

Welcome was he to his Parishioners, who always loved him in the time of his
Prosperity and Adversity, because of his affable and courteous behavior, his
Hospitality among them, and Relief to their Poor; his readiness to do his
Neighbors any kindness by Counsel or other assistance; his constant Preaching,
during all time of his abode; and in his absence, when he was called to Court,
supplied them with an able Curate; he was resolved now to spend his days among
them, and his Parishioners at South-Warnborough, from whom he had the same
respect and love. But the unhappy Wars now following, that put all things into
disorder and confusion, dispersed Families, parted nearest Relations, forced
People from their Houses, and Ministers out of their Churches, necessitated him
to fly for his own Preservation, as Elijah Persecuted by Ahab, being sent for
by a party of Horse, under the command of Sir William Waller, to bring him
Prisoner to Portsmouth, he fairly escaped their hands, but continually
disturbed with new Alarms of Drums and Trumpets sounding about him, and every
where else, that he could find no other way of safety like going to Oxford,
there to take Sanctuary with his Brethren (the persecuted Clergy.) But the news
of his being in Oxford, took wings to the old Committee, who forthwith Voted
him a Delinquent, and sent down an Order for Sequestration of all his Goods and
Chattels: And first they fetched away his Library (for they thought he was too
great a Scholar) the plunder of which he took deeply to heart, and over
accounted it the greatest of his losses. The Books were carried to Portsmouth,
where they were appraised at a thousand pound, and put into a public Library,
from whence they could never be redeemed. After the loss of them, those Sabeans
drove away his Goods and Chattels, seized upon his Corn and Hay, and in Carts
and Wagons carried away his Household goods, that they left him naked as Job;
for immediately by order of the Commit, the Tiths of both his Livings were
Sequestered, and the profits of his Prebendary in Westminster, and what temporal
Estate he had within their reach, taken from him; that being asked by one of
his acquaintance, how he lived? he answered him readily, By Horseflesh and old
Leather; which seeming a Riddle, he explained afterward his meaning, That he
saved only his Coach and Horses which brought him to Oxford, which he was
forced to sell, and live upon the money. But that being done, he must think of
some other way, first to live upon Credit, which seldom holds long, without
an Estate to support it; and afterward upon the Charity of Friends, which is
shorter lived, for the heat of that love soon grows cold.

So that being no longer able to maintain himself and Family in Oxford, he sent
his Wife to London, to get what money she could amongst her Relations: himself
went out of Oxford A. D. 1645. walking as a poor Traveller through the
Country, and disguised both in his Name and Habit; he sometimes went under the
name of Barker, at other times took the name of Harding, by which he was well
known among his Friends, and not discovered by his Enemies; his Habit changed
from a Priest to a Layman, and in the likeness usually of an honest
Countryman, or else of a poor decayed Gentleman, as indeed he was. The peril
of the times made him such a Proteus in his Garb, because the Parliament was
resolved, if they could take him, that he should follow his good Lord of
Canterbury to another World, than that described in his Cosmography; but he
happily outlived most of them, and died in honor, which they did not. He
wandered like a Jew, with a Groat in his purse, and sometimes without it, till he
got to some good Friends House. At his first setting out, he was betrayed by a
zealous She- Puritan, one Mrs. Monday, at her House in Oxfordshire; her Husband
was a true-hearted Cavalier, unto whose protection he committed himself: He
being one day gone from home, she Saint-like, unfaithful to her Husband and his
Friend, sent Intelligence to some Parliament Soldiers, that there was a
Cavalier-Doctor in her House; of which he had notice given him by two of her
Husbands Sisters, who hated her pure qualities; that as soon as the Family was
all in Bed, he went out at a back door, down a pair of Garden-stairs, from
whence he took his march all that Night, and by the help of God Almighty, he
got safely to another Friends House by Morning. Ever after, the Doctor observed
it for a rule, never to come within the doors of a Holy Sister, whose House may
be compared to that which Solomon describes, Is the way to Hell, going down to
the Chambers of death; that had not Divine Providence protected him from the
treachery of that Woman, he had fallen into the hands of those Nimrods that
hunted after his Life. From place to place he shifted like the old Travels of
the Patriarchs; and in pity to his necessity, found a hearty entertainment
amongst his Friends of the Royal party, at whose Tables he was fed, for he had
none of his own: His Children disposed of into several Friends hands, his Wife
among her Relations, himself depending upon the Courtesy, both of Friends and
Strangers, till he grew weary and tired out with this kind of life, for Vilis
amicorum annona est, it pleased God to send him afterward some supplies of
moneys, that he settled himself, Wife and eldest Daughter at Winchester, in the
House of a right honest man, one Mr. Lizard, with whom they Tabled a good
while, where he had a comfortable time of breathing and rest after his former
troubles, and to his hearts delight the sweet enjoyment and conversation of
Loyal persons; for Winchester was then a strong Garrison for the King, and
being near Alresford, he would go sometimes in disguise to visit his old
Neighbors, who he knew were true and faithful to him. But those Halcion days
quickly vanished, as seldom Prosperity continues so long a time as Adversity;
for that Town and Castle especially, which was thought strong enough to resist
a greater Force than came against it, were both treacherously delivered up to
the hands of their Enemies in three days time; and now every House full of
Soldiers quartered amongst them, poor Dr. Heylyn was in more danger than ever,
had not Mr. Lizard taken care of him as his dearest Guest, and hid him in a
private Room, as Providence ordained, to save his life; which Room formerly was
supposed to be made for the hiding of Seminary Priests and Jesuits, because the
House heretofore belonged to a Papist Family; and indeed it was so cunningly
contrived, that there was no door to be seen, nor entering into it, but behind
an old Beds head; and if the Bed had not been there, the door was so neatly
made like the other Wainscot of the Chamber, that it was impossible for a
Stranger to find it out: in which Room, instead of a Papist, a right Protestant
Doctor, who was a professed Enemy both to Popery and Puritanism, was now
secured from the rage and violence of the Soldiers, who sought after him with
no less eagerness, than if he had been a Heretic, followed by the Spanish
Inquisition, when he good man was in the very next Room to them, adjoining to
the Dining-chamber, where he could hear all their raillery and mirth, their
gaming at Cards and Dice; for those idle Lurdanes spent their time only in riot
and pleasure at home, and when they went abroad, they would tread the Maze near
the Town. He took his opportunity on the Market Day to put on his traveling
robes, with a long Staff in his hand, and so walked out of the Town
confidently, with the Country crowd, bidding adieu to the little Room that he
left for the next distressed Gentleman; in the mean while his Wife and Daughter
he entrusted to Mr. Lizard's care, his faithful Friend. And now he must again
travel to seek his Fortune, which proved more kind to him, than she did before;
yet he met with a hard Adventure not many miles from Winchester, where some
straggling Soldiers lighting on him, and catching hold of his hand, felt a Ring
under his Glove, which through have of his escape, he forgot to pull off; which
no sooner discovered, but they roughly swore he was some Runaway Cavalier: the
Ring being hard to get off, the poor Doctor willingly helped them; in which
time came galloping by some of the Parliaments, Scouts, who said to their
Fellow Soldiers, Look to your selves, the Cavaliers are coming; at which words
being affrighted, they took that little money that was in his Pocket, and so
rid away without further search, and he good man jog'd on to the next Friends
House, with some pieces of Gold that he had hid in his high Shoes, which if
the Rogues had not been so hastily frighted away, would have been undoubtedly
found, and might have cost him his life by further suspicions of him. At what
Friends House he was now secured from danger, though I have heard him named,
indeed I have forgot, but from thence he traveled to Dr. Kingsmill, a Loyal
person of great worth, an ancient Family, where he continued, and sent for his
Wife and Daughter from Winchester to him; and from thence removed to Minster
Lovel (in Oxfordshire) the pleasant Seat of his Elder Brother, in the year
1648. which he Farmed of his Nephew Colonel Heylyn, for six years: Being
deprived of his Ecclesiastical preferments, he must think of some honest way
for a Livelihood.

Yet not withstanding he followed his Studies, in which was his chief delight;
for though the Usurped Powers had silenced his Tongue from Preaching, they
could not withold his Pen from Writing, and that in an acute and as sharp a
style as formerly. At the same time he enlarged his Book of Geography into a
large Folio, which was before but a little Quarto, and entitled it with the
name of Cosmography; of which it may be truly said, it does contain a World of
Learning in it, as well as the Description of the World; and particularly
shows the Authors most excellent abilities, not only in History and
smoothness of its style, that makes the whole Book delightful to the Reader;
but in Chronology, Genealogy, and Heraldry, in which last any one may see that
he could blazon the Arms, and describe the descent and pedigree of the greatest
Families in Europe. In which pleasing study while he spent his time, his good
Wife, a discreet and active Lady, looked both after her Housewifery within
doors, and the Husbandry without; thereby freeing him from that care and
trouble, which otherwise would have hindered his laborious Pen from going
through so great a work in that short time. And yet he had several
divertisements by company, which continually resorted to his House; for having
(God be thanked) his temporal Estate cleared from Sequestration, by his
Composition with the Commissioners at Goldsmiths-Hall, and this Estate which he
Farmed besides, he was able to keep a good House, and relieve his poor
Brethren, as himself had found relief from others Charity, that his House was
the Sanctuary of Sequestered men, turned out of their Livings, and of several
Ejected Fellows out of Oxford; more particularly of some worthy Persons which I
can name, as Dr. Allibone, Mr. Levite, Mr. Thornton, Mr. Ashwell, who would
stay for two or three months at his House; or any other Acquaintance that were
suffering men, he cheerfully received them, and with a hearty Welcome might
tarry as long as they pleased. A virtue highly to be praised, and most worthy
of Commendation in it self. Mr. Marchamont Needham, then a zealous Loyalist,
and scourge to the Rump Parliament, being violently pursued by them, was
sheltered in the Doctors House while the storm was over: the good Doctor now as
his Tutelary Angel, preserved him in a high Room, where he continued writing
his Weekly Pragmaticus; yet he afterward like Balaam the Son of Beor, hired
with the Wages of Unrighteousness, corrupted with mercenary gifts and bribes,
became the only Apostate of the Nation, and writ for the pretended
Commonwealth, or rather I may say, for a base Democracy; for which the Doctor
could never after endure the mention of his name, who had so disobliged his
Country, and the Royal Party, by his shameful Tergiversation.

The good Doctors Charity also did not only extend it self to ancient Friends
and Acquaintance, but to mere Strangers, by whom he had like to run himself
into a praemunire; for word being carried to him in his Study, there was a
Gentleman at the door, who said he was a Commander in the Kings Army, and
earnestly desired some relief and harbor for that Night, and his Son with him;
the Doctor presently went to him, and finding by his discourse, and other
circumstances, what he said was true, received him into his House, and made him
very Welcome: The Gentleman was a Scotch Captain, who having a Scotch Diurnal
in his Pocket, they read it, fearing no harm thereby, but it proved otherwise;
for one of the Doctors Servants listening at the door, went streight-way to
Oxford, and informed the Governor, Colonel Kelsey, that his Master had received
Letters from the King, whereupon the Governor sent a party of Horse to fetch
him away. Strange news it was, knowing his own innocence, to hear that Soldiers
had beset his House so early in the Morning, before he was out of bed: But go
he must to appear before the Governor; and when he came, that treacherous
Rogue his Man did confidently affirm that he heard the Letters read, and was
sure he could remember the very words, if his Master would produce the Letters:
upon which the Doctor relates the whole story to the Governor, and withal
shows the Diurnal, which the Governor read to the Fellow; often asking him, is
this right, is this the same you heard? to whom he answered, yes Sir, yes that
is the very thing, and those words I remember: upon which the Governor caused
him to be soundly whipped, instead of giving him a reward for Intelligence, and
dismissed the Doctor, with some Complements, ordering the same party of Horse
that fetched him, to wait upon him home.

Being thus delivered from the Treachery of this Servant, his great care was to
provide one more faithful; which the good Lady Wainman, his Neighbor, hearing
of, commended to him one of her own Servants, whom Sir Francis her Husband had
bred up from a Child, whose fidelity he need not fear in the worst of times,
when a man's Enemies may be of his own Household, as Q. Vibius Serenus was
betrayed by his own Son, Reus pater, accusator filius, Tac. Annal. lib. 4.
idem index and testis, says the Historian, The Son was both Accuser and
Witness against the Father.

In the year 1653. he removed to Lacies-Court in Abingdon, which Seat he bought
for the pleasantness of its Situation, standing next the Fields, and not
distant above five miles from Oxford, where he might be furnished with Books at
his pleasure, either from the Booksellers Shops, or the Bodleian-Library: for
such a fresh appetite to Study and Writing he still retained in his old Age,
that he would give his mind no time of vacancy and intermission for those
labors in which he was continually exercised. When Monarchy and Episcopacy was
trodden under foot, then did he stand up a Champion in defense of both, and
feared not to Publish The Stumbling block of Disobedience, and his Certamen
Epistolare; in which Mr. Baxter fled the Field, because there was impar
congressus betwixt him, and as I may say an old Soldier of the Kings, who had
been used to fiercer Combats with more famous Goliahs. Also Mr. Thomas Fuller
was sufficiently chastized for his Church History, as he deserved a most sharp
correction, because he had been a Son of the Church of England, in the time of
her prosperity, and now deserted her in her adverse fortune, and took to the
Adversaries side: And it was then my hap, having some business with Mr. Tailor,
Fellow of Lincoln College in Oxon, and then Chaplain to the Lord Keeper, Mr.
Nathaniel Fiennes, to see Mr. Fuller make a fawning address to my Lord, with
his great Book of Church History hugged under his arm, which he presented to
the Keeper after an uncouth rustical manner, Epis. 13.
as Horace describes, -- Sub ala fasciculum portas Librorum ut rusticus agnum.
The many falsities, defects, and mistakes of that Book the Doctor discovered
and refuted; of which Mr. Fuller afterward being ingeniously ashamed, came to
the Doctors House in Abingdon, where he made his peace; both became very good
Friends, and betwixt them for the future was kept an inviolable bond of
Friendship.

In the year 1656. he Printed some Observations upon the History of the Reign
of King Charles, by H. L. Esquire with whom he dealt very heartily, and modestly
corrected some of his mistakes in most mild and amicable terms, telling him,
viz. Between us both the History will be made more perfect, and consequently
the Reader will be better satisfied, Obser. Epist. Ded.
which makes me somewhat confident that these few Notes will be so far from
making your History less vendible than it was before, that they will very much
advantage and promote the sale: And if I can do good to all, without wrong to
any, I hope no man can be offended with my pains and industry. In answer to
which, Mr. Hammond L'Estrange led by his passion, and not by reason, fell upon
the Doctor in such uncivil words, unbecoming a Gentleman, that as the Doctor
says, he never was accustomed to such Billinsgate language. There was indeed a
time (says he) when my name was almost in every Libel, Extr. cap. Epist.
which exercised the patience of the State for seven years together; and yet I
dare confidently say, that all of them together did not vomit so much filth
upon me, as has proceeded from the mouth of the Pamphleter, whom I have in
hand. Therefore the Doctor returned a quick and sharp reply in his Book,
Entitled Extraneus Vapulans, wherein with admired wit and eloquence, he gave
Mr. L'Estrange a most severe, yet civil correction. In the year 1657. he put
out in Print, Ecclesia Vindicata, or the Church of England justified, which he
dedicated (as a grateful testimony of his mind) to his Master then living, Mr.
Edward Davis, formerly Schoolmaster of Burford, and now Vicar of Shelton, in
the County of Berks, to whom he ever showed a Love and Reverence: and had the
Doctors power been answerable to his will and intention, he had designed more
considerable Preferments for him; but the sudden and unexpected alteration in
his own affairs prevented, (so soon almost as himself was preferred) that he
could show no other specimen of his gratitude. What says the Heathen? Diis
parentibus and praeceptoribus non redditur aequivalens, An amends can never be
made to God, our Parents and Tutors; and certainly he has but little of a
Christian in him, that can forget this lesson; yet some are so unnatural, as
the Child that loves not his Nurse.

About the same time he was harassed before Olivers Major General, for the
decimation of his Estate, he thinking there had been an end of those troubles,
by compounding for his Estate in Goldsmiths-Hall, he argued his Case notably
with them, but all in vain, for Arguments, though never so acutely handled, are
obtuse weapons against the edge of the sword. One Captain Allen formerly a
Tinker, and his Wife a poor Tripe-wife, took upon him to reprove the Doctor for
maintaining his Wife so highly, like a Lady; to whom the Doctor roundly
replied, That he had Married a Gentlewoman, and did maintain her according to
her quality, and so might he his Tripe-wife: adding withal, that this rule he
always observed, For his Wife to go above his Estate, his Children according to
his Estate, and himself below his Estate, so that at the years end he could
make all even. Soon after these things came out the Order for Decimation
against him. Notwithstanding which, the Doctor, like the Palm Tree, Crescit sub
pondere virtus, the more he was pressed with those heavy loads, did flourish
and grow up in his Estate, that through the blessing of God, being neither the
subject of any man's envy, nor the object of their pity, he lived in good
Credit, and kept a noble House; for I my self, being often there, can say I
have seldom seen him sit down at his Table without Company; for being nigh the
University, some out of a desire to be acquainted with him, and others to visit
their old Friend, whom they knew rarely could be seen but at Meals, made choice
of that time to converse with him: And likewise his good Neighbors at
Abingdon, whom he always made welcome, and was ready to assist them in their
Parish-business, or upon any other occasion, particularly in upholding
upholding the Church of S. Nicholas, which otherwise would have been pulled
down on pretense of uniting it to S. Ellens, but in truth to disable the sober
Party of the Town, who were Loyal People, from enjoying their wonted Service
and Worship of God in their own Parish Church, of which they had a Reverend and
Orthodox Man, one Mr. Huish, their Minister; and in his absence, the Doctor
took care to get them supplied with able men from Oxford. Great endeavors were
on both sides, the one Party to preserve the Church, and the other to pull it
down, because it was thronged with Malignants, who seduced others from their
godly way, as Religion always has been the pretense of factious minds, to draw
on others to their Party, Ubbr Emm. Hist. Fris.
as one says well. Sua quisque arma sancta praedicat, suam causam religiosam,
Deus, pietas, cultus divinus praetexuntur: Every one proclaims their own
quarrels to be be a Holy War; the Cause Religion, God, Godliness, and Divine
worship must be pretended.

Several Journeys the Doctor took to London, sparing neither his pains nor
purse in so pious a Cause; for the managing of which, he employed diverse
Solicitors, sometimes before Committees, at other times before Olivers Council,
where it was carried dubiously, and rather inclining to the other side; at
which the Presbyterian-Party made the Bells to be rung, and Bonfires in the
Town to express their joy, triumphing in the ruin of a poor Church; but the day
was not so clearly their own, as they imagined, for the Church yet stood
against all its Enemies, God protecting his own House, and his Servants that
were zealous for it, in a time when they could look for little favor from the
Powers that then ruled, who had not so much respect for Gods House, as the
Heathens had for their Idol Temples, and for those that Vindicated them,
Justin. lib. 8.
as Justin says on this occasion, Diis proximus habetur per quem deorum
majestas vindicata sit; for which he praises Philip of Macedon, calling him
Vindicem Sacrilegii, ultorem religionum, etc. During those troubles, Mr. Huish,
Minister of the Church, durst not go on in his Ministerial duties, which the
Doctor no sooner heard of, but to animate and encourage him, he writ a pious
Letter; a Copy of which I then transcribed, which is as follows, and worth
the inserting here.

SIR,
WE are much beholden to you for your cheerful condescending unto our desires,
so far as to the Lords-days Service, which though it be opus diei in die suo,
yet we cannot think our selves to be fully Masters of our Requests, till you
have yielded to bestow your pains on the other days also, We hope in reasonable
time to alter the condition of Mr. Blackwels pious gift, that without hazarding
the loss of his Donation, which would be an irrecoverable blow to this poor
Parish, you may sue out your quietus est, from that daily attendance, unless
you find some further motives and inducements to persuade you to it; yet so to
alter it, that there shall be no greater wrong done to his intentions, than to
most part of the Founders in each University, by changing Prayers for the souls
first by them intended, into a Commemoration of their bounties, as was
practiced. All dispositions of this kind must vary with those changes, which
befall the Church, or else be alienated and estranged to other purposes. I know
it must needs be some discouagement to you, to read to Walls, or to pray in
public with so thin a Company as hardly will amount to a Congregation: But
withal I desire you to consider, that magis and minus, all Logicians say, do
not change the species of things; that quantities of themselves are of little
efficacy (if at all of any) and that he who promised to be in the midst of two
or three when they meet together in his Name, has clearly showed, that even
the smallest Congregations shall not want his presence, and why then should we
think much to bestow our pains where he vouchsafes his presence, or think our
labor ill bestowed, if some few only do partake of the present benefit? And
yet no doubt the benefit extends to more than the parties present; for you know
well, that the Priest or Minister is not only to pray with, but for the people,
that he is not only to offer up the peoples Prayers to Almighty God, but to
offer up his own Prayers for them, the benefit whereof may charitably be
presumed to extend to, as well as it was intended for, the absent also. And if
a whole Nation may be represented in a Parliament of four hundred persons, and
they derive the blessings of Peace and Comfort upon all the Land, why may we
not conceive, that God will look on three or four of this little Parish, as the
Representative of the whole, and for their sakes extend his Grace and Blessings
unto all the rest; that he who would have saved that sinful City of Sodom, had
he found but ten righteous persons in it, may not vouchsafe to bless a less
sinful people upon the prayers of a like or less number of pious and religious
persons. When the High Priest went into the Sanctum Sanctorum, to make
atonement for the sins of the people, went he not thither by himself? none of
the people being suffered to enter into that place. Do not we read, that when
Zacharias offered up Incense, which figured the Prayers of the Saints, within
the Temple, the people waited all that while in the outward Courts? or find we
any where that the Priest, who offered up the daily sacrifice (and this comes
nearest to our case) did ever intermit that Office by reason of the slackness
and indevotion of the people in repairing to it. But you will say, there is a
Lion in the way, there is danger in it. Assuredly I hope none at all; or if
any, none that you would care for. The Sword of the Committee had as sharp an
edge, and was managed with as strong a malice, as any ordinance of later Date
can empower men with. Having so fortunately escaped the danger of that, why
should you think of any thing but despising this, as Tully did unto Mark
Antony, Catilinae gladios contempsi, non timebo tuos. Why may you not conclude
with David in the like sense and apprehensions of Gods preservation, that he
who saved him from the Bear and Lion, would also save him from the sword of
that railing Philistine; and you may see that the Divine Providence is still
awake over that poor remnant of the Regular and Orthodox Clergy, which have not
yet bowed their knees to the golden Calves of late erected, by putting so
unexpectedly a hook into the Nostrils of those Leviathans which threatened with
an open mouth to devour them all. I will not say as Clemens of Alexandria, did
in a case much like that, it is (...) to indulge too much to apprehensions of
this nature in matters which relate to Gods public service. All I shall add is
briefly this, that having presented you with these Considerations, I shall with
greediness expect the sounding of the Bell to morrow morning; and in the mean
time make my Prayers to Almighty God, so to direct you in this business, as may
be most for his glory, your own particular comfort, and the good of this
people, with which expressions of my Soul, I subscribe my self,

Your most affectionate Friend and Brother in Christ Jesus PETER HEYLYN.


After this good Letter Mr. Huish went on in his prayers, as formerly, and this
little Church withstood all the batteries and fierce assaults of its Enemies,
who were never able to demolish it, or unite it to Saint Ellens. So well had
the Doctor managed the business for the public good and benefit of the Parish:
for as to his own particular, he might have spared that pains and charge,
having in his house an Oratory or little Chapel, which he built after his
coming thither, where he had constant Prayers and Sacraments for his own
Family, and some particular Neighbors who had a desire to hear the Service and
receive the Sacrament according to the Church of England. He was a strict
keeper of Lent, save only Sundays, and an exact observer of the Holy Days. And
as he was a strict observer of all the Rites and Orders of our Church, so he
was a perfect abhorrer of Popery and Romish superstitions, in so much that he
would not hold a correspondency with a Papist, or with one so reputed, as I can
instance an example, of one Mr. Hood, whose Family and the Doctors were very
kind, when he lived at Minster, being near Neighbors, the Gentleman afterward
turning Papist, and coming to Abingdon to give him a Visit, the Doctor sent his
man Mr. Gervis to him, to bid him be gone, and shut the doors against him,
saying that he heard he was turned Papist, for which he hated the sight of him,
and so my Gentleman went away, never daring to give him another Visit.

In the Year 1658. he put forth Respondet Petrus or his Answer to Dr. Bernards
Book entitled, The Judgment of the late Primate of Ireland, etc. at the same
time Dr. Bernard who was before an Irish Dean, but was now Chaplain to Oliver,
one of his Almoners, and Preacher in Grayes Inn, would have procured an Order
from Olivers Privy Council not only for suppressing, but the burning of that
Book, which caused a common report, that Dr. Heylyns Book was publicly burnt;
but it was a mistake, for the Book never saw either the Fire, or any Answer. At
the same time the Doctor printed an Appendix to Respondet Petrus, in answer to
certain passages in Mr. Sandersons History of the Life and Reign of King
Charles, in which he lays a scandal upon the Doctor that he was an Agent for
the Sea of Rome. The Doctor indeed in all his Writings, did ever assert the
Kings Prerogative, and the Churches Rights, for which he incurred the Odium of
the opposire Party, with whom it is ordinary to brand such persons with the
ignominious name of Papists, or being Popishly affected, as abhor the other
extreme of Puritanism, in which kind of Calumnies the Doctor has sufficiently
had his share, though no man has written more sharply against the Church of
Rome, as appears from most of his Books, and particularly in his Theologia
Veterum, and his Sermons upon the Tares: but though these have not been able to
secure him from the malicious Tongues and Pens of ill men, yet his innocence
has found very worthy Advocates. Among whom I thank particularly the Reverend
and Learned Dr. Stillingfleet in his Answer to T.G. who would have made use of
the Puritans accusation for the Papists purpose, but the worthy Doctor quickly
refuted him out of the fourth Sermon of Doctor Heylyn upon the Tares, where he
lays at the door of the Papists the most gross Idolatry, greater than which was
never known among the Gentiles.

But against these things it is commonly said, and as commonly believed; that
some persons, and those of most illustrious quality, have been perverted from
the Protestant Faith to Popery, by reading some of the Doctors Books, and
particularly that which he writ about the History of the Reformation, called
Ecclesia Restaurata. And Mr. Burnet in his late History upon the same subject,
has done all he can to confirm the world in that belief. For after a short
commendation of Dr. Heylyns style and method (it being usual with some men
slightly to praise those at first, whom they design to sting and lash
afterward) he presumes to tell his Reader, that either the Doctor was ill
informed, or very much led by his passions, and he being wrought on by most
violent prejudices against some that were concerned in that time, delivers many
things in such a manner, and so strangely, that one would think that he had
been secretly set on to it, by those of the Church of Rome, though I donbt not
but he was a sincere Protestant, but violently carried away by some particular
conceits. In one thing he is not to be excused, that he never vouched any
Authority for what he writ; which is not to be forgiven any who write of
Transactions beyond their own time, and deliver us things not known before.

This Objection having many particular Charges contained in it, will require as
many distinct Answers, which I shall give in short. And first, if it be true
that any have embraced the Roman Faith, by means of that Book, he may enclude
them to be very incompetent Judges in the matters of Religion, that will be
prevailed upon to change it upon the perusal of one single History; and
especially in the Controversies between us and the Papists, which do not depend
upon matter of fact, or an Historical Narration of what Occurrences happened in
this Kingdom, but upon doctrine of Faith, what we are to believe and
disbelieve, in order to our serving God in this life, and being Eternally
blessed with him in the next. Secondly, As for his vouching no Authority for
what he writ, which is not to be forgiven him, I hope the Doctor has met with a
more merciful Judge in another World, than Mr. Burnet is in this. If he had
been a Factor for Papists, Mr. Burnet should have presented one particular
instance, which he cannot do. As we have said before in his Life, he
communicated that design of his History of Reformation to Archbishop Laud,
from whom he received all imaginable encouragement, by ancient Records that he
perused. And what benefit could any Reader receive, to have quoted to him the
pages of Manuscripts, Acts of Parliament, Records of old Charters, Registers of
Convocation, Orders of the Council Table, or any of those out of the Cottonian
Library, which the Doctor made use of. The Lord Bacon writ of Transactions
beyond his own time, living as far distant from the Reign of K. Hen. VII. as
Dr. Heylyn did from K. Hen. VIII. who laid the first foundation of the
Reformation, yet I cannot find there more quotations of Authors than in Dr.
Heylyns History; yet I suppose Mr. Burnet will look upon the Lord Bacons
History as complete. And if all this were made out, it is no more than what may
be laid at the door of the Author, who lately writ the History of Duke
Hamilton, Hist. D. Ham. p. 29, 30.
where are reported the most abominable Scandals that were broached by the
malicious Covenanters against the Scottish Hierarchy, and they are permitted
without the least contradiction or confutation to pass as infallible Truths,
that so Posterity, as well as the present prejudiced Age might be levened with
an implacable enmity and hatred against the whole Order of Episcopacy. Although
the Hamiltons were the old inveterate Enemies of the Stuarts; and the Duke of
whom the History is compiled, was an Enemy as treacherous to K. Charles I. as
any that ever appeared against him in open Arms. He was the cause of the first
Tumult raised in Edinburgh: He Authorized the Covenant with some few
alterations in it, and generally imposed it on that Kingdom. He was the chief
Person that prevailed with the King to continue the Parliament during the
pleasure of the two Houses, and boasted how he had got a perpetual Parliament
for the English, and would do the like for the Scots. He aimed at nothing less
than the Crown of Scotland, and had so courted the common Soldiers, that David
Ramsey openly began a health to K. James VII. yet all these things, with many
others are either quite smothered, or so painted over by Mr. Burnet, that the
Volume he has writ may be called an Apology or a Panegyric, rather than a
History. Of all these matters the Doctor has acquainted the world before in
the Life of Archbishop Laud, and the Observations that he wrote upon Mr.
L'Estrange's History of King Charles I. I will be bold to aver, if the Doctor
had employed his great Learning and Abilities to have written but one half of
those things against the King and Church of England, which he wrote for them,
he would have been accounted by very many persons (I will not say by Mr.
Burnet) the truest Protestant, the most faithful Historian, the greatest
Scholar, and in their own phrase the most precious man, that ever yet breathed
in the Nation. But he had the good luck to be a Scholar, and better luck to
employ his Learning like an honest man and a good Christian, in the defense of
a righteous and pious King, of an Apostolical and true Church, of a venerable
and learned Clergy, and that drew upon him all the odium and malice, that two
opposite Parties, Papist and Sectary, could heap upon him.

After the happy Restoration of the King, it was high time for the good Doctor
to rest a while from his Labors, and bless himself with joy for the coming in
of his Sovereign: for now the Sun shone more gloriously in our Hemisphere than
ever, the Tyrannical powers being dissolved, the King brought home to his
people, the Kingdom settled in peace, the Church restored to its rights, and the
true Religion established, every man returned to his own vine with joy, who had
been a good Subject and a sufferer, and the Doctor came to his old habitation
in Westminster, of which and of his other Preferments he had been dispossessed
for the space of seventeen years, and he no sooner got thither, but according
to his wonted custom, he sets upon building, and erected a new Room in his
Prebends house to entertain his Friends in. And seldom was he without Visitors,
especially the Clergy of the Convocation, who constantly came to him for his
Advice and Direction in matters relating to the Church, because he had been
himself an ancient Clerk in the old Convocations. Many Persons of Quality,
besides the Clergy, for the Reverence they had to his Learning, and the delight
they took in his company, paid him several visits, which he never repayed,
being still so devoted to his Studies, that except going to Church, it was a
rare thing to find him from home. I happened to be there, when the good Bishop
of Durham, Dr. Cousins, came to see him; who after a great deal of familiar
discourse between them; said, I wonder Brother Heylyn thou art not a Bishop,
but we all know thou have deserved it. To which he answered, Much good may it
do the new Bishops, I do not envy them, but wish they may do more than I have
done. Now what that great Man did so readily acknowledge to be the Doctors due,
was no more than what his true worth might justly challenge from all that were
Friends to Learning and Virtue. For his knowledge was extensive as the Earth,
and in his little world, the great one was so fully comprehended, that not an
Island or Province, nay scarce a Rock or Shelf could escape his strict survey
and exact description. Nor was he content with that degree of knowledge which
did far exceed what any other durst hope, or even wish for, viz. A perfect
familiarity with the present State of all the Countries in the World, but he
was resolved to understand as well what they had always been, as what they then
were; to be as thoroughly acquainted with their History, as he was with their
Situation, and to leave nothing worth the knowing, undiscovered. So that what
he has done in that kind, looks liker the product of the most Learned and
Ancient Inhabitans of their respective Countries, than the issue of the
industry of a Single Person. Yet for all this, his head was not so filled with
the contemplations of this World, as to leave no room for the great concerns of
the other. But on the contrary, the main of his Study was Divinity, the rest
were but by the by, and subservient to that. For he having strictly viewed and
examined all the various Religions and Governments upon Earth, and coming to
compare them with those under which himself lived, did find the advantage both
in respect of this life and another to lie so much on the side of these, as
made him a most resolute Champion for them, and was the reason that he was
often heated with great Indignation against those that were so blind or
obstinate, to endeavor the interruption of such transcendent blessings: And
though some have thought his zeal too ardent, yet they might consider, that it
was his fortune to live in such times as made the highest expressions of it not
only just but necessary: Of which he was so sensible, that forgetting all his
other diverting Studies, he wholly set himself to endeavor the defense and
support of a tottering Church and Grown, which he labored to that degree, that
his body (though naturally a very strong one) not being able to keep pace with
his mind, was often hurried into violent Fevers. And at last his eyes (of
themselves brisk and sparkling) through continual watchings and intensness,
lost their function, and refused any longer to assist his Studies. Yet could
not all this abate the vigor of his mind, which as tho it had lost no outward
assistance, or that it stood in need of none, still continued its action, and
produced several excellent Books after their Author was neither capable of
writing nor reading them. Nor was any thing but death able so much as to
slacken his industry: for besides the discouragements I have named, he had all
those which an Usurped Authority, (under which he was forced to live, and
against which he could not forbear both to speak and write) could threaten him
with; for he was thereby not only deprived of his Preferments, but often put in
hazard of his life: But that merciful God, who never fails those that trust
in him, did preserve him, that he might enjoy the fruits of his pains and
prayers in the Restoration of that Religion and Government which he so truly
loved, and had so earnestly endeavored; in the public enjoyment of which he
lived three years. And then having completed the utmost of his wishes in the
world, God was pleased to call him to the eternal Reward of another; and in so
favorable a way as he might well look upon as a remarkable instance of the
divine Goodness toward him. For as we read in the Scriptures that God did
frequently warn his Servants of their approaching deaths, so he dealt with this
good man. For on the Saturday night before he fell sick, he dreamed, That he
was in an extraordinary pleasant and delightful place, where standing and
admiring the Beauty and Glory of it, he saw the late King his Master, who said
to him, Peter, I will have you buried under your Seat at Church, for you are
rarely seen but there, or at your Study. This Dream he related to his Wife next
morning, told her it was a significant one, and charged her to let him be
buried according to it. On the Monday he bought an House in the Almonry, Sealed
the Writings and paid the Money the same day; and at night told his Wife, he
had bought her an House to live in near the Abbey, that she might serve God in
that Church as he had done: And then renewing his Charge of burying him
according to his dream, went to bed very well, but after his first sleep, was
taken with a violent Fever, which deprived him of his understanding, till a few
hours before his death; when seeing one of the Vergers of the Church in his
Chamber, he called him, and said, I know it is Church time with you, and this
is Ascension day, I am ascending to the Church triumphant, I go to my God and
Savior, into joys Celestial, and to Hallelujahs eternal. After which and other
like expressions he died the same day, Anno Dom. 1663. in the 63 year of his
Age. He had eleven Children, four of which are still living. He was buried
under the Sub-Dean's Seat, according to his dream and desire, over against
which, on the North-side of the Abbey, stands his Monument with this
Inscription, composed by Dr. Earl, then Dean of that Church.

Depositum Mortale Petri Heylyn. S. Th. P. Hujus Ecclesiae Prebendarii and
Subdecani, Viri plane memorabilis, Egregiis dotibus instructissimi, Ingenio
acri and foecundo, Judicio subacto, Memoria ad prodigium tenaci; Cui adjunxit
incredibilem in studiis patientiam Quae, cessantibus oculis non cessarunt.
Scripsit varia and plurima, Que jam manibas hominum teruntur; Et argumentis non
vulgaribus Stylo non vulgari suffecit. Constans ubiq. Ecelesiae Et majestatis
Regie assertor, Nec florentis magis utriusque Quant afflictae: Idemque
perduellium, and Schismaticae Factionis Impugnator acerrimus. Contemptor
invidiae. Et animo infracto. Plura ejusmodi meditanti Mors indixit Silentium:
Vt sileatur, Efficere non potest. Obiit Anno Aetat. 63. Posuit hoc illi
Moestissima Conjux.
A Catalogue of such Books, as were written by this Learned Doctor.
Spurius, a Tragedy M.S. written A. D. 1616. Theomachia, a Comedy M.S. 1619.
Geography, printed at Oxon twice A. D. 1621, and 1624. in 4. and afterward in
1652. enlarged into a Folio, under the Title of Cosmography. An Essay, called
Augustus 1631, since inserted into his Cosmography. The History of St. George,
Lon. 1631. reprinted 1633. The History of the Sabbath, 1631, reprinted 1636.
Answer to the B. of Lincolns Letter to the Vicar of Grantham 1636. twice
reprinted. Answer to Mr. Burtons two seditious Sermons 1637. A short Treatise
concerning a Form of Prayer to be used according to what is enjoined in the 55
Canon, written at the request of the Bishop of Winchester, 1637. Antidotum
Lincolniense, or an Answer to the Bishop of Lincoln's Book, entitled, Holy
Table, Name and Thing, 1637, reprinted 1638. An Uniform book of Articles,
fitted for Bishops and Archdeacons in their Visitation, 1640. De Jure
paritatis Episcoporum, or concerning the Peerage of Bishops, 1740, M. S. A
Reply to Dr. Hackwel, concerning the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, M. S. 1641.
The History of Episcopacy, first under the name of Theoph. Churchman,
afterward in his own name reprinted, 1657. The History of Liturgies written
1642. A Relation of the Lord Hoptons Victory at Bodmin. A View of the
proceedings in the West for a Pacification. A Letter to a Gentleman in
Lincolnshire about the Treaty. A Relation of the proceedings of Sir John Gell.
A Relation of the Queens return from Holland, and the Siege of Newark. The
black Cross, showing that the Londoners were the cause of the Rebellion. The
Rebels Catechism: All these printed at Oxon, 1644. An Answer to the Papists
groundless Clamor, who Nickname the Religion of the Church of England by the
name of a Parliamentary Religion, 1644. A Relation of the Death and sufferings
of Will. Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, 1644 The Stumbling Block of
Disobedience removed, written 1644. printed 1658. The Promised Seed in English
Verse. Theotogia Veterum, or an Exposition of the Creed, Fol. 1654. Survey of
France, with an account of the Isles of Guernsey and Jersey, 1656. 4. Examen
Historicum, or a Discovery and Examination of the mistakes, falsities, and
defects in some modern Histories, Land. 1659. Certamen Epistolare, or the
Letter-Combat managed with Mr. Baxter, Dr. Bernard, Mr. Hickman, 8. Land. 1659.
Historia Quinqu-Articularis, 4. Land. 1660. Respondet Petrus, or the Answer of
Peter Heylyn, D. D. to Dr. Bernards book, entitled The Judgment of the late
Primate, etc. Land. 4. 1658. Observations on Mr. Hammond L' Estranges History
of the Life of King Charles I. 1658. Extraneus Vapulans, or a Defense of those
Observations. Land. 1658. A short History of King Charles the First, from his
Cradle to his Grave, 1658. Thirteen Sermons, some of which are an Exposition of
the Parable of the Tares, printed at London 1659, and again 1661. A help to
English History, containing a succession of all the Kings, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Bishops, etc. of England and Wales, first written in the Year 1641,
under the name of Robert Hall, but now enlarged and in Dr. Heylyns name.
Ecclesia Vindicata, or the Church of England Justified, etc. 4. 1657.
Bibliotheca Regia, or the Royal Library, 8. Ecclesia Restaurata, or the History
of the Reformation, Fol. Land. 1661. Cyprianus Anglicus, or the History of the
Life and Death of William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, Fol. Aerius Redivivus,
or the History of the Presbyterians, Fol.
ECCLESIA VINDICATA: OR, THE Church of England JUSTIFIED; I. In the Way and
Manner of her Reformation. II. In Officiating by a Public Liturgy. III. In
prescribing a Set Form of Prayer to be used by Preachers before their Sermons.
IV. In her Right and Patrimony of Tithes. V. In retaining the Episcopal
Government. And therewith, VI. The Canonical Ordination of Priests and Deacons.


By PETER HEYLIN, D. D.

PSALM. CXXXVI. 6, 7. Si oblitus fuero tui, O Jerusalem, oblivioni detur dextra
med:

Adhaereat lingua mea faucibus meis, si non proposuero tui in principio
laetitiae meae.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark for C. Harper. 1681.

A General Preface TO THE READER; CONCERNING The Design and Method of the
following WORK.
1. The Authors Address to those of the same persuasion with him. 2. As also to
those of different Opinion. 3. His humble application to all such as be in
Authority. 4. Persecution a true note of the Church verified in the Jews, the
primitive Christians and the Church of England. 5. The several Quarrels of the
Genevians and Papists against the way and manner of our Reformation. 6. The
Authors Method and Design in answering the Clamors and Objections of either
party. 7. The first Quarrels against the Liturgies of King Edward the sixth,
and the grounds thereof. 8. The Liturgy of Queen Elizabeth approved by the
Pope, subscribed by the Scots; and the Church frequented by the Papists for the
first ten years of that Queens reign. 9. The Puritans and Papists separate from
the Church at the same time, and the hot pursuance of this Quarrel by the
Puritan party. 10. The Quarrel after some repose revived by the Smectymnuans,
and their actings in it. 11. The Author undertakes the Defense of Liturgies, as
also the Times and Places of Public Worship against all Opponents unto each.
12. The Prayer prescribed to be used by Preachers before their Sermons, the
reasons why it was prescribed, and the Church justified for so doing, in a
Brief Discourse upon that subject of the Authors making. 13. An Answer to the
Objection touching the free exercise of the Gift of Prayer. 14. Set Forms of
Prayer condemned in Churches by the Devisers of the Directory, and prescribed
for Ships. 15. The Liturgy cried down by the Lay-Brethren in Order to the
taking away of Tithes. 16. The same Design renewed by some late Projectors, the
Author undertakes against them, and his Reasons for it. 17. The first Bishops
of Queen Elizabeth's time quarrelled by the Papists, and the grounds thereof.
18. Covetousness and Ambition in the Presbyterians, the two main grounds of
their Pursuit against Episcopacy. 19. Set on by Calvin and Beza, they break out
into action, their violent proceedings in it, and cessation from it. 20. The
Quarrel reassumed by the Smectymnuans, outwitted in the close thereof by the
Lay-Brethren, without obtaining their own ends in advancing Presbytery. 21. The
Author undertakes against Smectymnuus, and proves Episcopacy to be agreeable to
all Forms of Civil Government. 22. His History of Episcopacy grounded on the
Authority of the Ancient Fathers, and what the Reader is desired in Relation to
them. 23. Ordination by the Imposition of Hands, generally in use in all
Churches, and how the Ordinance of March 20. 1653. is to be understood as to
that particular. 24. No Ordination lawful but by Bishops, and what the Author
has done in it. 25. The close of all, and the submission of the whole to the
Readers judgment.
Christianity. A Church, which for her Power and Polity, her sacred Offices and
Administrations, has not alone the grounds of Scripture, the testimony of
Antiquity, and consent of Fathers, but as good countenance and support, as the
Established Laws of the Land could give her; which Laws, if they be still in
force, as they seem to be, thy sufferings for adhering to the Church in her
Forms and Government, may not improperly be said to have fallen upon thee for thy
obedience and conformity to the Laws themselves. Smectym. Answ. 85.
For though it may be supposed with the Smectymnians, the Author of The True
Cavalier, etc. and some other of our modern Politics, that Government and
Forms of Worship are but matters of humane appointment, and being such may
lawfully abrogated by the same Authority by which at first they were
Established; yet then it must be still by the same Authority, and not by any
other which is less sufficient for that end and purpose. And I presume it will
not be affirmed by any, that an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons occasionally
made and fitted for some present exigent is of as good authority as an Act of
Parliament, made by the King with the consent and approbation of the three
Estates, in due form of Law. Or if it be, I would then very fain know the
reason why the Ordinance of the third of January, Anno 1644. should be in force
as to the taking away of the Book of Common Prayer, and yet be absolutely void
or of no effect as to the establishing and imposing of the Directory thereby
authorized, which bears an equal share in the title of it; or why the Ordinance
of the ninth of October, Anno 1646. for abolishing Archbishops and Bishops
should be still in credit; and yet so many Ordinances for settling the
Presbyterian Government (in order whereunto the Hierarchy of Bishops was to be
abolished) should be as short lived as Jonas's Goard, Plautus in Pseudolo.
or the solstitial Herb in Plautus, Quae repentino orta est repentino occidit,
blasted as soon as sprung up, without acting any thing; and finally why so many
of the Clergy should still stand sequestered by Order from the Committees of
both Houses of Parliament, and yet the Orders of those Houses, as to the
recovering of their fifths, should be void and null. So that thy Judgment and
Affection being so well bottomed, thy Conscience cannot but bear thee witness
that thou have not suffered as a Malefactor, a Violator of the Laws, a
contemner of Order, or a Despiser of Dominion; which will be a contentment to
thee in thy greatest sorrows, Lactant. lib. 1. cap. 1.
above all expression. Delectabit tamen se Conscientia, quod est Animae pabulum
incredibile jucunditate perfusum, as Lactantius has it.

If thou art otherwise persuaded, different judgment from me in the main
Disputes, yet I desire thee notwithstanding to peruse these papers, and to
peruse them with that Candor and Christian Charity which we ought to have about
us in the agitation of all weighty Controversies. I despair not but that thou
may here meet with something which may inform thy Understanding, and rectify
the obliquity of those misconceptions which thou have harbored heretofore
against this Church, the way and manner of proceeding in her Reformation, her
Government and Established Orders in Gods public service, her Right and Title
to that settled Maintenance, which is reserved to those who officiate in her. Te
quoque in his Aliquid quod juvet esse potest, in the Poets Language. Ovid in
Phaedra ad Hippolyt.
Howsoever I hope thou art not of those men who hate to be reformed, or stop
their ears like the deaf Adder in the Psalms, that so they may not hear the
voice of the Charmer; but have a malleable soul, and capable of all impressions
tending unto peace and truth. And then I shall be confident of this favor from
thee, that if thou can not find good reason to change thy judgment and alter
thy opinion in the points disputed, yet thou will hereafter think more
charitably of those poor Men, who cannot sail with every wind of new Opinion,
nor easily wean themselves from those persuasions which they have sucked in as
it were with their Mothers milk. If thou art strong, and can digest all meats
which are set before thee, condemn not those of weaker stomachs who have been
used unto a Regular and strict kind of Diet.

But if thou art not only of a different Opinion from me, Condition also,
advanced perhaps unto some eminent degree of Trust and Power in the present
Government, I must address my self unto thee in another way. I must then say to
thee as did Tertullian once to the Roman Senators, that since there is no means
in the way of a personal Defense to vindicate the Church, and clear her
Children from all those Calumnies and imputations which are charged upon them,
Liceat veritati vel occulta via tacitarum literarum ad aures vestras pervenire;
Tertul. in Apologet. cap. 2.
I hope it may be lawful for the Truth to appear before you, by the humble and
modest way of a Declaration. For what has been the cause of our great
Disturbances, but the want of a right Understanding of those Grounds and
Principles upon which the Church of England was first reformed, or of those
greater Animosities, those Odia plus quam Vatiniana, expressed toward such as
are most cordially affected to her Rules and Tendries? The Men themselves known
generally to be both of Parts and Piety, many of them possessed of liberal
Fortunes, and all responsal to the Public in all those capacities in which
they may do service to it. And can it rationally be conceived, that either
wilfulness or perverseness, or a vainglorious affectation of adhering to their
old Mumpsimus (as King Harry used to say in another case) could make them run
the hazard of all which is dear unto them, were there not some inward
principle of Conscience, and light of Understanding to incline them to it? Or
that they can suppose themselves to equally dealt with in being debard from
serving God in that way of Worship, and under those Forms of Administration,
which they find countenanced and commended to them by as good Authority as the
Established Laws of the Land could give them; and in the mean time that all
sorts of Sects and Heresies destructive of all civil Magistracy and Humane
Society, should find not only a Connivence, but Support and Countenance? And if
this cannot be conceived, how can thou answer it to thy self, or to God and
Man, that they who live so peaceably and inoffensively in their several
stations, as not to be reproached with any disaffection to the present
Government in word or deed, should notwithstanding be marked out to continual
Ruin, because supposed to be of different Principles and Persuasions from some
of those who have such powerful influences on the public Counsels? For thy
sake therefore, not for theirs only, have I took this pains, and drawn these
several Tracts together, that being perfectly instructed in the grounds of
their affections, and the right constitution of the Church their common Mother,
thou may not only carry a more gentle hand toward those who have adhered
unto it, but be more tenderly affected to the Church it self, which hitherto
has met with so much contradiction from unquiet men.

And to say truth, Church of England to be a true Catholic and Apostolic
Church; this were sufficient to evince it, that it has been always under
persecution, which the whole tenor of the Scriptures and the ancient Monuments
of Christianity have given us as a mark or character of the Church of God. No
sooner had the Israelites freed themselves from the bondage of Egypt, but they
were presently pursued and forced through the Red Sea, by the Host of Pharaoh;
nor had they sooner escaped that danger by Gods Almighty power, but the
Amalekites set upon them, the Moabites set themselves against them, and Balaam
the son of Beor is hired to curse them, hated by all the Nations amongst whom
they lived, derided for their Sabbath and Circumcision, ( Recutitaque Sabbata
palles, as the Satyrist has it) and for their other Rites and Ceremonies in
which they differed from the rest of their neighboring Nations; Their Laws are
diverse from all people, Hest. 3.8. Tacit, Hist. lib. 5.
says Haman in the Book of Hester; Novi illis Ritus coeterisque mortalibus
contrarii, as it is in Tacitus; therefore to be exterminated as Enemies unto
Civil Government and to all mankind. Thus did it also fare with the Primitive
Christians, as soon as they had separated themselves from the Jewish Synagogue;
exposed to all the disadvantages of scorn and danger, both by Jews and
Gentiles. For as concerning this Sect we know that every where it is spoken
against; so said the Jews to Paul at his coming to Rome; Acts 28.^2. Tacitus in
Annal. lib. XV.
Homines per flagitia invisi, as much about the same time the same Tacitus
calls them; and therefore odio humani generis convicti, obnoxious to the common
hatred of all men, as it after follows. Persecuted upon this account by the
Roman Emperors, reviled by the malicious Pens of Celsus, Prophyry, Lucian,
Julian, and the rest of that Rabble. Thus also has it happened to the Church
of England, No sooner had King Harry freed her from the Bondage of Rome, but
the proud Pharaohs of that City pursued him presently with their fulminations,
endeavoring to raise up all the Princes of the Earth against him; nor had she
sooner purged her self of those superstitions and corruptions which had been
put upon her in the time of that Bondage, but many hundreds of her children
were forcibly driven through the Red Sea (a Sea of their own blood) to the
Heavenly Canaan. Persecuted after this in foreign parts by the Inquisition, at
home by the malicious pens and practices of that dangerous Enemy. And as if
this had not been enough for her affliction, her Bowels must be torn out by
those very children which she had nourished in the faith, though afterward
they scorned to own her for their Mother.

The first thing quarrelled on both sides is the Way and manner of her
Reformation. Rome, to have too little of the Pope, and too much of the
Parliament; by those of the Genevian party, to have too little of the People,
and too much of the Prince. The Genevians or Presbyterians find themselves
agrieved that in the agitating of this great Business, there was no such
consideration had of the common People, as in other places; their Lay Elders
being allowed no Vote either in the Consistory or the Convocation, and
consequently no care taken of the Peoples Interess, which in a matter which so
nearly concerned their souls, was as great as any: applauding for this cause
the riotous proceedings in some other Countries, where the People threw down
Altars, defaced Images, and in a pious zeal (no doubt) demolisht Churches,
laying thereby the groundwork of a more through Reformation than was made with
us. The Romanists do complain as loudly that this great Work was wholly carried
on by the power of Parliaments. And hereupon it is affirmed by D. Harding, the
first that took up Arms against this Church in Queen Elizabeth's time, that we
had a Parliament-Religion, a Parliament-Faith, and a Parliament-Gospel; as by
Scultingius and some others, that we had none but Parliament-Bishops, and a
Parliament-Clergy. Two Clamors so repugnant unto one another, that if the one
of them be true, the other cannot choose but be very false. And thus again the
Papists generally object, that in that great work of the Reformation, there was
no care taken of the Pope, neither consulted with as the Patriarch of the
Western Churches, or as the Apostle at the least of the English Nation: the
Pope thereby unworthily deprived of that Supremacy which of ancient Right
belonged unto him, to the subverting of the Fundamentals of the Christian
Faith. Primo and praecipuo Romanensium fidei articulo de Pontificis primatu
immutato, Hist Council. Trident. lib. 1.
as my Author has it. Calvin and his Disciples on the other side, are as much
offended with settling the Supremacy upon the King; the Master grievously
complaining of it in his Comment on the 7th of Amos, Calvin in Amos cap. 7.
his Scholars doing the like in their several Pamphlets, And though it be
affirmed by Bracton, one of our ancient Common Lawyers (if my memory fail not)
that Kings are therefore anointed with holy Oil, Eo quod spiritualis
jurisdictionis sunt capaces, because they are capable of exercising
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Jurisdiction; yet Calvin will have none of that,
condemning those for rash and inconsiderate Persons, Qui faciunt eos nimis
Spirituales, who ascribe to them any such Authority in Spiritual matters, His
Followers will take after him in this particular, none more professedly and at
large than Caldwood (or Didoclavius as he calls himself) and his Associates in
the Altar Damascenum.

To satisfy the Clamors of these opposite parties, and to appease some
Scruples raised thereby in Mr. G. A. of W, a modest and ingenuous Gentleman my
especial friend, I set my self in the first place to justify the Church of
England as to the Way and Manner of her Reformation, so loudly and so falsely
clamoured on so little ground. And by this Tract it will be proved that nothing
was done here in the Reformation, but what was acted by the Clergy in their
Convocations, or grounded on some Act of theirs precedent to it, with the
Advice, Counsel, and Consent of the Bishops and other learned men assembled by
the Kings appointment; and secondly that the Parliaments did nothing in it but
that sometimes upon the Post-fact it was thought fit to add some strength to
the Decrees and Determinations of the Church (especially in inflicting
punishments on the Disobedient) by the Civil Sanctions. And for the proof of
this I have used none but Domestic Evidences, that is to say, the Edicts of
the King, the Records of Convocation, and the Acts of Parliaments themselves,
the best assurances that can be devised in Law to convey the Truth unto us in
all these particulars. In the next place I have endeavored to give
satisfaction unto all those Doubts which do relate unto the King, the Pope, or
the Churches Protestant (the riotous actings of the Common People being no good
ground to build a Right on) either too little or too much looked after, as it
is pretended, in that weighty business. Whose pretensions being well examined
by the Testimony of the Fathers, Councils, and other Ecclesiastical
Antiquities, I hope it will appear as clearly that there was no wrong done
either to the Pope or the Foreign Churches in being excluded from our Councils
in so great a work; and that our Kings have exercised no other power in sacred
matters, than what is warranted unto them by the word of God, and precedented
with the best examples of the most godly Kings of Judah, and the most pious
Kings and Emperors in the happiest times. Nothing in all the Managery of the
Reformation but what is justifiable by the practice of the former Ages, and may
be drawn into Example for the Instruction and Direction of the present Powers
in all occasions of like natue.

The next thing faulted on both sides is the public Liturgy, condemned by
those of Rome, first for abolishing the Mass, and then for being published and
communicated in the vulgar Tongue; by those of the Genevian party, for having
too much in it of the Roman Rituals. The Papists of the two the more moderate
Adversary, and such whose edg was sooner taken off from the prosecution of the
Quarrel than the others were. For though the first Liturgy of King Edward the
sixth, compiled by many Learned and Religious persons, was cried up both by Act
of Parliament, 2.3 ^d. 6. cap. 1.
and by Fox himself as done by the especial aid of the holy Ghost, yet it gave
no small offense to some scrupulous Men, who relished nothing that related to
the Ancient Forms. And when by the Authority of Calvin the opposition in
conformity of Bishop Hooper, and the great power and policy of John Earl of
Warwick (after Duke of Northumberland) it was brought under a Review and
altered in such things as were thought offensive, yet then it would not down
neither with those tender stomachs. Witness the troubles raised to the English
Church at Francford in Queen Mary's days, by Knox, Whittingham, and their
Associates at their returning from Geneva, and the definitive sentence of
Calvin in it, to whom it was thought good to refer the Difference. And he
accordingly declares, to content his followers, In Liturgia Anglicana multas
esse tolerabiles ineptias, that he found in it very many tolerable follies,
Calv. Epist. Anno 15 55.
Reliquias Papisticae faecis, the very dregs of Popery, as he afterward calls
it.

Brought to a Review in Queen Elizabeth's time, and purged of a passage in the
Letany, which gave distaste unto the Papists, it grew into such general esteem
and reputation (as being fitted to the common Principles of Christianity in
which all parties did agree) that Pius the fourth, Anno 1560. made offer by
Parpatio Abbot of St. Saviors, whom he sent with Letters to the Queen,
Liturgiam Anglicam Authoritate sua confirmaturum, Cambd. in Annal. Eliz.
to ratify and confirm the same by his Authority. The Scots obliged themselves
by a public Subscription to observe the same ( Religionis cultui and Ritibus
cum Anglis communibus subscripserant, as we read in Buchannan) the fancy of
Extemporary Prayer not being then taken up, Histor. Scot. lib. 19.
as is affirmed by Knox himself in his Scottish History. So grateful was it for
a time to all sorts of people that the Papists for the first ten years of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign did diligently frequent the Church, and attend the public
Services and performance of it, as is affirmed by Sir Edward Coke in his charge
given at the Assizes held at Norwich, and in his Speech against Garnet, and the
other Traitors, Anno 1605. And this not spoken on vulgar hearsay, but on his
own certain knowledge and observation, he having noted Bedding field,
Cornwallis, and diverse others of that party to repair frequently to the Church
without any scruple. And though we may take this well enough on so good
Authority, yet may it possibly find more credit because averred by Queen
Elizabeth herself in her Instructions to Sir Francis Walsingham bearing date
August 11. Anno 1570. In which it is affirmed expressly of the Heads of that
party (and therefore we may judge the like of the Members also) that they did
ordinarily resort from the beginning of her Reign in all open places to the
Churches and to divine services in the Church, without contradiction or show of
misliking.

But in the year 1568. Sanders and others of the Popish Emissaries began to
practice on that party under pretense of doing service to the Catholic Cause;
as Button, Bellingham, Compl. Embassad. l. 4.
and Benson sticklers for the Genevian Interesse did upon those who were
inclinable to their Opinions. And they so far prevailed on their several
Partisans, Cambd. Annal. 1568.
that about two years after upon the coming out of the Bull of Pope Pius
Quintus against the Queen, the Papists generally withdrew themselves from that
conformity, and came no longer to our Churches as before they had done. And on
the other side the Puritans (as they then began to call them) animated by
Cartwright and the rest of their Leaders, did separate themselves also from the
Congregation, declaming in their frequent Pamphlets against the Liturgy, as
superstitious, and impure, and altogether savouring of the Romish Missals.
Favored underhand by Archbishop Grindal, and openly countenanced by the Earl
of Leicester, they became so confident at the last, that some of their Leaders
being demanded by an Honorable Counselor, if the abolition of some Ceremonies
would not serve their turn, they answered with arrogance enough, Ne ungulam
esse relinquendam, that they would not leave so much as a Hoof behind. But
notwithstanding this strong vapor, partly by the constancy and courage of
Archbishop Whitgift who succeeded Grindal, Anno 1583. the opportune death of
the Earl their Patron, Anno 1588. and the incomparable pains of judicious
Hooker Anno 1595. but principally by the seasonable Execution of Copping and
Hacker hanged at St. Edmondsbury in Suffolk for publishing the Pamphlets of
Rob. Brown against the Book of Common Prayer ( pouer publier le liveres de Rob.
Brown en country le Livre de Commune Prayer, as Compton does report the Case in
his Lawyers French) they become so quiet, Compton in his Office of Justices.
that the Church seemed to be restored to some hopes of peace. No Libelling or
Seditious preachings, no great disturbance after this for some years together;
the Brethren turning their assaults into underminings, and enterprising that by
practice which they had found impossible to be gained by violence.

By which means having formed their party, Scots, and countenanced by some
leading members in both Houses of Parliament Anno 1640. they brake out again;
the Smectymnuans openly appearing in the way of Argument, while others of more
Brains and Power managed the business for them in their several Houses. The
Liturgy by the one affirmed to have been intended by the first Reformers to be
an help only to the want or weakness of a Minister, and not to be imposed on
any but such as would confess themselves unable to pray without it; by some
resembled unto Crutches and such like helps to insufficiency, not to be made
use of, but by those only who otherwise could make no use of their legs;
reproached by their vulgar followers with the name of Pottage, a dish to stay
their stomachs till the meat came in: all Offices of Piety reduced to
Preaching, and all Devotion to the Prayer of the Preachers making.

To this extremity were things brought, Humble-Remonstrance, Pref. to the Tract
of Liturgies.
in which I found the whole building (as to this particular) to be laid on this
foundation; viz. that if by Liturgy we understand prescribed and stinted Forms
of Administration composed by some, and imposed upon all the rest, Smectym.
Answ. page 6.
then they are sure that no such Liturgy had been used anciently by the Jews or
Christians. Considering therefore they appealed to the ancient practice of the
Jews and Christians, I was resolved that to the ancient practice they should go
for their justification; and to that end drew down the Pedigree and Descent of
Liturgies among the Jews from the time of Moses unto CHRIST, carrying it on
through the constant practice of the Greeks and Romans, and finally through the
whole state of the Christian Church from the time of CHRIST our Savior till
the death of Saint Augustine, when Liturgies and Set Forms of Prayer, were
universally received in all parts of Christendom. But hardly had I finished my
Undertaking, Plutarch. in Mario.
when the War broke out; and I knew well (as Marius was once heard to say in
another case) That the voice of the Laws could not be heard for the noise of
Weapons: the Dispute being then like to be determined by stronger Arguments
than could be urged on either side by pen and paper. On which consideration the
Work lay by me as it was, till the Ordinance of the third of January, 1644. did
seem to put an end to the Disputation, by abolishing the Book of Common Prayer,
and authorizing the Directory or New Form of Worship to be observed in the
three Kingdoms. But finding in that Directory that all set times of Public
Worship were reduced to One, that one supposed to be commanded in the
Scripture, and that the Festival days vulgarly called Holy Days, Direct. page
ult.
having no warrant in the Word of God, were not to be continued longer; I took
that hint or opportunity to enlarge my self in laying down the ancient practice
both of Jews and Christians in appointing Holy Days, and recommending them to
the pious practice of all men, which did desire to live conformably to
established Laws. And finding afterward, that notwithstanding the Care taken by
that Directory, That Places of public assembling for worship among us, should
be continued and employed to their former use; Ibid.
some Men began to threaten them with a speedy destruction, and breathed out
nothing but Down with them, Down with them, even unto the ground, reproaching
them in the mean time with the name of Steeple Houses: I interserted also in
convenient places the pious care of the Jewish Nation in erecting Synagogues
and Oratories for Gods public Worship, and of the Primitive Christians (not to
say any thing of the like care in the ancient Gentiles) in building,
consecrating and adorning Churches for the like employments. And this I did to
let the Reader understand, that the accustomed times and places which were
designed and set apart for Gods public service, had more authority to rest on
than those Men gave out; the Liturgy it self being apt enough to be beaten down
without any such Ordinance, if once those times and places should be
discontinued. By these degrees and on these several occasions, the whole Work
came to that perfection in which it is now presented to thee; not to be now
presented to thee neither, if the necessity of doing my Duty unto God, and the
Church, and offering something unto the consideration of the Higher Powers, had
not prevailed with me above all respects of my private interest.

Liturgies and Set Forms of Worship being thus asserted, which is prescribed to
be used by Preachers before their Sermons, Can. 55. For certainly the Church
had not sufficiently provided for the Common peace, if she had tied her
Ministers to Set Forms in the Daily Office, and left them to their own liberty
in conceiving Prayers to be used by them in the Pulpit before their Sermons.
The inconvenience which that liberty has brought upon us in these latter days,
being so apparent, that it is very hard to say whether the Liberty of
Prophesying, or the Licenciousness in Praying what and how we list, has more
conduced to these distractions which are now amongst us. And if there were no
such effect too visible of this licentiousness (which I desire the present
State to take notice of) the scandal which is thereby given unto our Religion
in speaking so irreverently with such vain repetitions and tautologies to
Almighty God (as in extemporary and unpremeditated Prayers is too frequently
done) seems a sufficient consideration to bring us back again to that ancient
Form which the wisdom of the Church prescribed to prevent the Mischief. Such
was the care and providence of the elder times and happiest ages of the Church
as to ordain that no unlearned person should make use of any of those Prayers
which himself had framed, nisi prius eas cum instructioribus fratribus
contulerit, Council. Carthag. Can. 23.
before he had conferred about them with more learned men. The reason of which
is thus given in the Council of Milevis, Can. 12.
Ne forte aliquid contra fidem vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus studium sit
compositum; for fear lest any thing should escape them against faith (and
piety) either through the ignorance of the Composer, or carelessness in the
Composition. And if such care were taken of Men's private Prayers, no question
but a greater care is to be observed in ordering those public Prayers which
are to be offered unto God in the Congregation. Never did Men so literally
offer unto God the Calves of their lips, as they have done of late since the
extemporary way of Praying has been taken up. And if it were prohibited by the
Law of Moses to offer any thing unto God in the way of the legal Sacrifices,
which was maimed, spotted, or imperfect; how can it rationally be conceived
that God should be delighted with those Oblations, or Spiritual Sacrifices,
which have nothing almost in them but maims, spots, and blemishes? In which
respect I have subjoyned to the Tract of Liturgies a brief Discourse about
restraining Preachers to that Form of Prayer which is prescribed them by the
Church; and that not only in the Canon of 603. but in the Injunction of King
Harry the 8th, King Edward the 6th, and Queen Elizabeth of famous memories,
till the predominating Humor of drawing all Gods public Worship to the
Pulpit-prayer carried all before it.

But here it is to be observed that one of the chief reasons for abolishing the
public Liturgy was, Ministers might put forth themselves to exercise the Gift
of Prayer, with which our Lord Jesus Christ pleases to furnish all his
servants whom he calls to that Office; Pref. to the Direct. p. 2, 3.
and that nothing was less effected than the end intended. For first the
Directory which prescribes not alone the Heads, but the sense and scope (which
is the whole matter) of the Prayers and other parts of public Worship, Ibid.
p. 4.
does in effect leave nothing to the Ministers spirit but the wording of it:
which if it be not a restraining of the Gift of Prayer, I am much to seek: the
Spirit being as much restrained, and the Gift of Prayer as much kept in, where
the matter of the Prayer is prescribed unto us, as when we are prescribed also
in the form and words.

And secondly, whereas it seems to be intended that Ministers should use no
Form of Prayer before their Sermons, or in any other part of worship, but such
as they call Conceived extemporary or unpremeditated Prayers (though by the
way, all Conceived prayer require some premeditation.) Few of those Men who
have conformed themselves to the Rules of the Directory, have ventured on the
Exercise of the Gift of Prayer; most of them using certain and Set Forms of
their own Composing, and some not only using such Set Forms memoriter or
without book, as we use to say, but reading them in their books or papers as
they lie before them. As great a stinting of the Spirit, as contrary to the
free Exercise of the Gift of Prayer, as any public Liturgy or Set Form of
Worship can be thought to be.

But that which is most worth our noting is, Directory, and labored so
industriously in abolishing all Set Forms of Worship by the Ordinance of the
third of January, should within a while after publish some Set Forms of Prayer
to be used by such as were at Sea. A supply of Prayer for the Ships.
Quo teneam nodo? This is just fast and loose, pretty sport for children. For
though it be pretended, that these Set Forms are to be used only in the want of
Ministers, yet then it must be supposed withal, that none but Ministers have
the Gift of Prayer; or if they have, are not to be permitted the free exercise
and use thereof as they see occasion; which I conceive the Lay-brethren will
not thank them for, who think themselves as well Gifted as the Presbyters do.
Or if it be to be supposed, it is to be supposed only in common Cases, when no
sense of extraordinary danger or approaching Ruin can quicken the dull spirits
of Men, to the free and voluntary acts of invocation; to which the
tempestuousness of the Sea, and unavoidable fears of a sudden death give so
many advantages, that there cannot be a better Tutor to teach men to pray.
Insomuch that it grew into a proverb in the elder times, Qui nescit orare
discat navigare, that he who knew not how to to pray, should undertake some
Voyage by Sea, and there he would be sure to learn it. Which shows that there
was somewhat else which these good Men aimed at, in crying down the public
Liturgy, than the free exercise and use of the Gift of Prayer (which few of
them make use of now they have their ends in it) and what that was it shall not
be long before I tell you.

For if we look back into the busy times of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Puritan or
Presbyterian party, to draw all the power and Riches of the Church into their
own hands. And to this end the Ministers so bestirred themselves, that as they
had invaded the Government and Jurisdiction of the Church, by setting up their
Presbyters in several places; so they resolved that the people should depend
upon them alone, as for prayer and preaching, and all the other exercises of
their Religion. A thing which could not be effected if the Liturgy were not
first abolished, which of necessity must bring their own conceived prayers (as
they use to call them) into estimation, and make them the sole Rule and Rubric
of all public Worship, by means whereof they were sure to get that absolute
Sovereignty in the peoples Consciences, which in their practices and preachings
they had so long aimed at. But on the other side, the Lay-brethren had their
Ends in it also, hoping, that if they could destroy the Liturgy, it would be no
hard matter for them to ingross the Tithes unto themselves, and to put their
Ministers off with arbitrary Pensions as in other places; Tithes being (as they
gave it out) a Jewish imposition, not to be laid upon free Subjects in the
times of the Gospel, never intended for the maintenance of a Preaching
Ministry, but of a Sacrificing Priesthood. And so far they might seem to have
the truth on their side, that the first Tithes which were ever taken, were not
received with reverence to preaching to, or instructing the people, but with
relation unto praying for them, or offering up to God the daily and commanded
Sacrifices in their behalf. When Melchisedech took Tithes of Abraham, it was
not for any pains he had taken in preaching to him, or instructing his little
Army, but for praying to God for his Blessings on them; for the Text only tells
us, that he blessed Abraham, praising God for his good success against his
Enemies, Genesis 14.19..20.
and for performing that Office had the Tithes of all. And when Tithes were
paid by Gods appointment to the Priests and Levites, it was not for their
Teaching, Preaching, or Exhorting, for we find not, that any such Offices were
either required of them, or performed by them; but for their service in the
Temple, the offering the appointed and occasional Sacrifices performed with
several kinds of Prayer agreeable to the occasion, and the Spiritual
necessities of that people. Tithes therefore being the reward and maintenance
of a praying, not a preaching Ministry; the Liturgy being taken away, and
Preaching made the main, if not the sole work of the Minister, there could no
reason be alleged, why the people might not withold their Tithes, or why the
Tithes might not be otherwise employed, as the State thought fit.

This business being resumed and more hotly followed in these latter times,
proposals set on foot for depriving the Ministers of their Tithes, drawing them
into some Common Treasuries, and out of them allotting such maintenance to the
Ministers, as the necessities and wants of the State could spare; I published a
Discourse entitled, The undeceiving of the people in the point of Tithes; and
to my Preface to that Treatise do refer the Reader both for the motives which
induced me (having no ends of my own in it) to that Undertaking; the whole
Design and Method of it; and finally the Reasons why I did so disguise my name,
that I might not appear for the Author of it. At this time I shall only add,
that Tithes being now the only remaining Patrimony which is left the Church,
for the encouragement and reward of a learned Ministry; should they be also
taken from it, and the poor Clergy forced to depend on uncertain Stipends: I
see not what can follow thereupon, but a gross night of Ignorance, and Egyptian
darkness, especially in those who now hold out the light to others. For
certainly that saying of Panormitan will be always true, Ad tenuitatem
Beneficiorum necessaria sequitur ignorantia sacerdotum. And if ignorance once
possess the Priests (I hope it will not be offensive if I use that name) we
cannot look for much knowledge in the Common people. For if the light be
darkness, then ipsae tenebrae quantae! as we know who said.

But the grand Quarrel of these times is about Episcopacy, Bishops, than by
contending about Forms and Freedoms to be used in Prayer. And in this point the
Papists and the Presbyters differ not a little both in the end they aimed at,
and the motives to it. The Papists quarrelled not the Calling, the Episcopal
function, and much less the Revenues which belonged unto it, but the persons
rather; offended chiefly that some Men of their own persuasions were not
advanced to those great places, and yet not quarrelling the persons neither,
for want of any fitness or abilities to discharge the Office, but for defect of
some Legalities in their Consecration. And if they could possess the World,
that we had no Bishops, it would be no hard matter to persuade them that we had
no Ministry, no lawful Dispensation of the Word and Sacraments; by
consequence, that since we had withdrawn our selves from the Sea Apostolic, we
had left off to be a Church: the gaining of which point was the matter aimed at
in the Calumny. Quid enim est Ecclesia nisi Plebs Sacerdoti adunata, and
Pastori suo grex adhaerens? Cypr. Epist. 69.
No Bishop, no Church, in St. Cyprians judgment; for that by Pastor and
Sacerdos he does mean the Bishop is a thing past question. In this respect, as
Harding in his Answer to Jewels Challenge, would not acknowledge him to be
Bishop of Salisbury, and Bonner denied Horn (in an open Sessions) to be Bishop
of Winchester; so did they generally disclaim all the first Bishops of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign (and consequently those also which descended from them) as
being consecrated in no other Chapel than the Nags-head in Cheapside, nor by
the imposition of any other Hands than their own, nor finally by any lawful
Ordinal either old or new. But being beaten from these Holds, partly by the
inspection of the Public Registers at Lambeth-house, and partly by the
Testimony of some honorable persons who were present at those Consecrations,
but partly by the pains and industry of Fr. Mason in his Book entitled,
Vindi^iae Ecclesiae Anglicanae; they join themselves underhand to the other
Faction, for the subverting of the Calling, as the easiest and most expedite
way to their Journeys end.

With greater violence and impetuosity did the other Faction hurry on toward
their Design, Covetousness and Ambition, the two principal Sticklers in all
Distractions of the Church. The Lay-brethren with unsatiable Covetousness gaped
after the Possessions and Lands of the Bishops, as the Presbyters and Ministers
with as great Ambition did aspire unto their jurisdiction. And as He in
Plutarch seeing his own name unexpectedly amongst the Proscripts, and
consequently certain of nothing more than some sudden death, cried out aloud,
that it was his fine Gardens, and his Countrey-house which drew that fatal end
upon him; so might the Bishops also say, that it was their fair Houses and
their goodly Manors which exposed them to the common envy, and sacrificed them
in conclusion to Spoil and Rapine. For though nothing else was pretended by
them but a zeal to Gods glory, the purity of the Ordinances and the Churches
peace; yet as my Author well observes, Ecclesiarum opibus inhiabant, it was the
Churches goods which they most gaped after, Cam^d. in Annal. Eliz.
not the Churches good. In vain had the Presbyterian Ministers labored in the
pursuit of their Ambition, and hopelesly endeavored to change the Government,
that they might have it to themselves, had they not been animated and supported
in it by their Lay-patrons; many of which (as some of the Scottish Writers say
of theirs) would have crucified CHRIST himself to have had his garments.

Presuming on their power and favor, Geneva in Queen Mary's days, brought with
them at their coming back in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, a strong
affection (and some secret instructions withal) to settle the Presbyterian
Discipline (first fitted by Calvin for that City) in the Church of England:
Encouraged thereunto no doubt both by Calvin and Beza, the two great Patriarchs
of the Sect, who could not but be much agrieved, that their Discipline which
had found such welcome in the neighboring Churches, should find none in this.
And yet we do not hear of any open Declaration which they made herein, till the
year 1566. in which Genebrard places the beginning of the Puritan Faction;
more visibly appearing about two years after, when Coleman, Button, Cambd.
Annal. An. 1568.
and some others spoken of before, and Cartwright not long after them, did
openly undertake the Business. And we may very well conceive, that Beza would
not be an idle Spectator, when they once were at it; having given order unto
Knox for the Church of Scotland, Ne pestem illam unquam admittat, quantumvis
unitatis retinendie specie blandiatur, Beza in Epist.
that is to say, not to admit the plague of Episcopal Government, though it
might seem of special use for preserving Unity. Thus countenanced abroad, and
backed at home, they presently mustred up their forces, betook themselves to
the quarrel, and whole Realm was on the sudden in an uproar. The Parliaments
continually troubled with their Supplications, Admonitions, and the like; and
when they found not there that favor which they looked for, they denounced
this dreadful Curse against them, That there shall not be a man of their seed
that shall prosper to be a Parliament man, For this and that which follows, see
Bancrofts dangerous positions, etc.
or bear Rule in England any more. The Queen exclaimed upon in many of their
Pamphlets, her honorable Council scandalously censured as opposers of the
Gospel. The Prelates every where cried down as Antichristian, Petti-popes,
Bishops of the Devil, cogging and cousening Knaves, dumb Dogs, Enemies of God,
etc. and their Courts and Chanceries the Synagogues of Satan. After this they
erected privately their Presbyteries in diverse places of the Land, and cantoned
the whole Kingdom into their several Classes and divisions; and in a time when
the Spaniards were expected, they threaten to Petition the Queens Majesty with
100000 Hands. Their Discipline they called the Scepter and Throne of Christ,
and their erecting of Presbyteries the setting of Christ upon his Throne: Their
quarrel not being raised (as they gave it out) about Caps and Surplices, but
whether Jesus Christ should be King or not. Good ground for our Fifth
monarchy-men, and by them well followed. Never did men so ply their Adversaries
with the Hail-shot of Libels as Martin Mar-prelate and his followers played upon
the Bishops; but they had then no Ordinance on their side, and did little hurt.
And all this while the Church might seem to he asleep, till wakened by a Sermon
preached at Saint Paul's Cross by Dr. Bancroft then Chaplain unto Chancellor
Hatton, Feb. 9. 1588. upon that passage in S. John, Believe not every spirit,
etc. 1 John 4.1. After which time (the Earl of Leicester their great Patron
being newly dead) so vigilant an eye was carried toward them, and such quick
execution done upon them, that it was high time for them to give over their
open and seditious practices. Their privity to Hacket's Treasons, together with
learned and industrious Treatises of Dr. Bilson in defense of Episcopal
Government, of Dr. Bancroft in discovering their dangerous proceedings and
positions, his Anatomy or Survey of their pretended holy Discipline; Dr.
Cousens his Apology for the proceeding in Courts Ecclesiastical, all published
in the year 1593. the execution of Penry, the condemnation of Vdal, and the
imprisonment of Cartwright happening all together, gave such a check unto their
fortunes, that they durst never venture on the like Disturbances in Queen
Elizabeth's time.

But as once Florus said of the Affairs of Rome and Carthage; Semper inter eos
populos aut bellum, Flor. Hist. Romans lib. 4.
aut belli praeparatio, aut infida pax fuit. They either were at open War, or
preparing for it, or at a peace more doubtful and uncertain than the War it
self. And in this interval, while the Brethren had nothing so much as peace in
their mouths, they made themselves ready for the battle; and drew unto their
side a party like to David's Army, resorted to by every one that was in
distress, and every one that was in debt, 1 Samuel 22.2.
and every one that was discontented; or otherwise were desirous of Novelties,
and hoped to mend their Fortunes by the change of Government. Yet had they not
courage enough to discover themselves (excepting some preparatory Libels about
the year 1635.) till the Scots having in a Tumult expelled their Bishops, and
falling not long after into England with a puissant Army, gave them the
confidence of effecting that without any hazard, which with such danger they
had tugged for in the former times. And in that confidence the Smectymnuans
came to act their part on the public Theater, addressing their Discourse
against Episcopacy to the Lords and Commons, amongst whom they were sure enough
to find very good friends; and having tired out with their numbers and
continual exercise, the Patience of the Humble Remonstrant, they began to
triumph in the Victory before they had it, and thought themselves as sure of
setting up their beloved Presbyteries in every corner of the Kingdom, as if
already they were cantoned out and confirmed by Parliament. Never so much
outwitted as by being engaged in that employment, in which they served the
turns of others; without speeding their own. For though they had the hap to
obtain an Ordinance for abolishing all Archbishops and Bishops, bearing date
October 9.1646. and several Ordinances thereupon for settling the Presbyterian
Government as they had projected it; yet these last Ordinances being but
Probationers expired before their time, within few months after they had passed
the Houses: These great contrivers of our Troubles and the Churches Ruin, not
having the good luck to see their Discipline established in any one Church
within the Kingdom. The Lay-brethren had other fish to fry, and having made use
of these hot spirits to effect their purposes, laid by all care of gratifying
them with that Supremacy which they affected in the Church, and presently fell
to the division of the Spoil among themselves. Which Prey as it had been in
chase from the 37 year of K. Henry the VIII. who laid his first hand on that
part of the Churches Patrimony, 37 Harry 8. cap 16.
as appears by the Statutes of that year, so was it followed more or less from
that time forwards (except the short parenthesis of Queen Mary's reign) till
the first Parliament of King James, who past an Act against the diminution of
the possessions and Estates of Bishops, repealing in the same some clauses of
an unprinted Statute made in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, by which their
Land both Sede plena and vacant were wrested from them. But this Pale being
broken down by the Ordinance of October. 9, which before we spoke of, there past
another on the 16th of November following for the sale of those Lands, which
was the Game so closely followed by their Forefathers in the Faction, and
sometimes brought unto the Bay; but never could be hunted to the Fall before.

But I return to the Smectymnuans whom though I left triumphing before the
Victory (as before was said) yet seeing my self engaged by Duty and Provocation
(which I have spoken of elsewhere) I was resolved to undertake them, Pref. to
the Hist. of Episco.
notwithstanding all advantages which they had against me, as the times then
were. And I resolved to undertake them in a way less capable of Contradiction,
of Answers and Replies, than than that of Polemical Discourses; to fashion my
Design into the form of an History, tracing Episcopacy with all the parts and
powers thereof, from the first Institution of it by our Lord and Savior, to
the reign of Constantine, at what time it had attained to its full
Establishment. One only Argument, which I have heard of late from the mouths of
many, must be answered here; and that is, that Episcopacy is so fitted to the
Kingly or Monarchical Government, that it is altogether inconsistent with any
other. And for this they have no other proof, but because King James did use to
say, No Bishop no King, meaning thereby, that there could be no King where
there was no Bishop; therefore it follows, e converso, that there can be no
Bishop where there is no King. An Argument to be answered without further
trouble, than by looking into the three principal Estates of Italy, as they
stood at and before the year 1520. that is to say, the Kingdom of Naples, the
Aristocratie of Venice, and the Democraty or popular Estate of Florence, with
each of which Episcopacy did so well comply, that it created no disturbance
unto any of them, but peace and comfort to them all. Some of the Scots, the
greatest Enemies to Episcopacy in the Christian World, have now of late confessed
ingenuoufly enough, that they have buried their ancient Monarchy in the same
grave with it. But I could never hear from any that when the Kingdom of the
Lombards was destroyed in Italy, and distracted into many popular and petit
Signories, each independent to the other, the Government of the Church by
Bishops, as it had been formerly, was ruined or determined with it. And so this
Argument being Topical only, calculated for the Meridian of the present Times,
with reference to the temper of a broken and unsettled State, can neither serve
for any place else, nor for this in fine, when our Affairs shall be reduced to
a settled Government. Adeo Argumenta ab absurdo petita ineptos habent exitus,
said Lactantius truly.

Now for my History and my proceedings in it, matter of Fact, that is to say,
that in all Ages of the Church there has been an imparity of Ministers; that
the chief of these Ministers was called the Bishop; that this Bishop had the
Government of all Presbyters and other Christian people within his Circuit; and
finally that the powers of Jurisdiction and Ordination were vested in him. In
which particulars if the Affirmative be maintained by sufficient evidence, it
will be very difficult, if not impossible, to prove the Negative. And for the
better making good of the Affirmative, I have called in the ancient Writers,
the holy Fathers of the Church, to testify unto the truth of what is here
said, either as writing on those Texts of Scripture in which the Institution
and Authority the Church in their several times, in the Administration and
Government whereof they had most of them some special interess. Their
Testimonies and Authorities I have fully pondered and alleged as fully; not
misreporting any of them in their words or meaning, according to the best of my
understanding: as knowing well and having seen experience of it, that such
false shifts are like hot waters, which howsoever they may serve for a present
pang, do in the end destroy the stomach. And for those holy and renowned
Authors thus by me produced, I desire no more, but that we yieldas much
Authority unto them in Expounding Scripture, as we would do to any of the
Modern writers on the like occasion: and that we would not give less credit to
their Affirmations, speaking of things that happened in their own times, and were
within the compass of their observation, than we would do to any honest Country
Yeoman, speaking his knowledge at the Bar between man and man. And finally that
in relating such orrurrences of Holy Church, as happened in the times before
them, we think them worthy of as much belief, as we would give to Livy,
Tacitus, or Suetonius, reporting the Affairs of Rome, from the Records,
Monuments, and Discourses of the former times. This is the least we can afford
those Reverened Persons, whether we find them acting in public Councils, or
speaking in their own private and particular Writings, and if I gain but this,
I have gained my purpose. I hope to meet with no such Readers as Peter
Abeilard, of whom Saint Bernard tells us, that he used to say, Omnes Patres
sic, ego autem non sic, though all the Fathers hold one way, he would hold the
contrary. To such, if any such there be. I shall give no other answer at this
time, but what Dr. Saravia gave to Beza in this very case, viz. Qui omnem
Patribus adimit Authoritatem, nullam sibi relinquit; that is to say, He which
takes all Authority from the ancient Fathers, will in fine leave none unto
himself.

I should proceed next to the Canonical Ordination of Priests and Deacons,
Stewards which the Lord has set over his Household, the ordinary Dispensers of
Mysteries of Eternal life; which like the Angels ascending and de?scending upon
Jacobs Ladder, offer the People Prayers to God, and signify Gods good pleasure
and commands to the rest of the People. Offices not to be invaded or usurped by
any who are not lawfully Ordained; that is to say, who are not inwardly
prompted and inclined unto it by the Holy Spirit, outwardly set apart and
consecrated to Gods public service by Prayer and imposition of Hands. A point
so clear, as to the Designation of some persons unto sacred Offices, that it
has been universally received in all times and Nations. The sanctifying of the
Tribe of Levi for the service of the Tabernacle amongst the Jews, the
instituting of so many Colleges of Priests for the service of their several
Gods by the ancient Gentiles, Acts 13. v. 2.
the Separating of Paul and Barnabas to the work of the Ministry in the first
dawnings of the Gospel, sufficiently evidence this truth. And no less clear it
is, as to the Laying on of Hands, in that Sacred action, retained since the
Apostles times in all Christian Churches at the least deservedly so called. And
this the Presbyterian-Calvinists saw well enough, who though professed
Adversaries to all the old Orders of the Church, do notwithstanding admit none
amongst them to the Ministration of the Word and Sacraments, but by the Laying
on of the Hands of their Presbyteries.

But if it be objected that there is no such thing required by the Ordinance of
approbation of public Ministers bearing date, March 20. 1653.

I answer, that that Ordinance relates not to Ordination, but to Approbation
and Admission; it being supposed that no Man is presented to any Benefice with
cure of souls, or unto any public Lecture, and being so presented, craves to
have Admission thereunto, who is not first lawfully Ordained. That Ordinance
was made for no other end but to great Admission to such fit persons as were
nominated and presented to them; and thereby to supply the place of Institution
and Induction, which had been formerly required by the Laws of the Land. And
therefore the said Ordinance declares very well, that in such Approbations and
Admissions there is nothing sacred, no setting apart of any Person to a
particular Office in the Ministry (that being the sole and proper work of
Ordination:) but only by such trial and approbation to take care, that places
destitute may be supplied with able and faithful Preachers throughout the
Nation.

The Question is not then about Ordination, Laying on of Hands, in which all
agree, but what it is which makes the Ordination lawful, whose Hands they are,
which make it to be held Canonical. The Genevians, and the rest of Calvin's
Discipline challenge this power to their Presbyteries, a mungrel company not
heard of till these latter times, consisting of two Lay Elders for each
preaching Minister. The Lutherans with better reason appropriate it to their
Superintendents which in their Churches execute the place of Bishops. But all
Antiquity, Councils, Fathers, the general usage of the Churches of the East and
West, with those also of the Ethiopian or Habassine Empire, carry it clearly
for the Bishop; who has alone the power to Ordain and Consecrate, and by the
imposition of Hands to set apart some Men to the public Ministry, though he
call in some Presbyters as Assistants to him. Saint Jerome, no great friend to
Bishops, does acknowledge this. Quid facit Episcopus excepta Ordinatione, quod
Presbyter non faciat? What does a Bishop, says the Father, but what a
Presbyter may do also, except Ordination? And to the disquisition of these
Canonical Ordinations I shall next proceed, as has been promised in the Title.
But I have said so much to that Point in the Course of the History, as Part 1.
Cap. 2. Number. 11, 12. Cap. 4. Number. 2,3. Cap. 5. Number. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, Part 2. Cap.
1. Number. 10, etc. Cap. 4, Numb, 7. Cap. 5. Number. 5, 6. Cap. 6. Number. 5, 7. besides
many other passages here and there interserted to the same effect; that I shall
save my self the trouble of adding any thing further to those Observations. And
to them therefore I refer the Reader for his satisfaction. At this time I shall
say no more but that the Church had never stood so constantly to Episcopal
Government, were it not for the great and signal benefits which redound unto it
by the same. Of which there is none greater, or of more necessary use to
Christianity, than the preserving of a perpetual succession of Priests and
Deacons, ordained in a Canonical way to be Ministers of holy things to the rest
of the people; that is to say, to Preach the Word, Administer the Sacraments,
and finally to perform all other Divine and Religious Offices which are
required of them by the Church in their several places.

Thus have I laid before thee, good Christian Reader, the Method, fitly spoken,
or not clearly evidenced, they would give me notice of it in such a charitable
and Christian way, as I may be the better for it, and they not the worse, Which
favor if they please to do me, they shall be welcome to me as an Angel of God,
sent to conduct me from the Lands of error into the open ways of truth. And
doing these Christian Offices unto one another, we shall by Gods good leave and
blessing, not only hold the bond of external peace, but also in due time be
made partakers of the spirit of Unity. Which Blessing that the Lord would
graciously bestow on his afflicted and distracted Church is no small part of
our Devotions in the public Liturgy; where we are taught to pray unto Almighty
God, that he would please continually to inspire his universal Church with the
spirit of Truth, Unity, and Concord, and grant that all they which do confess
his holy Name, may agree also in the truth of his holy Word, and live in Unity
and godly Love. Unto which Prayer he has but little of a Christian, which does
not heartily say, Amen.

Lacies Court in Abingdon, April 23. 1657.
The Way of the REFORMATION OF THE Church of England, DECLARED and JUSTIFIED,
etc.
THE INTRODUCTION, Showing the Occasion, Method, and Design of the whole
discourse.
My dear Hierophilus,
YOUR company is always very pleasing to me; but you are never better welcome
han when you bring your doubts and scruples along with you; for by that means
you put me to the studying of some point or other, whereby I benefit my self,
if not profit you. And I remember at the time of your last being with me, you
seemed much scandalized for the Church of England, telling me you were well
assured that her Doctrine was most true and orthodox, her Government conform to
the Word of God, and the best ages of the Church; and that her public Liturgy
was an Extract of the Primitive Forms; nothing in all the whole composure but
what did tend to edification and Increase of piety. But for all this, you were
unsatisfied (as you said) in the ways and means by which this Church proceeded
in her Reformation; alleding, that you had heard it many times objected by some
Partisans of the Church of Rome, that our Religion was mere Parliamentarian,
not regulated by Synodical Meetings, or the Authority of Councels, as in elder
times; or as D. Harding said long since in his Answer unto B. Jewel, That we
had a Parliament Religion, a Parliament Faith, and a Parliament Gospel: To
which Scultinguis and some others after added, that we had none but Parliament
Bishops, and a Parliament Clergy; that you were apt enough to think that the
Papists made not all this noise without some ground for it, in regard you have
observed some Parliaments in these latter days so mainly bent to catch at all
occasions, whereby no manifest their powers in Ecclesiastical matters,
especially in constituting the new Assembly of Divines and others. And finally,
that you were heartily ashamed, that being so often choked with these
Objections, you neither knew how to traverse the ^ndictment, nor plead Not
guilty to the Bill. Some other doubts you said you had, relating to the King
the Pope, and the Protestant Churches, either too little or too much looked
after in our Reformation; but you were loath to trouble me with too much at
once. And thereupon you did entreat me to bethink my self of some fit Plaster
for the sore which did often afflict you, religiously affirming that your desires
proceeded not from curiosity, or an itch of knowledge, or out of any
disaffection to the Power of Parliaments; but merely from an honest zeal to the
Church of England, whose credit and prosperity you did far prefer before your
life, or whatsoever in this world could be dear unto you: Adding withal, that
if I would take this pains for your satisfaction, and help you out of these
perplexities which you were involved in, I should not only do good service to
the Church it self, but to many a wavering member of it, whom these objections
had much staggered in their Resolutions. In fine, that you desired also to be
informed how far the Parliaments had been interessed in these alterations of
Religion, which happened in the Reigns of K. Hen. VIII. K. Edw. VI. and Q.
Elizabeth? What ground there was for all this clamor of the Papists? And
whether the Houses, or either of them, have exercised of old any such Authority
in matters of Ecclesiastical or Spiritual nature, as some of late have ascribed
unto them? Which though it be a dangerous and invidious Subject (as the times
now are) yet for your sake, and for the truth's, and for the honor of
Parliaments, which seem to suffer much in the Popish calumny, I shall undertake
it; premising first, that I intend not to say any thing to the point of Right,
whether or not the Parliament may lawfully meddle in such matters as concern
Religion; but shall apply my self wholly unto matters of Fact, as they relate
unto the Reformation here by law established. And for my method in this
business, I shall first lay down by way of preamble, the form of calling of the
Convocation of the Clergy here in England, that we may see by what Authority
they proceed in their Constitutions, and then declare what was acted by the
Clergy in that Reformation: In which, I shall begin with the ejection of the
Pope, and settling the Supremacy in the Crown Imperial of this Realm; descending
next to the Translation of the Scriptures into the English tongue, the
Reformation of the Church in Doctrinals and forms of Worship, and to proceed
unto the Power of making Canons for the well ordering of the Clergy, and the
direction of the people in the exercise of their Religion; concluding with an
Answer to all such Objections (by what part soever they be made) as are most
material. And in the canvassing of these points, I doubt not but it will appear
unto you, that till these late busy and unfortunate times, in which every man
intrudeth on the Priestly Function, the Parliaments did nothing at all either
in making Canons, or in matters Doctrinal, or in Translation of the Scriptures:
Next, that That little which they did in reference to the Forms and Times of
Worship, was no more than the inflicting of some temporal or legal penalties on
such as did neglect the one, or not conform unto the other, having been first
digested and agreed upon in the Clergy way: And finally, that those Kings and
Princes before remembered, by whose Authority the Parliaments did that little in
those Forms and Times, did not act any thing in that kind themselves, but what
was warranted unto them by the Word of God, and the example of such godly and
religious Emperors and other Christian Kings and Princes as flourished in the
happiest times of Christianity. This is the sum of my design, which I shall
follow in the order before laid down; assuring you that when you shall acquaint
me with your other scruples, I will endeavor what I can for your satisfaction.

1. Of calling or assembling the Convocation of the Clergy, and the Authority
thereof when convened together.
AND in this we are first to know, that anciently the Archbishop of the
several Provinces of Canterbury and York were vested with a power of
Convocating the Clergy of their several and respective Provinces, when, and as
often as they thought it necessary for the Churches peace. And of this power
they did make Use upon all extraordinary and emergent cases, either as
Metropolitans and Primates in their several Provinces, or as Legati nati to the
Popes of Rome: But ordinarily, and of common course, especially after the first
passing of the Acts or Statutes of Praemuniri, they did restrain that power to
the good pleasure of the Kings, under whom they lived, and used it not but as
the necessities and occasions of these Kings, or the distresses of the Church
did require it of them; and when it was required of them, the Writ or Precept
of the King was in this form following. Rex, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo
Patri N. Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati and Apostolicae,
sedis Legato salutem. Quibusdam ardius and urgentibus negotiis defensionem and
securitatem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ac pacem, tranquillitatem, and bonum
publicum, and defensionem Regni nostri, and subditorum nostrorum ejusdem
concernentibus, Vobis in Fide and dilectione, quibus nobis tenemini, rogando
mandamus, quatenus praemissis debito intuito attentis and ponderatis universos
and singulos Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos and Priores Ecclesiarum
Cathedralium, Abbates, Priores and alios Electivos, exemptos and non exemptos,
nec non Archidiaconos, Conventus, Capitula, and Collegia totumque Clerum
cujuslibet Dioceseos ejusdem Provinciae, ad conveniendum coram vobis in
Ecclesia Sancti Pauli London. vel alibi, prout melius expedire videritis, cum
omni celeritate accommoda modo debito Convocari faciatis; Ad tractandum,
consentiendum and concludendum super praemissis and aliis quae sibi clarius
proponentur, tunc and ibidem ex part nostra. Et hoc sicut nos and statum Regni
nostri, ac honorem and utilitatem Ecclesiae praedictae diligitis, nullatenus
omittatis. Test meipso, etc. These are the very words of the ancient Writs,
and are still retained in these of later times; but that the Title of Legatus
sedis Apostolicae then used in the Archbishops style, was laid aside, together
with the Pope himself; and that there is no mention in them of Abbots, Priors,
and Convents, as being now not extant in the Church of England. And in this
Writ you may observe; first, that the calling of the Bishops and Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury to a Synodical Assembly, belonged to the Archbishop of
that Province only (the like to him of York also within the Sphere or Verge of
his Jurisdiction.) Secondly, that the nominating of the time and place for this
Assembly was left to the Archbishops pleasure, as seemed best unto him; though
for the most part, and with reference unto themselves and the other Prelates,
who were bound to attend the service of the King in Parliament,they caused
these Meetings to be held at the time and place, at, and to which the
Parliament was, or had been called by the Kings Authority. Thirdly, That from
the word Convocari, used in the Writ, the Synodical Meetings of the Clergy were
named Convocations. And fourthly, That the Clergy thus assembled in
Convocation, had not only a power of treating on, and consenting unto such
things as should be there propounded on the Kings behalf, but a power also of
concluding or not concluding on the same as they saw occasion: Not that they
were restrained only to such points as the King propounded, or were proposed in
his behalf to their consideration; but that they were to handle his business
with their own, wherein they had full power when once met together.

In the next place we must behold what the Archbishop did in pursuance of the
Kings command, for calling the Clergy of his Province to a Convocation, who on
the receipt of the King's Writ, presently issued out his Mandate to the Bishop
of London (Dean by his place of the whole College of Bishops of that Province)
requiring him immediately, on the sight hereof (and of the King's Writ
incorporated and included in it) to cite and summon all the Bishops, and other
Prelates, Deans, Archdeacons, and capitular Bodies, with the whole Clergy of
that Province, that they the said Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, in their own
persons, the Capitular Bodies by one Procurator, and the Clergy of each Diocese
by two, do appear before him at the time and place by him appointed; and that
those Procurators shouldbe furnished with sufficient powers by those which sent
them, not only to treat upon such points as should be propounded, touching the
peace of the Church, and defense and welfare of the Realm of England, and to
give their counsel in the same; sed ad consentiendum iis quae ibidem ex communi
deliberatione ad honorem Dei and Ecclesiae in praemissis contigerent
concorditer ordinari, but also to consent both in their own names, and in the
names of those who sent them, unto all such things, as by mature deliberation
and consent should be there ordained. Which Mandate being received by the B. of
London, the several Bishops cited accordingly, and intimation given by those
Bishops unto their Arch Deacons for summoning the Clergy to make choice of
their Procurators; as also the Chapters, or capitular Bodies, to do the like:
The next work is to proceed to the choice of those Procurators. Which choice
being made, the said Chapters under their common seals, and the said Clergy in
a public Writing subscribed by them, do bind themselves sub Hypotheca omnium
bonorum suorum, under the pawn and forfeiture of al their goods moveable and
immovable, (I speak the very words of these public Instruments) se ratum,
gratum and acceptum habere quicquid dicti Procuratores sui nomine and vice suis
fecerint, etc. To stand to and perform whatsoever their said Procurators, in
their name and stead, shall do, determine and consent to. The like is also done
in the Province of York; but that the Archbishop thereof sends out the Summons
in his own name to the Suffragan Bishops, the Province being small, and the
Suffragans not above three in number. Finally, as the Convocations of the
Clergy in their several Provinces were called by the Archbishops only, the
Kings Writ thereunto requiring and authorizing; so by the same powers were they
also dissolved again; when they had done the business, they were called about,
or did desire to be dismissed to their own affairs. At which time by special
Writ or Mandates to the said Archbishops, expressing the calling and
assembling of the Convocation by virtue of the former Precept; it is declared,
That on certain urgent causes and considerations moving his Majesty thereunto,
he thought fit with the advice of his Privy Council, that the same should be
again dissolved: Et ideo vobis mandamus quod eandem praesentem Convocationem
hac instanti die debito modo sine ulla dilatione dissolvatis, sive dissolvi
faciatis, prout convenit; and therefore did command them to dissolve it, or
cause the same to be dissolved in the accustomed manner, without delay. Which
Writ received, and not before, the Convocation was dissolved accordingly: and
so it holds in Law and practcie to this very day.

I have the longer staid on these public Forms, partly because not obvious
unto every eye; but especially to let you see by what Authority the Clergy are
to be assembled in their Convocations, and what it is which makes their Canons
and Conclusions binding unto all those which send them thither, or entrust them
there. Their calling by the Kings Authority makes their meeting lawful, which
else were liable to exceptions and disputes in Law, and possibly might render
them obnoxious to some grievous penalties; and so would their continuance too,
after the Writ was issed for their Dissolution. As on the contrary their
breaking or dissolving of their own accord, would make them guilty of contempt,
and consequently subject to the Kings displeasure; for being called by the
Kings Writ, they are to continue till dissolved by the Kings Writ also,
notwithstanding the dissolving of the Parliament, with which sometimes it might
be summoned. And so it was resolved in terminis, by the chief Judges of the
Realm, and others of his Majesty's Counsel Learned, May 10. anno 1640. at such
time as the Convocations did continue sitting, the Parliament being most
unhappily dissolved on the Tuesday before, subscribed by Finch, Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal, Manchester then Lord Privy Seal, Littleton chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Banks Attorney General, Whitfield and Heath his Majesty's
Sergeants, Authority enough for the poor Clergy to proceed on, though much
condemned and maligned for obedience to it. [Now as they have the Kings
Authority not only for their Meeting, but continuance also; so also have they
all the power of the whole National Clergy of England, to make good whatsoever
they conclude upon: The Archbishops, Deans, Archdeacons, acting in their own
capacities, the Procurators in the name, and by the power committed to them,
both by he Chapters or capitular Bodies, and the Diocesan Clergy of both
Provinces. And this they did by virtue of that power and trust alone, without
any ratification or confirmation from King or Parliament, until the 25th. year
of King Henry the VIII. At which time they bound themselves by a Synodical Act
(whereof more hereafter) not to enact, promulge, or execute any Canons,
Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial in their Convocations for time coming,
unless the Kings Highness by his Royal Assent command them to make promulge,
and execute the same accordingly. Before this time they acted absolutely in
their Convocations, of their own Authority, the Kings Assent neither concurring
nor required; and by this sole Authority, which they had in themselves, they
did not only make Canons, declare Heresy, convict and censure persons
suspected of Heresy, in which the subjects of all sorts (whose Votes were
tacitly included in the suffrages of their Pastors and spiritual Fathers) were
concerned alike. But also to conclude, the Clergy whom they represented in the
point of Property, imposing on them what they pleased, and levying it by Canons
of their own enacting. And they enjoyed this power to the very day in which
they tendered the submission, which before we spoke of. For by this
self-authority (if I may so call it) they imposed and levied that great Subsidy
of 120000 l. (an infinite sum as the Standard of the times then was) granted
unto K. Henry VIII. anno 1530. to free them from the fear and danger of the
Praemuniri. By this the Benefit of the Chapter called Similiter in the old
Provincial, extended formerly to the University of Oxon only, was made
communicable the same year unto Cambridge also. By this Crome, Latimer, Bilney,
and diverse others, were in the year next following impeached of Heresy. By
this the Will and Testament of William Tracie of Toddington was condemned as
scandalous and heretical, and his body taken up and burnt not many days before
the passing of the Act of Submission, anno 1532.

But this power being thought too great or inconsistent at least with the Kings
Design touching his divorce, the Clergy were reduced unto such a straight by
the degrees and steps which you find in the following Section, as to submit
their power unto that of the King, and to promise in verbo sacerdotii, that
they would do and Enact nothig in their Convocations without his consent. And
to the gaining of this point, he was pressed the rather, in regard of a
Remonstraence then presented to Him by the House of Commons, in which they
showed themselves aggrieved, that the Clergy of this Realm should act
Authoritatively, and supremely in the Convocations, and they in Parliament do
nothing, but as it was confirmed and ratified by the Royal Assent. Which
notwithstanding, though this Submission brought down the Convocation to the
same Level with the Houses of Parliament; yet being made unto the King in his
single person, and not as in conjunction with his House of Parliament, it
neither brought the Convocation under the command of Parliaments, nor rendered
them obnoxious to the power thereof. That which they did in former times of
their self-authority (in matters which concerned the Church) without the Kings
consent cooperating and concurring with them, the same they did and might do
in the times succeeding, the Kings Authority and Consent being superadded,
without the help and midwifery of an Act of Parliament, though sometimes that
Authority was made Use of also, for binding of the subject under Temporal and
Legal penalties, to yield obedience and conformity to the Churches Orders.
Which being the true state of the present business, it makes the clamor of the
Papists the more unreasonable; but then withal, it makes it the more easily
answered. Temporal punishments inflicted on the refractory and disobedient in a
Temporal Court, may add some strength unto the Decrees and Constitutions of the
Church, but hey take none from it: Or if they did, the Religion of the Church
of Rome, the whole Mass of Popery, as it was received and settled here in Qu.
Mary's Reign, would have a sorry crutch to stand upon, and might as justly bear
the name of a Parliament-Faith, as the reformed Religion of the Church of
England. It is true indeed, that had those Convocations which were active in
that Reformation, being either called or summoned by the King in Parliament, or
by the Houses separately, or convenedly without the King: Or had the Members of
the same been nominated and empowered by the House alone, and intermixed with a
considerable number of the Lords and Commons; (which being by the way, the Case
of this New Assembly, I do not see how any thing which they agree on can bind
the Clergy, otherwise than imposed by a strong hand, and against their
privileges.) Or finally, had the conclusions or results thereof been of no
effect, but as reported to, and confirmed in Parliament, the Papists might have
had some ground for so gross a calumny, in calling the Religion which is now
established by the name of a Parliament-Religion, and a Parliament-Gospel. But
so it is not in the Case which is now before us, the said Submission
notwithstanding. For being the Body being still the same, privileged with the
same freedom of debate and determination; and which is more, the Procurators of
the Clergy invested with the same power and Trust which before they had: There
was no alteration made by the said Submission, in the whole constitution and
composure of it, but only the addition of a greater and more excellent power.
Nor was there any thing done here in that Reformation, but either by the Clergy
in their Convocations, and in their Convocations rightly called and Canonically
constituted, or with the council and advice of the Heads thereof in more
private conferences, the Parliaments of these times contributing very little
toward it, but acquiescing in the Wisdom of the Sovereign Prince, and in the
piety and zeal of the Ghostly Fathers. This is the groundwork or foundation of
the following Building. I now time I should proceed to the Superstructures,
beginning first with the Ejection of the Pope, and vesting the Supremacy in the
Regal Crown.

2. Of the Ejection of the Pope, and vesting the Supremacy in the Regal Crown.
AND first, beginning with the Ejection of the Pope and his Authority that led
the way unto the Reformation of Religion, which did after follow: It was first
voted and decreed in the Convocation, before ever it became the subject of an
Act of Parliament. For in the year 1530. 22 Hen. 8. the Clergy being caught in
a praemunire, were willing to redeem their danger by a sum of money; and to that
end, the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury bestowed upon the King the sum of
100000 l. to be paid by equal portions in the same year following; but the King
would not so be satisfied, unless they would acknowledge him for the supreme
Head on earth for the Church of England; which, though it was hard meat, and
would not easily down amongst amongst them, yet it passed at last. For, being
thoroughly debated in a Synodical way, both in the upper and lower Houses of
Convocation, they did, in sine, agree upon this expression. Cujus Ecclesiae,
(sc. Anglicanae) Singularem protectorem, unicum and Supremum Dominum; and
(quantum per Christi leges licet) Supremum caput, ipsius Majestatem
recognoscimus. To this they all consented and subscribed their Hands, and
afterward incorporated it into the publik Act or Instrument, which was
presented to the King in the Name of his Clergy, for the redeeming of their
error, and the grant of their money, which as it does at large appear in the
Records and Acts of the Convocation; so it is touched upon in a Historical way
in the Antiq. Britan. Mason de Minist. Anglic. and other Authors, by whom it
also does appear, that what was thus concluded on by the Clergy of the Province
of Canterbury, was also ratified and confirmed by the Convocation of the
Province of York (according to the usual custom) save that they did not buy
their pardon at so dear a rate. This was the leading Card to the Game that
followed. For on this ground were built the Statutes, prohibiting all Appeals
to Rome, and for determining all Ecclesiastical suits and controversies within
the Kingdoms, 24 H. 8. c. 12. That for the manner of electing and consecrating
of Archbishops and Bishops, 25 H. 8. c. 20. and the prohibiting the payment of
all Impositions to the Court of Rome; and for obtaining all such dispensations
from the Sea of Canterbury, which formerly were procured from the Popes of
Rome, 25 H. 8. c. 21. Which last is builkt expressly upon this foundation: That
the King is the only supreme Head of the Church of England, and was so
recognized by the Prelates and Clergy, representing the said Church in their
Convocation. And on the very same foundation was the Statute raised, 26 H. 8.
c. 1. wherein the King is declared to be the supreme Head of the Church of
England, and to have all honor and preheminences which were annexed unto that
Title, as by the Act it self does at full appear: Which Act being made (I speak
it from the Act it self) only for corroboration and confirmation of that which
had been done in the Convocation, did afterward draw on the Statute for the
Tenths and first fruits, as the point incident to the Headship or supreme
Authority, 26 H. 8. c. 3.

The second step to the Ejection of the Pope, was the submission of the Clergy,
to the said King Henry, whom they had recognizanced for their supreme Head. And
this was first concluded on in the Convocation, before it was proposed or
agitated in the Houses of Parliament, and was commended only to the care of the
Parliament, that is might have the force of a Law by a civil Sanction. The
whole debate, with all the Traverses and emergent difficulties which appeared
therein, are specified at large in the Records of Convocation, Anno 1532. But
being you have not opportunity to consult those Records, I shall prove it by
the Act of Parliament, called commonly The Act of submission of the Clergy; but
bearing this Title in the Abridgment of the Statutes set out by Poulton, That
the Clergy in their Convocations shall enact no constitutions without the Kings
assent. In which it is premised for granted, that the Clergy of the Realm of
England, had not only acknowledged, according to the truth, that the
Convocation of the same Celrgy, is, always has been, and ought to be assembled
always by the Kings Writ; but also submitting themselves to the Kings Majesty,
had promised, in verbo Sacerdotis. That they would never from henceforth
presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure, enact, promulge, or execute
any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances provincial, or other; or by
whatsoever other name they shall be called in the Convocation, unless the Kings
most Royal Assent may to them be had, to make, promulge, and execute the same;
and that his Majesty do giv his most Royal Assent and Authority in that behalf.

Upon which groundwork of the Clergies, the Parliament shortly after built
this superstructure to the same effect, viz.

That none of the said Clergy from henceforth should presume to attempt,
allege, claim or put in ure, any Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial, or
Synodals, or any other Canons; norshall enact, promulge, or execute any such
Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial, (by whatsoever names or names
they may be called) in their Convocations in time coming (which always shall be
assembled by the Kings Writ) unless the same Clergy may have the Kings most
Royal Assent and License to make, promulge, and execute such Canons,
Constitutions, and Ordinances Provincial, or Synodical, upon pain of every one
of the said Clergy doing the contrary to this Act, and thereof convicted to
suffer Imprisonment, and make Fine at the Kings Will, 25 H. 8. c. 19.

So that the Statute in effect, is no more than this, An Act to bind the Clergy
to perform their promise, to keep them fast unto their word for the time to
come, that no new Canon should be made in the times succeeding in the favor of
the Pope, or by his Authority, or to the diminution of the Kings Royal
Prerogative, or contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of England, as
many Papal Constitutions were in the former Ages: Which Statute I desire you
nto take notice of, because it is the Rule and Measure of the Churches power in
making Canons, Constitutions, or whatsoever else you shall please to call them
in their Convocations.

The third and final Act, conducing to the Popes Ejection, was an Act of
Parliament, 28 H. 8 c. 10. entitled, An Act extinguishing the Authority of the
Bishop of Rome. By which it was enacted, That if any person should extol the
Authority of the Bishop of Rome, he should incur the penalty of a preamunire;
that every Officer, both Ecclesiastioal and Lay, should be Sworn to renounce
the said Bishop and his Authority, and to resist it to his power, and to repute
any Oath formerly taken in maintenance of the said Bishop, or his Authority, to
be void; and finally, that the refusal of the said Oath should be judged High
Treason. But this was also ushered in by the determination first, and after by
the practice of all the Clergy. For in the year 1534. which was two years
before the passing of this Act, the King had sent this Proposition to be
agitated in both Universities, and in the greatest and most famous Monasteries
of the Kingdom; that is to say, An aliquid authoritatis in hoc Regno Angliae
Pontifici Romano, de jure competat, plusquam alii cuicunque Episcopo extero? By
whom it was determined Negatively, that the Bishop of Rome had no more power of
Right in the Kingdom of England, than any other foreign Bishop. Which being
testified and returned under the hands and seals respectively (the Originals
whereof are still remaining in the Library of Sr. Robert Cotton) was a good
preamble to the Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy assembled in their
Convocation, to conclude the like. And so accordingly they did, and made an
Instrument thereof subscribed by the hands of all the Bishops, and others of
the Clergy, and afterward confirmed the same by their corporal Oaths. The
copies of which Oaths and Instrument you shall find in Foxes Acts and Monumets,
Vol. 2. fol. 1203. and fol. 1210, 1211. of the Edition of John Day, Anno 1570.
And this was semblably the ground of a following Statute, 35 H. 8. c. 1.
wherein another Oath was devised and ratified, to be imposed upon the Subject,
for the more clear asserting of the Kings Supremacy, and the utter exclusion fo
the Popes for ever; which Statutes, though they were all repealed by an Act of
Parliament, 1 and 2 d. of Phil. and Mary, c. 1. yet were they all revived in 1
Elize. save that the name of supreme Head was changed unto that of the supreme
Governor, and certain clauses altered in the Oath of Supremacy. Where (by the
way) you must take notice that the Statutes which concern the Kings Supremacy,
are not introductory of any new Right that was not in the Crown before; but
only declaratory of an old, as our best Lawyers tell us, and the Statute of the
26 of H. 8. c. 1. does clearly intimate. So that in the Ejection of the Pope of
Rome, which was the firt and greatest steptowards the work of Reformation, the
Parliament did nothing, for ought it appears, but what was done before in the
Convocation, and did no more than fortify the Results of Holy Church, by the
addition and corroboration of the Secular Power.

3. Of the Translation of the Scriptures, and permitting them to be read in the
English Tongue.
THE second step toward the work of Reformation (and indeed one of the most
especial parts thereof) was the Translation of the Bible into the English
Tongue, and the permitting all sorts of people to peruse the same, as that
which visibly did tend to the discovery of the errors and corruptions in the
Church of Rome, and the intolerable pride and tyranny of the Roman Prelates,
upon which grounds it had been formerly translated into English by the hand of
Wickliff, and after, on the spreading of Luthers Doctrine, by the pains of
Tindal, a stout and active man in K. Henry's days, but not so well befriended
as the work deserved; especially considering that it happened in such a time when
many Printed Pamphlets did disturb the State (and some of them of Tindals
making) which seemed to tend unto sedition, and the change of Government. Which
being remonstrated to the King, he caused diverse of his Bishops, together with
sundry of the Learned and most eminent Divines of all the Kingdom to come
before him; whom he required freely and plainly to declare, as well what their
opinion was of the aforesaid Pamphlets, as what they did think fit to be done
concerning the Translation of the Bible into the English Tongue: And they upon
mature advice and deliberation, unanimously condemned the aforesaid Books of
Heresy and Blasphemy (no smaller crime:) then for translating of the
Scriptures into the English tongue, they agreed all with one assent, that it
depended wholly on the will and pleasure of the Sovereign Prince, who might do
therein as he conceived to be most agreeable to his occasions, but that with
reference to the present estate of things, it was more expedient to explain the
Scripture to the people by the way of Sermons, than to permit it to be read
promiscuously by all sorts of men; yet so, that hopes were to be given unto the
Laily, that if they did renounce their errors, and presently deliver to the
hands of his Majesty's Officers all such Books and Bibles (which they conceived
to be translated with great fraud and falsehood) and any of them had in keeping,
his Majesty would cause a true and catholic Translation of it to be published
in convenient time, for the use of his Subjects.

This was the sum and substance of the present Conference, which you shall find
laid down at large in the Registers of Archbishop Warham.

And according to this advice, the King sets out a Proclamation, not only
prohibiting the buying, reading, or translating of any the aforesaid Books; but
straightly charging all his Subjects which had any of the Books of Scripture,
either of the Old Testament, or of the New, in the English Tongue, to bring
them in without delay: But for the other part, of giving hopes unto the people
of a true Translation, if they delivered in the false (or that at least, which
was pretended to be false,) I find no word at all in the Proclamation. That was
a work reserved unto better times, or left to be solicited by the Bishops
themselves, and other Learned men who had given the counsel; by whom (indeed)
the people were kept up in hope that all should be accomplished unto their
desires.

And so indeed it proved at last. For in the Convocation of the year 1536. the
Authority of the Pope being abrogated, and Cranmer fully settled in the Sea of
Canterbury, the Clergy did agree upon a form of Petition to be presented to the
King, That he would graciously indulge unto his Subjects of the Laity the
reading of the Bible in the English Tongue, and that a new Translation of it
might be forthwith made for that end and purpose.

According to which godly motion, his Majesty did not only give Order for a new
Translation, which afterward He authorized to be read both in public and
private; but in the interim he permitted CROMWELL, his Vicar General, to set out
an Injunction for providing the whole Bible both in Latin and English, after
the Translation then in Use, (which was called commonly by the name of Matthews
Bible, but was no other than that of Tindal somewhat altered) to be kept in
every Parish Church throughout the Kingdom, for every one that would repair
thereunto, and caused this mark or character of Authority to be set upon them
in red Letters, Set forth with the Kings most gracious License; which you may
see in Fox his Acts and Monuments, p. 1248. and 1363.

Afterward when the new Translation, so often promised, and so long expected,
was complete and finished, Printed at London by the Kings Authority, and
countenanced by a grave and pious Preface of Archbishop Cranmer; the King sets
out a Proclamation dated May 6. Anno 1541. Commanding all the Curates and
Parishioners throughout the Kingdom, who were not already furnished with Bibles
so authorized and translated, as is before said, to provide themselves before
All-hallowtide next following, and to cause the Bible, so provided, to be
placed conveniently in their several and respective Churches, straightly
requiring all his Bishops, and other Ordinaries, to take special care to see
his said commands put in execution.

And therewithal came out Instructions from the King, to be published by the
Clergy in their several Parishes, the better to possess the people with the
Kings good affection toward them in suffering them to have the benefit of such
Heavenly Treasure; and to direct them in a course by which they might enjoy the
same to their greater comfort, the reformation of their lives, and the peace
and quiet of the Church. Which Proclamation and Instructions are still
preserved in that most admirable Treasury of Sir Robert Cotton.

And unto these Commands of so great a Prince, both Bishops, Priests, and
People, did apply themselves with such cheerful reverence, that Bonner (even
that bloody Butcher, as he after proved caused six of them to be chained in
several places of St. Paul's Church in London, for all that were so well
inclined to resort unto, for their edification and instruction; the Book being
very chargeable, because very large, and therefore called commonly (for
distinctions sake) The Bible of the greater Volum.

Thus have we seen the Scriptures faithfully translated into the English
Tongue, the Bible publicly set up in all Parish-Churches, that every one which
would; might peruse the same, and leave permitted to all people to buy them for
their private Uses, and read them to themselves, or before their Families; and
all this brought about by no other means than by the Kings Authority only,
grounded on the advice and judgment of the Convocation.

But long it was not (I confess) before the Parliament put in for a share, and
claimed some interest in the work; but whether for the better, or the worse, I
leave you to judge. For in the year 1542. the King being then in agitation of a
League with Charles the Emperor, He caused a complaint to be made unto him in
this Court of Parliament, That the Liberty granted to the people in having in
their hands the Books of the Old and New Testament, had been much abused by
many false glosses and interpretations which were made upon them, tending to
the seducing of the people, especially of the younger sort, and the raising of
sedition within the Realm.

And thereupon it was enacted by the Authority of the Parliament (on whom He
was content to cast the envy of an Act so contrary to his former gracious
Proclamations) That all manner of Books of the Old and New Testament, of the
crafty, false and untrue Translation of Tindal, be forthwith abolished, and
forbidden to be used and kept. As also, that all other Bibles not being of
Tindals Translation, in which were found any Preambles or Annotations, other
than the Quotations or Summaries of the Chapters should be purged of the said
Preambles and Annotations, either by cutting them out, or blotting them in such
wise, that they might not be perceived or read. And finally, That the Bible be
not read openly in any Church, but by the leave of the King, or of the Ordinary
of the place; nor privately by any Women, Artificers, Apprentices, Journey-men,
Husbandmen, Laborers, or by any of the Servants of Yeomen, or under, with
several pains to those who should do the contrary.

This is the substance of the Statute of the 34 and 35 Hen. 8. c. 1. Which
though it shows that there was somewhat done in Parliament, in a matter which
concerned Religion, (which howsoever if you mark it, was rather the adding of
the penalties, than giving any resolution or decision of the points in
question) yet I presume the Papists will not use this for an Argument, that we
have either a Parliament-Religion, or a Parliament Gospel; or that we stand
indebted to the Parliament for the Use of the Scriptures in the English Tongue,
which is so principal a part of the Reformation. Nor did the Parliament speed
so prosperously in the undertaking (which the wise King permitted them to have
a hand in, for the foresaid ends,) or found so general an obedience in it from
the common people, as would have been expected in these Times on the like
occasion; but that the King was fain to quicken and give life to the Acts
thereof, by his Proclamation, Anno 1546. which you shall find in Fox his Book,
fo. 1427.

To drive this Nail a little further: The terror of this Statute dying with H.
8. or being repealed by that of K. Ed. 6. c. 22. the Bible was again made
public; and not only suffered to be read by particular persons, either
privately, or in the Church; but ordered to be read over yearly in the
Congregation, as a part of the Liturgy, or Divine Service: Which how far it
relates to the Court of Parliament we shall see anon: But for the publishing
thereof in Print for the Use of the people, for the comfort and edification of
private persons, that was done only by the King, at least in his Name, and by
His Authority. And so it also stood in Q. Elizabeth's time, the translation of
the Bible being again reviewed by some of the most learned Bishops, appointed
thereunto by the Queens Commission (from whence it had the name of the Bishops
Bible) and upon that review, Reprinted by her sole Commandment, and by her
sole Authority left free and open to the Use of her well-affected and religious
subjects. Nor did the Parliament do any thing in all Her Reign with reference
to the Scriptures in the English Tongue, otherwise than at the reading of them,
in that Tongue, in the Congregation, is to be reckoned for a part of the
English Liturgy, whereof more hereafter.

In the translation of them into Welsh, or British, somewhat indeed was done
which does look this way. It being ordered in the Parliament, 5. Eliz. c. 28.
That the B. B. of Hereford, St. David's, Bangor, Landaff, and St. Asaph, should
take care amongst them for translating the whole Bible, with the Book of Common
Prayer, into the Welsh or British Tongue, on pain of forfeiting 40 l. a piece
in default hereof. And to encourage them thereunto, it was Enacted that one
Book of either sort being so translated and imprinted, should be provided and
bought for every Cathedral Church, as also for all Parish-Churches and Chapels
of Ease, where the said tongue is commonly used; the Ministers to pay the one
half of the price, and the Parishioners the other.

But then you must observe withal, that it had been before determined in the
Convocation of the self-same year, Anno 2562. That the Common Prayer of the
Church ought to be celebrated in a tongue which was understood by the people
(as you may see in the Book of Articles of Religion, Art. 24. which came out
that year) and consequently, as well in the Welsh or British, as in any other.
Which care, had it been taken for Ireland also, as it was for Wales, no
question but that people had been more generally civilized, and made
conformable in all points to the English Government, long before this time. And
for the new Translation of K. James his time, to show that the Translation of
Scripture is no work of Parliament, as it was principally occasioned by some
passages in the Conference at Hampton Court, without recourse unto the
Parliament, so was it done only by such men as the King appointed, and by His
Authority alone imprinted, published and imposed, care being taken by the Canon
of the year, 1603. That one of them should be provided for each several Church,
at the charge of the Parish. No flying in this case to an Act of Parliament,
either to Authorize the doing of it, or to impose it being done.

4. Of the Reformation of Religion in points of Doctrine.
NExt let us look upon the method used in former Times in the reforming of the
Church, whether in points of Doctrine, or in forms of Worship, and we shall
find it still the same. The Clergy did the work as to them seemed best, never
advising with the Parliament, but upon the post-fact, and in most cases not at
all. And first for Doctrinals, there was but little done in K. Henry's time,
but that which was acted by the Clergy only in their Convocation, and so
commended to the people by the Kings sole Authority, the matter being never
brought within the cognizance of the two Houses of Parliament. For in the year
1536. being the year, in which the Popes Authority was for ever banished, there
were some Articles agreed on in the Convocation, and represented to the King,
under the hands of the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and inferior Clergy usually
called unto those Meetings; the Original whereof being in Sir Robert Cotton's
Library I have often seen: Which being approved of by the King, were forthwith
published under the Title of Articles devised by the Kings Highness, to stable
Christian quietness and unity amongst the people. In which it is to be
observed: First, that those Articles make mention of three Sacraments only,
that is to say, of Baptism, Penance, and the Sacrament of the Altar. And
secondly, That in the Declaration of the Doctrine of Justication, Images,
honoring of the Saints departed; as also concerning many of the Ceremonies,
and the fire of Purgatory, they differed very much from those Opinions which
had been formerly received in the Church of Rome; as you may partly see by that
Extract of them, which occurs in Fox his Acts and Monuments, Vol. 2. fol. 1246.

For the confirming of which Book, and recommending it to the use of the
people, His Majesty was pleased in the Injunctions of the year 1536. to give
command to all Deans, Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, so to open and declare in
their Sermons, and other Collations, the said Articles unto them which be under
their Cure, that they might plainly know and discern, which of them be
necessary to be believed and observed for their salvation, and which do only
concern the decent and politic Order of the Church. And this he did upon this
ground, that the said Articles had been concluded and condescended upon by the
Prelates and Clergy of the Realm in their Convocation; as appears in the very
words of the Injunction: For which, see Fox his Acts and Monuments, fol. 1247.
I find not any thing in Parliament which relates to this, either to countenance
the work, or to require obedience and conformity from the hand of the people.
And to say truth, neither the King nor Clergy did account it necessary, but
thought their own Authority sufficient to go through with it; though certainly
it was more necessary at that time, than in any since: The power and reputation
of the Clergy being under foot, the King scarce settled in the Supremacy so
lately recognized unto him; and therefore the Authority of the Parliament of
more Use than afterward, in Times well balanced and established.

It Is true, that in some other year of that Princes Reign, we find some Use and
mention of an Act of Parliament in matters which concerned Religion; but it was
only in such Times when the hopes of Reformation were in the Wane, and the Work
went retrogade. For in the year 1539. being the 31. H. 8. When the Lord Comwels
power began to decline, and the King was in a necessity of compliance with His
Neighboring Princes, there passed an Act of Parliament, commonly called the
Statute of the six Articles (or the Whip with six strings.) In which it was
Enacted, That whosoever by word or writing should Preach, Teach, or publish,
that in the blessed Sacraments of the Altar, under form of Bread and Wine,
there is not really the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,
conceived of the Virgin Mary, ( or affirm otherwise thereof than was maintained
and taught in the Church of Rome) should be adjudged an Heretic, and suffer
death by burning, and forfeit all his Lands and Goods, as in case of High
Treason.

Secondly: That whosoever should Teach or Preach, that the Communion of the
blessed Sacrament (in both kinds) is necessary for the health of man's soul, and
ought to be maintained.

Thirdly: Or that any man ofter the Order of Priesthood received, might Marry,
or contract Matrimony.

Fourthly: Or that any Woman which had vowed and professed Chastity, might
contract Marriage.

Fifthly: Or that private Masses were not lawful and laudable, or agreeable to
the Word of God.

Or sixthly: That auricular Confession was not necessary and expedient to be
used in the Church of God, should suffer death, and forfeit Lands and Goods as
a Felon, 31 H. 8. c. 14.

The rigor of which terrible Statute was shortly after mitigated in the said
King's Reign, 32 H. 8. c. 10. and 35 H. 8. c. 5. and the whole Statute
absolutely repealed by Act of Parliament, 1 E. 6. c. 12. But then it is to be
observed first, that this Parliament of K. H. 8. did not determine any thing in
those six points of Doctrine which are therein recited; but only took upon them
to devise a course for the suppressing of the contrary Opinions, by adding by
the secular Power, the punishment of Death, and forfeiture of Lands and Goods,
unto the censures of the Church, which were grown weak, if not unvalid; and
consequently, by degrees became neglected ever since the said K. Henry took the
Headship on Him, and exercised the same by a Lay Vicar General.

And secondly, you must observe, that it appears evidently by the Act it
self, that at the same time the King had called a Synod and Convocation of all
the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Learned men of the Clergy, that the
Articles were first deliberately and advisedly debated, argued and reasoned, by
the said Archbishops, Bishops, and other Learned men of the Clergy, and their
opinions in the same declared and made known, before the matter came in
Parliament.

And finally, That being brought into the Parliament, there was not any thing
declared and passed as doctrinal, but by the assent of the Lords Spiritual, and
other Learned men of the Clergy, as by the Act it self does at large appear.

Finally, Whatsoever may be drawn from thence, can be only this, That K. Hen.
did make use of his Court of Parliament for the establishing and confirming of
some points of Popery, which seemed to be in danger of a Reformation. And this
compared with the Statute of the 34. and 35. prohibiting the reading of the
Bible by most sorts of people, does clearly show that the Parliaments of those
times did rather hinder and retard the work of Reformation, in some especial
parts thereof, than give any furtherance to the same.

But to proceed: There was another point of Reformation begun in the Lord
Cromwels time, but not produced, nor brought to perfection till after his
decease; and then too, not without the Midwifery of an Act of Parliament. For
in the year 1537. the Bishops and others of the Clergy of the Convocation, had
composed a Book entitled, The Institution of a Christian Man; which being
subscribed by all their hands, was by them presented to the King, by His most
excellent judgment to be allowed of, or condemned. This Book, containing the
chief Heads of Christian Religion, was forthwith Printed and exposed to public
view. But some things not being clearly explicated, or otherwise subject to
exception, he caused it to be reviewed, and to that end, as Supreme Head on
Earth of the Church of Engl. (I speak the very words of the Act of Parl. 32. H.
8. c. 26.) appointed the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and also a
great number of the best, learned, honestest, and most virtuous sort of the
Doctors of Divinity, men of discretion, judgment, and good disposition, to be
called together; to the intent, that according to the very Gospel and Law of
God, without any partial respect or affection to the Papistical sort, or any
other Sect or Sects whatsoever, they should declare by writing, and publish, as
well the principal Articles and points of our Faith and Belief; with the
Declaration, true understanding and observation of such other expedient points,
as by them, with his Graces advice, counsel, and consent, shall be thought
needful and expedient; as also for the lawful Rights, Ceremonies, and
observation of Gods Service within this Realm.

This was in the year 1540. at what time the Parliament was also sitting, of
which the King was pleased to make this special use, That whereas the work
which was in hand (I use again the words of the Statute) required ripe and
mature deliberation, and was not rashly to be defined and set forth, and so not
fit to be restrained to the present Session, an Act was passed to this effect,
That all Determinations, Declarations, Decrees, Definitions, and Ordinances, as
according to God's Word, and Christ's Gospel, should at any time hereafter be
set forth by the said Archbishops and Bishops, and Doctors in Divinity, now
appointed, or hereafter to be appointed by his Royal Majesty, or else by the
whole Clergy of England, in, and upon the matter of Christ's Religion, and the
Christian Faith, and the lawful Rights, Ceremonies, and Observations of the
same, by his Majesty's advice and confirmation under the great Seal of England,
shall be by all his Graces Subjects fully believed, obeyed, observed, and
performed, to all purposes and intents, upon the pains and penalties therein to
be comprised, as if the same had been in express words and sentences plainly
and fully made, set forth, declared, and contained in the said Act, 32 H. 8. c.
26. where note, That the two Houses of Parliament were so far from meddling in
the matter which was then in hand, that they did not so much as require to see
the Determinations and Decrees of those Learned men whom his Majesty had then
Assembled, before they passed the present Act, to bind the Subject fully to
believe, observe, and perform the same; but left it wholly to the judgment and
discretion of the King and Clergy, and trusted them besides, with the ordaining
and inflicting of such pains and penalties on disobedient and unconformable
persons as to them seemed meet.

This groundwork laid, the work went forwards in good order, and at last being
brought unto as much perfection as the said Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Learned men would give it, without the cooperation and concurrence of the
Royal assent; it was presented once again to the Kings consideration, who very
carefully perused it, and altered many things with his own hand; as appears by
the Book it self still extant in the famous Library of Sir Robert Cotton; and
having so altered and corrected it in some passages, returned it to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who bestowed some further pains upon it; to the end,
that being to come forth in the King's Name, and by his Authority, there might
be nothing in the same which might be justly reprehended.

The business being in this forwardness, the King declares in Parliament, Anno
1544. being the 34 year of his Reign, his zeal and care, not only to suppress
all such Books and Writings as were noisome and pestilent, and tended to the
seducing of his Subjects; but also to ordain and establish a certain Form of
pure and sincere Teaching agreeable to God's Word, and the true Doctrine of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church, whereunto men may have recourse for the
decision of some such controversies, as have in Times past, and yet do happen
to arise.

And for a preparatory thereunto, that so it might come forth with the greater
credit, he caused an Act to pass in Parliament for the abolishing of all Books
and Writings, comprizing any matters of Christian Religion, contrary to that
Doctrine, which since the year 1540. is, or any time during the King's life,
shall be set forth by his Highness, and for the punishment of all such (and
that too, with most grievous pains) which should preach, teach, maintain, or
defend any matter or thing contrary to the Book of Doctrine, which was then in
readiness, 34, 35 H. 8. c. 1. Which done, he caused the said Book to be
Imprinted in the year next following, under the Title of A necessary Doctrine
for all sorts of People; prefixing a Preface thereto in his Royal Name, to all
his faithful and loving Subjects, that they might know the better in those
dangerous Times, what to believe in point of Doctrine, and how they were to
carry and behave themselves in points of Practice.

Which Statute, as it is the greatest Evidence which those Times afford to
show, that both, or either of the Houses of Parliament had any thing to do in
matters which concerned Religion; so it entitles them to no more (if at all to
any thing) then that they did make way to a Book of Doctrine, which was before
digested by the Clergy only, revised after, and corrected by the Kings own
hand; and finally, perused and perfected by the Metropolitan.

And more then so, (besides, that being but one Swallow, it can make no Summer)
it is acknowledged and confessed in the Act it self (if Poulton understand it
rightly in his Abridgment) That recourse must be had to the Catholic and
Apostolic Church, for the decision of Controversies. Which as it gives the
Clergy the decisive power, so it left nothing to the Houses, but to assist and
aid them with the Temporal Sword, when the Spiritual Word could not do the
deed, the point thereof being blunted, and the edge abated.

Next, let us look upon the time of K. Ed. 6. and we shall find the Articles
and Doctrine of the Church (excepting such as were contained in the Book of
Common Prayer) to be composed, confirmed, and settled in no other way then by
the Clergy only in their Convocation, the Kings Authority cooperating and
concurring with them.

For, in the Synod held in London, Anno 1552. the Clergy did compose and agree
upon a Book of Articles, containing the chief Heads of the Christian Faith;
especially, with reference to such Points of Controversy, as were in
difference between the Reformators of the Church of England and the Church of
Rome, and other Opponents whatsoever, which after were approved and published
by the Kings Authority.

They were in number 41. and were published by this following Title; that is to
say, Articuli de quibus in Synodo London, Anno 1552. ad tollendum opinionum
dissentionem and consensum verae Religionis firmandum, inter Episcopos and
alios Eruditis viros Convenerat, Regia authoritate in lucem Editi. And it is
worth our observation, that though the Parliament was held at the very time,
and that the Parliament passed several Acts which concerned Church Matters; as
viz. An Act for Uniformity of Divine Service, and for the Confirmation of the
Book of Ordination, 5 and 6 Edw. 6. c. 1. An Act declaring which days only
shall be kept for Holy days, and which for Fasting days, C. 3. against striking
or drawing weapon, either in the Church or Churchyard, C. 4. And finally,
another Act for the legitimating of the Marriages of Priests and Ministers, C.
12. Yet neither in this Parliament, nor in that which followed, is there so
much as the least syllable which reflecteth this way, or medleth any thing at
all with the book of Articles. Where, by the way, if you behold the lawfulness
of Priests Marriages as a matter Doctrinal; or think we owe that point of
Doctrine, and the indulgence granted to the Clergy in it, to the care and
goodness of the Parliament, you may please to know, that the point had been
before determined in the Convocation, and stands determined by and for the
Clergy in the 31 of those Articles; and that the Parliament looked not on it as
a point of Doctrine; but as it was a matter practical, conducing to the benefit
and improvement of the Commonwealth. Or if it did, yet was the Statute built
on no other groundwork, than the Resolution of the Clergy, the Marriage of
Priests being before determined to be most lawful (I use the very words of the
Act it self) and according to the Word of God, by the Learned Clergy of this
realm in their Convocations, as well by the common assent, as by subscriptions
of their hands, 5, 6. Edw. 6. chap. 12.

And for the time of Q. Elizabeth, it is most manifest, that they had no other
body of Doctrine in the first part of her Reign, then only the said Articles of
K. Edward's Book; and that which was delivered in the Book of Homilies of the
said Kings time: In which the Parliament had as little to do, as you have seen
they had in the Book of Articles.

But in the Convocation of the year, 1562. being the fifth of the Q. Reign, the
Bishops and Clergy taking into consideration the said book of Articles, and
altering what they thought most fitting, to make it more conducible to the use
of the Church, and the edification of the people, presented it unto the Queen,
who caused it to be published with this Name and Title, viz. Articles whereupon
it was agreed by the Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole
Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, Anno 1562. for the avoiding of
diversity of Opinions, and for the establishing of Consent touching true
Religion; put forth by the Queens Authority.

Of any thing done, or pretended to be done, by the power of the Parliament,
either in the way of Approbation, or of Confirmation, not one word occurs
either in any of the Printed Books, or the Public Registers.

At last, indeed in the 13th. of the said Queens Reign (which was 8 years full
after the passing of those Articles) comes out a Statute for the Redressing of
disorders in the Ministers of holy Church: In which it was enacted, That all
such as were Ordained Priests or Ministers of God's Word and Sacraments, after
any other form then that appointed to be used in the Church of England; all
such as were to be Ordained, or permitted to Preach, or to be instituted into
any Benefice with Cure of souls, should publicly subscribe to the said
Articles, and testify their assent unto them. Which shows (if you observe it
well) that though the Parliament did well allow of, and approve the said Book
of Articles, yet the said Book owes neither confirmation nor authority, to the
Act of Parliament. So that the wonder is the greater, that that most insolent
scoff which is put upon us by the Church of Rome, in calling our Religion by
the name Parliamentaria-Religio, should pass so long without control; unless,
perhaps, it was in reference to our Forms of Worship, of which I am to speak in
the next place.

But first we must make answer unto some Objections which are made against us,
both from Law and Practice. For Practice; first, it is alleged by some out of
Bishop Jewel, in his Answer to the Cavil of Dr. Harding, to be no strange
matter to see Ecclesiastical Causes debated in Parliament; and that it is
apparent by the Laws of King Ina, King Alfred, King Edward, etc. That our Godly
Forefathers, the Princes and Peers of this Realm, never vouchsafed to treat of
matters touching the Common State, before all Controversies of Religion, and
Causes Ecclesiastical had been concluded, Def. of the Apol. part 6. chap. 2.
sect. 1.

But the answer unto this is easy: For first, if our Religion may be called
Parliamentarian, because it has received confirmation and debate in
Parliament, then the Religion of our Forefathers, even Papistry it self
(concerning which so many Acts of Parliament were made in K. Hen. 8. and Q.
Mary's time) must be called Parliamentarian also.

And secondly, it is most certain, that in the Parliaments or Common-Councils
(call them which you will) both of King Inas time, and the rest of the Saxon
Kings which B. Jewel speaks of; not only Bishops, Abbots, and the higher part
of the Clergy, but the whole Body of the Clergy generally had their Votes and
Suffrages, either in person, or by proxy. Concerning which, take this for the
leading Case: That in the Parliament or Common Council in K. Ethelberts time,
who first of all the Saxon Kings, received the Gospel, the Clergy were convened
in as full a manner, as the Lay-Subjects of that Prince: Convocati Communi
Concilio tam Cleri, quam Populi, says Sir H. Spelman in his Collection of the
Councils, Anno 605. p. 118. And for the Parliament of King Ina, which leads the
way in Bishop Jewel, it was (says the same Sr. H. Spelman, p. 630. Communi
Concilium Episcoporum, Procerum, Comitum, nec non omnium Sapientum, Seniorum,
Populorumque totius Regni; Where, doubtless, Sapientes and Seniores (and you
know what Seniores signifies in the Ecclesiastical notion) must be some body
else then those which after are expressed by the name of Populi, which shows
the falsehood and absurdity of the collection made by Mr. Pryn, in the Epistle
to his Book against Dr. Cousins, viz. That the Parliament (as it is now
constituted) has an ancient genuine, just and lawful Prerogative, to establish
true Religion in our Church, and to abolish and suppress all false, new, and
counterfeit Doctrines whatsoever. Unless he means upon the post fact, after the
Church has done her part, in determining what was true, what false, what new,
what ancient; and finally, what Doctrines might be counted counterfeit, and
what sincere. And as for Law, it is true indeed, that by the Statute, 1 Eliz.
cap. 1. The Court of Parliament has power to determine and judge of Heresy;
which at first sight seems somewhat strange; but on the second view, you will
easily find that this relates only to new and emergent Heresies, not formerly
declared for such in any of the first four General Councils, nor in any other
General Cuncil, adjudging by express words of holy Scripture; as also that in
such new Heresies, the following words restrain this power to the Assent of the
Clergy in their Convocation, as being best able to instruct the Parliament what
they are to do, and where they are to make use of the secular sword for cutting
off a desperate Heretic from the Church of CHRIST, or rather from the Body of
all Christian people.

5. Of the Reformation of the Church of England in the Forms of Worship, and
the Times appointed thereunto.
THIS Rub removed, we now proceed unto a view of such Forms of Worships as have
been settled in this Church, since the first dawning of the day of Reformation,
in which our Parliaments have indeed done somewhat, though it be not much. The
first point which was altered in the public Liturgies, was, that the Creed,
the Paternoster, and the Ten Commandments, were ordered to be said in the
English Tongue; to the intent, the people might be perfect in them, and learn
them without book, as our Phrase is. The next, the setting forth and using of
the English Letany, on such days and times, in which it was accustomably to be
read, as a part of the Service. But neither of these two was done by
Parliament; nay, (to say truth) the Parliament did nothing in them. All which
was done in either of them, was only by the King's Authority, by virtue of the
Headship or Supremacy, which by way of recognition was vested in him by the
Clergy, either cooperating and concurring with them in their Convocations, or
else directed and assisted by such learned Prelates, with whom he did advise in
matters which concerned the Church, and did relate to Reformation. By virtue of
which Headship or Supremacy he ordained the first; and to that end, caused
certain Articles or Injunctions to be published by the Lord Cromwell, then his
Viear General, Anno 1536. And by the same did he give order for the second, I
mean, for the saying of the Letany in the English Tongue, by his own Royal
Proclamation, Anno 1545. For which, consult the Acts and Monuments, fol. 1248,
1312. But these were only preparations to a greater work which was reserved
unto the times of K. Edw. 6. In the beginning of whose Reign there passed a
Statute for the administering the Sacrament in both kinds to any person that
should devoutly and humbly desire the same, 1 E. 6. c. 1. In which it is to be
observed, that though the Statute do declare, that the ministering of the same
in both kinds to the people was more agreeable to the first Institution of the
said Sacrament, and to the common usage of the primitive Times. Yet Mr. Fox
assures us (and we may take his word) that they did build that Declaration, and
consequently the Act which was raised upon it, upon the judgment and opinion of
the best learned men, whose resolution and advice they followed in it, fol.
1489. And for the Form by which the said most blessed Sacrament was to be
delivered to the common people, it was commended to the care of the most grave
and learned Bishops, and others, assemby the King at His Castle of Windsor; who
upon long, wise, learned and deliberate advice did finally agree (says Fox)
upon one godly and uniform zOrder for receiving of the same, according to the
right rule of Scriptures, and the first use of the primitive Church, fol. 1491.
Which Order, as it was set forth in Print, Anno 1548. with a Proclamation in
the name of the King, to give Authority thereunto amongst the people, so was it
recommended by special Letters writ unto every Bishop, severally from the Lords
of the Council to see the same put in execution: A copy of which Letters you
may find in Fox, fol. 1491. as before is said.

Hitherto nothing done by Parliament in the Forms of Worship, but in the
following year there was. For the Protector and the rest of the Kings Council
being fully bent for a Reformation, thought it expedient that one uniform,
quiet and godly Order should be had throughout the Realm, for Officiating God's
divine Service. And to that end (I use the words of the Act it self) appointed
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain of the most learned and discreet
Bishops, and other learned men of the Realm to meet together, requiring them,
that having as well eye and respect to the most pure and sincere Christian
Religion, taught in Scriptures, as to the usages in the Primitive Church, they
should draw and make one convenient and meet Order, Rite and fashion of Common
Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, to be had and used in this his
Majesty's Realm of England. Well, what did they being thus assembled? that the
Statute tells us: Where it is said, that by the aid of the Holy Ghost (I pray
you mark this well) and with one uniform agreement they did conclude upon and
set forth an Order, which they delivered to the Kings Highness, in a Book
entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and
other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, after the use of the Church of
England. All this was done before the Parliament did any thing. But what was
done by them at at last? Why first, considering the most godly travel of the
King's Highness, and the Lord Protector and others of his Highness Council, in
gathering together the said B. and learned men. Secondly: The Godly Prayers,
Orders, Rites and Ceremonies in the said Book mentioned. Thirdly: The motive
and inducements which inclined the aforesaid learned men to alter those things
which were altered, and to retain those things which were retained: And
finally, taking into consideration the honor of God, and the great quietness
which by the grace of God would ensue upon it; they gave his Majesty most
hearty and lowly thanks for the same, and most humbly prayed him, that it might
be ordained by his Majesty, with the assent of the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, and by Authority of the same, that the said Form of
Common Prayer, and no other, after the Feast of Pentecost next following,
should be used in all his Majesty's Dominions, with several penalties to such,
as either should deprave or neglect the same. 2 and 3. E. 6. cap. 1. So far the
very words of the Act it self. By which it evidently appears, that the two
Houses of Parliament did nothing in the present business, but impose that Form
upon the people; which by the learned and religious Clergymen (whom the K.
appointed thereunto) was agreed upon, and made it penal unto such as either
should deprave the same, or neglect to use it. And thus does Poulton (no mean
Lawyer) understand the Statute, who therefore gives no other title to it in his
Abridgement published in the year 1612. than this, The penalty for not using
uniformity of Service, and Ministration of the Sacrament. So then the making of
one uniform Order of celebrating divine Service, was the work of the Clergy,
the making of the Penalties, was the work of the Parliament. Where let me tell
you by the way, that the men who were employed in this weighty business (whose
names deserve to be continued in perpetual memory) were Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, George Day Bishop of Chichester, Thomas Goodrich B.
of Ely, and Lord Chancellor; John Ship Bishop of Hereford, Henry Holbeck
Bishop of Lincoln, Nicholas Ridley Bishop of Rochester, translated afterward
to London, Thomas Thirlby Bishop of Westminster, Dr. May Dean of St. Paul's, Dr.
Tailor (then Dean, afterward) Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Hains Dean of Exeter, Dr.
Robertson afterward Dean of Durham, Dr. Redman Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and Dr. Cox then Almoner to the King, afterward Dean of Westminster,
and at last Bishop of Ely; men famous in their generations, and the honor of
the Age they lived in. And so much for the first Liturgy of King Edwards Reign;
in which you see how little was done by Authority or power of Parliament, so
little, that if it had been less, it had been just nothing. But some exceptions
being taken against the Liturgy by some of the preciser sort at home, and by
Calvin abroad, the Book was brought under a review: And though it had been
framed at first (if the Parliament which said so erred not) by the aid of the
Holy Ghost himself; yet to comply with the curiosity of the Ministers and
mistakes of the people, rather than for any other weighty cause, As the
Statutes 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 1. it was thought expedient by the King, with the
assent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, that the said Order of
Common Service should be faithfully and godly perused, explained, and made
fully perfect.

Perused and explained; by whom? Why, questionless by those who made it; or
else, by those (if they were not the same men) who were appointed by the King
to draw up and compose a Form of Ordination for the Use of the Church. And this
Assent of theirs (for it was no more) was the only part that was ever acted by
the Parliament, in matter of this present nature; save that a Statute passed in
the former Parliament 3 and 4 Ed. 6. c. 12. unto this effect, that such form
and manner of making and consecrating Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
and other Ministers of the Church (which before I spoke of) as by six Prelates,
and six other men of this Realm, learned in Gods Laws, by the King to be
appointed and assigned, shall be devised to that purpose, and set forth under
the great Seal, shall be lawfully used and exercised, and none other. Where
note, that the King only was to nominate and appoint the men, the Bishops and
other learned men were to make the Book; and that the Parliament in a blind
obedience, or at the least upon a charitable confidence in the integrity of the
men so nominated, did confirm that Book, before any of their Members had ever
seen it, though afterward indeed, in the following Parliament, this Book,
together with the Book of Common Prayer, so Printed and explained, obtained a
more formal confirmation, as to the use thereof throughout the Kingdom, but in
no other respect; for which see the Statute 5 and 6 Ed. 6. c. 1. (As for the
time of Q. Elizabeth, when the Common Prayer book now in use (being the same
almost with the last of King Edward) was to be brought again into the Church,
from whence it was cast out in Queen Mary's Reign; it was committed to the care
of some learned men; that is to say, to M. Whitehead (once Chaplain to Q. Anne
Bullen) Dr. Parker, after Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Grindal, after Bishop
of London, Dr. Cox, after Bishop of Ely, Dr. Pilkington, after Bishop of
Durham; Dr. May, Dean of Saint Paul's, Dr. Bill, Provost of Eaton, after Dean of
Westminster, and Sir Tho. Smith. By whom being altered in some few passages
which the Statute points to, 1 Eliz. c. 21. it was presented to the Parliament,
and by the Parliament received and established without more ado, or troubling
any Committee of both or either Houses to consider of it, for ought appears in
their Records. All that the Parliament did in it, being to put it into the
condition in which it stood before in Kings Edwards Reign, partly by repealing
the Repeal of King Edw. Statutes, made in the first of Q. Mary, c. 2. and
partly by the adding of some farther penalties on such as did deprave the Book,
or neglect to use it, or wilfully did absent themselves from their
Parish-Churches. And for the Alterations made in King James his time, being
small in the Rubric only; and for the additions of the Thanksgivings at the
end of the Letany, the Prayer for the Queen and the Royal Issue, and the
Doctrine of the Sacraments at the end of the Catechism, which were not in the
Book before, they were never referred unto the Parliament, but were done only
by Authority of the Kings Commission, and stand in force by virtue only of His
Proclamation, which you may find before the Book; the charge of buying the said
Book so explained and altered, being laid upon the several and respective
Parishes, by no other Authority than that of the eightieth Canon, made in
Convocation, Anno 1603. The like may also be affirmed of the Forms of Prayer
for the Inauguration-day of our Kings and Queens, the Prayer-books for the
fifth of November, and the fifth of August, and those which have been used in
all public Fasts: All which, without the help of Parliaments, have been
composed by the Bishops, and imposed by the King.

Now unto this discourse of the Forms of Worship, I shall subjoyn a word or two
of the times of Worship; that is to say, the Holy Days observed in the Church
of England; and so observed, that they do owe that observation chiefly to the
Churches power. For whereas it was found in the former times, that the number
of the Holy Days was grown so great, that they became a burden to the common
people, and a great hinderance to the thrift and manufactures of the Kingdom;
there was a Canon made in the Convocation, An. 1536. For cutting off of many
superstitious and superfluous Holy Days, and the reducing them into the number
in which they now stand (save that St. George's day, and Mary Magdalens day,
and all the Festivals of the blessed Virgin had their place amongst them)
according to which Canon, there went out a Monitory from the Archbishop of
Canterbury, to all the Suffragans of his Province, respectively to see the same
observed in their several Diocesses, which is still extant on Record. But being
the Authority of the Church was then in the wane, it was thought necessary to
confirm their Acts, and see execution done upon it by the Kings Injunction;
which did accordingly come forth with this Form or preamble; That the
abolishing of the said Holy Days, was decreed, ordained, and established by the
Kings Highness Authority, as Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England,
with the common consent and assent of the Prelates and Clergy of this his Realm
in Convocation lawfully Assembled and Congregate. Of which see Fox his Acts and
Monuments, fol. 1246, 1247. Afterward in the year 1541. the King perceiving
with what difficulty the people were induced to leave off those Holy Days, to
which they had been so long accustomed, published his Proclamation of the
twenty-third of July, for the abolishing of such Holy Days (amongst other
things) as were prohibited before by his Injunctions; both built upon the same
foundation, namely, the resolution of the Clergy in their Convocation.

And so it stood until the Reign of King E. 6. at which time the Reformation of
the public Liturgy drew after it by consequence an alteration in the present
business, no days being to be kept or accounted Holy, but those for which the
Church had set apart a peculiar office, and not all those neither: For, whereas
there are several and peculiar offices for the day of the Conversion of St.
Paul, and the day of St. Barnabas, the Apostles; neither of these are kept as
Holy Days, nor reckoned or esteemed as such in the Act of Parliament, wherein
the names and number of the Holy Days is precisely specified, which makes some
think the Act of Parliament to have had an overruling power on the
Common Prayer Book; but it is not so, there being a specification of the
Holy Days in the Book it self, with this direction, These to be observed for
Holy Days, and none other; in which the Feasts of the Conversion of St. Paul,
and the Apostle Barnabas are omitted plainly, and upon which specification the
Stat. 5 and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 3. which concerns the Holy Days, seems most expressly
to be built. And for the Offices on those days in the Common Prayer Book, you
may please to know that every Holy Day consists of two special parts, that is
to say, rest or cessation from bodily labor, and celebration of Divine or
Religious duties; and that the days before remembered are so far kept holy, as
to have still their proper and peculiar Offices, which is observed in all the
Cathedrals of this Kingdom, and the Chapels Royal, where the Service is read
every day; and in most Parish Churches also, as often as either of them falls
upon a Sunday, though the people be not in those days injoined to rest from
bodily labor, no more than on the Coronation-day, or the Fifth of November,
which yet are reckoned by the people for a kind of Holy Days. Put all which
has been said together, and the sum is this: That the proceedings of this
Church in the Reformation were not merely Regal (as it is objected by some
Puritans) much less that they were Parliamentarian in so great a work, as the
Papists falsely charge upon us, the Parliaments for the most part doing little
in it, but that they were directed in a justifiable way, the work being done
Synodically, by the Clergy only, according to the usage of the Primitive times,
the King concurring with them, and corroborating what they had resolved on,
either by his own single Act in his letters Patent, Proclamations and
Injunctions, or by some public Act of State, as in times, and by Acts of
Parliament.

6. Of the power of making Canons, for the well ordering of the Clergy, and the
directing of the People in the public Duties of Religion.
WE are now come to the last part of this design, unto the power of making
Canons, in which the Parliament of England have had less to do than in either
of the other which are gone before. Concerning which, I must desire you to
remember that the Clergy, who had power before to make such Canons and
Constitutions in their Convocation as to them seemed meet, promised the King in
verbo Sacerdotij, not to Enact or Execute and new Canons, but by his Majesty's
Royal Assent, and by his Authority first obtained in that behalf; which is thus
briefly touched upon in the Ant. Brit. in the life of William Warham, Arch
Bishop of Canterbury, Clerus in verb Sacerdotij sidem Regi dedit, ne ullas
deinceps in Synodo ferrent Ecclesiasticas leges, nisi and Synodus authoritate
Regia congregata, and constitutiones in Synodis publicatae eadem authoritate
ratae essent. Upon which ground I doubt not but I might securely raise this
proposition, That whatsoever the Clergy did, or might do lawfully before the
act of Submission in their Convocation of their own power, without the Kings
Authority and consent concurring, the same they can, and may do still, since
the act of their Submission; the Kings Authority and consent cooperating with
them in their Councils, and giving confirmation to their Constitutions, as was
said before. Further, it does appear by the asoresaid Act, 25 H. 8. c. 19. That
all such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodals Provincial, as were
made before the said Submission, which be not contrary or repugnant to the
Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the
Kings Prerogative Royal, were to be used and executed as in former times. "And
by the Statute 26 H. 8. c. 1. of the Kings Supremacy, that (according to the
Recognition made in Convocation) our said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and
Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall have full power and authority from time
to time to visit, repress, reform, order, correct, etc. all such Errors,
Heresies, Abuses Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities whatsoever they be, and.c
as may be most to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of virtue in
Christ's Religion, and for the peace, unity, and tranquillity of this Realm, and
the confirmation of the same. So that you see these several ways of ordering
matters for the public weal and governance of the Church: First, by such
ancient Canons and Constitutions, as being made in former times, are still in
force: Secondly, by such new Canons as are, or shall be made in Convocation,
with and by the Kings consent: And thirdly, By the Authority of the Sovereign
Prince, according to the Precedents laid down in the Book of God, and the best
ages of the Church, concerning which you must remember what was said before,
viz. That the Statutes which concern the Kings Supremacy are Declaratory of an
old power only, not Introductory of a new; which said, we shall the better see
whether the Parliament have had any thing to do either in making Canons, or
prescribing Orders for the regulating of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters,
and unto whom the same does of right belong according to the Laws of the Realm
of England.

And first, King Henry being restored to his Headship of Supremacy (call it
which you will) did not conceive himself so absolute in it (though at the first
much enamoured of it) as not sometimes to take his Convocation with him, but at
all times to be advised by his Prelates, when he had any thing to do that
concerned the Church; for which there had been no provision made by the ancient
Canons, grounding most times, his Edicts and Injunctions Royal, upon their
advice and resolution. For on this ground, I mean the judgment and conclusions
of his Convocation, did he set out the Injunctions of the year 1536. for the
abolishing of superstitious Holy Days, the exterminating of the Popes
Authority, the publishing of the Book of Articles, which before we spoke of
number. 8. by all Parsons, Vicars, and Curates; for preaching down the use of
Images, Relics, Pilgrimages, and superstitious Miracles; for rehearsing
openly in the Church, in the English tongue, the Creed, the Pater noster, and
the Ten Commandments; for the due and reverend ministering of the Sacraments and
Sacramentals; for providing English Bibles to be set in every Church for the
use of the people; for the regular and sober life of Clergymen, and the relief
of the poor. And on the other side, the King proceeded sometimes only by the
advice of his Prelates, as in the injunctions of the year 1538. for quarterly
Sermons in each Parish; for admitting none to Preach but men sufficiently
Licenced; for keeping a Register-book of Christnings, Weddings, and Burials;
for the due paying of Tithes, as had been accustomed; for the abolishing of the
commemoration of St. Thomas Becket; for singing a Parce nobis Domine, instead
of Ora pro nobis, and the like to these. And of this sort were the Injunctions
which came out in some years succeeding, for the taking away of Images and
Relics, with all the Ornaments of the same; and all the Monumens and writings
of feigned Miracles, and for restraint of offering or setting up Lights in any
Churches, but only to the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, in which he was
directed chiefly by Archbishop Cranmer; as also those for eating of white
meats in the time of Lent, the abolishing the Fast on St. Marks day, and the
ridiculous (but superstitious) sports accustomably used on the days of St.
Clement, St. Katherine and St. Nicholas. All which and more was done in the
said Kings Reign without help of Parliament. For which I shall refer you to the
Acts and Mon. fol. 1385, 1425, 1441. The like may also be affirmed of the
Injunctions published in the name of K. E. 6. An. 1547. and printed also then
for the Use of the Subjects: And of the several Letters missive which went
forth in his Name, prohibiting the bearing of Candles on Candlemas-day; of
Ashes in Lent, and of Palms on Palm Sunday; for the taking down of all the
Images throughout the Kingdom; for administering the Communion in both kinds,
dated March 13, 1548. for abrogating of private Masses, June 24, 1549. for
bringing in all Missals, Graduals, Processionals, Legends, and Ordinals about
the latter end of December of the same year; for taking down of Altars, and
setting up Tables instead thereof, An. 1550. and the like to these: All which
particulars you have in Foxes Book of Acts and Mon. in King Edwards life, which
whether they were done of the Kings mere motion, or by advice of his Council,
or by consultation with his Bishops (for there is little left upon Record of
the Convocations of that time, more than the Articles of the year 1552) certain
I am that there was nothing done, nor yet pretended to be done in all these
particulars by the Authority of Parliament.

Thus also in Q. Elizabeth's time, before the new Bishops were well settled, and
the Queen assured of the affections of her Clergy, she went that way to work in
the Reformation, which not only her two Predecessors, but all the Godly Kings
and Princes in the Jewish State, and many of the Christian Emperors in the
Primitive times had done before her, in the well ordering of the Church and
People committed to their care and government by Almighty God; and to that end
she published her Injunctions, An. 1559. A Book of Orders, An. 1561. Another of
Advertisements, An. 1562. All tending unto Reformation unto the building up of
the new Jerusalem, with the advice and counsel of the Metropolitan, and some
other Godly Prelates, who were then aabout her, by whom they were agreed on and
subscribed unto, before they were presented to her, without the least
concurrence of her Court of Parliament. But when the times were better settled,
and the first difficulties of her Reign passed over, she left Church-work to
the disposing of Churchmen, who by their place and calling were most proper
for it; and they being met in Convocation, and thereto Authorized as the Laws
required, did make and publish several Books of Canons, as viz. 1571. An. 1584.
An. 1597. Which being confirmed by the Queen under the broad Seal of England,
were in force of Laws to all intents and purposes which they were first made;
but being confirmed without those formal words, Her Heirs and Successors, are
not binding now, but expired together with the Queen. No Act of Parliament
required to confirm them then, nor never required ever since, on the like
occasion. A fuller evidence whereof we cannot have, than in the Canons of year,
1603. being the first year of King James, made by the Clergy, only in the
Convocation, and confirmed only by the King; for though the old Canons were in
force, which had been made before the submission of the Clergy, as before I
showed you, which served in all these wavering and unsettled times, for the
perpetual standing rule of the Churches Government; yet many new emergent cases
did require new rules, and whilst there is a possibility of Mali mores; there
will be a necessity of bonae Leges. Now in the confirmation of these Canons we
shall find it thus, That the Clergy being met in their Convocation, according
to the Tenor and effect of his Majesty's Writ, his Majesty was pleased by
virtue of his Prerogative Royal and Supreme Authority in causes Ecclesiastical,
to give and grant unto them by his Letters Patents, dated April 12. and June
25. full, free, and lawful liberty, license, power and authority, to convene,
treat, debate, consider, consult, and agree upon such Canons, Orders,
Ordinances, and Constitutions, as they should think necessary, fit and
convenient for the honor and service of Almighty God, the good and quiet of
the Church, and the better government thereof from time to time, etc. to be
kept by all persons within this Realm, as far as lawfully, being members of the
Church, it may concern them; which being agreed on by the Clergy, and by them
presented to the King, humbly requiring him to give his Royal assent unto them,
according to the Statute made in the 25 of K. H. 8. and by his Majesty's
Prerogative and Supreme Authority in Ecclesiastical causes to ratify and
confirm the same, his Majesty was graciously pleased to confirm and ratify
them by his Letters Patents, for himself, his Heirs, and lawful Successors,
straightly commanding and requiring all his loving Subjects, diligently to
observe, execute, and keep the same in all points, wherein they do or may
concern all or any of them. No running to the Parliament to confirm these
Canons, nor any question made till this present, by temperate and knowing men,
that there wanted any Act for their confirmation which the law could give them.

7. An Answer to the main Objections of either Party.
BUT against this, all which has been said before, it will be objected, That
being the Bishops of the Church are fully and wholly Parliamentarian, and have
no more Authority and Jurisdiction, nisi a Parliamentis derivatum, but that
which is conferred upon them by the power of Parliaments, as both Sanders and
Schultingius do expressly say, whatsoever they shall do or conclude upon, either
in Convocation, or in more private conferences, may be called Parliamentarian
also. And this last calumny they build on the several Statutes 24 H. 8. c. 12.
touching the manner of Electing and Consecrating Archbishops and Bishops, that
of the 1 E. 6. c. 2. appointing how they shall be chosen, and what Seals they
shall use; these of 3 and 4 Ed. 6. c. 12. and 5. and 6 E. 6. for Authorizing of
the Book of Ordination. But chiefly that of the 8 Eliz. c. 1. for making good
all Acts since 1 Eliz. in Consecrating any Arch Bishop or bishop within this
Realm. To give a general answer to each several cavil, you may please to know,
that the Bishops as they now stand in the Church of England, derive their
Calling, together with their Authority and power in Spiritual matters, from no
other hands than those of Christ and his Apostles, their Temporal honors and
possessions, from the bounty and affection only of our Kings and Princes, their
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in causes Matrimonial, Testamentary, and the like,
for which no action lies at the common Law, from continual usage and
prescription; and ratified and continued unto them in the Magna Charta of this
Realm, and owe no more unto the Parliament than all sort of Subjects do
besides, whose Fortunes and Estates have been occasionally and collaterally
confirmed in Parliament. And as for the particular Statutes which are touched
upon, that of the 24 H. 8. does only constitute and ordain a way by which they
might be chose and consecrated, without recourse to Tome for a confirmation,
which formerly had put the Prelates to great charge and trouble; but for the
form and manner of their Consecration, the Statute leaves it to those Rites and
Ceremonies wherewith before it was performed; and therefore Sanders does not
stick to affirm, that all the Bishops which were made in King Henry's days were
Lawfully and Canonically ordained and consecrated, the Bishops of that time,
not only being acknowledged in Queen Mary's days for lawful and Canonical
Bishops, but called on to assist at the Consecration of such other Bishops
(Cardinal Pool himself for one) as were promoted in her Reign, whereof see
Masons Book de Minist. Ang. l. c. Next for the Statute, 1 E. 6. cap. 2. besides
that it is satisfied in part by the former Answer, as it relates to their
Canonical Consecrations, it was repealed in Terminis in the first of Queen
Mary's Reign, and never stood in force nor practice to this day. That of the
Authorizing of the Book of Ordination in two several Parliaments of that King,
the one a part ante, and the other a part post, as before I told you, might
indeed seem somewhat to the purpose, if any thing were wanting in it which had
been used in the formula's of the Primitive times; or if the Book had been
composed in Parliament, or by Parliamentmen, or otherwise received more
Authority from them, then that it might be lawfully used and exercised
throughout the Kingdom. But it is plain, that none of these things were
objected in Queen Mary's days, when the Papists stood most upon their points,
the Ordinal being not called in because it had too much of the Parliament, but
because it had too little of the Pope, and relished too strongly of the
Primitive piety. And for the Statute of 8 of Q. Elizabeth, which is chiefly
stood on, all that was done therein was no more than this, and on this
occasion; A question had been made by captious and unquiet men, and amongst the
rest by Dr. Bonner, sometimes Bishop of London, whether the Bishops of those
times were lawfully ordained or not; the reason of the doubt being this (which
I marvel Mason did not see) because the book of Ordination which was annulled
and abrogated in the first of Queen Mary, had not been yet restored and revived
by any legal Act of Queen Elizabeth's time; which Cause being brought before the
Parliament in the 8th year of her Reign, the Parliament took notice first, that
their not restoring of that Book to the former power in terms significant and
express, was but Casus omissus; and then declare, that by the Statute 5 and 6
E. 6. it had been added to the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments as a member of it, at least as an Appendant to it; and therefore by
the Statute 1 Eliz. c. 2. was restored again, together with the said Book of
Common Prayer, intentionally at the least, if not in Terminis. But being the
words in the said Statute were not clear enough to remove all doubts, they
therefore did revive now, and did accordingly Enact, That whatsoever had been
done by virtue of that Ordination, should be good in Law; This is the total of
the Statute, and this shows rather in my judgment, that the Bishops of the
Queens first times had too little of the Parliament in them, than that they
were conceived to have had too much. And so I come to your last Objection,
which concerns the Parliament, whose entertaining all occasions to manisest
their power in Ecclesiastical matters, does seem to you to make that groundless
slander of the Papists the more fair and plausible.

It Is true indeed, that many Members of both Houses in these latter Times, have
been very ready to embrace all businesses which are offered to them, out of a
probable hope of drawing the managery of all Affairs, as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil, into their own hands. And some there are, who being they cannot hope to
have their sancies Authorized in a regular way, do put them upon such designs,
as neither can consist with the nature of Parliaments, nor the Authority of the
King, nor with the privileges of the Clergy; nor, to say truth, with the esteem
and reputation of the Church of Christ And this has been a practice even as
old as Wickliffe, who in the time of K. R. 2. addressed his Petition to the
Parliament (as we read in Walsingham) for the Reformation of the Clergy, the
rooting out of many false and erroneous Tenets, and for establishing of his own
Doctrines (who though he had some Wheat, had more Tears by odds) in the Church
of England. And lest he might be thought to have gone a way, as dangerous and
unjustifiable, as it was strange and new, he laid it down for a position. That
the Parliament or Temporal Lords (where by the way this ascribes no Authority
or power at all to the House of Commons) might lawfully examine and reform the
Disorders and Corruptions of the Church, and a discovery of the errors and
corruptions of it, divest her of all Tithes and Temporal endowments, till she
were reformed. But for all this, and (more than this) for all he was so
strongly backed by the Duke of Lancaster, neither his Petition nor his Position
found any welcome in the Parliament, further than that it made them cast many a
longing eye on the Churches patrimony; or produced any other effect toward the
work of Reformation, which he chiefly aimed at, than that it has since served
for a precedent to Penry, Pryn, and such like troublesome and unquiet spirits,
to disturb the Church, and set on foot those dreams and dotages, which
otherwise they durst not publish. And to say truth, as long as the Clergy were
in power, and had Authority in Convocation to do what they would in matters
which concerned Religion, those of the Parliament conceived it neither safe nor
fitting to intermeddle in such business as concerned the Clergy, for fear of
being questioned for it at the Churches Bar. But when that Power was lessened
(though it were not lost) by the submission of the Clergy to K. H. 8. and by
the Act of the Supremacy which ensued upon it; then did the Parliaments begin
to entrench upon the Churches Rights, to offer at, and entertain such
businesses as formerly were held peculiar to the Clergy only; next, to dispute
their Charters and reverse their privileges; and finally, to impose some hard
Laws upon them. And of these notable encroachments, Matthew Parker thus
complains in the life of Cranmer, Qua Ecclesiasticarum legum potestate
abdicata, populus in Parliamento coepit de rebus divinis inconsulto Clero
Sancire, tum absentis Cleri privilegia sensim detrahere, juraque duriora quibus
Clerus invitus teneretur, Constituere. But these were only tentamenta, offers
and undertakings only, and no more than so. Neither the Parliaments of K.
Edward, or Q. Elizabeth's time knew what it was to make Committees for Religion,
or thought it fit that Vzzah should support the Ark, though he saw it
tottering. That was a work belonging to the Levites only, none of the other
Tribes were to meddle with it. But as the Puritan Faction grew more strong and
active, so they applied themselves more openly to the Houses of Parliament, but
specially to the House of Commons; putting all power into their hands, as well
in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Causes, as in matters Temporal. This, amongst
others, confidently affirmed by Mr. Pryn, in the Epistle to his Book called
Anti-Arminianism, where he avers, That all our Bishops, our Ministers, our
Sacraments, our Consecration, our Articles of Religion, our Homilies,
Common Prayer Book; yea, and all the Religion of the Church, is no other way
publicly received, supported, or established amongst us, but by Acts of
Parliament. And this not only since the time of the Reformation, but, That
Religion and Church affairs were determined, ratified, declared, and ordered by
Act of Parliament, and no ways else, even then when Popery and Church men had
the greatest sway. Which strange assertion falling from the pen of so great a
Scribe, was forthwith cheerfully received amongst our Pharisees, who hoped to
have the highest places, not only in the Synagogue, but the Court of Sanhedrim,
advancing the Authority of Parliaments to so high a pitch, that by degrees they
fastened on them, both an infallibility of judgment, and an omniotency of
power. Nor can it be denied (to deal truly with you) but that they met with
many apt Scholars in that House, who either out of a desire to bring all the
grist to their own Mill, or willing to enlarge the great power of Parliaments,
by making new precedents for Posterity, or out of faction, or affection, or
what else you please, began to put their Rules in practice, and draw all
matters whatsoever within the cognizance of that Court: In which their
embracements were at last so general, and that humor in the House so
prevalent; that one being once demanded what they did amongst them, returned
this answer, That they were making a new Creed: Another being heard to say,
That he could not be quiet in his Conscience, till the holy Text should be
confirmed by an Act of theirs: Which passages, if they be not true and real,
(as I have them from an honest hand) I assure you they are bitter jests. But
this, although indeed it be the sickness and disease of the present Times, and
little to the honor of the Court of Parliament, can be no prejudice at all to
the way and means of the Reformation; amongst sober and discerning men, the
Doctrine of the Church being settled, the Liturgy published and confirmed, the
Canons authorized and executed, when no such humor was predominant, nor no
such power pretended to, by both or either of the Houses of Parliament.

But here perhaps it will be said that we are fallen into Charybdis by avoiding
Scylla, and that endeavoring to stop the mouth of this Popish Calumny, we have
set open a wide gap to another no less scandalous of the Presbyterians; who
being as professed Enemies of the Kings as the Popes Supremacy, and noting that
strong influence which the King has had in Ecclesiastical affairs since the
first attempts for Reformation, have charged it as reproachfully on the Church
of England, and the Religion here established; that it is Regal at the best if
not Parliamentarian, and may be called a Regal Faith, and a Regal Gospel. But
the Answer unto this is easy. For first the Kings intended by the Objectors,
did not act much in order to the Reformation (as appears by that which has
been said) but either by the advice and cooperation of the whole Clergy of the
Realm in their Convocations, or by the Counsel and consent of the Bishops and
most eminent Church men in particular Conferences: which made it properly the
work of the Clergy only, the Kings no otherwise than as it was propouned by
him, or finally confirmed by the Civil Sanction. And secondly, had they done
more in it than they did, they had been warranted so to do by the Word of God;
who has committed unto Kings and Sovereign Princes a Supreme or Supereminent
power, not only in all matters of a Temporal or Secular nature, but in such as
do concern Religion and the Church of Christ. And so St. Augustine has
resolved it in his third Book against Cresconius. In hoc Reges sicut iis
divinitus praecipitur: (pray you note that well) Deo serviunt in quantum Reges
sunt, si in suo Regno bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent
ad humanum societatem, verum etiam ad Divinam Religionem. Which words of his
seemed so significant and convincing unto Heart the Jesuit, that being showed
the Tractate writ by Dr. Nowel against Dorman the Priest, in the beginning of
Q. Elizabeth's time, and finding how the case was stated by that Reverend
person, he did ingenously confess that there was no Authority ascribed to the
Kings of england in Ecclesiastical affairs, but what was warranted unto them by
that place of Augustine. The like affimed by him that calls himself
Franciscus de S. Clara, though a Jesuit too (that you mjay see how much more
candid and ingenuous the Jesuits are in this point than the Presbyterians) in
his Examen of the Articles of the Church of England. But hereof you may give me
opportunity to speak more hereafter, when you propose the Doubts which you say
you have, relating to the King, the Pope, and the Churches Protestant, and
therefore I shall say no more of it at the present time.

SECT. II. The manner of the Reformation of the Church of England declared and
justified.
HItherto I had gone in order to your satisfaction, and communicated my
conceptions in writing to you, when I received your Letter of the 4th. of
January, in which you signified the high contentment I had given you, in
condescending to your weakness, (as you pleased to call it) and freeing you
from those doubts which lay heaviest on you. And therewithal you did request me
to give you leave to propound those other scruples which were yet behind,
relating to the King, the Pope and the Protestant-Churches, either too little
or too much looked after in the Reformation. And first you say it is
cvomplained of by some Zelots of the Church of rome, that the Pope was very
hardly and unjustly dealt with, in being deprived of the Supremacy so long
enjoyed and exercised by his Predecessors, and that it was an Innovation no
less strange than dangerous to settle it upon the King. 2. That the Church of
England ought not to have proceeded to a Reformation without the Pope,
considered either as the Patriarch of the Weftern world, or the Apostle in
particular of the English Nation. 3. That if a Reformation had been found so
necessary, it ought to have been done by a General Council, at least with the
consent and cooperation of the Sister-Churches, especially of those who were
engaged at the same time in the same designs. 4. That in the carrying on of the
Reformation, the Church proceeded very unadvisedly, in letting the people have
the Scriptures and the public Liturgy in the vulgar tongue, the dangerous
consequents whereof are now grown too visible. 5. That the proceedings in the
point of the Common Prayer Book were merely Regal, the body of the Clergy not
consulted with, or consenting to it; and consequently not so Regular as we fain
would have it. And 6. That in the power of making Canons, and determining
matters of the Faith, the Clergy have so fettered and entangled themselves by
the Act of Submission, that they can neither meet, deliberate, conclude nor
execute, but as they are enabled by the Kings Authority, which is a Vassalage
inconsistent with their native Liberties, and not agreeable to the usage of the
Primitive times. These are the points in which you now desire to have
satisfaction, and you shall have it in the best way I am able to do it, that so
you may be freed hereafter from such troubles and Disputants, as I perceive
have labored to perplex your thoughts, and make you less affectionate than
formerly to the Church your Mother.

1. That the Church of England did not Innovate in the Ejection of the Pope,
and settling the Supremacy in the Royal Crown.
And in this point you are to know that it has been, and still is the general
and constant judgment of the greatest Lawyers of this Kingdom, that the vesting
of the Supremacy in the Crown Imperial of this Realm, was not Introductory of
any new Right or Power which was not in the Crown before, but Declaratory of an
old, which had been anciently and originally inherent in it, though of late
Times usurped by the Popes of Rome, and in Abeyance at that time, as our
Lawyers phrase it. And they have so resolved it upon very good reasons; the
principal managery of affairs which concern Religion, being a flower
inseparably annexed to the Regal Diadem, not proper and peculiar only to the
Kings of England, but to all Kings and Princes in the Church of God, and by
them exercised and enjoyed accordingly in their times and places. For who, I
pray you, were the men in the Jewish Church who destroyed the Idols of that
people, cut down the Groves, demolished the high places, and brake in pieces
the Brazen Serpent, when abused to Idolatry? Were they not the godly Kings and
Princes only which swayed the Scepter of that Kingdom? And though it is possible
enough that they might do it by the counsel and advice of the Highpriests of
that Nation, or of some of the more godly Priests and Levites (who had a zeal
unto the Law of the most high God) yet we find nothing of it in the holy
Scripture; the merit of these Reformations which were made occasionally in that
faulty Church, being ascribed unto their Kings, and none but them. Had they
done any thing in this which belonged not to their place and calling, or by so
doing had entrenched on the Office of the Priests and Levits, that God who
punished Vzzab for attempting to support the Ark when he saw it tottering, and
smote Osias with a Leprosy, for burning Incense in the Temple (things which
the Priests and Levites only were to meddle in) would not have suffered those
good Kings to have gone unpunished, or at least uncensured, how good soever
their intentions and pretenses were. Nay on the contrary, when any thing was
amiss in the Church of Jewry, the Kings, and not the Priests were admonished of
it, and reproved for it by the Prophets; which shows that they were trusted
with the Reformation, and none else but they. Is it not also said of david,
that he distributed the Priests and Levites into several Classes, allotted to
them the particular times of their Ministration, and designed them unto several
Offices in the public Service? Josephus adding to these passages of the Holy
Writ, That he composed Hymns and Songs to the Lord his God, and made them to be
sung in the Congregation, as an especial part of the public Liturgy, Of which,
although it may be said that he composed those Songs and Hymns by virtue of his
Prophetical Spirit, yet he imposed them on the Church, appointed Singing-men to
sing them, and prescribed Vestments also to these Singing-men, by no other
power than the regal only: None of the Priests consulted in it, for ought yet
appears.

The like Authority was exercised and enjoyed by the Christian Emperors, not
only in their calling Councils, and many times assisting at them, or presiding
in them by themselves, or their Deputies, or Commissioners; but also in
confirming the Acts thereof. He that consults the Code and Novelles in the
Civil Laws, will find the best Princes to have been most active in things which
did concern Religion, in regulating matters of the Church, and setting out
their Imperial Edicts for suppressing of Heretics. Quid Imperatori cum
Ecclesia? What has the Emperor to do in matters which concern the Church? is
one of the chief Brand-marks which Optatus sets upon the Donatists. And though
some Christians of the East have in the way of scorn had the name of Melchites
(men of the Kings Religion, as the word does intimate) because they adhered
unto those Doctrines which the Emperors, agreeable to former Councils, had
confirmed and ratified; yet the best was, that none but Sectaries and Heretics
put that name upon them. Neither the men, nor the Religion was a jot the worse.
Nor did they only deal in matters of Exterior Order, but even in Doctrinals,
matters intrinsecal to the Faith; for which their Enoticon set out by the
Emperor Zeno for settling differences in Religion, may be proof sufficient.

The like Authority was exercised and enjoyed by Charles the Great, when he
attained the Western Empire, as the Capitulars published in his Name, and in
the names of his Successors, do most clearly evidence; and not much less
enjoyed and practiced by the Kings of England in the elder times, though more
obnoxious to the power of the Pope of Rome, by reason of his Apostleship (if I
may so call it:) the Christian Faith being first preached unto the English
Saxons, by such as he employed in that Holy work. The instances whereof
dispersed in several places of our English Histories, and other Monuments and
Records which concern this Church, are handsomely summed up together by Sir
Edward Cook, in the fifth part of his Reports, if I well remember; but I am
sure in Cawdries Case, entitled De Jure Regis Ecclesiastico. And though
Parsons (the Jesuit) in his Answer unto that Report, has took much pains to
vindicate the Popes Supremacy in this Kingdom, from the first planting of the
Gospel among the Saxons; yet all he has effected by it, proves no more than
this, That the Popes, by permission of some weak Princes, did exercise a kind
of concurrent jurisdiction here with the Kings themselves, but came not to the
full and entire Supremacy, till they had brought all other Kings and Princes of
the Western Empire; nay, even the Emperors themselves under their command. So
that when the Supremacy was recognized by the Clergy in their Convocation to K.
H. 8. it was only the restoring of him to his proper and original power,
invaded by the Popes of these latter Ages; though possibly the Title of Supreme
Head seemed to have somewhat in it of an Innovation. At which Title, when the
Papists generally, and Calvin in his Comment on the Prophet Amos, did seem to
be much scandalized, it was with much wisdom changed by Q. Elizabeth, into that
of Supreme Governor, which is still in use. And when that also would not down
with some queasie stomachs, the Queen her self by her Injunctions, published in
the first year of her Reign, and the Clergy in their book of Articles agreed
upon in Convocation about five years after, did declare and signify, That
there was no Authority in sacred matters contained under that Title, but that
only Prerogative which had been given always to all godly Princes in holy
Scriptures by God himself; that is, That they should rule all Estates and
degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and to restrain, with the Civil Sword, the stubborn and evil doers;
as also to exclude thereby the Bishop of Rome from having any jurisdiction in
the Realm of England, Artic. 37. Lay this unto the rest before, and tell me (if
you can) what has been acted by the Kings of England in the Reformation of
Religion, but what is warranted unto them by the practice and example of the
most godly Kings of Jewry, seconded by the most godly Emperors in the
Christian Church, and by the usage also of their own Predecessors in this
Kingdom, till Papal Usurpation carried all before it. And being that all the
Popes pretended to in this Realm was but Usurpation, it was no Wrong to take
that from him which he had no Right to, and to restore it at the last to the
proper Owner. Neither prescription on the one side, nor discontinuance on the
other, change the case at all; that noted Maxim of our Lawyers, that no
prescription binds the King (or Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, as their own words
are) being as good against the Pope, as against the Subject.

This leads me to the second part of this Dispute, the dispossessing of the
Pope of that Supreme Power, so long enjoyed and exercised in this Realm by his
Predecessors. To which we say, that though the pretensions of the Pope were
ancient, yet they were not primitive; and therefore we may answer in our
Saviors words, Ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so from the beginning. For
it is evident enough in the course of story, that the Pope neither claimed nor
exercised any such Supremacy within this Kingdom in the first Ages of this
Church, nor in many after; till by gaining from the King the Investiture of
Bishops under Henry the First, the exemption of the Clergy from the Courts of
Justice under Henry the Second, and the submission of King John to the Sea of
Rome, they found themselves of strength sufficient to make good their Plea. And
though by the like artifices, seconded by some Texts of Scripture, which the
ignorance of those times encouraged them to abuse as they pleased, they had
attained the like Supremacy in France, Spain, and Germany, and all the Churches
of the West: Yet his Encroachments were opposed, and his Authority disputed
upon all occasions, especially as the light of Letters did begin to shine.
Insomuch as it was not only determined essentially in the Council of Constance
(one of the Imperial Cities of High germany) that the Council was above the
Pope; and his Authority much curbed by the Pragmatick Sanction, which thence
took beginning: But Gerson the learned Chancellor of Paris, wrote a full
Discourse, entitled, De auferibilitate Papae, touching the total abrogating of
the Papal Office; which certainly he had never done in case the Papal Office
had been found essential and of intrinsecal concernment to the Church of
Christ. According to the Position of that learned man, The greatest Princes in
these times did look upon the Pope and the Papal power as an Excrescence at the
best in the body mystical, subject and fit to be pared off as occasion served;
though on self ends, Reasons of State, and to serve their several turns by him
as their needs required, they did and do permit him to continue in his former
greatness. For Lewis the 11th King of France, in a Council of his own Bishops,
held at Lions, cited Pope Julius the 2d. to appear before him; and Laustrech
Governor of Millaine under Francis the 1st, conceived the Popes Authority to
be so unnecessary (yea, even in Italy it self) that taking a displeasure
against Leo the 10th. he outed him of all his jurisdiction within that Dukedom.
anno 1528. and so disposed of all Ecclesiastical affairs; ut praefecto sacris
Bigorrano Episcopo omnia sine Romani Pontificis authoritate administrarentur,
as Thuanus has it, that the Church there was supreamly governed by the Bishop
of Bigor (a Bishop of the Church of France) without the intermedling of the
Pope at all. The like we find to have been done about six years after, by
Charles the Fifth, Emperor and King of Spain, who being no less displeased with
Pope Clement the 7th. Abolished the Papal power and jurisdiction out of all the
Churches of his Kingdoms in Spain. Which though it held but for a while (till
the breach was closed) yet left he an example by it (as my Author notes)
Ecclesiasticam disciplinam citra Romani nominis autoritatem posse conservari,
that there was no necessity of a Pope at all. And when K. Henry the 8th.
following these examples, had banished the Popes Authority out of his
Dominions, Religion still remaining here as before it did (the Popes Supremacy
not being at the time an Article of the Churistian Faith, as it has since been
made by Pope Pius the 4th.) that Act of his was much commended by most knowing
men, in that without more alteration in the face of the Church, Romanae sedis
exuisset obsequium (says the Author of the Tridentine History) he had freed
himself and all his Subjects from so great a Vassalage. Now as K. Henry the
8th. was not the first Christian Prince, who did de facto abrogate the Popes
Authority; so was he not the last that thought it might be abrogated if
occasion were. For to say nothing of King Edward the 6th. and Queen Elizabeth,
two of his Successors, who followed his example in it; We find it to have been
resolved on by K. Henry the 4th. of France, who questionless had made the
Archbishop of Bourges, the Patriarch of the Gallicane Church, and totally
withdrawn it from acknowledging of the Authority of the Sea of Rome, had not
Pope Clement the 8th. (much against his will) by the continual solicitations of
Cardinal D' Ossat, admitted him to a formal Reconciliation, on his last falling
off to Popery. How near the Signeury of Venice was to have done the like, anno
1608. the History of the Interdict, or of the Quarrels betwixt that State and
Pope Paul the 5th. does most plainly show. This makes it evident, that in the
judgment and esteem of most Christian Princes (in other things of the Religion
of the Church of Rome) the Popes Supremacy was looked upon as an incroachment;
and therefore might be abrogated upon better reasons, than it had formerly been
admitted in their several Kingdoms. By consequence the doing of it here in
England, is neither so injurious or unjust as your Zelots make it.

2. That the Church of England might proceed to a Reformation without the
Approbation of the Pope or Church of Rome.
But here you say it will be replied, that though the Pope be not considered as
the Supreme Head or Universal Pastor of the Church; with reference whereunto
his supereminent jurisdiction was disputed in the former times; yet it cannot
be denied with reason, but that he is the Patriarch of these Western Churches,
and the Apostle in particular of the English Nation. In these respects no
Reformation of the Church to be made without him; especially considering that
the Church of England at that time was a Member of the Church of Rome, and
therefore to act nothing in that kind but by consent of the whole; according to
that known Maxim of the Schools, Turpis est pars ea quae totisuo non cohaereat.
This though it be a Triple Cord, will be easily broken. For first, the Pope is
not the Patriarch of the West. One of the Patriarchs of the West we shall
easily grant him; but that he is the Patriarch we will by no means yield. To
tell you why we dare not yield it, I must put you in mind of these particulars.
1. That all Bishops in respect of their Office or Episcopality are of equal
power, whether they be of Rome or Rhegium, of Constantinople or Engubium, of
Alexandria or of Tanais, as S. Hierom has it, Potentia divitiarum and
paupertatis humilitas vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit. A
plentiful Revenue, and a sorry Competency makes not (says he) one bishop
higher than another in regard of his Office, though possibly of more esteem and
reputation in the eyes of men. 2. That in respect to Polity and external order,
the Bishops anciently were disposed of into Sub et supra, according to the
platform of the Roman Empire, agreeable to the good old Rule which we find
mentioned, though not made in the general Council of Chalcedon, that is to say,
(...), etc. The government of the Church is to be sitted and accommodated to
the Civil State. 3. That the Roman Empire was divided anciently into 14
Juridical Circuits, which they called Diocesses, reckoning the Praefecture of
rome for one of the number; six the of which, that is to say the Diocesses of
Italy, Africa, Spain, Britain, Gaul, and Illyricum occidentale, besides the
Praefecture of the City, were under the command of the Western Emperors, after
the Empire was divided into East and West. 4. That in the Praefecture of the
City of Rome were contained no more than the Provinces of Latium, Tuscia,
Picenum, Suburbicarium, Samnum, Apulia, and Calabria, Brutium and Lucania, in
the main land of Italy, together with the Islands of Sicilie, Corsica, and
Sardinia. 5. That every Province having several Cities, there was (agreeable to
this model) a Bishop placed in every City a Metropolitan in the chief City of
each Province, who had a superintendence over all the Bishops; and in each
Diocese a Primate ruling in chief over the Metropolitans of the several
Provinces. And 6. Though at first only the three Primates or Archbishops of
Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, commonly and in vulgar speech had the name of
Patriarchs, by reason of the wealth and greatness of those Cities (the greatest
of the Roman Empire, and the chief of Europe, Asia, and Africa) to which the
Bishops of Jerusalem and Constantinople were after added; yet were they all of
equal power among themselves, and shined with as full a splendour in their
proper Orbs as any of the Popes then did in the Sphere of Rome, receiving all
their light from the Sun of Righteousness, not borrowing it from one another;
for which the so much celebrated Canon of the Nicene Council may be proof
sufficient. If not, the Edicts of Justinian shall come in to help, by which it
was decreed that all Appeals in point of grievance should lie from the Bishop
to the Metropolitan, and from the Metropolitans unto the Primates (the
Patriarchs as he calls them) of the several Diocesses. By which account it does
appear that the Patriarchate of Rome was anciently confined within the
Praefecture of that City; in which respect as the Provinces subject to the
Pope, were by Ruffinus called Regiones Suburbicariae, or the City Provinces; so
was the Pope himself called Vrbicus, or the City-Bishop, by Optatus Afer.

To prove this point more plainly by particular instances, I shall take leave
to travel over the Western Diocesses, to see what marks of Independence we can
find among them; such as dissenting in opinion from the Church of Rome, or
adhering unto different ceremonies and forms of worship, or otherwise standing
in defense of their own Authority. And first the Diocese of Italy, though under
the Popes nose (as we use to say) was under the command of the Archbishop of
Milain, as the Primate of it; which City is therefore called by Athanafius
(...) the Metropolis or chief City of Italy. The Saturdays fast observed at
Rome and not at Milain, ( Quando Romae sum jejuno Sabbato, quum hic sum non
jejuno Sabbato, as S. Ambrose has it) shows clearly that the one had no
dependence upon the other. And yet the difference of Divine Offices or Forms of
worship is a more pregnant proof than this: the Churches of Milain officiating
for many Ages by a Liturgy which S. Ambrose had a special hand in; they of the
Patriarchate of Rome following the old Roman Missals, not fully finished and
completed till the time of Pope Gregory. Whence the distinction of Ecclesiae
Ambrosianae and Ecclesiae Gregorianae, extant in Bonaventure and others of the
Writers of the latter times. Cross we the Seas unto the Diocese of Africa,
governed in chief by the Primate or Archbishop of Carthage: And there we find
S. Cyprian determining against Pope Stephen in the then controverted case of
Rebaptization; and calling him (in his Epistle to Pompeius) an obstinate and
presumptuous man, and a fautor of Heretics; no very great tokens of
subjection, if you mark it well. The error of his judgment in the point
debated I regard not here; but I am sure that in defense of his authority and
jurisdiction, he was right enough, and therein strongly seconded by the African
Church, opposing the encroachments of Zosimus, Boniface, and Celestine,
succeeding one another in the Roman Patriarchate; prohibiting all Appeals to
Rome in the Councils of Milevis and Carthage; and finally excommunicating
Lupicinus for appealing to Pope Leo the first, contrary to the Rites and
Liberties of the African Church. Next for the Diocese of Spain, I look upon the
Musarabick Liturgy, composed by Isidore, Archbishop of Sevil, and universally
received in all the Churches of that Continent for as unquestionable a
character of self-subsistency as the Ambrosian Office was in the Church of
Milain; the Roman or Gregorian Missal not being used in all this Country till
the year 1083. At which time one Bernard a Frenchman and a great stickler in
behalf of the Roman Ceremonies, being made Archbishop of Toledo, by practicing
with Alfonso the then King of Castile, first introduced the Roman Missal into
some of the Churches of that City, and after by degrees into all the rest of
those Kingdoms: soon after the Churches of France, the greatest and most noble
part of the Gallick Diocese, they were originally under the Authority of the
Bishop of Lions, as their proper Primate, not owing any suit or service to the
Court of Rome; but standing on their own Basis, and acting all things of
themselves as the others did. The freedom wherewith Irenaeus the renowned
Bishop of that City reproved the rashness of Pope Victor (in the Case of
Easter) not well becoming an inferior Bishop to the Supreme Pastor; shows
plainly that they stood on even ground, and had no advantage of each other in
respect of sub and supra, as Logicians say; notwithstanding that more powerful
Principality ( potentior principalitas, as the Latin has it) which Irenaeus
did allow him over those at home. But a more evident proofof this there can
hardly be, than those large liberties and freedoms which the Church Gallican
does at this time enjoy; the remainders past all doubt of those ancient Rights
which under their own Patriarch they were first possessed of; not suffering the
Decrees of the Council of Trent (that great supporter of the Popedom) to take
place amongst them, but as insensibly, and by the practices of some Bishops
they were introduced; curbing the Popes exorbitant power by the pragmatick
Sanction, and by the frequent Judgments and Arrests of Parliament; insomuch as
a Book of Cardinal Bellarmines tending to the advancement of the Papal
Monarchy, and another Writ by Beanus the Jesuit, entitled Controversia
Anglicana, in maintenance of the Popes Supremacy, were suppressed and censured,
Anno 1612. Another Writ by Gasper Scioppius to the same effect (but with far
less modesty) being at the same time burnt by the hands of the Hangman.
Finally, for the Churches of the Diocese of Britain (those of Illyricum lying
too far off to be brought in here) they had their own Primate, also the
Archbishop of York, and under him two Metropolitans, the Bishops of London and
Caer-leon. And for a character of their Freedom or self-subsistence, they had
four different customs from the Church of Rome, as in the Tonsure, and the
keeping of the Feast of Easter, wherein they followed the Tradition of the
Eastern Churches: So firm withal in their obedience to their own Primate, the
Arch Bishop of Car-leon on Vsh (the only Archbishop of three, which before
they had) that they would by no means yield subjection unto Augustine the Monk,
the first Archbishop of the English, though he came Armed amongst them with
the Popes Authority. Nor would they afterward submit unto his Successors,
though backed by the Authority of the Kings of England, acknowledging no other
Primate but the Bishop of St. David's (to which the Metropolitan See was then
translated) until the time of Henry II. when the greatest part of South- Wales
and the City of S. David's it self was in possession of the English. These were
the Patriarchs or Primates of the Western Churches, and by these Primates the
Church was either governed singly (but withal Supreamly) in their several
Diocesses, (taking the word Diocese in the former notion) or in conjunction
each with other, by their Letters of advice and intercourse, which they called
Literas Formatas and Communicatorias. You see by this, that though the Pope was
one of the Western Patriarchs, yet was he not originally and by primitive
Institution, either the Patriarch of the West (that is to say, not the only
one) nor could pretend unto their Rights, as any of their Sees were ruined by
the barbarous Nations; and consequently his consent not necessary to a
Reformation beyond the bounds of his own Patriarchate, under that pretense.

Let us next see what power he can lay claim unto, as the Apostle in particular
of the English Nation. Which memorable title I shall never grudge him. I know
well not only that the Wife of Ethelbert King of Kent, a Christian and a
Daughter of France had both her Chapel and her Chappellance in the Palace
Royal, before the first preaching of Austin the Monk, but that the Britains
living intermixed with the Saxons for so long a time, may be supposed in
probability and reason to have gained some of them to the Faith. But let the
Pope enjoy this honor, let Gregory the Great be the Apostle of the English
Saxons, by whom that Augustine was sent hither; yet this entituleth his
Successors to no higher Prerogatives than the Lords own Apostles did think fit
to claim in Countries which they had converted. For neither were the English
Saxons Baptized in the name of the Pope (they had been then Gregoriani and not
Christiani;) or looked upon him as the Lord of this part of Gods Heritage, but
as an helper to their joy. S. Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles did disclaim the
one; S. Peter the Apostle of the Jews did dissuade the other. The Anglican
Church was absolute and Independent from the first beginning, not tied so much
as to the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome; it being left by Gregory to the
discretion of Augustine, out of the Rites and Rubricks of such Churches as he
met with in his journey hither (these of Italy and France he means) to
constitute a form of worship for the Church of England. And for a further proof
hereof, he that consults the Saxon Councils collected by that Learned and
Industrious Gentleman Sir H. Spelman, will find how little there was in them of
a Papal influence, from the first planting of the Gospel to the Norman
Conquest. If we look lower, we shall find that the Popes Legate a Latere
whenever sent, durst not set foot on English ground, till he was licensed and
indemnified by the Kings Authority; but all Appeals in case of grievance were
to be made (by a Decree of Henry II. from the Archdeacon to the Bishop, from
the Bishop to the Metropolitan, Et si Archiepiscopus defecerit in justitia
exhibenda, ad Dominum Regem deveniendum est postremo, and last of all from the
Metropolitan to the King himself; no Appeal hence unto the Pope as in other
places, so that the Clergy of this Land had a Self-authority of treating and
concluding in any business which concerned their own peace and happiness,
without resorting to the Pope for a confirmation. Out of which Canons and
Determinations made amongst our selves, Lindwood composed his Provincial
(though framed according to the method of the Roman Decretal) to be the
standing body of our Canon Law: that on the other side neither the Canons of
that Church, or Decretals of the Popes were concluding here, but either by a
voluntary submission of some fawning and ambitious Prelates, or as they were
received Synodically by the English Clergy; of which the constitutions made by
Otho and Othobon Legates a latere from the Pope may be proof sufficient; and
finally that Anselm the Archbishop of Canterbury, was welcomed by Pope Urban
II. to the Council of Bari in Apulia, tanquam alterius orbis Papa, as in
William of Malmesbury; tanquam Patriarcham and Apostolicum, as John Capgrave
hat it, as the Pope, Patriarch, and Apostolic Pastor of another World (
Divisos orb Britannos, as you know who said.) Which titles questionless the
Pope would never have conferred upon him, had he not been as absolute and
supreme in his own jurisdiction (succeeding in the Patriarchal Rights of the
British Diocese) as the Pope was within the Churches subject unto his
Authority. And this perhaps might be the reason why Innocent II. bestowed on
Theobald (the third from Anselm) and on his Successors in that See, the Title
of Legati nati; that they might seem to act rather in the time to come as
Servants and Ministers to the Pope, than as the Primates and chief Pastors of
the Church of England. And by all this it may appear that the Popes Apostleship
was never looked on here as a matter of so great concernment, that the Church
might not lawfully proceed to a Reformation without his allowance and consent.
Were that plea good, the Germans might not lawfully have reformed themselves,
without the allowance of the English; it being evident in story that not only
Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, called generally the Apostle of Germany, was an
English man; but that Willibald the first Bishop of Eystel, Willibad the first
Bishop of Bremen, Willibrod the first Bishop of Vtretcht, Swibert the first
Bishop of Virdem, and the first converters of those parts were of England also,
Men instigated to this great work (all except the first) not so much by the
Popes zeal as their own great piety.

By this that has been said, it is clear enough that the Church of England at
the time of the Reformation, was not indeed a Member of the Church of Rome,
under the Pope as the chief Pastor and Supreme Head of the Church of Christ;
but a Fellow-member with it of that Body Mystical, whereof Christ only is the
Head, part of that Flock whereof he only is the Shepherd, a sister Church to
that of Rome, though with relation to the time of her last conversion, but a
younger Sister. And if a Fellow-member and a Sister-Church, she might make use
of that Authority which naturally and originally was vested in her, to reform
her self, without the leave of the particular Church of Rome, or any other
whatsoever of the Sister-Churches. The Church is likened to a City in the Book
of God, a City at Unity in it self, as the Psalmist calls it; and as a City it
consists of many houses, and in each house a several and particular Family.
Suppose this City visited with some general sickness, may not each Family take
care to preserve it self, advise with the Physician, and apply the Remedy,
without consulting with the rest? Or if consulting with the rest, must they
needs ask leave also of the Mayor or principal Magistrate, take counsel with no
other Doctors, and follow no other course of Physic than such as he commends
unto them, or imposes on them? Or must the lesser languish irremediably under
the calamity, because the greater and more potent Families do not like the
cure? Assuredly it was not so in the Primitive times, when it was held a
commendable and lawful thing for National and particular Churches to reform
such errors and corruptions as they found amongst them; nor in the Church of
Judah neither, when the Idolatries of their Neighbors had got ground upon
them. Though Israel transgress, let not Judah sin, says the Prophet Hosea,
chap. 4. Yet Israel was the greater and more numerous people. Ten Tribes to
two, two of the ten the Eldest Sons of their Father Jacob, all of them older
than Benjamin the last begotten, being the second of the two; which
notwithstanding the Kings of Judah might and did proceed to a Reformation,
though those of Israel did refuse to cooperate with them. The like was also
done de facto and dejure too in the best and happiest times of Christianity;
there being many errors and unsound opinions condemned in the Councils of
Gangra, Aquilia, Carthage, Milevis; and not a few corruptions in the practical
part of Religion reformed in the Synods of Eliberis, Laodicea, Arles, and
others in the fourth Century of the Church; without advising or consulting with
the Roman Oracle, or running to the Church of Rome for a confirmation of their
Acts and doing; though at that time invested with a greater and more powerful
principality than the others were. No such regard had in those times to the
Church of Rome, though the elder Sister, but that another National Church might
reform without her; nor any such consideration had of the younger Sisters, that
one should tarry for another till they all agreed, though possibly they might
all be sensible of the inconvenience, and all alike desirous of a speedy
Remedy. But of this more anon, in Answer to the next Objections.

Proceed we now a little further, and let us grant for once that the Church of
England was a Member at that time of the Church of Rome, acknowledging the Pope
for the Head thereof: Yet this could be no hindrance to a Reformation, when the
pretended Head would not yield unto it, or that the Members could not meet to
consult about it. The whole Body of the Church was in ill condition, every part
unsound, but the disease lay chiefly in the Head it self, grown monstrously too
great for the rest of the Members. And should the whole Body pine and languish
without hope of ease, because the Head (I mean still the pretended Head) would
not be purged of some superfluous and noxious humors occasioning giddiness in
the brain, dimness in the eye, deafness in the ear, and in a word, a general
and sad distemper unto all the Members? The Pope was grown to an exorbitant
height both of pride and power; the Court of Rome wallowing (as in a course of
prosperous fortunes) in all voluptuousness and sensuality. Nothing so feared
amongst them as a Reformation, whereby they knew that an abatement must be made
of their pomp and pleasure. Of these corruptions and abuses, as of many others,
complaint had formerly been made, by Armachanus, Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln,
S. Bernard, Nic. de Clemangis, and other Conscientious men in their several
Countries; not a few errors noted and informed against by Wickliffe, John of
Hus, etc. But they complained to a deaf Adder, who was resolved not to hear the
voice of those Charmers, charmed they never so wisely. The Church meanwhile
was in a very ill condition, when he that should prescribe the cure, was become
the sickness. Considering therefore that a Reformation could not be obtained by
the Popes consent, there was no remedy but that it must be made without it. The
Molten Calf modelled by the Egyptian Apis, and the Altar patterned from
Damasus, had made the Israelites (in all probability) as great Idolaters as
their Neighbors, if the High Briests that set them up might have had their
wills. Nor had it been much better with the Church of Christ, if Arianism could
not have been suppressed in particular Churches, because Liberius Pope of Rome,
(supposing him to be the Head of the Church in general) had subscribed unto it,
and that no error and corruption could have been reformed, which any of the
Popes (whose Graves I am very loath to open) had been guilty of, but by their
permission. The Church now were in worse estate under Christian Princes, than
when it suffered under the power and tyranny of the Heathen Emperors, if it
were not lawful for particular Churches to provide for their own safety and
salvation, without resorting to the Pope; who cannot every day be spoke with,
and may (when spoken with) be pressed with so many inconveniences nearer hand,
as not to be at leisure to attend such businesses as lie further off. And
therefore it was well said by Danet the French Ambassador, when he communicated
to the Pope his Masters purpose of Reforming the Gallican Church by a National
Council: If (said he) Paris were on Fire, would you not count the Citizens
either Fools or Madmen, if they should send so far as Tiber for some Water to
quench it, the River of Seine running through the City, and the Marne so near
it?

3. That the Church of England might lawfully proceed to a Reformation without
the help of a General Council, or calling in the aid of the Protestant Churches.
But here you say it is objected, that if a Reformation were so necessary as we
seem to make it, and that the Pope was never like to yield unto it, as the case
then stood; it ought to have been done by a General Council, according to the
usage of the Primitive times. I know indeed that General Councils (such as are
commonly so called) are of excellent use, and that the name thereof is sacred
and of high esteem. But yet I prize them not so highly as Pope Gregory did, who
ranked the four first General Councils with the four Evangelists: Nor am I of
opinion that they are so necessary to a Reformation either in point of Faith or
corruption of manners, but that the business of the Church may be done without
them. Nay, might I be so bold as to lay my naked thoughts before you (as I
think I may) you would there find it to be some part of my Belief that there
never was, and never can be such a thing as a General Council truly and
properly so called; that is to say, such a General Council, to which all the
Bishops of the Church (admitting none but such to the power of voting) have
been or can be called together by themselves or their Proxies. These which are
commonly so called, as those of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, were
only of the Prelates of the Roman Empire. Christian Churches existing at that
time in Ethiopia and the Kingdom of Persia (which made up no small part of the
Church of Christ) were neither present at them, nor invited to them. And yet
not all the Prelates neither of the Roman Empire, nor some from every Province
of it did attend that service: those Councils only being the Assemblies of some
Eastern Bishops, such as could most conveniently be drawn together; few of the
Western Churches (none at all in some) having or list or leisure for so long a
journey: For in the so much celebrated Council of Nice, there were but nine
Bishops sent from France, but two from Africa, one alone from Spain, none from
the Diocese of Britain; and out of Italy, which lay nearest to it, none but two
Priests appeared at all, and those as Legates from the Pope, not Authorized to
represent the Italian Churches; so that of 318. Bishops which were there
Assembled, there were but twelve in all, (besides the Legates of the Pope) for
the Western Churches; too great a disproportion to entitle it to the name of
General. And yet this was more General than the rest that followed; there being
no Bishops of the West at all in the second and third, but the Popes
themselves; and in the fourth none but the Legates of the Pope to supply his
place. So that these Councils were called General, not that they were so in
themselves, but that there was a greater concourse to them from the
neighboring Provinces, than was or had been to some others on the like
occasions. Which if it be enough to constitute a General Council, I see no
reason but the Council of Antioch might be called so too, summoned in the case
of Paulus Samosetanus, the Patriarch at that time of that famous City. For the
condemning of whose Heresy there convened not the Bishops of that Province
only, but the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine,
Bozra in Arabia, Tarsus in Cilicia, Caesarea in Cappadocia, of Iconium in
Lycaonia, of Neo-Caesarea in Pontus, besides many others from all places, of
the same rank and quality, but of lesser same: Not to say any thing of
Dionysius, Patriarch of Alexandria, invited but not present in regard of
sickness, which defect he recompensed by his Letters of advice and intercourse;
or of Dionysius Pope of Rome, so hampered by the Puritan or Novatian faction,
that he could not come. So that if the present of two of the four Patriarchs,
and the inviting of the others, with the Bishops of so many distant Nations as
were there assembled, suffice to make a General Council; the Council of Antioch
might as well have the name of General, as almost any of the rest which are so
entitled.

But laying by these thoughts as too strong of the Paradox, and looking on a
General Council in the common notion, for an Assembly of the Prelates of the
East and West, to which the four Patriarchs are invited, and from which no
Bishop is excluded that comes commissionated and instructed to attend the
service: I cannot think them of such consequence to the Church of God, but that
it may proceed without them to a Reformation. For certainly that saying of S.
Augustine in his 4th. Book against the two Epistles of the Pelagians, cap. 12.
is exceeding true. Paucas fuisse haereses ad quas superandas necessarium fuerit
Concilium plenarium occidentis and orientis, that very few Heresies have been
crushed in such General Councils. And so far we may say with the Learned
Cardinal, that for seven Heresies suppressed in seven General Councils (though
by his leave the seventh did not so much suppress as advance an Heresy) an
hundred have been quashed in National and Provincial Synods; whether confirmed
or not confirmed by the Popes Authority, we regard not here. Some instances
hereof in the Synods of Aquileia, Carthage, Gaugra, Milevis, we have seen
before, and might add many others now, did we think it necessary. The Church
had been in ill condition, if it had been otherwise, especially under the power
of Heathen Emperors, when such a confluence of the Prelates from all parts of
the world would have been construed a Conspiracy against the State, and drawn
destruction on the Church and the Persons both. Or granting that they might
assemble without any such danger, yet being great bodies, moving slowly, and
not without long time, and many difficulties and disputes, to be rightly
constituted: The Church would suffer more under such delay by the spreading of
Heresy, than receive benefit by their care to suppress the same. Had the same
course been taken at Alexandria for suppressing Arius, as was before at Antioch
for condemning Paulus, we never had heard news of the Council of Nice; the
calling and assembling whereof took up so long time, that Arianism was diffused
over all the world before the Fathers met together; and could not be suppressed
(though it were condemned) in many Ages following after. The plague of Heresy,
and leprosy of sin would quickly overrun the whole face of the Church, if
capable of no other cure than a General Council. The case of Arius, and the
universal spreading of his Heresy compared with the quick rooting out of so
many others, makes this clear enough.

To go a little further yet, we will suppose a General Council to be the best
and safest Physic that the Church can take, on all occasions of Epidemical
distemper; but then we must suppose it at such times and in such cases only,
when it may conveniently be had. For where it is not to be had, or not had
conveniently, it will either prove to be no Physic, or not worth the taking.
But so it was, that at the time of the Reformation, a General Council could not
conveniently be Assembled, and more than so, it was impossible that any such
Council should Assemble; I mean a General Council rightly called and
constituted, according to the Rules laid down by our Controversors. For first
they say it must be called by such as have power to do it. 2. That it must be
intimated to all Christian Churches, that so no Church nor people may plead
ignorance of it. 3. The Pope and the four chief Patriarchs must be present at
it, either in person or by Proxy. And lastly, that no Bishop is to be
excluded, if he be known to be a Bishop and not excommunicated. According to
which Rules, it was impossible I say, that any General Council should be
assembled at the time of the Reformation of the Church of England. It was not
then as when the greatest part of the Christian world was under the command of
the Roman Emperors; whose Edict for a General Council might speedily be posted
over all the Provinces. The Messengers who should now be sent on such an errand
unto the Countries of the Turk, the Persian, the Tartarian, and the great Mogul
(in which are many Christian Churches, and more perhaps than in all the rest of
the world besides) would find but sorry entertainment. Nor was it then, as when
the four chief Patriarchs, together with their Metropolitans and Suffragan
Bishops, were under the protection of the Christian Emperors, and might without
danger to themselves, or unto their Churches, obey the intimation and attend
the service; those Patriarchs with their Metropolitans and Suffragans, both
then and now languishing under the tyranny and power of the Turk, to whom so
general a confluence of Christian Bishops must needs give matter of suspicion
of just fears and jealousies, and therefore not to be permitted (as far as he
can possibly hinder it) on good Reason of State. For who knows better than
themselves how long and dangerous a War was raised against their Predecessors
by the Western Christians for recovery of the Holy Land, on a resolution taken
up at the Council of Clermont; and that making War against the Turks is still
esteemed a cause sufficient for a General Council. And then besides it would be
known by whom this General Council was to be assembled: If by the Pope, as
generally the Papists say, he and his Court were looked on as the greatest
grievance of the Christian Church; and 'twas not probable that he would call a
Council against himself, unless he might have leave to pack it, to govern it by
his own Legates, fill it with Titular Bishops of his own creating, and send the
Holy Ghost to them in a Cloakbag, as he did to Trent. If jointly by all
Christian Princes (which is the common Tenet of the Protestant Schools) what
hopes could any man conceive (as the time then were) that they should lay aside
their particular interesses, to center all together upon one design? Or if they
had agreed about it, what power had they to call the Prelates of the East to
attend the business, or to protect them for so doing at their going home? So
that I look upon the hopes of a General Council, I mean a General Council
rightly called and constituted, as an empty Dream. The most that was to be
expected was but a meeting of some Bishops of the West of Europe, and those but
of one party only; such as were Excommunicated (and that might be as many as
the Pope should please) being to be excluded by the Cardinals Rule. Which how
it may be called an Ecumenical or General Council, unless it be a
Topical-Oecumenical, a Particular-general (as great an absurdity in Grammar, as
a Roman Catholic) I can hardly see.

Which being so, and so no question but it was, either the Church must continue
without Reformation, or else it must be lawful for National particular Churches
to reform themselves. In such a case the Church may be reformed per parts,
part after part, Province after Province, as is said by Gerson. But I do not
mean to trouble you with this Dispute. For that particular Churches may reform
themselves by National or Provincial Councils, when the Church general will not
do it, or that it cannot be effected by a General Council, has been so fully
proved by my Lord of Canterbury in his learned and elaborate discourse against
Fisher the Jesuit, that nothing can be added unto so great diligence. But if
it be objected, as you say it is, that National Councils have a power of
Promulgation only, not of Determination also: I answer first, that this runs
cross to all the current of Antiquity, in which not only National but
Provincial Councils did usually determine in the points of Faith, and these too
of the greatest moment, as did that of Antioch; which if it were somewhat more
than a National, was notwithstanding never reckoned for a General Council. I
answer secondly as before, that for one Heresy suppressed in a General
Council, there has been ten at least suppressed in National and Provincial
Synods; which could not be in case they had no power of Determination. And
thirdly, That the Articles or Confession of the Church of England are only
Declaratory of such Catholic Doctrines as were received of old in the Church
of Christ, not Introductory of new ones of their own devising; as might be
evidenced in particular, were this place fit for it. But what needs any proof
at all, when we have Confession? For the Archbishop of Spalato (a man as well
studied in the Fathers, as the best amongst them) ingenuously acknowledged at
the High Commission that the Articles of this Church were profitable, none of
them Heretical; and that he would defend the honor of the Church of England
against all the World. And this he said at the very time of his departure, when
his soul was gone before to Rome, and nothing but his Carcass left behind in
England. The like avowed by Davenport, or Franciscus a Sancta Clara (call him
which you will) who makes the Articles of this Church rightly understood
according to the literal meaning, and not perverted to the ends of particular
Factions, to be capable of a Catholic and Orthodox sense, which is as much as
could be looked for from the mouth of an Adversary. So much as cost one of them
his life (though perhaps it will be said that he died in prison) and the
burning of his body after his death; though he endeavored to save both by a
Retractation. So that in this case too we have omnia been, nothing amiss in the
proceedings of this Church, with reference to the Pope or a General Council.

But you will say, that though we could not stay the calling of a General
Council, which would have justified our proceedings in the eyes of our
Adversaries; it had been requisite even in the way of civil Prudence to have
taken the advice of the Sister-Churches, especially of those which were engaged
at the same time in the same designs, which would have added reputation to us
in the eyes of our Friends, As for the taking counsel of the Sister-Churches,
it has been touched upon already, and therefore we shall say no more as to
that particular; unless the Sister-Churches of these latter times had been like
the Believers in the infancy of the Christian Faith, when they were all of one
heart and one soul, as the Scripture has it, Act. 4. their counsels had been
dilatory, if not destructive. It Is true indeed, united Counsels are the
stronger and of greater weight, and not to be neglected where they may be had;
but where they are not to be had, we must act without them. And if we look into
the time of our Reformation, we shall find those that were engaged in the same
design, divided into obstinate parties; and holding the names of Luther and
Zuinglius in an higher estimate than either the truth of the Opinion in which
they differed, or the common happiness of the Church so disturbed between them.
The breach not lessened, but made wider by the rise of Calvin, succeeding not
long after in the fame of Zuinglius: Besides, that living under the command of
several Princes, and those Princes driving on to their several ends; it had
been very difficult, if not impossible to draw them unto such an Harmony of
affections, and consent in judgment, as so great a business did require. So
that the Church of England was necessitated in that conjuncture of affairs to
proceed as it did, and to act that single by it self, which could not be
effected by the common Counsels, and joint concurrence of the others. It Is
true, Melancthon was once coming over in King Henry's days, but staid his
journey on the death of Queen Anne Bullen; and that he was after sEnt for by
King Edward IV. ( Regis Literis in Angliam vocor) as he affirms in an Epistle
unto Camerarius, Anno 1553. But he was staid at that time also on some other
occasion, though had he come at that time, he had come too late to have had any
hand in the Reformation, the Articles of the Church being passed, the Liturgy
reviewed and settled in the year before. And it is as true that Calvin offered
his assistance to Archbishop Cranmer, for the reforming of this Church; Si
quis mei usus esset, as his own words are, if his assistance were thought
needful to advance the work. But Cranmer knew the man, and refused the offer;
and he did very wisely in it. For seeing it impossible to unite all parties, it
had been an imprudent thing to have closed with any. I grant indeed that Martin
Bucer and Peter Martyr (men of great learning and esteem, but of different
judgments) were brought over hither, about the beginning of the Reign of K.
Edward VI. the one of them being placed in Oxford, the other in Cambridge; but
they were rather entertained as private Doctors to moderate in the Chairs of
those Universities, than any ways made use of in the Reformation. For as the
first Liturgy which was the main key unto the work, was framed and settled
before either of them were come over; so Bucer died, before the compiling of
the Book of Articles, which was the accomplishment thereof: Nor do I find that
Peter Martyr was made use of otherwise in this weighty business, than to make
that good by disputation, which by the Clergy in their Synods or Convocations
was agreed upon. By means whereof the Church proceeding without reference to
the different interesses of the neighboring Churches, kept a conformity in all
such points of Government and public order with the Church of Rome, in which
that Church had not forsaken the clear Tract of the primitive Times; retaining
not only the Episcopal Government, with all the concomitants and adjuncts of
it, which had been utterly abolished in Zuinglian Churches, and much impaired
in power and jurisdiction by the Lutherans also; and keeping up a Liturgy or
set form of worship, according to the rites and usages of the primitive times,
which those of the Calvinian Congregations would not hearken to. God certainly
had so disposed it in his Heavenly wisdom, that so this Church without respect
unto the names and Dictates of particular Doctors, might found its Reformation
on the Prophets and Apostles only, according to the Explications and Traditions
of the ancient Fathers: And being so founded in it self, without respect to any
of the differing parties, might in succeeding Ages sit as Judge between them,
as being more inclinable by her constitution to mediate a peace amongst them,
than to espouse the quarrel of either side. And though Spalato in the Book of
his Retractations, which he calls Consilium redeundi, objects against us: That
besides the public Articles and confession authorized by the Churches, we had
embraced some Lutheran and Calvinian Fancies ( multa Lutheri and Calvini
dogmata, so his own words run) yet this was but the error of particular men,
not to be charged upon the Church as maintaining either. The Church is constant
to her safe and her first conclusions, though many private men take liberty to
embrace new Doctrines.

4. That the Church did not innovate in translating the Scriptures, and the
public Liturgy into vulgar tongues; and of the consequents thereof in the
Church of England.
The next thing faulted (as you say) in the Reformation, is the committing so
much heavenly treasure to such rotten vessels, the trusting so much excellent
Wine to such musty bottles: I mean the versions of the Scriptures and the
public Liturgies into the usual Languages of the common people, and the
promiscuous liberty indulged them in it. And this they charge not as an
Innovation simply, but as an Innovation of a dangerous consequence; the sad
effects whereof we now see so clearly. A charge which does alike concern all
the Protestant and Reformed Churches, so that I should have passed it over at
the present time, but that it is made ours more specially in the application;
the sad effects which the enemy does so much insult in being said to be more
visible in the Church of England, than in other places. This make it ours, and
therefore here to be considered, as the former were. First then, they charge it
on the Church as an Innovation, it being affirmed by Bellarmine, l. 2. De verbo
Dei, c. 15. (whether with less truth or modesty, it is hard to say) Vniversam
Ecclesiam semper his tantum linguis, etc. that in the Universal Church, in all
times foregoing, the Scriptures were not commonly and publicly read in any
other language but in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: This is (you see) a
two-edged sword, and strikes not only against all Translations of the
Scriptures into vulgar Languages for common use, but against reading those
Translations publicly as a part of Liturgy, in which are many things as the
Cardinal tells us quae secreta esse debent, which are not fit to be made known
to the common people. This is the substance of the charge, and herein we join
issue in the usual Form with Absque hoc, sans ceo, no such matter really; the
constant current of Antiquity does affirm the contrary; by which it will appear
most plainly that the Church did neither Innovate in the act of hers, nor
deviate therein from the Word of God, or from the usage of the best and
happiest times of the Church of Christ. Not from the Word of God, there is no
doubt of that, which was committed unto writing that it might be read, and read
by all that were to be directed and guided by it. The Scriptures of the Old
Testament first writ in Hebrew, the Vulgar Language of that people, and read
unto them publicly on the Sabbath days, as appears clearly, Act. 13.15. and
15.21. translated afterward (by the cost and care of Ptolemy Philadelphus King
of Egypt) into the Greek tongue, the most known and sTudied Language of the
Eastern World. The New Testament first writ in Greek for the self-same reason,
(but that S. Matthew's Gospel is affirmed by some Learned men to have been
written in the Hebrew) and written to this end and purpose, that men might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing they might
have life in his Name, Joh. 20. verse. ult. But being that all the Faithful did
not understand these Languages, and that the light of holy Scripture might not
be likened to a Candle hidden under a Bushel: It was thought good by many godly
men in the Primitive times to translate the same into the Languages of the
Countries in which they lived, or of the which they had been Natives. In which
respect S. Chrysostom then banished into Armenia, translated the New Testament,
and the Psalms of David into the Language of that people; S. Hierom a Pannonian
born, translated the whole Bible into the Dalmatick tongue, as Vulphilas Bishop
of the Goths did into the Gothic; all which we find together without further
search, in the Bibliotheque of Sixtus Senensis, a learned and ingenuous man,
but a Pontifician, and so less partial in this cause. The like done here in
England by the care of Athelstan causing a Translation of it into the Saxon
Tongue; the like done by Methodius, the Apostle General of the Sclaves,
translating it into the Sclavonian, for the use of those Nations; not to say
any thing of the Syriack, Aethiopick, Arabic, the Persian, and Chaldaean
Versions, of which the times and Authors are not so well known. And what I pray
you, is the vulgar or old Latin Edition, (of late times made Authentic by the
Popes of Rome) but a Translation of the Scriptures out of Greek and Hebrew for
the instruction of the Roman and Italian Nations, to whom the Latin at that
time was the Vulgar Tongue? And when that Tongue by reason of the breaking in
of the barbarous Nations was worn out of knowledge, (I mean as to the common
people) did not God stir up James Archbishop of Genoa, when the times were
darkest (that is to say, Anno 1290. or thereabouts) to give some light to them
by translating the whole Bible into the Italian, the modern Language of that
Country? As he did Wiclef not long after, to translate the same into the
English of those times, (the Saxon Tongue not being then commonly understood) a
copy of whose Version in a fair Velom Manuscript I have now here by me, by the
gift of my noble Friend Charles Dymoke, Hereditary Champion to the Kings of
England. So then it is no Innovation to translate the Scriptures; and less to
suffer these Translations to be promiscuously read by all sorts of people; the
Scripture being as well Milk for Babes, as strong Meat for the man of more able
judgment. Why else does the Apostle note it as a commendable thing in Timothy,
that he knew the Scriptures from his Childhood? And why else does S. Hierom
speak it to the honor of the Lady Paula, that she made her Maids learn
somewhat daily of the holy Scriptures? Why else does Chrysostom call so
earnestly on all sorts of men to provide themselves of the holy Bibles, (...),
the only Physic for the Soul, as he calls it there; inviting to the reading
thereof not only men of learning and public business; but even the poor
Artificer also, as is acknowledged by Senensis, whom before we mentioned. And
why else does S. Augustine inform his Auditors, that it suffices not to hear
the Scriptures read in the Congregation, unless they read also in their private
Houses. Assuredly, if Boys and Girls, if Servants and Artificers are called
upon so earnestly to consult the Scriptures, to have them in a Tongue
intelligible to them in their private Families; and are commended for so doing,
as we see they are: I know no rank of men that can be excluded.

Let us next see whether it be an Innovation in the Church of Christ, to have
the Liturgies or Common Prayers of the Church in the Tongue generally
understood by the common people, which make the greatest number of all Church
Assemblies. And first we find by the Apostle, not only that the public Prayers
of the Church of Corinth, were celebrated in a Language which they understood;
but that it ought to be so also in all other Churches, Except (says he) ye
utter by the voice, words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is
spoken? How shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen to thy
giving of thanks (and consequently to thy Prayers also) if he understand not
what thou say? 1 Cor. 14.9.16. What say the Papists unto this? Do not both
Lyra and Aquinas expressly grant in their Commentaries on this place of
Scripture, that the common Service of the Church in the Primitive times was in
the common vulgar language? Is not the like affirmed by Harding in his Answer
to Bishop Jewels challenge, Art. 3. Sect. 28. Adding withal, that it was
necessary in the Primitive times that it should be so; and granting that it
were still better that the people had their Service in their own vulgar Tongue
for their better understanding of it? Sect. 33. Having thus Consitentes reos,
we need seek no further, and yet a further search will not be unprofitable. And
on that search it will be found that the converted Jews did celebrate their
divine Offices ( Tractatus and oblationes, as the Father has it) most commonly
in the Syriack, and sometimes in the Hebrew tongue, the natural Languages of
that people; as is affirmed by S. Ambrose in 1. ad Cor. cap. 14. and out of him
by Durand in his Rationale Divinerum. Eckius a great stickler of the Popes,
affirms in his Common places, that the Indians have their Service in the
Indian tongue; and that S. Hierome having translated the whole Bible into the
Dalmatick, procured that the Service should be celebrated in that Language
also. The like S. Hierome himself, in his Epistle to Heliodorus, has told us
of the Bessi a Sarmatian people: The like S. Basil in his Epistle to the
Neo-caesareans, assures us for the Egyptians, Libyans, Palestinians,
Phenicians, Arabians, Syrians, and such as dwell about the banks of the River
Euphrates. The Aethiopians had their Missal, the Chaldeans theirs; each in the
language of their Countries, which they still retain. So had the Moscovites of
old, and all the scattered Churches of the Eastern parts, which they continue
to this day.

But nothing is more memorable in this kind then that which Aeneas Silvius
tells of the Sclavonians, who being converted to the Faith, made suit unto the
Pope to have the public Service in their natural Tongue; but some delay being
made therein by the Pope and Cardinals, a voice was heard, seeming to have come
from Heaven, praying, Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum, and omnis lingua
confiteatur ei: Whereupon their desires were granted without more dispute.
Touching which grant, there is extant an Epistle from Pope John VIII. to
Sfentopulcher King of the Moravian Sclaves, anno 888 at what time both the
Latin Service and the Popes Authority were generally received in those parts
of Europe. Which Letter of Pope John VIII. together with the Story above
mentioned, might probably be a chief inducement to Innocent III. to set out a
Decree in the Lateran Council, importing that in all such Cities in which there
was a concourse of diverse nations, and consequently of different Languages, (as
in most Towns of Trade there does use to be) the Service should be said, and
Sacraments administered, Secundum diversitates nationum and linguarum, according
to the difference of their Tongues and Nations. And though Pope Gregory VII. a
turbulent and violent man, about 200 years after the Concession made by John
VIII. in his Letter to Vratislaus King of Bohemia, labored the cancelling of
that privilege, and possibly might prevail therein as the times then were; yet
the Liburnians, and Dalmatians, two Sclavonian Nations, and bordering on Italy
(the Popes proper seat) do still enjoy the benefit of that Indulgence, and
celebrate their Liturgy in their own Language to this very day. So that the
wonder is the greater, that those of Rome should stand so stiffly in defense of
the Latin Service, which the common people understand not, and therefore
cannot knowingly, and with faith say Amen unto it. For though the Latin Tongue
was Vulgar in a manner to those Western Nations, amongst whom the Latin
Service was first received, and for that cause received because Vulgar to them:
Yet when upon the inundation of the barbarous Nations, the Latin tongue
degenerated into other Languages, as in France, Italy, and Spain; or else was
quite worn out of knowledge, as in Britain, Belgium, and some parts of the
modern Germany, in which before it had been commonly understood; it was both
consonant to Piety and Christian Prudence, that the Language of the common
Liturgies should be altered also. The people otherwise either in singing
David's Psalms, or repeating any parts of the daily Office, must needs be like
those Romans or Italians which S. Ambrose speaks of; who loved to sing Greek
songs by rote (as we use to say) out of a mere delight which they had to the
sound of the words; nescientes tamen quid dicant, not understanding one word
which they said or sung.

The blame and guilt of Innovation being taken off, we must next examine the
effects and dangerous consequents; more visibly discerned at this time in the
Church of England, than was or could have been believed when they were first
intimated. Amongst these they reckon in the first place the increase of
Heresies, occasioned by the mistaking of the true sense and meaning of the Holy
Scripture; and to that end it is said by Bellarmine, that the people would not
only receive no good by having the Scripture read publicly unto them in their
national Languages, sed etiam caperet detrimentum, but on the contrary are like
to receive much hurt. However, acciperet facillime occasionem errandi; because
thereby they would most easily be led into errors, which gave occasion unto
some (as he tells us there) to call the Scripture Librum Haereticorum, the
Heretics Book. So he in his 2. Book, and 15th. chapter De verbo Dei. The like
says Harding in his Answer to Bishop Jewel's Challenge, Art 3. Sect. 31. The
Nations (says he) that have ever had their Service in the vulgar Tongue (where
note that some Nations never had it otherwise) have continued still in Errors,
Schisms, and certain Judaical Ceremonies, etc. In the next place they reckon
this, that by permitting Scripture and the public Liturgies to be extant in
the Vulgar Tongues, all men would think themselves Divines, and the Authority
of the Prelates would be disesteemed: So Harding in his Answer to Jewels
Apology, l. 5. fol. 460. that the people not content with hearing or reading
the holy Scripture, would first take upon them to be Expositors, and at last to
be Preachers also, which in effect is that which is charged by Bellarmine. And
for this last, the present Distempers and confusions in the Church of England
(out of which they suck no small advantage) gives them great rejoicing, as
seeing their predictions so exactly verified. In answer to the first we need
say no more, then that there have been Sects and Heresies in all times and
Ages; never so many as in the first ages of the Church (witness the Catalogue
of S. Augustine, Philastrius, and Epiphanius) in which the Scripture was
translated into fewer Languages than it is at the present. 2. That this is no
necessary effect of such Translations (for we see few new Heresies started up
of late in France or Germany, where such Translations are allowed of) but a
mere possible Contingency, which either may be or may not be, as it pleases
God to give or to withdraw his grace from a State or Nation. And 3. That as
according to the Divine Rule of the Apostle, we must not do a thing positively
evil, in hope that any good, how great soever, may come of it: So by Analogy
thereunto, we must not debar the people of God from any thing positively good,
for fear that any contingent mischief may ensue upon it. But of this I shall
not say more now, as being loath to travel on a common place. The point has
been so canvassed by our Controversors, that you may there find Answers unto
all Objections.

That which does most concern me to consider of, is the second consequent,
because it does relate more specially than the other did to the present
condition and estate of the Church of England. Although the Charge be general
and equally concerning all the Protestant and Reformed Chrrches; yet the
Application makes it ours, as before I said, and as ours, properly within the
compass of my present design. And though I will not take upon me to Advocate
for the present distempers and confusions of this wretched Church (which no man
can lament with a greater tenderness, or look on with more indignation than I
do, and I think you know it:) yet I must tell you that it is neither Novum
crimen C. Caesar, nor ante haec tempora inauditum, for those of the inferior
sort to take upon them the inquiry into sacred matters, to turn Expositors and
Preachers, as the spirit of delusion moves them. The people have had an itch
this way, in all times and Ages. The Satyrist thus complained of it amongst the
Heathens: -- Ecce inter pocula quaerunt
Romulides saturi, quid dia Poemata narrant.


That is to say,

The well fed Romans in their Cups, do sit
And judge of things contained in holy Writ.
And the Apostle does complain of it among the Christians, where he informs us
of some ignorant and unstable men, which wrested some hard places of S. Paul's
Epistles, as they also did the other Scriptures, to their own destruction, 2
Pet. 3.26. and wrest them so, they could not (I am sure of that) did they not
take the liberty of expounding also. Look lower to S. Basils time, when
learning did most flourish in the Church of Christ, and we shall find the
Emperors Cook (or the Clerk of his Kitchen at the best) as busily dishing out
the Scriptures, as if it were no more than serving up his Masters diet from the
Kitchin-hatch; paid home by that good Father for his overgreat sawciness, with
this handsome scoff, Tuum est de pulmento cogitare, non Divina deeoquere, that
it belonged unto his office to provide good Pottage for the Court, not to Cook
the Scriptures. But this was not the folly only of this Master Cook, who
perhaps (though better fed than taught) might now and then have carried up the
Chaplains Mess, and having heard their Learned conferences and discourses, was
apt enough to think himself no small fool at a joint of Divinity. That whole
Age was extremely tainted with the self-same peccancy; of which S. Hierome in
his Epistle to Paulinus, makes this sad complaint. Whereas (says he) all other
Sciences and Trades have their several and distinct professors, Sola
Scripturarum ars est quam omnes passim sibi vendicant; only the Art of opening,
or rather of undoing a Text of Scriptue, (as the phrase is now) was usurped by
all: Hanc garrula anus, hanc delirus senex, etc. The prattling Gossip and the
doting Sire, the windy Sophister, and in a word, all sorts of people do presume
upon, dismembring the body of the Scriptures, and teaching others before they
have learnt any thing that is worth the teaching. Some with a supercilious
look, speaking big words, discourse of holy Scripture among silly Women; others
(the more the shame) learn that of Women which afterward they may teach to
Men, and some with no small volubility of tongue, and confidence, teach that to
others which they never understood themselves: Not to say any thing of those
who having a smack of humane learning, and coming so prepared to handle the
Holy Scriptures, do with enticing words feed the ears of the people, bearing
their Auditors in hand quicquid dixerint legem Dei esse, that whatsoever they
deliver is the Word of God, nor will vouchsafe to learn what the Prophets and
Apostles do conceive of the matter, but very incongruously produce some
Testimonies out of holy Writ to make good their corrupt imaginations; as if it
were an excellent, not a pernicious way of teaching, to wrest the sense of holy
Scripture, and thereby to accommodate it to their present purposes! Has not
the Father given us in this place and passage a most excellent Mirror, wherein
to see the ill complexion of the present times? Does not he set them forth in
such likely colors, as if he rather did delineate the confusions of the
present Age, than lament the miseries of his own? May not both Factions see by
this, what a condition the poor Church of England is involved in by them? The
sight whereof, althoug it justify them not in their several courses, as being
not without example in their present practices:) yet it may serve to let you
know that as the distractions and confusions under which we suffer, are not the
consequents of our translating of the Scriptures and public Liturgies into the
common vulgar Tongues, so it is neither new nor strange that such confusionsand
distractions should befall the Church.

5. That the proceedings of this Church in setting out the English Liturgy,
were not merely Regal; and of the power of Sovereign Princes in Ecclesiastical
affairs.
Having thus proved that nothing has been done amiss by the Church of England,
with reference to Gods Word, the testimonies of godly Fathes, and the usage of
the primitive times, in leaving off the Latin Service, and celebrating all
Divine Offices in the English Tongue: I am to justify it next, in order to the
carrying on of that weighty business, whether so Regular or not, as we fain
would have it. I see you are not scrupled at the subject matter of the
Common Prayer Book, which being translated into Greek, Latin, French and
Spanish, has found a general applause in most parts of Christendom; no where
so little set by as it is at home. All scruples in that kind have been already
fully satisfied by our learned Hooker, who has examined it per parts, and
justified it in each part and particular Office. But for the greater honor of
it, take this with you also, which is alleged in the Conference of Hampton
Court, touching the Marquess of Rhosny (after Duke of Sally, and Lord High
Treasurer of France) who coming Ambassador to King James from Henry IV. and
having seen the solemn celebration of our Service at Canterbury, and in his
Majesty's Royal Chapels, did often and publicly affirm, that if the Reformed
Churches in France had kept the same Orders as were here in England, he was
assured there would have been many thousand Protestants in that Kingdom more
than were at that time. That which you seem to stick at only is in the way and
manner of proceeding in it; which though you find by perusal of the Papers
which I sent first unto you, not to have been so Parliamentarian as the Papists
made it; yet still you doubt whether it were so Regular and Canonical as it
might have been. And this you stumble at the rather, in regard that the whole
Body of the Clergy in their Convocation, had no hand therein, either as to
decree the doing of it, or to approve it being done; but that it was resolved
on by the King (or rather by the Lord Protector in the Kings Minority) with
some few of the Bishops; by which Bishops, and as small a number of Learned
Churchmen, being framed and fashioned, it was allowed of by the King,
confirmed or imposed rather by an Act of Parliament. Your question hereupon is
this, Whether the King (for his acting it by a Protector does not change the
Case) consulting with a lesser part of his Bishops and Clergy, and having their
consent therein, may conclude any thing in the way of a Reformation, the
residue and greatest part not advised withal, nor yielding their consent unto
it in a formal way. This seems to have some reference to the Scottish Liturgy
(for by your Letter I perceive that one of the chief of your Objectors is a
Divine of that Nation) and therefore it concerns me to be very punctual in my
Answer to it.

And that my Answer my be built on the surer Ground, it is to be considered,
first whether the Reformation be in corruption of manners, or abuses in
Government, whether in matters practical, or in points of Doctrine. 2. If in
matters practical, whether such practice have the character of Antiquity,
Universality, and Consent, imprinted on it; or that it be the practice of
particular Churches, and of some times only. And 3. If in points of Doctrine,
whether such points have been determined of before in a General Council, or in
particular Councils universally received and countenanced; or are to be defined
de novo on emergent controversies. And these Distinctions being laid, I shall
answer briefly. First, If the things to be reformed be either corruptions in
manners, or neglect of public duties to Almighty God, abuses either in
Government or the parties governing; the King may do it of himself by his sole
Authority. The Clergy are beholden to him, if he takes any of them along with
him when he goes about it. And if the times should be so bad, that either the
whole body of the Clergy, or any (though the greatest) part thereof should
oppose him in it; he may go forwards notwithstanding, punishing such as shall
gainsay him in so good a work, and compelling others. And this I look on as a
Power annexed to the Regal Diadem, and so inseparably annexed, that Kings could
be no longer Kings if it were denied them. But hereof we have spoke already in
the first of this Section, and shall speak more hereof in the next that
follows. And on the other side, if the Reformation be in points of Doctrine, and
in such points of doctrine as have not been before defined, or not defined in
form and manner as before laid down: The King only with a few of his Bishops
and Learned Clergy (though never so well studied in the point disputed) can do
nothing in it. That belongs only to the whole Body of the Clergy in their
Convocation rightly called and constituted; whose Acts being ratified by the
King, bind not alone the rest of the Clergy, in whose names they Voted, but all
the residue of the subjects, of what sort soever, who are to acquiesce in their
Resolutions. The constant practice of the Church, and that which we have said
before, touching the calling and authority of the Convocation, makes this clear
enough. But if the thing to be Reformed be a matter practical, we are to look
into the usage of the Primitive times. And if the practice prove to have been
both ancient and universally received over all the Church, though intermitted
for a time, and by time corrupted: The King consulting with so many of his
Bishops, and others of his most able Clergy, as he thinks fit to call unto him,
and having their consent and direction in it, may in the case of intermission
revive such practice, and in the case of corruption and degeneration, restore
it to its Primitive and original luster, whether he do it of himself, of his
own mere motion, or that he follow the advice of his Council in it; whether he
be of age to inform himself, or that he does rely on those to whom he has
committed the public Government; it comes all to one: So they restrain
themselves to the ancient patterns. The Reformation which was made under
josias, though in his Minority and acting by the Counsel of the Elders, as
Josephus tells us, Antiqu. Jud. 1. cap. was no less pleasing unto God, nor
less valid in the eyes of all his Subjects, than those of Jehosaphat and
Hezekiah in their riper years, and perhaps acting singly on the strength of
their own judgments only without any advice. Now that there should be Liturgies
for the use of the Church, that those Liturgies should be celebrated in a
Language understood by the people: That in those Liturgies there should be some
prescribed Forms for giving the Communion in both kinds, for Baptizing Infants,
for the reverent celebration of Marriage, performing the last office to the
sick and the decent burial of the Dead, as also for set Feasts and appointed
Festivals; has been a thing of primitive and general practice in the Christian
Church. And being such, though intermitted or corrupted, as before is said, the
King advising with his Bishops and other Churchmen (though not in a Synodical
way) may cause the same to be revised and revived; and having fitted them to
edification and increase of piety, either commend them to the Church by his
sole authority, or else impose them on the people under certain penalties by
his power in Parliament. Saepe Coeleste Regnum per Terrenum proficit. The
Kingdom of Heaven (said Reverend Isidore of Sevil) does many times receive
increase from these earthly Kingdoms; in nothing more than by the regulating
and well ordering of Gods public worship.

We saw before what David did in this particular, allotting to the Priest the
Courses of their Ministration, appointing Hymns and Songs for the Jewish
Festivals, ordaining Singing-men to sing, and finally prescribing Vestments for
the Celebration. Which what else was it but a Regulating of the Worship of God,
the putting it into a solemn course and order, to be observed from time to time
in succeeding Ages? Sufficient ground for Christian Princes to proceed on in
the like occasions; especially when all they do is rathe the reviving of the
Ancient Forms than the Introduction of a new. Which as the King did here in
England by his own Authority, the Body of the Clergy not consulted in it; so
possibly there might be good reason why those who had the conduct of the Kings
affairs, thought it not safe to put the managing of the business to a
Convocation. The ignorance and superstition of the common people was at that
time exceeding profitable to the Clergy, who by their frequent Masses for the
quick and dead raised as great advantage, as Demetrius and the Silver-Smith by
Dianas shrines. It happened also in a time when many of the inferior Clergy had
not much more learning than what was taught them in the Massals and other
Rituals, and well might fear that if the Service were once extant in the
English tongue, the Laity would prove in time as great Clerks as themselves. So
that as well in point of Reputation, as in point of Profit, (besides the love
which many of them had to their former Mumpsimus) it was most probable that
such an hard piece of Reformation would not easily down, had it been put into
the power of a Convocation; especially under a Prince in Nonage, and a state
unsettled. And yet it was not so carried without them neither, but that the
Bishops generally did concur to the Confirmation of the Book (or the
approbation of it rather) when it passed in Parliament; the Bishops in that
time, and after (till the last vast and most improvident increase of the
Lay-nobility) making the most considerable, if not the greatest part of the
House of Peers; and so the Book not likely to be there allowed of, without
their consent. And I the rather am inclined unto that Opinion, because I find
that none but Tunstal, Gardener, and Bonner were displaced from their
Bishoprics, for not submitting in this case to the Kings appointments; which
seems to me a very strong and convincing argument, that none but they dissented
or refused conformity. Add here, that though the whole body of the Clergy in
their Convocation were nto consulted with at first (for the Reasons formerly
recited) yet when they found the benefit and comfort which redounded by it to
good Christian people, and had by little and little weaned themselves from
their private interesses, they all confirmed it on the Post-fact: passing an
Article in the Convocation of the year 1552. with this Head or Title, viz.
Agendum esse in Ecclesiae linguae quae fit Populo nota, which is the 25th.
Article in King Edwards Book. Lay all that has been said together, and the
result of all will be briefly this, that being the setting out of the Liturgy
in the English Tongue was a matter practical, agreeable to the Word of God and
the Primitive times; that the King with so many of his Bishops and others of
the Clergy as he pleased to call to Counsel in it, resolved upon the doing of
it; that the Bishops generally confirmed it when it came before them, and that
the whole body of the Clergy in their Convocation (the Book being then under a
review) did avow and justify it: The result of all I say is this, that as the
work it self I say was good, so it was done not in a Regal but a Regular way,
Kings were not Kings if regulating the external parts of Gods public worship
according to the Platforms of the Primitive times, should not be allowed them.

But yet the Kings of England had a further right as to this particular, which
is a power conferred upon them by the Clergy (whether by way of Recognition or
Concession, I regard not here) by which they did invest the King with a Supreme
Authority, not only of confirming their Synodical Acts not to be put in
execution without his consent; but in effect, to devolve on him all that power,
which formerly they enjoyed in their own capacity. And to this we have a
parallel Case in the Roman Empire, in which there had been once a time when the
Supreme Majesty of the State was vested in the Senate and people of Rome, till
by the Law which they called Lex Regia, they transferred all their Power on
Caesar, and the following Emperors. Which Law being passed, the Edicts of the
Prince or Emperor were as strong and binding as the Senatus Consulta, and the
Plebiseita had been before. Whence came that memorable Maxim in Justinians
Institutes; that is to say, Quod Principi placuerit legis habet vigorem. The
like may be affirmed of the Church of England, immediately before, and in the
Reign of K. Henry VIII. The Clergy of this Realm had a Self-authority in all
matters which concerned Religion, and by their Canons and Determinations did
bind all the Subjects of what rank soever, till by acknowledging that King for
their Supreme Head, and by the Act of Submission not long after following, they
transferred that power upon the King, and on his Successors: By doing whereof
they did not only disable themselves upon concluding any thing in their
Convocations, or putting their results into execution without his consent; but
put him into the actual possession of that Authority which properly belonged to
the Supremacy, or the Supreme Head, in as full manner as ever the Pope of Rome,
or any delegated by and under him did before enjoy it. After which time,
whatsoever the King or his Successors did in the Reformation, as it had
virtually the power of the Convocations; so was it as effectual and good in
Law, as if the Clergy in their Convocation particularly, and in terminis, had
agreed upon it. Not that the King or his Successors were hereby enabled to
exercise the Keys, and determine Heresies much less to preach the Word and
administer the Sacraments, as the Papists falsely gave it out; but as the Heads
of the Ecclesiastical Body of this Realm, to see that all the members of that
Body did perform their duties, to rectify what was found amiss amongst them,
to preserve peace between them on emergent differences, to reform such errors
and corruptions as are expressly contrary to the Word of God; and finally, to
give strength and motions to their Councils and Determinations, tending to
Edification and increase of Piety. And though in most of their proceedings
toward Reformation, the Kings advised with such Bishops as they had about
them, or could assemble without any great trouble or inconvenience, to advise
withal; yet was there no necessity, that all or the greater part of the Bishops
should be drawn together for that purpose, no more than it was anciently in the
Primitive Times for the godly Emperors to call together the most part of the
Bishops in the Roman Empire, for the establishing of the matters which
concerned the Church, or for the godly Kings of Judah to call together the
greatest part of the Priests and Levites, before they acted any thing in the
Reformation of those corruptions and abuses which were crept in amongst them.
Which being so; and then withal considering as we ought to do, that there was
nothing altered here in the state of Religion, till either the whole Clergy in
their Convocaton, or the Bishops and most eminent Churchmen had resolved upon
it; our Religion is no more to be called a Regal than a Parliament-Gospel.

6. That the Clergy lost not any of their just Rights by the Act of Submission,
and the power of calling and confirming Councils did anciently belong to the
Christian Princes.
If you conceive that by ascribing to the King the Supreme Authority, taking
him for their Supreme Head, and by the Act of Submission which ensued upon it,
the Clergy did unwittingly ensnare themselves, and drew a Vassallage on these
of the times succeeding, inconsistent with their native Rights, and contrary to
the usage of the Primitive Church: I hope it will be no hard matter to remove
that scruple. It Is true the Clergy in their Convocation can do nothing now, but
as their doings are confirmed by the Kings Authority, and I conceive it stands
with reason (as well as point of State) that it should be so. For since the two
Houses of Parliament, though called by the Kings Writ, can conclude nothing
which may bind either King or Subject in their civil Rights, until it be made
good by the Royal Assent: so neither is it fit nor safe that the Clergy should
be able by their Constitutions and Synodical Acts, to conclude both Prince and
People in spiritual matters, until the stamp of Royal Authority be imprinted on
them. The Kings concurrence in this case devesteth not the Clergy of any lawful
power which they ought to have, but restrains them only in the exercise of some
part thereof, to make it more agreeable to Monarchical Government, and to
accommodate it to the benefit both of Prince and People. It Is true, the Clergy
of this Realm can neither meet in Convocation, nor conclude any thing therein,
nor put in execution any thing which they have concluded, but as they are
enabled by the Kings Authority. But then it is as true withal, that this is
neither inconsistent with their native Rights, nor contrary unto the usage of
the Primitive Times. And first it is not inconsistent with their native Rights,
it being a peculiar happiness of the Church of England to be always under the
protection of Christian Kings; by whose encouragement and example, the Gospel
was received in all parts of this Kingdom. And if you look into Sir Henry
Spelman's Collection of the Saxon Councils, I believe that you will hardly find
any Ecclesiastical Canons for the Government of the Church of England, which
were not either originally promulgated, or after approved and allowed o either
by the Supreme Monarch of all the Saxons, or by some King or other of the
several Heptarchies, directing in their National or Provincial Synods. And they
enjoyed this Prerogative without any dispute after the Norman Conquest also,
till by degrees the Pope in grossed it to himself (as before was shown) and
then conferred it upon such as were to exercise the same under his Authority;
which plainly manifests that the Act of Submission so much spoke of, was but a
changing of their dependence from the Pope to the King, from an usurped to a
lawful power, from one to whom they had made themselves a kind of voluntary
Slaves, to him who justly challenged a natural dominion over them: And
secondly, that that submission of theirs to their natural Prince, is not to be
considered as a new Concession, but as the Recognition only of a former power.

In the next place I do not find it to be contrary to the usage of the
Primitive times. I grant indeed that when the Church was under the command of
the Heathen Emperors, the Clergy did Assemble in their National and Provincial
Synods of their own Authority; which Councils being summoned by the
Metropolitans, and subscribed by the Clergy, were of sufficient power to bind
all good Christians who lived within the Verge of their jurisdiction. They
could not else Assemble upon any exigence of affairs but by such Authority. But
it was otherwise when the Church came under the protection of Christian
Princes; all Emperors and Kings from Constantine the Great (till the Pope
carried all before him in the darker times) accompting it one of the principal
flowers, (as indeed it was) which adorned their Diadems. I am not willing to
beat on a common place. But if you please to look into the Acts of ancient
Councils, you will find that all the General Councils (all which deserve to be
so called, if any of them do deserve it) to have been summoned and confirmed by
the Christian Emperors, that the Council of Arles was called and confirmed by
the Emperor Constantine, that of Sardis by Constans, that of Lampsacus by
Valentinian, that of Aquileia by Theodosius, that of Thessalonica (National or
Provincial all) by the Emperor Gratian: That when the Western Empire fell into
the hands of the French, the Councils of Akon, Mentz, Meldun, Worms, and Colen
received both life and motion from Charles the Great and his Successors in that
Empire; it being evident in the Records of the Gallican Church, that the
opening and confirming of all their Councils not only under the Caroline but
under the Merovignean Family, was always by the power, and sometimes with the
Presidence of their Kings and Princes, as you may find in the Collections of
Lindebrogius and Sirmondus the Jesuit; and finally that in Spain it self
(though now so much obnoxious to the Papal power) the two at Bracara, and the
ten first holden at Toledo, were summoned by the Writ and Mandate of the Kings
thereof. Or if you be not willing to take this pains, I shall put you to a
shorter and an easier search; referring you for your better information in this
particular, to the learned Sermon Preached by Bishop Andrews at Hampton Court,
Anno 1606. touching the Right and power of calling Assemblies, or the right use
of the Trumpets. A Sermon Preached purposely at that time and place for giving
satisfaction in that point to Melvin, and some leading men of the Scottish
Puritans, who of late times had arrogated to themselves an unlimited power of
calling and constituing their Assemblies without the Kings consent and against
his will.

As for the Vessallage which the Clergy are supposed to have drawn upon
themselves by this Submission, I see no fear or danger of it as long as the two
Houses of Parliament are in like condition; and that the Kings of England are
so tender of their own Prerogative, as not to suffer any one Body of the
Subjects to give a Law unto the other without his consent. That which is most
insisted on for the proof hereof, is the delegating of this power by King Henry
VIII. to Sir Thomas Cromwell (afterward Earl of Essex and Lord high
Chamberlain) by the name of his Vicar General in Ecclesiastical matters; who by
that name presided in the Convocation, Anno 1536. and acted other things of
like nature in the years next following. And this (especially his presiding in
the Convocation) is looked on both by Sanders and some Protestant Doctors, not
only as a great debasing of the English Clergy (men very Learned for those
times) but as deforme satis Spectaculum, a kind of Monstrosity in nature. But
certainly those men forget (though I do not think my self bound to justify all
King Harries actions) that in the Council of Chalcedon, the Emperor appointed
certain Noblemen to sit as Judges, whose names occurr in the first Action of
that Council. The like we find exemplified in the Ephesine Council, in which by
the appointment of Theodosius and Valentinian then Roman Emperors, Candidianus,
a Count Imperial, sat as Judge or President; who in the managing of that trust
over-acted any thing that Cromwell did, or is objected to have been done by him
as the Kings Commissioner. For that he was to have the first place in those
public meetings as the Kings Commissioner, or his Vicar General, which you
will, (for I will neither trouble my self nor you with disputing Titles) the
very Scottish Presbyters, the mo st rigid sticklers for their own pretended
(and but pretended) Rights which the world affords, do not stick to yield. No
Vassallage of the Clergy to be found in this, as little to be feared by their
Submission to the King as their Supreme Governor.

Thus Sir, according to my promise, and your expectation, have I collected my
Remembrances, and represented them unto you in as good a fashion as my other
troublesome affairs, and the distractions of the time would give me leave; and
therein made you see, if my judgment fail not, that neither our King or
Parliaments have done more in matters which concerned Religion and the
Reformation of this Church, than what has formerly been done by the secular
Powers, in the best and happiest times of Christianity; and consequently, that
the clamours of the Papists and Puritans both, which have disturbed you, are
both false and groundless. Which if it may be serviceable to your self, or
others, whom the like doubts and prejudices have possessed or scrupled, It is
all I wish; my studies and endeavors aiming at no other end, than to do all
the service I can possibly to the Church of God; to whose Graces and divine
Protection you are most heartily commended in our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, By

SIR, Your most affectionate Friend to serve you Peter Heylyn.

OF LITURGIES, OR SET FORMS OF PUBLIC WORSHIP: With the Concomitants thereof.
IN Way of an Historical Narration.

By PETER HEYLYN, D.D.

Augustine: de bono perseverantiae, lib. 2. c. 22. Vtinam tardi cord and
infirmi, etc. sic audirent vel non audirent in hac quaestione Disputationes
nostras, ut potius intuerentur orationes suas, quas semper habuit and habebit
Ecclesia, ab exordiis suis donec finiatur hoc seculum.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Harper and Mary Clark, 1680.

To the Reader.
WHen the disputes were first raised by those of the Genevian faction, against
the Divine Service of this Church, it was pretended that they were well enough
content to admit a Liturgy, so it were such an one, as tended more to
edification and increase of Piety, than that which was imposed and established
by the Laws of this Land, was given out to do. That which most seemed to
trouble them, as they gave it out, was, that it had too much in it of the Roman
Rituals; that it was cloyed with many superstitious and offensive Ceremonies,
the frequent and unnecessary repetition of the Lords Prayer, the ill
translation of the Psalms and other Scriptures, the intermixture of impertinent
Responsories, whereby the course of the Prayers was interrupted; and finally,
the diffeence betwixt that Liturgy, and those of other reformed Churches, with
which they did desire to hold a more strict Communion. But being beaten from
these holds, as by many others, so more chiefly by judicious Hooker, and never
daring to adventure any more in pursuit of that quarrel, the Smectymnians in
our times resolved upon a nearer course to effect their purposes, than the
Martinists had done before them; and rather chose to fell down Liturgy it self
as having no authority from the Word of God, nor from the practice of Gods
people, than waste their time in lopping off the branches and excrescencies of
it. Accordingly they reduced the whole state of the Controversy to these two
Positions.

1. That if by Liturgy we understand an order observed in Church Assemblies, of
Praying, Reading, and Expounding the Scriptures, Administering Sacraments, etc.
Such a Liturgy they know, and do acknowledge both Jews and Christians to have
used: But if by Liturgy we undersTand prescribed and stinted forms of
Administration composed by some particular men in the Church, and imposed upon
all the rest, then they are sure (for so they must be understood, if they say
any thing) that no such Liturgy has been used ancient by the Jews or
Christians.

2. That the first Reformers of Religion did never intend the use of a Liturgy
surther, than to be an help in the want, or to the weakness of a Minister; and
thereupon it is inferred with contempt enough, that if any Minister appear
insufficient to discharge the duty of conceived Prayer, it may be imposed on
him as a punishment to use set forms and no other.

If these two Propositions did proceed from the same one spirit, as no doubt
they did, the extreme falsehood of the last does prove sufficiently, that
neither of them did proceed from the Spirit of Truth. King Edward VI. the Lord
Protector then being, and the learned Prelates of that time, were our first
Reformers; the two first approving and confirming, the last laboring and
acting in that weighty business, but all contributing to the passing of an Act
of Parliament, for uniformity of Service, and Administration of the Sacraments,
2 and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 1. and in that Act it is said expressly, That all Ministers
in any Cathedral or Parish Church, or other place within this Realm of England,
Wales, and other the Kings Dominions, shall from and after the Feast of
Pentecost next coming, be bounden to say and use all Mattens, Evensong,
Celebration of the Lords Supper, commonly called the Mass, and Administration
of each of the Sacraments, and their common and open Prayer, in such order and
form as is mentioned in the same Book, and none other or otherwise. Which
clause continued still in being (notwithstanding the alteration of the
Liturgy) till K. Edward's death, and was revived again in the Act of
Parliament, 1 Eliz. cap. 2. By which the second Liturgy was confirmed and
ratified. Assuredly, they that are bound to officiate by a Form prescribed, to
use no other Form but that; and to use that Form no otherwise than the Law
requires, and requires under several penalties contained in it; cannot be
said to be at liberty to use or not to use it as they list themselves; nor can
pretend in any reason, nor with common sense, That the first Reformers of
Religion, did never intend the use of a Liturgy further, than to be an help in
the want, or to the weakness of a Minister. What the Reformers did in other
Countries, was no Rule to ours, who in the modelling of that great work, had
not only an eye and respect (as the forementioned Statute tells us) to the
most sincere and pure Christian Religion taught by the Scripture, as probably
the others had, but also to the usages in the Primitive Church, which certainly
the others had not. So that the second Position, which the proud Inference
thence deducted, being blown aside, the whole weight of the cause must wholly
rest upon the first, which whether it be of strength enough to support the
same, is the main disquisition and enquiry which we have in hand.

For when this Proposition was first vented, and the point had been somewhat
ventilated betwixt the humble Remonstrant on the one part, and the Smectymnians
on the other, I was required by those who had Authority to command me, to try
what I could do in drawing down the Pedigree and the descent of Liturgies from
the first use and institution of them amongst the Jews, till they were settled
and established also amongst the Christians. For since the Smectymnians had
appealed to the ancient practice of the Jews and Christians, affirming
positively that no such Liturgies (that is to say, no stinted and prescribed
Forms of Administration) were anciently used by either of them; it is most fit
and just they should be tried by the Records and practice of those elder times
to which they have Appealed for their justification. So that the point between
us being matter of Fact, I shall pursue it in the way of an Historical
Narration; in which the Affirmative being made good by sufficient evidence, it
will be very difficult, if not impossible, to prove the Negative. And for the
better making good of the Affirmative; I have taken in the Jewish Rabbis, and
other Antiquaries of that people, of most faith and credit, the holy Fathers,
and other Ecclesiastical Authors since the times of Christ, to testify unto
the truth of what here is said; either by way of explication of such Texts of
Scripture which do relate unto this cause, or in the way of declaration, as
laying down the practice of the Jews or Christians in their several times. And
that it may be seen that Liturgies or Set Forms of worship were of general
usage, I have made diligent search into the best and most unquestioned
monuments of the ancient Gentiles, and traced out many of their Forms of prayer
and sacrifice, used by them in the most religious acts of those performances,
and placed that search betwixt the practice of the Jews and that of the
Christians. And I have placed it in that order, to the end that it may appear
that the Christians had not only some ground of Scripture, Tradition
Apostolical, and the best judgments of their own times to direct this business;
but that they were also guided in it by the light of Nature, the Word of God
amongst the Jews, and the constant practice of that people in the times
precedent.

Nor have I only took this pains in tracing out the constant practice of all
people in respect of Liturgies, but also with relation unto the necessary
adjuncts and concomitants of them. Set Forms of Worship require set times and
places to perform them in; which gives occasion to insert some notes or
observations touching the Festivals, or days of Religious offices, taken up by
the Authority of the Church in several Ages, according as the commemoration of
some signal benefits, or Gods special mercies toward them might invite them to
it. The like I have done also in the erecting and dedicating of those sacred
places which have been destinated in all times to Religious offices, from the
first Consecrating of the Tabernacle by Gods own appointment, till the last
dedication of the Temple in the time of Herod, and from the first deputing of
some places by the Lords Apostles, for the divine performances and
administrations of the Christian Faith, till calmer times permitted the
erecting of those stately Fabrics which the Gentiles looked upon with envy and
admiration. Some other things are intermingled touching the Habit of the
Priests or Ministers under either Testament in the time or act of their
officiating; as also of the Gestures used both by Priests and People, according
to the several offices and acts of worship. And this I have drawn down unto the
time of S. Austin's death, when neither Superstition in point of worship, nor
Heterodoxie in point of Doctrine, had gotten any predominancy in the Church of
Christ, which was then come unto her height both for peace and purity. By which
the Reader may perceive how warrantably this Church proceeded in her
Reformation, as to this particular, how strict an eye was had therein, as well
to the most sincere and pure Christian Religion taught by the Scripture, as to
the usages in the Primitive Church, how justifiable in the whole course and
order of her public Liturgy, with all the Rubricks and observances therein
contained. In which, if any thing be done conducible unto Gods glory and the
Churches peace, the information of the Reader, or the convincing of such men
who are otherwise minded, I shall think my labor well bestowed, and my pains
well recompensed. Howsoever it will be some matter of contentment to me that I
have done my duty in it, according unto that poor measure of abilities which
the Lord has given me; commending both the cause and these weak indevours to
his Heavenly blessings, without which, Paul's planting and Apollo's watering
are of no increase.

CHAP. I. What does occur, and whether any thing at all, for Set Forms of
Prayer from the time of Adam unto Moses.
1. Prayer, the chief exercise of public Worship. 2. The ground, use, and
necessity of public Forms. 3. What privilege belongs unto the Priest or
Minister, in that part of Gods Service which consists in Prayer. 4. The
inconvenience and confusion that must needs arise for want of Set Forms in the
Worship of God. 5. Liturgies or Set Forms of Prayer, in use amongst all sorts
of people, Jews, Gentiles, Christians. 6. The meaning of the word Liturgy, or
(...), in the civil sense. 7. As also in the Ecclesiastical notion of it. 8.
Whether the offerings of Cain and Abel were regulated by a prescribed Form. 9.
A prescribed Form of Worship conceived by some to have been introduced by Enos.
10. The Sacrifices and devotions of the ancient Patriarchs, for the most part
occasional only. 11. The Consecrating of set places for Gods public worship,
first begun by Jacob.


IT is exceeding well observed by our incomparable Hooker, Hook. Eccl. Pol. l.
5.. 23.
That if the Angels have a continual intercourse betwixt the Throne of God in
Heaven, and his Church here militant upon the Earth, the same is no where
better verified than in those two godly exercises of Doctrine and Prayer. For
what, says he, is the assembling of the Church to learn, but the receiving of
Angels descended from above? What to pray, but the ascending of Angels upwards?
His Heavenly inspirations, and our holy desires being as so many Angels of
commerce and intercourse between God and us. And although these two godly and
religious exercises seem to walk hand in hand together; the Prayers made in and
by the Church, having for many Ages past, even long before the birth of
Christianity, been intermingled with the reading of the Law and Prophets; yet
find we that of Prayer so acceptable in the sight of God, so highly valued by
the Lord, above all other parts of his public Service, that he vouchsafed from
hence to give a name to his holy Temple, and to entitle it, Isa. 56.7.
The House of Prayer. Which holy and religious duty, as it concerns us two
ways, one way in that we are men, and another way as parts and members of the
Church, the mystical Body of our Lord and Savior; so it admits of several
considerations both for the matter of the same, and the manner of it. As men we
are at our own choice for time, place, and form, according to the exigences of
our own occasions. The Church requires not any thing in the performance of this
pious office, either as private or domestical; but that we pray with
understanding; that we consider with our selves what it is we ask, 1 Cor.
14.15. Jam. 4.3.
and of whom we ask it. Ye ask and receive not (says S. James) because ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. But for the Service which we do
as a public body, that being public, is for that cause to be accounted so
much the worthier than the other, as a whole society of such condition
exceeds the worth of any one particular person; and for that cause has been
more strictly tied in all former Ages, as to prescribed times and places, so to
set Forms also. For were there not some time prescribed (in the great growth
and spreading of the Church of God) for the convening of the Congregation, some
place assigned in which to meet together at the times appointed; the prayers
and devotions of Gods people might and would happen oftentimes to be either at
the same time in several places, or in the same place at several times; and so
be nothing less than the common prayers, the joint devotions of Gods Servants.
Of all the circumstances which attend Gods public Service, those two, of time
and place, come most near the substance; and are de been esse at the least, of
that weighty duty.

And if appointed times and places, being merely circumstances, effect and
comfort; assuredly the form thereof, containing the whole substance; the main
body of it has much more need to be prescribed. For what says the Apostle in
this case, or one very near it, If the whole Church should come together in
some place, and all speak with tongues, 1 Cor. 14.23.
and there come in those which are Unbelievers, would they not say that ye are
mad? every one of you has a Psalm, has a Tongue, has a Doctrine, has a
Revelation; would it not be a strange medly? God, as S. Paul has told us, is
the God of order, not of confusion in the Churches. And therefore has given
power unto his Church, that all things in it, for the manner, Hook. Eccl. Pol.
l. 9. number. 25.
So that (as Hooker well observes) if the Liturgies of all ancient Churches
throughout the world be compared amongst themselves, it may be easily perceived
that they had all one original mould; and that the public prayers of the
People of God in Churches thoroughly settled and established, did never use to be
voluntary dictates, proceeding from any man's extemporal wit. And certainly to
drive this point unto an end, (with some small alteration of my Authors words)
To him who does consider the grievous and scandalous inconveniences whereunto
they make themselves daily subject, when any blind and secret corner is made a
fit place for Common Prayer; the manifold Confusions which they fall into,
which cry down all the difference of days and times; the irksome Deformities,
whereby through endless and senseless Effusions of indigested Prayers they
oftentimes disgrace in most unsufferable manner, the worthiest part of
Christian duty toward God, who being subject herein to no certain order, do
pray both what they list, and how they list; to him I say, which duly weighs
all these things, the reason cannot be obscure, why God so much respects in
public Prayer, not only the solemnity of places where, and the convenience of
the times when; but also the precise appointment, even with what words or
sentences his Name should be called on amongst his people.

I have said little all this while of the Priest or Minister, the gift of
Prayer: Why may not other men pretend unto that gift, as much as he; or on
opinion that they have it, may not make use thereof in the Congregation? Why
may not any one so gifted, or so opinionated of his gift, say unto his Minister
as Zedekiah did unto Micaiah (in case he do not also strike him upon the cheek)
Mean ergo dimisit Spiritus Domini, and locutus est tibi? 1 King. 22 24.
Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me, to speak unto thee? Assuredly
the gift of prayer is as much restrained in the People, by hearkening only to
those expressions which are delivered by their Minister, as that of the
Minister can be, (be he who he will) by tying up his spirit to those forms
which are prescribed by the Church. This, if it be a quenching of the Spirit,
as some please to make it, is such a quenching of the Spirit as has good
ground from God himself, who did not only prescribe unto his Priests those very
words, Numb. 6.23.
wherewith they were to bless the People, as we shall see hereafter in due
place and time; Mat. 6.9.
but did instruct both Priests and People, both the Apostles and Disciples how
they were to pray, in what set form they might present their souls and desires
unto him. So little privilege has the Priest or Minister more than other
People, to speak his own thoughts in the Congregation by way of voluntary and
extemporal prayers, on the grounds they go on; that on the same, the meanest of
the multitude may pretend the like, and that as well in other parts of public
worship as in that of prayer; which what a Chaos of devotion it would
introduce, I leave to every sober minded man to judge by that which follows.

For if we look into the public Service of Almighty God, England so conceives
it, when in the general Invitation she informs her Children that the chief
reasons why they do assemble and meet together, Dearly beloved Brethren, etc.
are to set forth Gods most holy praise, to hear his most holy Word, and to ask
those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the
soul. The Brethren of the Separation (as they call themselves) do conceive so
too, though with some variation of the terms, saying there be three kinds of
spiritual worship, Praying, Prophesying, and Singing of Psalms. H. Smith in a
Book entitled. The differences of the Churches of the Separation. 1606. cap.
18. Id. cap. 11. Id. cap. 10.
They add, with truth enough in the affirmation, were there but any sense in
the application, that there is the same reason of helps in all the parts of
spiritual worship (as is to be admitted in any one) during the time of
performing the worship. What then? Observe I pray you the illation and the
necessity thereof on the former grounds. Therefore (for so they do infer) as in
Prayer the Book is laid aside, and that by the confession of the ancient
Brethren of the separation; so must it also be in Prophesying, and in Singing
of Psalms, as we are persuaded. What, are they but persuaded of it, and no more
than so? Yes sure, they are more positive and affirm for certain, Id. ibid.
that as in Prayer the Spirit only is our help, and there is no outward help
given of God for that kind of worship; so also in Prophesying and Singing. And
in another place more plainly, therefore whether we Pray, Prophecy, or Sing,
it must be the Word or Scripture, not out of the book, but out of the heart.
Id. cap. 18.
Add here these Quaeres raised on the former Thesis. Id. in fine libri.
1. Whether in a Psalm a man must be tied to Meter, Rhythm, and Tune; and
whether voluntary be not as necessary in tune and words as in matter. 2.
Whether Meter, Rhythm, and Tune, be not quenching the spirit. 3. Whether a
Psalm be only thanksgiving without Meter, Rhythm, and Tune, yea or no. Put this
together, and then tell me truly whosoever thou art, if when a great and
populous Congregation should be met together, every one of them in that part of
worship which consists in Singing, should first conceive his own matter,
deliver it in Prose or Meter as he list himself, and in the same instant chant
it out in what Tune soever, that which comes first into his head: Tell me I
say, if ever there were heard so black a Sanctus, such a confused and horrid
noise of tongues and voices; if any howling or gnashing of the teeth whatever,
can be like unto it. And yet it follows so directly on the former Principles,
that if we banish all set forms of Common Prayer, which is but one part only of
Gods public worship; we cannot but in justice and in reason both, banish all
studied and premeditated Sermons from the House of God; and utterly cast out
all King David's Psalms (whether in Prose or Meter, that comes all to one) and
all divine Hymns also into the bargain.

This, liberty of the Spirit of God; so may there somewhat else be added to set
forth the necessity of those public forms which they so labor to put down.
For if we cast a careful eye upon the business, we may perceive without much
difficulty, that as a prescript form of Common Prayer, as well amongst the Jews
as Christians, proceeded either from the Example of God, who in some cases so
prescribed it; or from the Wisdom of God guiding the counsels of his Church, as
before was noted: So by the Law and light of Nature, which was the way whereby
he pleased to manifest himself, and make known his will unto the Gentiles, they
also were directed to set forms of Worship, though otherwise mistaken utterly
in the object of it: For being taught by Nature that there was a God, one
universal supreme Power that disposed of all things; and that that God was to
be served and worshipped by them, even with the best of their devotions: It was
not long before they had agreed on set times and places for the performance of
that Worship; as also of some special Minister by whom to tender some solemn
forms of words in which to represent their said devotions. The ignorance and
blindness of their hearts occasioned them to set up Idols in the place of God;
and to serve many Gods instead of one. But in the service of those gods, in the
adoring of those Idols, they thought it did concern them in an high degree, to
do it with the most solemnity, with the greatest majesty that wisest of them
could devise; prescribing as it were by common counsel and advice, whatever
they intended to have done therein both for form and matter. So that it will
appear on a diligent search, that in all public Congregations of men met
together for the performance of Religious Offices, whether they did adhere to
false gods, or adore the true; there was not any thing almost left arbitrary:
nothing almost which was not limited and prescribed by Rules or Rubricks; no
kind of service to be done for which there was not some set form prescribed in
their established and received Liturgies. The following of which search is the
intent and Argument of this present work. In which I doubt not but to make it
plain and evident by the continual and constant practice of the former times,
that in all public Congregations, whether of the Jews under the Law, or of the
Gentiles without the Law, or of the Christians being a body of men made up both
of Jews and Gentiles; both Priests and People have been tied to set forms of
worship: And therefore that the use of a public Liturgy is no such new matter
in the world, as some men have made it, who will needs have it a device either
of a lazy zeal, or Popish ignorance.

But first before we do proceed in this search of Liturgies, quid nominis,
Suidas derives the word (...), from (...), Suidas in Lexico.
which signifies public, and (...), any work or office. (...) (says that old
Grammarian) (...). Which doubtless is the true and proper Etymology, the old
word being (...) as we find in Stephanus; Stephanus in Thesauro linguae Grae.
(...) q. d. opus publicum faciens, and (...) opus aliquod publicum facio; and
shortly after, (...) pro (...) and ejusdem significationis. For the quid rei
next, it signifies (as we see by the Etymology) ministerium vel munus
publicum, a public charge or ministry in what kind soever, whether it be
sacred or profane, and is so used in Classick and approved Authors. Isocrates
in some of his Orations, Isocrat. orat.
uses the word pro Magistratuum functione, for the power and office of the
Civil Magistrate. Romans 13 6.
So also does S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, (...), for they are Gods
Ministers attending continually upon this very thing: Sometimes it signifies
the doing or offering a man's service to the Commonwealth, as (...), Arist.
Politic. l. 4.
in the great Philosopher: in which regard such wealthy Citizens as were able
to supply the public wants from their private Coffers, are said (...), to
serve the Commonwealth with their proper goods. Romans 16.27.
And so the word is used also by the great Apostle. For if (says he) the
Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their duty also
is, (...), to minister unto them in carnal things. And in this sense the word
is taken several times in the Epistle unto the Philippians, Polyn. ib hist. Romans
viz. cap. 2. verse. 25. and verse. 30. I might here add that (...) is used in
Polybius for munifex in castris, or an Engineer; as (...) in the same Author,
pro ministerio castrensi, for a charge or office in the camp; and that in
Clemens Alexandrinus, the word is used to signify those businesses and
employments which attend on Marriage; where he informs us, that the Married
state has several duties, Clemens Alexan. Stromat. l. 5.
(...), whereof a reckoning or account must be made to God. But these being the
acceptions of the word in the civil sense and meaning only, I shall pass them
over.

As for the sacred sense or meaning of it, Aristotle that (...), are those
public offices to be performed unto the gods with expense and cost. Arist.
Politic. l. 7.
From which acception of the word, the Septuagint made use thereof to signify
the Worship and Service due to God, who is not to be Served or Worshipped but
with the best of our Devotions, as in the Jewish Church with the best also of
their substance. The word so used by them in their Translation of the Old
Testament, became in fine a word of Art or speciality amongst the Writers of
the New. For in the first Chapter of S. Luke's Gospel, the Ministry of the
Jewish Priesthood is called by the name of (...), Luke 1.23.
as where it is said of Zacharias, how it came to pass, (...), that as soon as
the days of his ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own House.
And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, S. Paul alluding to the Ministeries of the
Jewish Temple, calls our Savior Christ, (...), a Minister of the Holies,
Heb. 8.2.
or of the Sanctuary. Thus also in allusion to the Ministeries of the Church of
Jewry, the Ministry of the Gospel is in the Scripture called by the selfsame
name; Act. 13.2. Chrysostom. in Act. Apud Bezam. in Annot. in Act. 13.
the Holy Ghost affirming of the Prophets which were in Antioch, (...), that
they ministered unto the Lord, i.e. as Chrysostom expounds the word (...), they
Preached the Gospel; or (...), they made their Prayers unto the Lord, as the
Syriack Translation has it. Indeed both glosses on the word, as well that of
the Syriack Interpreters, as of S. Chrysostom, do yield a fuller meaning of it
(according as it is now used in the Church of Christ) than either of them taken
severally; the public Liturgies of the Church consisting both of Prayers and
Preaching, taking the word Preaching as before I did, for the public notifying
of the will and pleasure of Almighty God, touching man's salvation. In which
respect, as the word (...) is taken many times by the Ancient Fathers, for a
Priest or Bishop, to whom the executing or performance of divine Offices in
public did belong especially, as (...), or (...), or (...), the Ministers of
God, of the Holy Altar, of the New Testament, in Basil, Nazianzen, and others:
So that of (...) came to be appropriated to the performance of those Offices
which they were to execute, or rather to the rule and order by which they were
to be performed. And so the word is used in the Law Imperial, in which it is
expressly ordered, (...), Justin. Novel. 131. de Eccles.
that no man should presume to execute the public Liturgy, or to officiate the
divine Service of the Church in his private house. In which acceptance of the
word (as it is to be taken, and no otherwise in our present business) we do
define the same with the Learned Casaubon, to be descriptio quaedam ordinis
servandi in sacris celebrandis, Casaubon Exercit. 16.. 41.
a regulated form or order to be observed in the officiating of divine Service;
such as the Latins call sometimes Officium, and sometimes Agenda; and the
Greek Writers many times (...). And to this definition I assent the rather,
because I find the same approved by the adverse party, particularly by the
Altar of Damascus, Altar Damascen. p. 612.
the total sum of all that had been contributed in the former times, to the
disturbance of this Church.

This business being thus past over, we will prepare our selves for the
following search; Moses: Of those the first we have upon Record is that of Cain
and Abel, in Genesis 4. where we are told how that in process of time it came to
pass that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an offering to the Lord; and
Abel also brought of the Firstlings of his Flock, and of the fat thereof. In
which it is to be observed that this is said to have been done, post multos
dies, as the Vulgar, or in process of time, as our English reads it; Genesis 4.3,
4.
but as it is in others more near the Hebrew, in fine dierum, or at the end of
days, as Aynsworth has it. If we demand what time this was, Musculus will
inform you, that it was post messem, at the end of Harvest, as being the most
proper time to offer the fruits of the Earth, which was Cain's Oblation. And
hereto Aynsworth does agree, Musculus in Genesis 4.
a man well versed amongst the Rabbis, affirming thus, that at the years end,
men were wont in most solemn manner, to Sacrifice unto God with thanks for his
Blessings, having gathered in their fruits; which he observes to be the custom
of the Gentiles also, Aynsw. Anno. in Genesis 4.
according to a place of Aristotle which is therein cited. So that the
Sacrifice of Cain and Abel was occasional merely, as unto the time. And for the
place, although the Scriptures tell us nothing of it, as a thing unnecessary to
be spoken of: Yet by the Rabbis we are told, that it was there where after
Abraham purposed to have offered Isaac. For as they say, It is a tradition by
the hand of all, that the place wherein David and Solomon built an Altar, in
the floor of Araunah, Id. ibid.
was the place where Abraham built an Altar and bound Isaac upon it; and that
was the place where Noah builded after he came out of the Ark; and that was the
Altar whereon Cain and Abel offered, and on it Adam the first man offered an
offering after he was created, etc. But this being of no greater certainty than
the tradition of the Rabbis, and such as has no ground to stand on; we may
conclude, that in these early days there was no set place put apart for Gods
public service; no greater constat to be found of that, than of a set and
prescribed time for the doing of it. Touching the Priest indeed, by whom the
Offering was presented to Almighty God, there is more assurance; that office
being executed by their Father Adam, to whom as to the Father of his Family, it
of right belonged; Bilson, perpetual Government. cap. 1. Exodus 19.22.
as it did afterward under the Firstborn, to those that had the privilege of
Primogeniture, until the Priesthood was by God established in the Tribe of
Levi. For howsoever it be said by Paraeus, in illa hominum paucitate, quisque
ut spiritualis sacerdos offerebat, that in those early times, when there were
so few men in the world, Paraeus in Genesis cap. 4.
every one as a spiritual Priest might tender and present his own oblation; yet
it is only said, not proved: and does not only contradict most approved
Writers, but seems also to run cross to the holy Scripture. And though we
find not in Gods Book, that in the celebration of this offering brought by Cain
and Abel, there were either Prayers or Praises intermingled with it: Calvin. in
Genesis
Yet I am very apt to think with Calvin, non inanibus ceremoniis illusisse
patres, that the Oblations offered both by Cain and Abel, as afterward by
other of the Patriarchs were not mere dumb shows, a bare and naked ceremony,
and no more than so. But being their devotions were occasional, as before was
said, we have no reason to presume that they had any prescript and set form of
Prayer, which of congruity was to change and vary, according to the several
occasions presented to them.

And yet it seems it was not long, Cain and Abel bringing their Offerings to
the Lord; and in the end thereof, on the birth of Enos, we find that men began
to call on the Name of the Lord. Genesis 4.26.
Which Text, by reason of the different readings, and no less differing
expositions, is not yet so clear, but that a question may be made, whether an
holy and religious Invocation on the Name of God be there meant or not, and if
it be, whether it were a private or a public duty. For howsoever we read it in
the Text of our English Bibles, Then began men to call on the Name of the Lord;
yet in the Margin it is otherwise, Then began men to call themselves by the
Name of the Lord: And Aynsworth differing from them both, Then began men to
call profanely on the Name of Jehovah. So also for the several Glosses made
upon the Text (not to insist upon the different readings either of the Greek or
Latin Bibles) the Chaldee Paraphrase had it thus, Tunc in diebus ejus
inceperunt filii hominum ut non orarent in nomine Domini: Chald. Paraph. in Genesis
Then in his days began the Sons of men not to invoke or call upon the Name of
God; which is directly contrary unto the English. S. Hierome thus according to
the tendries of the Jews, as himself informs us, Tunc primum in nomine Domini,
and in similitudine ejus fabricata sunt idola; then began men to set up Idols
both in the Name and after the Similitude of God. Hieronym. Qu. Hebraic. in Genesis
Maymonides one of the Learnedest of the Rabbis, as he is vouched by
Aynsworth, thus, That in those days Idolatry took its first beginning, and the
People Worshipped the Stars and the Host of Heaven. And as for those that do
adhere unto the reading of the vulgar Latin, Ap. Aynsw. in his notes on Genesis 4.
Iste coepit invocare nomen Domini, which differs very little from the English
Bible; they are not very well agreed amongst themselves, though most of them do
agree in this, that it is meant of public Worship, and which is more than so,
of set forms of worship. Junius amongst the Protestants does conceive it so.
Prius quidem invocavit Adam, sed in familia; nunc invocarunt multi, sed in
Ecclesiam recepti. Junii Annot. in Genesis
Adam (says he) did in the first beginning, call upon the Name of God, but it
was only as it were in his private Family: Now began many men to do the like,
but such as were assembled to that purpose in a Church or body. Paraeus is more
plain and positive. Sed an prius non fuit invocatum? Had not the Name of God
been called on in the former times? Yes that it had, says he, but privately
and by a few. But now the Family of Seth increasing, the Church and the
Religion in the same professed, Paraeus in cap. 4. Genesis
became much improved; Et certa cultus forma fuit constituta, and there was
constituted and established a set form of Worship. The like Pererius has for
the Pontificians, who first expounding it of the Exemplary piety of Enos, by
preaching and instructing others in the fear of God, then adds, that Enos is
first said to call upon the Name of the Lord, Pererius in Genesis cap. 4.
quia iste primus certas quasdam precationum formulas condidit, because he was
the first that did compose set forms of Prayer, and devised several rites and
ceremonies for the advancement of Gods Service. Of the same mind also is
Torniellus, as to the gathering of Gods People into Congregations, the setting
out of certain forms of Prayer and Praises for the performance of Religious
Worship, and the appointing of set times and places for those pious duties.
Tunc primum institutos fuisse spirituales quosdam conventus, and quasdam
devotas precationes, puta Psalmos aut Hymnos, in summi Dei laudem, Torniell.
Annal. sacri. anno 236.
certis temporibus and locis pie cultis, communiter recitandos, as his words
there are. In which he says no more, in substance, than did those before. But
where he adds Praecipue diebus Sabbati, that this was specially observed on the
Sabbath day; he has not only found a reach beyond his fellows, but plainly
contradicted what he said before in another place; where we are told that there
had been no sanctifying of a Sabbath here on earth, Id. Ibid. D. 7.
till the time of Moses, quando sub praecepto data est filiis Israel, when as
it was imposed by a Commandment on the House of Israel. Thus have we found
according to the Expositions of these Learned men, a prescribed form of
Common Prayer in the time of Enos, even in the cradle of the World. But being
the Text has different readings, and no less different explications, as before
was shown: I dare not hold it a fit ground whereon to raise the building which
I have in hand.

And if we find not here what we have in search, Noah or Abraham; Genesis 8.20.12,
7, 13, 4, etc. Genesis 12.8.13.4, etc. Genesis 26.25. Genesis 35.1. Genesis 33.20.
of both which it is said that they built Altars, and offered Sacrifice; of
Abraham, that he called also on the Name of God. Of Isaac, it is also said,
that he built an Altar, and called on the Name of the Lord: and it is said of
Jacob, the Son of Isaac, that he built two Altars, the one at Bethel, by the
Lords appointment, the other at El-Elohe-Israel, of his own devotion. But with
what rites those Sacrifices were accompanied, which were performed upon those
Altars; and in what solemn form of words, or whether with any solemn form of
words they did pour forth their prayers to Almighty God, I am not able to
determine. Most like it is, that their Devotions being occasional, their
Prayers and Hymns were fitted unto those occasions, as before was said. And
that the several Actions of Religious worship, which are recorded of the
Patriarchs in the Book of God, were occasional only, without relation either to
set times or places, may be easily seen, by looking over the particulars. The
Sacrifice of Noah as it was remarkable, so it was occasional; an Eucharistical
oblation for that great deliverance which had befallen him and his Family by
Gods grace and mercy. And therefore it is well observed by Scaliger, that
presently upon his coming out of the Ark, (...) immolavit Deo. Joseph. Scalig.
de Emend. Temp. l. 5.
He offered unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and paid his Vows to the
most High for so miraculous a safety. The Sacrifices and other Acts of public
Worship which are recorded in the Scripture of our Father Abraham, were
occasional also; either in due acknowledgment of Gods gracious promise made
unto him, at his first entrance into the Land of Canaan, Genesis xii. 7. or for
his blessings on his journey, ibid. verse. 8. or on his taking a livery and
seisin of the Promised Land, when he sat down and dwelt in the plain of Mamre,
cap. xiii. ver. 18. or on the peace concluded betwixt him and the King of
Philistims, cap. xxi. v. 33. or finally (not to look after other instances) on
the redemption or reprieve of Isaac, Genesis xxii. 13. The like we may observe in
that of Isaac, building an Altar, and calling on the Name of God, that it was
done upon the Lords appearing to him, and the gracious comforts which he gave
him, cap. xxxvi. 25. And why did Jacob offer Sacrifice at Galeed, Genesis xxxi. v.
48. and 54. but on occasion of the League concluded betwixt him and Laban? or
build an Altar at El-Elobe-Israel, but in regard that he had made a
Pacification with his Brother Esau, and was restored unto his Country? cap.
xxxii. v. 20. So that in all this search into particulars, the most which we
can find is this, that they were all intent upon building Altars; which shows
that Altars were no part of the Jewish Ceremonies, nor by those holy men
conceived unfit to be employed in the performance of Religious Worship; and
that the Sacrifices made upon these Altars, were intermixed with Prayer and
Invocation on the Name of God. Of any prescript form of Prayer, there is as
little to be found in the former instances, as of appointed either times or
places for the performance of the same; of which we have found nothing hitherto
in the Book of Genesis.

Not hitherto indeed in any of the instances before produced, Abraham's planting
of a Grove, and calling there upon the Name of the Lord, Genesis xxi. 33. is
thought by men of no mean credit and ability in the ways of Learning, to be the
designation of a set and appointed place, for the officiating of Gods public
Service. Musculus does conceive it so. Musculus in Genesis cap. 21. Cajetan in
locum.
Locum orationis and Ecclesiae suae constituit inter Arbores. And Cajetan
before him to the same effect, Nemus quoddam tanquam templum effecit, ut esset
oratorium tam sibi quam aliis colentibus verum Deum. Whose judgment in this
point is both recited and approved by Pererius the Jesuit, in his Commentaries
on the Text. They all agree in this, that Abraham did plant that Grove for a
Church or Oratory, wherein himself and others which were so devoted, might make
their supplications to the Lord their God. Calvin in locum.
But Calvin rather thinks that Abraham having settled all his differences with
K. Abimelech, did plant this Grove, in signum tranquillae fixaeque
habitationis, to signify that now he had a constant dwelling in the Land of
Canaan; men using not to build or plant but where they do intend to set up
their rest. Lyra conceives that it was planted for no other end, than the
benefit of shade and fruit, and to give entertainment unto Strangers; Lyran. in
locum.
qui amoenitate loci recrearentur, and fructibus reficerentur; to whom the
pleasures of the place, and sweetness of the fruits must needs be equally
delightful. And this comes nearer to the Hebrew Aeshel, which does not so much
signify a Grove, as a well-spread Tree. So that the meaning of the Text being
not resolved, or if that were, the meaning of the Text which Musculus and
Cajetan have agreed upon; yet being it was not drawn into example by Gods
faithful Servants in the times succeeding, but only by the Gentiles and the
Idolatrous Jews, in their Apostasy from God; we dare not from this Text infer
a set place of worship, or that the following Ages took an hint from hence to
consecrate appointed and determinate places for Religious uses. But if we look
a little lower, into the Life and History of Jacob, we may perhaps find that
which will be conclusive. Now it is said of Jacob in the Book of Genesis, that
when he had beheld the Vision, and awaked from sleep, and said, How dreadful is
this place, etc. that he rose up early in the morning, and took the stone which
he had put for his pillow, and set it up for a Pillar, Genesis 28.16, 17, etc.
and poured oil on the top of it. And then, and not till then he called the
name of the place Bethel, which by interpretation is the House of God. Josephus
gives this gloss on these words of Moses, Joseph. Antiq. Judaic. l. 1. c. 19.
(...). Honorem etiam loco addidit, Bethel nominando, quod Graecis domicilium
Dei significat. And this I take beyond all question, to be the first place
solemnly inaugurated for the Worship of God, ordained by him to be Gods House,
as it is called expressly, v. 22. A place so pleasing to the Lord, that he
vouchsafed to call himself the God of Bethel. I am the God of Bethel, where
thou anointedst the Pillar, Genesis xxxi. 13. And to this place did Jacob go by
Gods Commandment, to offer Sacrifice to the Lord, and to pay his Vows, Genesis
xxxv. Finally, to conclude this Chapter, in imitation of this act of Jacob's
(unless perhaps it were some remaining spark of the light of Nature) the Jews,
and after them the Gentiles, and at last the Christians have used to consecrate
their Temples, and in them their Altars. Sure I am that Rabanus Maurus so
resolves it, saying, Altar post aspersionem aquae Chrismate ungitur, ad
imitationem Patriarchae Jacob qui post visionem illam terribilem, Rab. Maurus
de Institut. Clericorum. l. 1. cap. 45.
erexit lapidem in titulum, fundens oleum desuper, vocansque eum locum domum
Dei. But it is time to pass from these unsettled Ages of the Church of God, and
to behold it in a constituted and established state; where we shall find not
only certain and determinate places and set times of worship to be prescribed
by the Lord; but also certain and established forms of worship to be observed
amongst Gods Servants from the first beginnings.

CHAP. II. That from the time of Moses unto that of David, the Jews were not
without a Liturgy or set form of Worship.
1. The Israelites in the Land of Egypt had not the liberty of public worship.
2. That people made a constituted Church, first, in the time of Moses. 3. The
prescribed rites and form of the legal Sacrifices. 4. Set forms of Prayer and
Benediction, used at the offering of the Sacrifices, in the time of Moses. 5.
The Song of Moses, made a part of the Jewish Liturgy. 6. The form and rites
used in the Celebration of the Passover, according unto Joseph Scaliger. 7.
The same, together with the Hymns then used, described by Beza, 8. The several
Prayers and Benedictions which were used therein, according to the Jewish
Rabbis. 9. A form of Blessing of the People prescribed by God unto the
Priests: A prescribed form used by the People at the offering of their first
fruits and tithes. 10. The like in burning of their Leaven, and in confessing
of their Sins to Almighty God, as also in the Excommunicating of Impenitent
persons. 11. An Answer to two main objections from, and against the Jewish
Rabbis. 12. The form of Marriage, and rites of Burial, used amongst the Jews.


HItherto we have looked into the Actions and devotions of the blessed
Patriarchs, Canaan; in which we find not any apparent footstep either of
appointed times or determinate places, or set forms of worship; more than the
Consecrating of Jacobs Pillar, and giving to the place the name of Bethel.
Follow them in their journey toward the Land of Egypt, and we find Israel
offering Sacrifices at Beersheba (being in his way upon the rode) unto the God
of his Father Isaac, Genesis xlvi. 1. Which Sacrifice, if we observe it as we
ought, Bersabe fuit ultima villa terra Chanaan eundi versus Aegyptum. Lyran in
Genesis 46. Ayns. Annot. in Genesis 46.1.
will prove to be as much occasional as any of the rest which we saw before: It
being very well observed by Aynsworth, that Jacob in his Sacrifice upon the
way, did both give thanks to God for the good tidings which he heard of Joseph,
and also consulted with the Lord about his going into Egypt, whither his Father
Isaac had been forbidden to go in a time of Famine, as this was, Genesis xxvi.
Besides, Beersheba being the last Town of the Land of Canaan, in the way of
Egypt, this might be the last time, for ought he could tell, wherein he might
have opportunity of offering Sacrifice to the Lord his God, or tendering to him
any public testimony of his faith and duty. And so it proved in the event; nor
he nor any one of his Posterity, being permitted whilst they were in Egypt to
offer any Sacrifice unto the Lord, as before they used to do. And this appears
by the request which Moses made to Pharaoh in behalf of the House of Israel,
that he would suffer them to go three days journey into the Wilderness, to
offer Sacrifice therein to the Lord their God. To which when Pharaoh made
reply, Exodus 5.3.
that rather than let the People go, he would permit them for that once, to
offer Sacrifice unto the Lord in the Land of Egypt: Not so, said Moses, it is
not meet we should do so; for we shall Sacrifice the abomination of the
Egyptians before their eyes, and they will stone us. Exodus 8.26.
His reason was, because the Gods of the Egyptians were Bulls and Rams, and
Sheep and Oxen, as Lyra notes upon the place. Talia vero animalia ab Hebraeis
erailt immolanda, Lyran. in Exodus cap. 8.
quod non permisissent Aegyptii in terrasua. And certainly the Egyptians could
not well endure to see their gods knocked down before their faces. So that for
all the time that they lived in Egypt, the piety and devotion of Gods people
did consist especially in the integrity and honesty of their conversation and
in those private exercises of Religion which might be done within their own
walls, in their several Families. Nothing to make it known that they were Gods
Servants, (...), as it is observed by Epiphanius, but that they feared the Lord
and were Circumcised; Epiphan. adv. haeres. l. 1. haer. 5.
nothing but that they did acknowledge one only God, and exercised themselves
in justice and in modesty, in patience and long-suffering both toward one
another and amongst the Egyptians, framing their lives agreeably unto the will
of God, and the law of Nature.

But no sooner, by a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, Sabbath Day, Exodus
16.23.
the keeping of the which was the first of the Commandments which God gave by
Moses; from whence the Hebrew Doctors say, that the Commandment of the Sabath
is the foundation and ground of all the rest, quod ante alia praecepta hoc
datum sit, quando Manna acceperunt, as being given before them all in the fall
of Manna. Hospini. de Fest. Judaeorum. cap. 3.
A day to be observed and sanctified, both by Priest and People; by the Priest
in adding to the daily Sacrifice an offering of two Lambs of an year old
without blemish, one in the morning, and the other in the evening; and by the
people in an absolute resting from the works of labor, that they might give
themselves the better to divine contemplation. Unto which day it pleased God
afterward to add diverse solemn Festivals to be observed in their several and
appointed seasons, viz. the New Mons, Lev. 1.23.
the Feasts of Trumpets, and of Tabernacles, the Feasts of Pentecost, and of
the Passover; although this last had the precedence indeed, both in regard of
institution, and of observation over all the rest; this being both ordained and
kept at their departure out of Egypt, the other not enjoined till they were
come unto mount Sinai, even in the bowels of the Wilderness. The times being
thus appointed and determined, Exodus 12. per tot.
the next particular we meet withal, is the designation of the place, which was
contrived by the direction of Almighty God, according to the present condition
of his People. For being they were then in motion toward Canaan, not yet
settled there, they were to be provided of a portable Temple, if I may so call
it, which might be carried and removed, according to the stations and removes
of Israel. This we find called in holy Scripture by the name of the Tabernacle,
the Tabernacle (...), Exodus 26. and 31. and 35.
and by way of eminency; the making and materials of the which are laid down
at large in the xxvi. Chapter of the Book of Exodus. And it continued a long
time the place of public Worship for the Tribes of Israel, not only when they
were in their way or journeys; but also after they were settled in the Land of
Canaan, though many times it changed its seat there, as occasion was, even till
the building of the Temple by the hand of Solomon. And for the Priests who were
to minister unto the Lord in his Congregation, no sooner were the times
determined, and the place designed, but the Lord gave command to Moses, saying,
Take thou unto thee Aaron thy Brother, and his Sons with him, from amongst the
Children of Israel, Exodus 28.1.
that he may minister unto me in the Priests office. Unto which office as they
were designed by these words of God, so were they after consecrated thereunto
in a solemn form, by the hand of Moses, the state and manner of the which is
upon record in the viii. Chapter of Leviticus. And now, and not till now, were
the Tribes of Israel established in a Constituted Church by the Lord their God.

But as once Isaac said to Abraham, Behold the fire and the wood, but where is
the Lamb for a Burnt-offering? Genesis 22.7.
So here we have the Sabbath and the solemn Festivals, the Tabernacle and the
Priests; but where are the Sacrifices all this while, where the forms of
worship? That now comes after in its course; and that we will consider in its
full extent, either as legal, or as moral. First for the legal part thereof, it
was all prescribed; nothing left arbitrary to the people, either for the matter
or the manner. God knew full well, that as they had been much infected with the
Idolatries of Egypt, where they lived before, (witness the Golden Calf which
they made in Horeb) so they were apt to be entangled in the Idolatries of those
Nations which they were to neighbor; and therefore thought it fittest for them
to be tied up and limited in all acts of worship, by his prescriptions. Which
that we may the better see, I shall present a brief Synopsis of those rites and
ceremonies which were to be observed in these legal Sacrifices, together with
the Creatures to be Sacrificed; according as I find them in Josephus, who has
reduced into a lesser compass, that which is laid down more at large in the
holy Scriptures. (...), Joseph Antiq. Judaic. l. 3. c. 10.
etc. The Sacrifices are of two sorts; the one of them is made for a private
person, the other for the people in general; and these are made in two manners,
for in the one all is consumed which is upon the Altar, which for that cause is
called an Holocaust, or an whole Burnt-offering; the other is Eucharistical or
of thanksgiving, and they are made with Feasts by those that Sacrifice. The
particular person that offered a Burnt-offering, killed an Ox, a Lamb, or a
Goat of an year old (yet it was lawful to kill an Ox of greater age) being all
Males: And after their Throats are cut, the Priests besprinkle the Altar round
about with the blood, then they dress the Beast, and cut it in pieces, and
season it with salt, and lay it on the Altar ready prepared with wood and fire;
and having well cleansed the feet and entrails, they lay them with the rest,
and the Priest takes the skins. They that offer the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving,
kill likewise such sorts of Beasts without spot, and more than a year old, both
Male and Female; and after they have cut the throats, they sprinkle the blood
on the Altar, then they take the reins, the caul, and the fat, with the caul
about the liver, and the rump, and lay it on the Altar, but the breast and the
left leg is left unto the Priests; and as touching the rest of the flesh, the
Priests feast therewith for the space of two days, and if then there remain any
thing thereof, it is burned. The same is also observed in the Sin-offering; but
those that are not of ability to make these greater offerings, do bring unto
the Offerings a pair of Pigeons, or two young Turtles, the one of which the
Priests have to feast withal, the other is consumed with sire. He that has
sinned upon Ignorance, offers a Lamb and a she Goat at the same time; and the
Priest besprinkleth the Altar with the blood thereof, not in the same manner as
before, but the horns only of the Altar; and on the Altar they offer the
kidneys with the rest of the fat and the caul of the liver; the Priests
carrying away the skins, and eating the flesh within the Tabernacle the very
same day, because the Law permits not to reserve any thing until the next.
He that has sinned (none but himself being privy to it) offers a Lamb
according as the Law commands, the flesh whereof is eaten in like sort by the
Priests the same very day. But if the Princes of the People offer for their
sins, they do in like sort as others do, save that they bring a Bull or a
Male-kid. The Law also ordains that in all Sacrifices both private and
common, there should be a certain quantity of fine flower brought, viz. for a
Lamb one Assar, An Assar, as I take it, is the tenth part of an Ephah, or three
pints and an half of Ale-measure. An Hin contained three quarts of our measure.
for a Ram two, for a Bull three, which is first of all mingled and wrought
with oil, and then set upon the Altar to be sanctified. They that Sacrifice do
likewise bring oil, the balf part of an Hin for a Bull; for a Ram, the third
part; for a Lamb the fourth: They brought also the like measure of wine, as of
oil, and poured the wine near to the Altar. And if any without Sacrificing,
offer up fine flower, he puts the first fruits upon the Altar, that is to
say, one handful of it; and the rest is taken by the Priests, either fried (for
it is kneaded with oil) or in loaves made thereof. But whatsoever the Priest
offers, that must all be hurnt. The Law likewise forbids to offer any
Beast whatever the same day it is born, or to kill it with its Dam, or in any
other sort, before it has fed twelve days. There are also other Sacrifices
made for deliverance from sickness, or for other causes; in which Sacrifices
they employ wine or liquor with that which is offered, of which liquors it is
not lawful to reserve any thing till the next day, when the Priests have taken
that portion which belongs to them. So far Josephus.

The rest that follows of this Argument is, Sabbath and the other Festivals;
in all which every thing was prescribed and limited by the Law of God. And if
such care was taken by the Lord our God in the prescribing of these Sacrifices,
and all the Rites and Ceremonies which belonged to them, being the legal part
only of this public worship; there is no question to be made but that the
Church took care to prescribe forms of Prayers and Praises to be used in them,
which is the moral part thereof. A thing which God might please to leave unto
the wisdom of his Church and the Rulers of it, in that being moral duties, and
so by consequence imprinted in the minds of men, by the stamp of nature; there
needed not so punctual and precise a prescription of them, as of the outward
ceremonies which were merely legal. Now that there were set forms of Prayers
and Praises used in the celebratien of these legal Sacrifices, even from the
very times of Moses, appears by a memorable passage in an old Samaritan
Chronicle, belonging once unto the Library of Joseph Scaliger, now in the
custody of the Learned Primate of Armagh. In which Book, after relation of the
death of Adrian the Emperor, whom the Jews curse with Conterat Deus ossa ejus
(as certainly he was a deadly enemy of theirs) it follows thus. Quo tempore
abstulit librum optimum qui penes illos fuit, Clted by the L. B. of Exeter now
B. of Norwich, in his Answer to the Vindication.
jam inde a diebus illis tranquillis and pacificis, qui continebat cantiones
and preces sacrificiis praemissas; Singulis enim Sacrificiis singulas
praemiserunt cantiones, jam tum diebus pacis usitatas, quae omnia acourato
conscripta, in singulas transmissa subsequentes generationes a tempore Legati
(Mosis sc.) ad hunc usque diem per ministerium Pontificum Maximorum. These are
the words at large as I find them cited; the substance of the which is this,
That after the decease of Adrian, the High Priest then being, took away that
most excellent Book, which had been kept amongst them ever since the calm and
peaceable times of the Israelites, which contained those Songs and Prayers
which were ever used before their Sacrifices, there being before every several
Sacrifice some several Song or Hymn still used in those times of peace; all
which being accurately written had been transmitted to the subsequent
generations from the time of Moses the Legate, or Ambassador of God, to that
very time, by the Ministry of the High Priests of the Jewish Nation. A book to
which the Chronicle aforesaid gives this ample testimony, Eo libro historia
nulla praeter Pentateuchum Mosis antiquior invenitur, that there was not to be
found a more ancient piece, except the Pentateuch of Moses. And though some
men, (no friends to Liturgy) out of a mind and purpose to disgrace the
evidence, have told us, that the most contained in the aforesaid book,
Smectymn. Vindicat. p. 24.
were only divine Hymns, wherein there was always something of Prayer: In
saying so, they have given up their verdict for us, and confirmed our evidence.
For if there were set Hymns or Songs premised before every Sacrifice; and if
that every Hymn had somewhat in it of a Prayer, there must be then set forms of
Hymns and Prayers used at every Sacrifice, which was the matter to be proved,
and by them denied.

But to descend unto particulars; there was a Song composed and sung by Moses,
Exodus 15.
on the defeat of Pharaoh and the host of Egypt, which is still extant in Gods
book. A song sung Quire-wise, as it seems, Moses as Chanter in that holy
Anthem, singing verse by verse, and Mary the Prophetess, Aaron's Sister, and
all the residue of the Women, with Instruments of Music in their hands, saying
or singing at each verses end, CANTATE DOMINO, Sing ye to the Lord, for he has
triumphed gloriously, the horse and the rider has he thrown into the Sea,
verse. 21. Aynsworth does so conceive it in his Notes on Exodus, and Lyra on the
place differs little from it. Egressae sunt mulieres, quibus (Maria)
praecinebat, sec. quod oportebat fieri, and aliae respondebant sicut solet
fieri in tympanis and choris; and eodem modo fecit Moses respecu virorum.
Cajetan, though he differ from them both in the manner of it, yet he agrees
upon the matter, that this Hymn or Anthem was sung Quire-wise or alternatim; it
being his opinion, that the Women singing some spiritual song to the praise of
God, Cajetan in Exodus c. 15.21.
Mary to every verse made answer CANTATE DOMINO. Innuitur (says he) quod tot
choris mulierum tanquam ex una part, canentibus aliquid in divinam laudem,
Maria sola tanquam ex altera part canebat initium supra scripti Cantici; that
viz. which was sung by Moses. But whatsoever manner there was used in the
singing of it, it seems the Jews did afterward make Use thereof in their
public Liturgy. For thus says Hooker in his Book of Ecclesiastical Polity:
Hook. Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. n. 26.
That very Hymn of Moses (whereof now we speak) grew afterward to be a part of
the ordinary Jewish Liturgy, and not that only, but sundry others since
invented; their Books of Common prayer containing partly Hymns, taken out of
the holy Scriptures, partly Thanksgivings, Benedictions, and Supplications,
penned by such as were from time to time the Governors of that Synagogue. All
which were sorted into several times and places; some to begin the Service of
God withal, and some to end; some to go before, and some to follow after, and
some to be interlaced between the divine readings of the Law and Prophets. Nor
is there any thing more probable than that unto their custom of finishing the
Passover with certain Psalms, the holy Evangelist does evidently allude,
saying, That after the Cup delivered by our Savior unto his Apostles, they
sung, and so went forth to the Mount of Olives.

What ground that eminent and learned man had for the first part of his
Assertion, viz That the song of Moses grew afterward to be a part of the
Jewish Liturgy, although he has not pleased to let us know; yet I am confident
he had good ground for what he said. But for the latter part thereof, that the
Evangelist does allude unto certain Psalms used at the finishing of the Jewish
Passover; I think there is not any thing more clear and evident. For proof
whereof, and that we may the better see with what set form of Prayers and
Praises the Passover was celebrated by the Jews of old; Joseph. Scalig. de
emend. Temp. 1.6.
we will make bold to use the words of Joseph Scaliger, who describes it thus:
All things being readily prepared, and the guests assembled, Offam azymam in
Embamma intingebat Paterfamilias, etc. The Father of the Family, or Master of
the House dipped the unleavened bread into the sauce, which was forthwith
eaten. Another part thereof being carefully reserved under a napkin, was broke
into as many pieces as there were several guests in the Paschal Chamber; each
piece being of the bigness of an Olive, and each delivered severally to the
guests, as they sat in order. That done, he takes the Cup, and having drank
thereof, gives it to the next, he to a second, and so in order to the rest,
till they all had drank. The form of Blessing which he used was this,
Benedictus es Domine Deus noster, Rex seculi, qui sanctificasti nos mandatis
tuis, and praeceptum dedisti super hoc pane Azymo. Blessed art thou O Lord our
God, King of all the world, which have sanctified us with thy holy precepts,
and given us this Commandment about the eating of unleavened bread. And at the
giving of the bread, this form, Iste est panis aerumnae quem comederunt patres
nostri in terra Aegypti. Quisquis esurit, accedat and paschatizet. This is the
bread of sorrow which our Fathers eat when they were in Egypt. Whosoever is an
hungered let him come and eat this Passover. The formal words used at the
blessing of the Cup, were these, Benedictus es Domine qui fructum vitis
creasti, Blessed art thou, O Lord, which have Created the fruit of the Vine.
And this is called (...), the Cup of Praise, because whilst it was passing
round about the Table, they sung an Hymn of Praise to the Lord their God.
Finally, Supper being done, and all the Ceremonies ended, they sung the cxiii
Psalm, and so dismissed the Assembly. So far the great and famous Scaliger.
This last affirmed also by Paulus Brugensis, who adds that this Psalm (being
the cxii. in his account) with the five that follow, are by the Hebrews made
into one Hymn, and called Allelujah magnum; Paulus Brugens. in Psalm. 112.
and that they use to sing the same not only at the conclusion of the Passover
(as it is observed by Joseph Scaliger) but also in the New Moons, and the three
great Feasts ( in tribus praecipuis festis and in neomeniis) those, viz. of
Pentecost, the Trumpets, and the feasts of Tabernacles and finally, that Christ
our Savior conforming to the forms established, Post comestionem agni
Paschalis, hymnum praedictum cum Apostolis recitavit, did after the eating of
the Paschal Lamb, sing the said Hymn with his Apostles.

This though it make it clear and evident, Beza also; whose words we will lay
down at large without alteration. Sciendum (says he) agitata fuisse haec
convivia in privatis aedibus (...), Beza Annot. in Mat. 26.
i.e. per contubernia, non paucorum quam denum virorum, interdum etiam vicenum,
qui nisi pedibus de more lotis, totos etiam nonnulli corporibus, non sedebant,
sed discumbebant, Agno illo solido cum panibus Azymis vescentes. Hac autem
coena peracta consurgentes, altera pedum ablutione facta rursum discumbentes ad
secundas mensas sese comparabant. In has vero secundas mensas pro bellariis
inferebantur in triblio Acetarium, ex intybis and lactucis agrestibus; quarum
amaritudinem adhibito quodam embammate temperabant. Tum vero Paterfamilias
panem Azymum integrum in duas parts dividens, sic uni benedicebat, Benedictus
es Domine, Deus noster, Rex universi, in esu panis Azymi. Alteram autem partem
sub mappa reconditam ad finem convivii servabat: quo peracto, idem
Paterfamilias alteram illam partem depremens, in tot frusta fractam quot erant
in illo contubernio convivatores, primus ipse sumebat, reliqua vero frusta
sigillatim and ordine discumbentibus caeteris porrigebat, cum his verbis: Iste
est panis aerumnae quem comederunt majores nostri in terra Aegypti. Quisquis
esurit accedat and paschatizet; cuicunque opus est accedat, and paschatizet.
Denique poculum acceptum and degustatum, praeeunte hac benedictione, Benedictus
es Domine, qui fructum vitis creasti, idem Paterfamilias proxime tradebat, and
ille secundo, donec poculum per totum convivium circumferretur. His autem
omnibus absolutis, Psalmus cxiii. cum quinque aliis proxime sequentibus
canebatur, quem solennem hymnum adhuc hodie magnum Hallelujah vocant; neque
post hoc poculum, quod propterea poculum hymni five laudationis dicebatur,
comedere quicquam illa nocte fas erat. The English of this Latin, as to the
sum and substance of it, we have seen before in that of Scaliger; and shall see
more at large in that which follows. In the mean time, without all
peradventure, we have found a Liturgy, an order of Celebrating that holy
Sacrament, consisting both of Rules and Rubricks, for the performing of the
service; as also of those forms of Prayer, and Praise, and Benediction,
wherewith that service was performed. And lest perhaps it may be said that
these were some of the traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees, devised in the
declining and corrupted Ages of the Jewish Church: Beza assures us it is no
such matter; but that these rites and forms had been used amongst them, a primo
in Chananitidem ingressu, from their first entrance into the Land of Canaan,
which was as soon directly, Id. Ibid.
as they were a Church.

To make the matter surer yet, Jewish Passover, according as it is described
at large by Aynsworth, out of the writings of the Rabbis, I will here show,
says he, the order which the Jews in the Ages following, Aynsworth Annot. in
Exodus 12.
kept at the Passover, as themselves have recorded it. First a cup of Wine is
filled for every one, and he blesses for it him that Created the fruit of the
Vine, etc. and drinks it. After that, he blesses for the washing of hands,
and washes his hands. Then is brought in a Table furnished, and upon it bitter
herbs and unleavened bread, and the sauce, and the body of the Paschal Lamb,
and the flesh of the Chagigah or Feast-offering, which is for the fourteenth
day of the month. Then he begins to bless God which Created the fruit of
the earth, and takes an herb and dippeth it in the sauce, and eats it, he and
all that lie at the Table, every one; none eats less than the quantity of an
Olive. Afterward the Table is taken away from before him only that makes the
declaration (of their deliverance out of Egypt, as is commanded, Exodus xiii.
and xii. 17.) Then they fill the second Cup, and the Son asks what is meant
by this service ( according to Exodus xii. 26.) and he that makes the
declaration says, How different is this night from all other nights? For all
other nights we wash but once, but this night twice. All other nights we eat
leavened bread or unleavened, but this night unleavened bread only. All other
nights we eat flesh roasted, baked or boiled, but this night roasted only; all
other nights we eat of any other herbs, but this night bitter herbs: All other
nights we eat either sitting or lying, but this night lying only. Then the
Table is brought again before him, and be says, This Passover which we eat,
is in respect that the Lord passed over the Houses of our Fathers in Egypt.
Then holds be up the bitter herbs in his hand, and says, These bitter herbs
which we eat are in respect that the Egyptians made the lives of our Fathers
bitter in Egypt. Then he holds up the unleavened bread in his hand, and
says, This unleavened bread which we eat, is in respect that the dough of our
Fathers had not time to be leavened, when the Lord appeared unto them, and
redeemed them out of the hand of the Enemy; and they baked unleavened Cakes of
the dough which they brought out of Egypt. Then be says, Therefore are we
bound to Confess, to Praise, to Laud, to Celebrate, to Glorify, to Honor, to
Extol, to Magnify, and to Ascribe Victory unto him that did unfreedom, from
sorrow to joy, from darkness to great light; and we say before him Hallelujah,
Hallelujab, Praise O ye Servants of the Lord, etc. unto the end of the cxiv.
Psalm. Then they bless the Lord which redeemed them and their Fathers out of
Egypt, and has brought them unto that night to eat unleavened bread therein,
and bitter herbs. And he blesses God who Created the fruit of the Vine, and
drinks the second Cup. After this he blesses for the washing of hands, and
washes his hands the second time; and takes two Cakes, parts one of them,
etc. and blesses God that brings bread out of the Earth. Because it is said
the Bread of Affliction, or of Poverty, Deuteronomy. xvi. 3. As it is the manner of
the Poor to have broken meat, so here is a broken part. Afterward he wrappeth
up of the unleavened bread and of the bitter herbs together, and dippeth them
in the sauce, and blesses God which commanded to eat unleavened bread and
bitter herbs, and they eat. Then he blesses God which commanded the eating of
the Sacrifice, and he eats the flesh of the Feast-offering; and again
blesses God which commanded the eating of the Passover, and then he eats of
the body of the Passover. After this they sit long at Supper, and eat every
one so much as he will, and drink as much as they will drink. Afterward he
eats of the flesh of the Passover, though it be but so much as an Olive; and
tastes nothing at all after it; that it may be the end of his supper, and that
the taste of the flesh of the Passover may remain in his mouth. After this, he
lifts up his bands and blesses for the third cup of Wine, and drinks it.
Then fills he the fourth cup, and accomplisheth for it the Praise (or hymn)
and says for it the blessing of the song, which is, All thy works praise thee,
O Lord, etc. Psalm. cxlv. 10. and blesses God that Created the fruit of the
Vine, and tastes nothing at all after it all the night, except water. And he
may fill the fifth cup, saying ( for it is the great Hymn, viz.) Confess ye to
the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever, Psalm. cxxxvi. unto
the end of that Psalm. But he is not bound (they say) to that cup as to the
four farmer cups. For this he cites Rabbi Maymoni, and after adds from the
said Author (but from another work of his) That at the breaking and delivering
of the unleavened bread, they do use these words, This is the Bread of
Affliction which our Fathers did eat in the Land of Egypt. Whosoever is hungry,
let him come and eat; whosoever has need, let him come and keep the Passover,
etc. Compare the words which follow after, viz. These observations of the Jews
whilst their Commonwealth stood, etc. with those of Beza formerly remembered, a
primo in Chananitidem ingressu; and then we have an Answer to the doubt which
might be raised from the first words of Aynsworth in these observations; which
seem to intimate, that this Order was not used by the Jews till the Ages
following. The Prayers, the Praises, and the Benedictions which are the points
which Beza speaks of, might be and were used by them at their first entrance on
the Land of Canaan; their frequent washings and reiterating of the Cup so
often, might not be introduced till the Ages following.

Here then we have set forms of Prayer and Praise, Moses made a part of the
Jewish Liturgy, the several rites and prescribed duties observed in the
solemnity of the Jewish Passover, and all of very great Antiquity, even from
the time of Moses, says the old Samaritan Chronicle; a primo in
Chananitidemingressu, from their first entrance into the Promised Land, as it
is in Beza. And for the instituting of these forms, besides the power that God
has given unto his Church on the like occasions, they had the president and
example of the Lord himself, who had prescribed in one kind, binding the
Priests unto a certain form of Benediction, when he blessed the people; and in
a second place of Moses, who had tied himself unto a certain form of words, as
often as he settled or removed the Ark. For we are told in holy Scripture, that
whenever the Ark set forwards, Moses said, Rise up Lord, and let thine
Enemies he scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thee. And when it
rested he said, Return O Lord unto the many thousands of Israel. Numb. 10.35.
And for the blessing of the people, we find the form thereof prescribed by the
Lord himself, saying unto Aaron and his Sons, On this wise shall ye bless the
Children of Israel, saying unto them, The Lord bless thee and keep thee; the
Lord make his Face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee, the Lord lift
up his Countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. Numb. 10.23, 24, 25, 26.
And to this form the Priests were so precifely tied, that they durst not vary
from the same, the Hebrew Doctors understanding the word thus, or in this wise,
to imply both the matter and the manner, as viz. Thus shall ye bless, i.e.
standing, thus, with the lifting up of hands; thus, in the holy tongue; thus,
with your faces toward the faces of the people; thus, with an high voice;
thus, by Gods expressed Name JEHOVAH, if ye bless in the Sanctuary. So that it
was not lawful to the Priest in any place to add any blessing unto these three
verses, as to say (like that of Deuteronomy. 1.11.) The Lord God of your Fathers make
you a thousand times so many more as you are, or any the like. Maymoni cited by
Aynsw in Numb. 6.
Now for the manner wherewithal the Priests performed this office, it was
briefly thus. The Priests went up unto the bank or stage, after that they had
finished the daily morning Service, and lifted up their hands on high above
their heads, and their fingers spread abroad, except the High Priest, who might
not lift his hands higher than the Plate (whereof see Exodus xxviii. 36.) and
one pronounced the blessing word by word, till the three verses were ended. And
the people answered not after every verse, but they made it in the Sanctuary
one blessing. And when they had finished, all the people answered, Blessed be
the Lord God, the God of Israel for ever and ever. Id. Ibid.
By which we may preceive most clearly, first that the Priests were tied
precisely to a form of blessing, prescribed by the Lord himself. And secondly,
that to this form of blessing thus prescribed by God, the Church did after add
of her own Authority, not only several external and significant rites, but a
whole clause to be subjoyned by the people, after the Priest had done his part.
Now as the Priests were limited by Almighty God unto a set and prescribed form,
wherewith they were to bless the people in the Name of God: So did he also set
a form unto the People; in which they were to pay their Tithes and First Fruits
to the Lord their God, toward the maintenance of the Priests. First for the
form used at the oblation of the First Fruits, it was this that follows: (the
words being spoke unto the Priest) I profess this day unto the Lord thy God,
that I am come unto the Country, which the Lord swear unto our Fathers to give
us. Which said, and the Oblation being placed by the Priest before the Altar,
the party which brought it was to say, A Syrian ready to perish was my Father,
and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a
Nation, great, mighty and populous. And the Egyptians evil entreated us and
afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage. And when we cried unto the Lord
God of our Fathers, the Lord beard our voice, and looked on our affliction, and
our labor, and our oppression. And the Lord brought us forth of Egypt with a
mighty hand; and with an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and
with signs and with wonders. And he has brought us into this place, and has
given us this Land, even a Land that flows with Milk and Honey. And now
behold I have brought the First Fruits of the Land, which thou O Lord have
given unto me. Then for the tendry of the Tithe of the third year, which only
was payable to the Priest, (those of the other two years being due to the
Levites in the Country) it was to be brought unto Jerusalem, and tendered in
these following words, viz. I have brought away the hallowed thing out of mine
House, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the Stranger, to the
Fatherless, and to the Widow, according to all thy Commandments which thou have
commanded me: I have not transgressed thy Commandments, neither have I
forgotten them. I have not eaten thereof in my journeying, neither have I taken
away ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for the dead;
but I have bearkened to the voice of the Lord my God, and have done according
to all that thou have commanded me. Look down from thy holy habitation from
Heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the Land which thou have given us; as
thou swarest to our Fathers, a Land that flows with Milk and Honey. Of this
see Deuteronomy. 26. from the 1 verse to the 16.

Led by these precedents, and guided by the Wisdom of the Spirit of God, viz.
Let all that Leaven, or whatsoever leavened thing is in my power, whether it
were seen of me, or not seen, whether cleansed by me, or not cleansed, let all
that be scattered, destroyed, and accounted of as the dust of the Earth: A
prescribed form they also had, in a constant practice for the confession of
their sins, to the Throne of God. The ground thereof they took indeed from the
holy Scripture, where the Lord God commanded, saying, And Aaron shall lay both
his hands upon the head of the live Goat, and confess over him all the
Iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their Transgressions in all their
sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, etc. Lev. 16.21.
Ask Lyra, what kind of Confession is there meant, and he will tell you that it
was a general Confession of the peoples sins, made by the mouth of the Priest,
for and in their names; sicut facimus in Confessione in principio Missae, as we
(the Priests) are wont to make in the beginning of the Mass. The Learned Morney
comes more home, and informs us thus. Lyr. in Levit. cap. 18.21.
Confessio olim in sacrificio solennis. Ejus praeterquam in lege vestigia, in
Prophetis formulam habemus. In ipsis Judaeorum libris verba tanquam concepta
extant, quae sacerdos pronunciare solitus. Of old they had a solemn or set
manner of Confession, Mornaeus de Missal. 1. cap. 5.
whereof besides those footsteps of it which are remaining in the Law, the form
is extant in the Prophets. And in the Jewish Liturgy the express words are to
be seen, which were pronounced by the Priest. Now if we ask of Paulus Phagius,
than whom none more acquainted with the Jewish Liturgies, what the precise form
was which the Priest did use; he will thus inform us. Forma confessionis qua
tum usus est summus Pontifex, secundum Hebraeorum relationem haec fuit, etc.
The form (says he) used then by the High Priest in Confessing the peoples
sins, (as the Hebrew Doctors have recorded) was as follows. P. Phagius in
Chaldaea Paraphr. in cap. 16. Levit.
O Lord thy People of the House of Israel have sinned, they have done wickedly,
they have grievously transgressed before thee. O Lord make Atonement now for
the Sins, and for the Iniquities, and for the Trespasses that thy People, the
House of Israel have sinned, and unrighteously done, and trespassed before
thee, as it is written in the Law of Moses thy Servant, that in this day he
shall make Atonement for you. This for the people on the Scapegoat. And there
were two other Confessions made by the Priest also, as the Rabbis testify;
one for himself, Maymoni. apud Aynsw. in cap. 16. Levit.
the other for himself with the other Priests; both on the Bullock of the
Sin-offering, mentioned v. 6. each of which also had their certain and
prescribed forms. For when he offered the Bullock for a Sin-offering for
himself, he said, O Lord I have sinned and done wickedly, and have grievously
transgressed. I beseech thee now, O Lord, be merciful unto those sins and
iniquities, and grievous transgressions, wherein I have sinned, P. Phagius,
loco supr. citato.
done wickedly, and transgressed against thee. And when he offered for himself,
and the rest of the Priests, then he used these words, saying, I and my House,
and the Sons of Aaron thy holy people have sinned and done wickedly, etc. I
beseech thee now, O Lord, be merciful, etc. as in the other forms before
delivered. Finally, as there was a form prescribed the Priests, in which to
make Confession of their own and the peoples sins to the Lord their God; so if
the people were Impenitent, and neither would be brought unto repentance, or
amendment of life, they had their forms of Excommunication also. Witness the
solemn form in use amongst them in Excommunicating the Samaritans. In the
denouncing of which censure, they brought together 300 Priests, and 300
Trumpets, and 300 Books of the Law, and 300 Boys, and they blew with the
Trumpets; and the Levites singing, accursed the Cuttbaeans (or Samaritans) in
the name of Tetragrammaton, or JEHOVAH, and with the curses both of the higher
and lower House of judicature, and said, Cursed is he who eats the bread of the
Cutthaean; and let no Cutthaean be a Proselyte in Israel, Drusius in Seph.
Tanhuma.
neither have any part in the resurrection of the just. Which Curse being wrote
on Tables, and sealed up, was published over all the Coasts of Israel, who
multiplied this great Anathema or Curse upon them.

Nothing can be more plain than this, Rabbi Maimony, that from the time of
Moses unto Ezra, there was no stinted form of Prayer heard of in the Jewish
Church, but every man prayed according unto his ability. Smectymn. Vindicat. p.
25.
To which the Answer is in brief, that they who have produced this place out of
Rabbi Maimony, dare not stand upon it, conceiving it to be no testimony to
command belief: Secondly, that the Rabbi in the place alleged, speaks not of
public, but of private prayers: And thirdly, that the place is curtalled to
make it serve the turn the better. For look upon the place at large, and we
find it thus. We are commanded to pray every day, as it is written, And ye
shall serve the Lord your God, Exodus xxiii. 25. We have been taught that this
Service is Prayer, as it is written, And to serve him with all your heart. Our
wise men have said, what Service is this with the heart? It is Prayer. And
there is no number of Prayers by the Law, neither is there any set form of this
Prayer by the Law, nor any appointed time for prayer by the Law. And therefore
Women and Servants are bound to pray, because it is a Commandment, the time
whereof is not determined. But the duty of this Commandment is thus, that a Man
make Supplication and Prayer every day, and show forth the praise of the holy
blessed God, and afterward ask such things as be needful for him by request,
and by supplication; and afterward give praise and thanks unto the Lord for his
goodness, which he abundantly ministers unto him; every one according to his
might. If he be accustomed unto it, let him use such Supplication and Prayer;
and if he be of uncircumcised lips, let him speak according as he is able, at
any time when he will; and so they make Prayers every one according unto his
ability. This is the place at large in Rabbi Maimony. Maymoni. cited by Ayns.
Deuteronomy. 6.13.
And who sees not, that this must be interpreted of private prayer, or else it
will conclude as strongly against appointed times and places for the
performance of this holy exercise, as against the forms; and then what will
become of the blessed Sabbath, the day of Prayer; or of the holy Temple, the
House of Prayer? Must not they also be discharged on the self-same grounds? Or
were it meant of public Prayer (as it cannot be) all that can be inferred, is
no more than this, that God prescribed no set form or number of prayers in the
Book of the Law; which makes but little to the purpose. For it was said and
showed before, that Moses was more punctual and precise in laying down the form
and matter of the legal Sacrifices, by which the Jews were to be nourished in
the faith of Christ, and with the which they had not been acquainted in the
former times; than in prescribing forms of Prayer and Praises, being moral
duties, in which they had been trained from their very infancy. Now to this
argument derived from the Authority of the Jewish Rabbis, we must needs add
another which is made against them; and that is, that the evidence of all this
(as also of much of that which follows) comes from no better Author than
Maimonides, Smectymn. in Vindicat. p. 23.
who wrote not till above a thousand years after Christ. Against which weak
objection (for it is no other) we have a very strong respondent, even the
famous Scaliger. Who having made a full description of those rites and forms
wherewith the Passover was solemnized in the former times, collected from the
Writings of the Jewish Rabbis, thinks it as idle and ridiculous to except
against them, because observed by Writers of a later date, though from the best
Records and Monuments of that scattered Nation; as if a man reading the
Pandects of the Civil Law, composed in Justinians time, should make a question
whether those judgments and opinions ascribed unto Paepinian, Paulus, Vlpianus,
were theirs or not. Quod nemo sanus dixerit, Scaliger de emendat. Temp. l. 6.
Quod nemo sanus dixerit, which none, says he, except a madman, would make
question of. And so these rubs being thus removed, and in part anticipated, we
will go forwards with our search in the Name of God.

But first, before we end this Chapter, Children of the Bride-chamber, Mat.
9.15.
in S. Matthews Gospel, to the Marriage-house; which from the Blessings and
Thanksgivings which were used therein on these occasions, was called Beth
Hillula, the House of Praise. There, in an Assembly of ten men at the least,
the Writing, or Bill of Dowry being ratied before a Scrivener or public
Notary, the Man thus said unto the Woman: Esto mihi in uxorem secundum legem
Mosis and Israel, and Ego juxta verbum Dei colam te, honorabo te, With my body
I thee worship.
alam and regam juxta morem qui colunt, honorant, and regunt uxores fideliter.
Do autem tibi dotem virginitatis tuae ducentos aureos (i.e. 50 siclos) quin
etiam alimentum tuum and vestitum, atque sufficientem necessitatem tuam,
Cornel. Bertram.
item cognitionem tui juxta consuetudinem universae terrae. That is to say, Be
thou a Wife to me according to the Law of Moses and Israel, and I shall worship
and honor thee according to the Word of God: I shall seed and govern thee
according to the custom of those who worship, honor, and govern their Wives
faithfully. I give thee for the Dowry of thy Virginity, two hundred pence, ( i.
e. 50 Shekels) as also thy food, clothing, and all sufficient necessaries, and
knowledge of thee according to the custom of the whole earth. A Shekel was a
piece of money among the Jews, amounting in our coin to 1 s. 3 d. Judge. 14.11.
1 Samuel 18.25. Ruth. 4.2.
Much of which form, as to the main and substance of it, is exceeding Ancient.
For in the Marriage of Sampson we find the Children of the Bride-chamber, being
the thirty young men, his Companions as they are there called; in that of David
unto Michael, the Daughter of Saul, the bringing in of an hundred Foreskins of
the Philistines, in loco dotis, as the Dowry-money; in that of Ruth, the
presence of ten men to bear witness to it. Nor was this done, being a business
of such moment, without a special Benediction. For at the Marriage of Boaz to
Ruth, the People and the Elders said, The Lord make the Woman which is come
into thine House, like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did build the House of
Israel; and do thou worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlehem; and let
thy House be like the House of Pharez, of the Seed which the Lord will give
thee of this young Woman. Ruth 4.11, 12.
Upon this ground it was that Marriage was not solemnized amonst them without
Prayers and Blessings; the form whereof in the ensuing times was this as
follows, Benedictus sis Domine Deus noster, Rex universi, etc. Blessed be the
Lord our God, the King of the World, who has Created Man after his own Image,
according to the Image of his own likeness, and has thereby prepared unto
himself an everlasting building. Blessed be thou O Lord God, who have Created
him. Moses and Aaron l. 6. cap. 4.
Then follows again, Blessed be thou O Lord our God, who have Created joy and
gladness, the Bridegroom and the Bride, Charity and Brotherly love, Rejoicing
and Pleasure, Peace and Society. I beseech thee O Lord, let there be suddenly
heard in the Cities of Judah, and the Streets of Jerusalem, the voice of joy
and gladness, the voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride; the voice of
exaltation in the Bride-chamber is sweeter than any Feast, and Children sweeter
than the sweetness of a song. Which Prayer thus ended, one of the Bride-men or
Companions took a cup (having before been blessed in the wonted form) and
drinks unto the Married-couple. As for the form and rites of Burial, not to say
any thing either of the washing or embalming of the Corpse, which was common
unto them with other Nations, Chiristan Synagogue. l. 1. cap. 6. sict. 8.
Paraph. 15. Diat, 1.
their custom was, after the body was interred, to speak something of the
justice of God, and of man's sin which meriteth death; and they prayed God in
justice to remember mercy. This said, they gave a Cup of Consolation to the
sad-hearted. Finally, on the grave or Tombstone, they caused these words
ensuing to be written, Sit anima ejus in fasciculo vitae cum caeteris justis.
Amen, Amen, Selah. That is to say, let his soul be in the bundle of life with
the rest of the just. Amen, Amen, So be it. These as they were the ancient
forms and ceremonies used in their Marriages and Burials; so after, when they
had erected Synagogues in convenient places, they solemnized their Marriages in
a Tent, Maymon. cited in Fishter's defense, cap. 17.
set upon four Pillars near their Synagogue; which shows, that there was
something in it wherewith the Priest or Prophet was to intermeddle, and that
they did esteem it of a nature not so merely civil, but that the blessing of
the Minister was required unto it. But it is time I now go forward to the Ages
following.

CHAP. III. Of the condition and estate of the Jewish Liturgy, from the time of
David unto Christ.
1. Several hours of prayer used amongst the Jews; and that the prayers then
used were of prescribed forms. 2. The great improvement of the Jewish Liturgy
in the time of David, by the addition of Psalms and Instruments of Music. 3.
The form of Celebrating Gods public Service, according unto David's
Institutions, described by the Jewish Rabbis. 4. The solemn form used in the
dedicating of the first and second Temples. 5. The Temple principally built for
an House of Prayer. 6. The several and accustomed gestures used among the Jews
in the performance of Gods public worship. 7. The weekly reading of the Law on
the Sabbath days, not used until the time of Ezra. 8. The reading of the Law
prescribed and regulated, according to the number of the Sections, by the care
of Ezra; and of the 18 Benedictions by him composed. 9. The Exposition of the
Law prescribed and ordered by the Authority of the Church. 10. The first
foundation of Synagogues and Oratories, and for what employments. 11. The
Church of Jewry ordained Holydays, and prescribed forms of prayer to be used
thereon. 12. Set days for public annual Feasts, appointed by the Jewish
Church; with a set form of prayer agreeable to the occasion. 13. The form of
Celebrating Gods public Service, according as it is described by Jesus the Son
of Syrac. 14. Jesus the Son of God conforms himself unto the forms established
in the Jewish Church. 15. A transition from the forms received in the Jewish
Church, to those in Use amongst the Gentiles.


THE Nation of the Jews, being thus settled into an established Church by the
hand of Moses, and several forms of Prayer and Praise and Benediction
prescribed unto them, either immediately by the Lord himself, or by the Church
directed by the wisdom of Almighty God; it was not long before that diverse
other points were added by the like Authority, until the Liturgy thereof became
full and absolute. Of these the first in course of time, was the deputing of
certain and determinate hours in every day, for the performance of those moral
duties of Prayer and Praises, in which Gods public worship did consist
especially; which were the third, the sixth, and the ninth. For clearer
knowledge of the which we shall add thus much, that the Jews did usually divide
their day into four great parts ( hours of the Temple they were called) that is
to say, the third hour, which began at six of the Clock in the Morning, and
held on till nine; the sixth, which began at nine and ended at twelve; the
ninth, which held from twelve to three in the afternoon; and the eleventh,
which was from three until six at night. According to which distribution, they
had three several hours of Prayer, viz. the third, the sixth, the ninth, as
before was said. For thus says David of himself, Evening and Morning, and at
Noonday will I pray unto thee, Psalm. lv. 17. And so the Scriptures say of
Daniel, that turning toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees and prayed,
and gave thanks before his God three times a day, as he had formerly been
accustomed, Dan. vi. 10. David who had the opportunity to repair unto the
Tabernacle, or the House of God, joined with the Congregation in those Prayers
which were appointed for those times. But Daniel who lived an exile in a
strange Land, and at a time, in which there was no Temple at Jerusalem, only
conceived himself obliged to observe the hours which had been anciently in Use
with the Jewish Nation; without being punctual in the forms, for ought I can
find. It Is true, the Jews used to repair unto the Tabernacle, as afterward
unto the Temple, and other places set apart for this pious duty (of which more
anon) to offer up their private Prayers and Vows to Almighty God. For so we
read of Hannah in the first of Samuel, chap. 1. v. 10. etc. and so in other
places of Gods Book of diverse others. Of which none is more eminent, because
not any one so much objected as that of the Publican and the Pharisee, of whom
we find mention in the Gospel, who going into the Temple to pray, (as who else
did not?) are confidently said to use no prayer that was of regular
prescription, because the prayer which they are said to make in the Book of
God, Smectymn. p. 8.
was of a present conception. But this, if pondered as it ought, can be no
Argument I trow, that therefore there was then no set form of public worship
to be performed in those holy places, because Gods Servants used as occasion
was, to make therein their private Prayers to the Lord their God: No better
argument, than if it should be proved that there is no set Liturgy in the
Church of England, because devout and godly men use oftentimes to have recourse
unto the Church (or Temple) for their private prayers. In those, though poured
forth in the Temple, the proper and appointed place of public worship, the
people were at liberty to make Use of their own conceptions. But it was
otherwise in those acts of worship, (so far forth as they do relate unto
Invocation) which were to be performed with the Congregation. And so it is
resolved by the best and learnedest of all the Rabbis; by whom it is affirmed,
that in the public Congregation, a private or a voluntary prayer was not to
have been offered to the Lord their God: Quoniam nec Ecclesia seu caetus
publicus offerebat ex lege sacrificium ultroneum; because the Church or
Congregation was not to offer any Sacrifice but such as was prescribed and
ordered by the Law of God. Maim. ap. Seldom. in Eutych. Alex. p. 49
Which rule as it was constantly observed in all other days, and at the several
hours of prayer in each several day; so most especially upon the Sabbaths and
the other Festivals; and that upon the self-same reason, viz. Quoniam in eis
non offerendum erat ultroneum quid, because no voluntary oblation might thereon
be offered, (as in some cases might be done on the other days) but only such as
were appointed in the Law. Now that there were set forms of prayer for these
several hours (besides what is affirmed by a Learned Writer of our own) as
appears by that memorable passage of Peter and John's going up into the
Temple, Seldom. Comment. in Eutych. Alex. p. 46, 47.
sub horam orationis nonam, at the ninth hour, being an hour of prayer. For if
the prayer they went to make, were rather of a sudden and extemporary
Conception, Smectymn. p. 8.
than of a regular Prescription, what needed they to have made Use of such a
time, when as the Congregation was assembled for Gods public worship? And on
the other side, that the prayer which the two Apostles went up to make, was
such as was prescribed the Congregation, is evident by that of Ludovicus
Capellus, the French Oracle of Hebrew Learning, as one truly calls him, who
says expressly, B. Hall. Answ. to the Vindication.
Orationem eam cujus causa Petrus and Johannes petebant templum, fuisse eam,
quae a Judaeis dicitur (...) Quae respondet oblationi vespertinae lege
praescriptae. The prayer (says he) for which Peter and John went up into the
Temple, is that which the Jews called the lesser oblation, answering to the
evening Sacrifice prescribed by the Law. And indeed Calvin intimates no less,
to my apprehension. For when he asks the question, An Apostoli in Templum
ascenderint, ut secundum legis ritum precarentur, whether the Apostles went
into the Temple to pray, according to the rites prescribed in the Law; Calv. in
Act.
although he thinks that they went thither at that time to have the better
opportunity to promote the Gospel; yet he confesses by the question, that at
that time there were set prayers made in the Temple, after the manner of the
Jews.

But to go on from Moses unto David, I find but little changed or added in
things that did concern Gods public worship, and the forms thereof. But in the
time of David, and by his Authority, there was a signal alteration made; much
outward form and luster added to the service of God. For whereas formerly the
Levites were appointed by the Law of Moses, to bear about the Tabernacle, as
occasion was; the Tabernacle being by David fixed and settled in Jerusalem,
there was no further Use of the attendance of the Levites in that kind or
ministry. He therefore thought it fit to set them to some new employment; some
to assist the Priests in the public offices of Gods holy worship; some to be
overseers and Judges of the people, some to be Porters also in the House of
God; and others finally to be Singers, to praise the Lord with Instruments that
he had made, with Harps, with Viols, and with Cymbals. 1 Chronicles. 23.4, 5, etc.
Of these the most considerable were the first and last, the first appointed to
assist at the Daily Sacrifices, as also at the offering of all Burnt-offerings
unto the Lord, in the Sabbaths, the months, and at the appointed times,
according to the number, and according to their custom, continually before the
Lord. Ibid. ver. 31. Id. chapter 35.7.
The other were instructed in the Songs of the Lord, not only such as had been
made before in the former times, but such as he composed himself, according to
the influence of the holy Spirit. Josephus tells us in the general, that after
Absaloms rebelling was suppressed, Joseph. Antiq. Jud. l. 7. cap. 10.
and the Kingdom settled, (...), he composed Odes and Hymns to the praise of
God; as also that he made diverse kinds of Instruments, and that he taught the
Levites to praise Gods Name upon the same, both on the Sabbath, (...), and on
other the appointed Festivals. And this we may observe also in the holy
Scripture by the style and title of those Psalms which were then made by him
for that end and purpose. For if we look upon the xcii. Psalm, we find it
styled, A Song or Psalm for the Sabbath day, i. e. as it is generally
expounded, a Song made to be sung on the Sabbath day. Docet inscriptio Sabbatis
praecipue cantatum fuisse hunc Psalmum, Ap. Marlorat. in Psalm 92.
says Mart. Bucer: Which Calvin seconds and approves. To the same purpose also
Lyra, save that he makes the Author of it to be Moses, Lyr. in Psalm.
following therein the old tradition of the Hebrew, Secundum Hebraeos Moses
feeit hunc Psalmum decantandum in die Sabbati; as he notes it there. Of the
same nature are those Psalms, which in S. Hieroms Bible and the Vulgar Latin,
are entitled Laus cantici Davidis in die ante Sabbatum, and Psalmus David
quarta Sabbati; being the 93 and 94, of our English Bibles. Which what else
were they but some Psalms by him intended to be sung in the Congregation upon
the Wednesday and the Friday? Besides it is observed by Junius, that from the
times of David forwards, they sung the 22 Psalm, ante alias omnes actiones
sacras, before they did begin the Morning Sacrifice; and that they sung each
day (as they did the former) and 136 Psalm at the conclusion of the Evening
Service. For which consult him in his Notes on Exodus xxix. As for the fifteen
Psalms called in the holy Scriptures, Cantica graduum, Psalms or Songs of
degrees, being the 120 Psalm, and the fourteen following, according to the
Hebrew Calculation, and the English Bibles; they are conceived to be made for a
perpetual and constant part of Gods daily Service. For though I find amongst
Interpreters no little difference about the reason of these titles; yet that to
me seems most agreeable to the truth thereof, which is most general agreed,
both by the Latin Writers and the Hebrew DOctors. And amongst them secundum
Doctores Hebraeos and Latinos, it is resolved, says Lyra, that they were so
called, eo quod in ascensu Templi qui erat per quindecim gradus, cantabantur a
Sacerdotibus and Levitis, primus Psalmus in primo gradu, secundus in secundo
and sic de aliis; Lyr. in Psalm. 91.
because they were sung by the Priests and Levites upon the fifteen Stairs or
degrees that went up to the Temple. And this of Lyra, is favored by the
Chaldee Paraphrase, as is said by Aynsworth in his short notes upon the Psalms.
And here that diverse of the Psalms are such as seem to b e composed of purpose
for stirring up the affections of the Congregation, as viz. Psalm. xxxiv. O
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together. And Psalm. xcv.
Venite Adoremus, O come, let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the
Lord our Maker. And Psalm. cxlix. O sing unto the Lord a new song, and his
praise in the Congregation of the Saints, with many others of that stamp; and
then I doubt not but it will appear to any apprehensive Reader, that those and
diverse of the rest were made of purpose to be sung daily in the Celebrating of
Gods public Service, and so by consequence to be a principal and constant part
of the public Liturgy. And it was usual with the Jews, Christ. Synag. l. 1. c.
6.. 6.
when they carried their first fruits to Jerusalem, to sing upon the way the
122 Psalm; when they came into the Sanctuary, with every man's Basket on his
shoulder, to sing the last in all the book; and when they were in the
Courtyard to sing the 30. So that it seems they had set Psalms for every duty,
which was to be discharged in public; and more than so, set parts and parcels
of some Psalms, for the beginning and conclusion of all public offices. For,
for the Introduction to their Prayers they used always this, O Lord open our
lips, and our mouth shall show forth thy praise, Psalm. li. 15. and for the
close thereof, this clause, Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of
my heart be always acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer,
ult.

Now unto these collections from the holy Scripture, it will not be amiss to
add from the Jewish Rabbis the form and manner in which Gods public Service
was performed, after the settling and establishing of the same by David. Maim.
ap. Aynsw. in the end of his notes upon the Psalms.
The Priests and Levites, say the Rabbis, do sing the song over all the
Burnt-offerings of the Congregation, which they were bound to offer, and over
all the Peace Offerings of the solemn Assembly, at the time when the wine (i.
e. the Drink Offering) was poured out. But over the voluntary Burnt-offerings
which the Congregation offered, and the drink offerings which were brought for
them, they said not the song. A Levite that mourned might not serve nor sing;
and there might not be fewer than twelve Levites standing on the bank or stage
everyday, to say the song over the Sacrifice; but they might always have as
many as they would. And they said not the song but by mouth without Instrument;
for the foundation of the Music is, that it be a Service by mouth. And there
were others standing there playing with Instruments of Music; and they played
on Pipes and Psalteries, and Harps, and Trumpets, and Cymbals. There might not
be fewer than two Psalteries, nor more than six; nor fewer than two Pipes (or
Flutes) nor more than twelve; nor fewer than two Trumpets, or more than an
hundred and twenty; nor fewer than nine Harps, but as many as they would; and
one Cymbal only. In all the days of the solemn Feasts, and at the new Maons,
there were Priests blowing with Trumpets at the hour of the Sacrifice, Numb. x.
10. and the Levites said the song. The Trumpets were of silver, and it was not
lawful to have them of other metal. The Pipes which they played on were of
Cane, or Reed; the Psaltery was an Instrument like a Bottle, and they played
thereon. Twelve days in the year they played on the Pipe or Flute before the
Altar, viz. at the killing of the first Passover, and at the killing of the
second Passover, and in the first good day of the Passover, and in the first
good day of Pentecost, and in the eight days of the Feast of Tabernacles. No
Service almost celebrated without Songs or Music, and that ordained after the
Law Levitical was given to Moses, and all the Rites and ceremonies of the same
prescribed and limited; which plainly shows that Instrumental Music in the
celebrating of Gods public worship, is not derived at any hand from the Law of
Moses, or to be reckoned as a part of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Levitical
Sacrifices. And lest this intermixture of Songs and Music in the officiating
of the Moral worship of God, might either be conceived to have been introduced
by the Jews, in the declining times of their zeal and piety; or else ordained
by David without good Authority, and never practiced in the purer times of the
Jewish Church; we will look into the Acts of Solomon, Hezekiah, Ezra. Of
Solomon and Ezra more anon. Of Hezekiah this at present; of whom it is recorded
in the Book of Chronicles, that in the restoration of Gods worship, being much
corrupted, When the Burnt-offering began, the Song of the Lord began also with
Trumpets, and with the Instruments ordained by David king of Israel: And all
the Congregation worshipped, and the Singers sang, and the Trumpeters sounded,
2 Chronicles. 29.27, 28.
and all this continued till the Burnt-offering was finished. Where note, that
this was some appointed and determinate song which had been formerly set out
for the like occasions, that which is here entitled the Song of the Lord, or
canticum Traditum, as the word is rendered by Tremelius; as also that the
intermixture of Musical Instruments in Gods holy Service is referred to David.
And so it is also in the Book of Nehemiah, Neh. 12.46.
where both the Singers and the songs are referred to him. For in the days of
David and Asaph of old, there were chief of the Singers, and songs of praise
and thanksgiving unto God, says the holy Scripture.

Of Solomon and Ezra next, the greatest and most memorable action of whose
times, immensae opulentiae Templum, Tacit. hist. l. 5.
as the last is called by the Historian. For that of Solomon, as soon as it was
fitted and prepared for the Service of God, that godly and religious Prince, to
whom the Lord had given a large and understanding heart, as the Scripture tells
us, did not think fit to put it unto public Use, till he had dedicated the
same to the Lord his God, by Prayer and Sacrifice. The pomp and order of the
Dedication we may see at large, 1 King. viii. To which add this considerable
passage from the Book of Chronicles; where it is said, 2 Chronicles. 5.12, 13.
with reverence unto David's Institution, that the Levites which were the
Singers, all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their Sons and their
Brethren; being arrayed in white linen, having Cymbals and Psalteries, and
Harps, stood at the East end of the Altar, and with them an hundred and twenty
Priests sounding with Trumpets: And that it came to pass, as the Trumpeters and
Singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the
Lord, that they lift up their voice with the Trumpets and Cymbals and
Instruments of Music, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good, for his
mercy endures for ever. In which we may observe two things, first, that in
Celebrating Gods public worship, and in that part thereof which was merely
moral, the Levites were arrayed in a white linen Raiment, such as the Surplice
now in Use in the Church of England. And secondly, that they were prescribed
what song or Psalm they were to sing, being the 136. of David's Psalms,
beginning with Confitemini Domino quoniam bonus, quoniam in aeternum
misericordia ejus. And this we may the rather think to be a certain and
prescribed Hymn, not taken up at the discretion of the Priests and Levites;
because we find the same expressly in laying the foundation of the second
Temple. For we are told in the book of Ezra, Ezr. 3.10, 11.
that when the Builders laid the foundation of the Temple of the Lord, they set
the Priests in their Apparel with Trumpets, and the Levites the Sons of Asaph,
with Cymbals, to praise the Lord, after the Ordinance of David the King of
Israel: (where not that still this Institution is referred to David) And they
sung together by course (Quire-wise) in praising and giving thanks unto the
Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures for ever toward Israel. Lyra
observes upon the place, that the Psalm here sung, ab ipso Davide factum, and
ad hoc ordinatum, was made by David for this very purpose; Lyr. in Ezr. cap. 3.
v. 1. 1 Chronicles. 28.
who had not only left command to Solomon about the building of the Temple, but
gave him patterns of the work, and much of the materials for the same. Add
finally, that at the Dedication of each Temple, there was a great and sumptuous
Feast provided for the People of God; whereof see 1 King. viii. 65. and Ezra.
vi. 16. Which as it was the ground of the (...), or Feast of Dedication,
established after by the Maccabees; so gave it no small hint unto the
Christians to institute the like Feasts on the like occasions; whereof more
hereafter.

In the mean time, Solomon, if question should be made to what particular end
he did erect that magnificent Structure; I answer, that it was most specially
for an House of Prayer. The legal Sacrifices were all of them performed in the
outward Courts, and there were all the utensils and vessels which did pertain
unto the same. The Priest that offered Sacrifice came not thither; he had no
place nor portion in it. It Is true, there was an Altar in it, but 'twas the
Altar of Incense, not the Altar for Sacrifices. That stood indeed within the
Temple, as at the first, by Gods own Ordinance and appointment, within the
Tabernacle, where it was placed before the Veil. Exodus 30.6, 7, 8.
And it was placed there to this end and purpose, that Aaron might burn Incense
on it every morning when he dressed the lamps, and when he lighted them at
even. By this was figured the offering up of the Prayers of the Saints to the
Lord their God. We find it so expressly in the Revelation. Apocal. 8.3, 4.
And another Angel, says the Text, came and stood at the Altar, having a
golden Censer, and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer
is with the Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar that was before the
Throne; and the smoke of the Incense which came with the Prayers of the Saints,
ascended up before God out of the Angels hand. And hereto David does allude in
the book of Psalms. Let my prayer (says he) be set forth before thee as
Incense, and the lifting up of my hand as the Evening Sacrifice. Psalm. 141.2. 1
King. 8.
But that which makes the matter most clear and evident, is the whole scope of
Solomon's prayer, made by him at the Dedication of it. The substance and effect
whereof is no more than this, that in what misery or distress soever the people
of the Lord should fall into, either by temporal plauges and punishments which
assault without, or on the apprehension of their sins which assails within: If
they poured forth their souls to God, either in or toward his holy Temple, the
Lord would hear them and deliver them out of all their troubles. And so much is
summed up by Josephus briefly, Joseph. Judaic. Antiq. l. 8. c. 2.
briefly, (...), etc. If it shall so fall out (says he) that thy People go
astray, and that afterward being punished by thee, with death, pestilence, or
any such chastisement, wherewithal thou reclaimest those that offend against
thee to the observance of thy Laws; if then they have recourse unto this
Temple, beseeching and requiring thee of mercy, that thou would please to
hear them, and have mercy on them, and deliver them from their Adversities. Nor
was it without special reason that God amongst so many Ministeries as were
performed in and about his Temple, should single out the exercise of prayer; by
which to give denomination to this holy place; for by that name, the House of
Prayer, he has been pleased to call it twice in one verse of Esaias. Isa. 56.7.
Or that our Savior Christ should be so scandalized at those which sold Doves
in the verge thereof, or at the Tables of the Money Changers, Mat. 21.
being so necessary, or at least convenient for those who came from remote
places, that they might easily provide their offerings there, and dispatch
their business with the greater speed. Why else was this, but that our Savior
looked on it as a place for Sacrifice, wherein his legal worship was to be
performed in the Oblations of Bulls and Goats, Turtles and Pigeons, and the
like; but as a place intended for his moral worship, wherein his People were to
offer the calves of their lips; or at the least as on a place which was more
grateful to him, as an House for Prayer, than as a Slaughterhouse for
Sacrifice? His saying that he would have mercy and not sacrifice, shows us how
little he esteemed of the legal duties in respect of moral.

So then, rites and gestures, wherewith the earnestness of their Petitions, and
the humility of the Petitioners might be at once presented to the Lord their
God. Not that these outward rites and gestures have in all times and places
been the same alike; for I know well they have been, may be varied according
unto times and seasons; the customs and conditions of several Nations; but that
in many of them, and those the principal, there has been an unanimous
agreement over all the world. The first of those which we shall speak of in
this place, is that which was first used in this holy Temple, which was the
kneeling on the knee, and then the lifting up of the hands to God. For so we
find it of K. Solomon at the first Consecration of it, and in the prayer of
Consecration, that he kneeled on his knees before the Altar, and his hands
spread up unto the Heavens. 1 King. 8.54.
But behold a greater than Solomon is here; for Christ our Savior, when he
prayed to God that that Cup if it were possible might pass from him, (...), he
fell upon his knees and prayed, as S. Luke; procidit super terram, He fell upon
the ground and prayed, Luke 22.41. Mark. 14.31. Mat. 26.35. Psalm. 95.
as S. Mark; procidit super faciem suam, He fell upon his face and prayed, as
S. Matthew has it. Our Savior being both the Lord and the Son of David, was
not to seek in David's lesson, where he does call upon the people, and invite
them, saying, O come, let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord
our Maker. He which is all in all, did all this and more. I know it is
conceived that commonly the Jews did stand upon their feet in the act of
Prayer; and for the proof thereof, is brought as well the instance of the
Pharisee and the Publican, of both whom it is said that they stood and prayed;
as also an old Saying used amongst that people, Sine stationibus non
subsisteret mundus. Christ. Synag. l. 1. c. 6. 5.
But clearly this is to be understood of private Prayers, whether made in the
Temple, as that of the Publican and the Pharisee before instanced in, or in the
fields, the ways, a man's secret closet, which cannot but be much subservient
unto the general subsistence of the Universe, in which they were at liberty to
stand or kneel, and did stand most commonly: not of the public acts of worship
in the Congregation. David's Venite, adoremus makes this sure enough. Yet we
will make it somewhat surer if it may be possible, by adding to this Text of
David, the Gloss or Commentary of the Jewish Rabbis; and they t ell us this,
that in the place of David there are three several gestures of humiliation in
the sight of God, and that they all differed from one another. The bending of
the body spoken of in any place, is toward the knees, the bowing of all the
joints of the backbone, so that he makes his body as a bow; the bending of the
head is with the face or countenance downward; the bowing of ones self, or
worshipping, is the displaying of hands and feet, till he be prostrate with his
face on the earth. And they conceived that every one of these had its several
Use; it being noted by them, that the bending of the head with the face to the
ground, was to escape judgment; the bowing of themselves or worshipping, to
obtain mercy; and that the bending of the head was before the worshipping,
according to the mystery of the Sin-offering before the Burnt-offering. This is
observed by Maimony in his book of Prayer; Cited by Aynsworth, Exodus 4.31.
and so most like to be the usual gestures in the Act of prayer. In those
particulars of kneeling and spreading of the hands to Heaven, the Jews and
Gentiles hold good correspondence with one another. In other rites concerning
Prayer they extremely differed; the Gentiles looking toward the East, whereof
more hereafter; and the Jews praying toward the West, if in the Temple,
because the Ark by Gods appointment was placed in the West end thereof.
Otherwise when they were abroad, or in foreign Countries, they turned their
faces toward Jerusalem, from what Coast soever; as appears evidently by
Daniel's practice, when he was a Prisoner in the Land of Babylon. Dan. 6.10.
It is reported also out of Drusius, (a man exceedingly well skilled in all the
knowledge of the Hebrews) that when they prayed their heads were covered.
Christ. Synag. l. 6. c. 6.
Which if it were so, as I have no reason to suspect the Author, it was not
without good cause affirmed by the Historian (if one should look no further
than those outward circumstances) Novos illic ritus, and caeteris mortalibus
contrarios; Tacit. hist. l. 5.
the very same with that which is affirmed of them in the book of Hester, viz.
their Laws are diverse from all people. Finally, Hester 3.8.
at the ending of their prayers, the people which were present used to say
Amen; which word from thence has been derived and incorporated into all the
Languages which make profession of the faith. Only observe that they had
several Amens amongst them; Christ. Synag. l. 1. c. 6. 5.
The first of which they called Pupillum, when one understands not what he
answers; the second Surreptum, when he says Amen, before the prayer be fully
ended; the third is Otiosum, when a man thinks of something else, and so says
it idly; the fourth Justorum, of the just, when a man's mind is set on his
devotions, and thinks upon no other thing. And so much of the Rites and
Gestures which they used in prayer.

But it is well observed by Aynsworth, Exodus) do signify the light of Gods
Word, and Incense, the Sacrifice of prayers; Aynsw. Annot. in Exodus 30.
so the doing of both these at one time, (the Incense being to be offered when
the Lamps were either dressed or lighted, as before was said) did signify the
joining of the word with prayer. We must look therefore in the next place what
room there was, or whether any room at all for reading of the Law in Gods holy
Temples. And first for that of Solomon, taking the Temple in the largest and
most ample sense, not only for the House, but the Courts and Outworks; it was
ordained by Moses in the book of Deuteronomy, that there the Law should
publicly be read at the end of every seven years, to the Congregation. At the
end of every seven years (says he) in the solemnity of the year of release, at
the feast of Tabernacles, when all Israel is come to appear before the Lord
their God in the place that he shall choose, thou shall read this Law before
all Israel, Deuteronomy. 31.11.
in their hearing. But then withal, we must take notice that such a reading as
is there commanded, could not be taken as a part of the public Liturgy. For by
the order and prescript of Moses, the Law was to be read publicly before the
people in the seventh year only, in the year of release; because then Servants
being manumitted from their bondage, and Debtors from the danger of their
Creditors, they might attend the hearing of the Law with the greater
cheerfulness: And in the feast of Tabernacles, because it lasted longer than
the other Festivals, and so it might be read with the greater leisure; and then
it was but this Law too, the book of Deuteronomy. This as it was to be
performed in that place alone, in which the Lord should choose to place his
Tabernacle, and afterward to build his Temple; so makes it little, if at all,
unto the frequent reading of the Law in the House of God. It Is true that Philo
tells us in a book not extant, that Moses did ordain the public reading of the
Law every Sabbath day. Philo. ap. Eusebius. de Praepar. Evang. l. 8. c. 7.
(...), etc. What then did Moses order to be dene on the Sabbath day? He did
appoint (says he) that we should meet all in some place together, and there
sit down with modesty and a general filence, (...), to hear the Law, that none
plead ignorance thereof. Which custom we continue still (says he) breakning
with wonderful silence to the Word of God, unless perhaps we give some joyful
acclamation on the bearing of it; some of the Priests, if any present, or
otherwise some of the Elders reading the Law, and then expounding it till the
night came on. But hereof, by the leave of Philo, we must make some doubt. This
was indeed the custom in our Saviors time, and when Philo lived; and he was
willing, as it seems, to setch the pedigree thereof as high as might be. So
Salianus tells him on the like occasion. Videtur Philo Judaeorum morem in
Synogogis disserendi, antiquitate donare voluisse, quem a Christ and Apostolis
observatum legimus. Salian. Annal. anno m. 25 46. n. 10.
And we must make the same Answer to Josephus also, who tells us of their
Lawmakers, that he appointed not that they should only hear the Law once or
twice a year, no oftener; (...), etc. Joseph. contr. Apion. l. 2.
but that once every week we should come together to hear the Law, that so we
might become the more perfect in it. Which thing, says he, all other Law
givers did omit. And so did Moses too by Josephus's leave. For besides that no
such order or command is to be found in the books of Moses, there were not
then, nor long time after, any set places destinate to religious Uses, but the
holy Tabernacle. And how the people being planted all about the Country, could
be assembled every week before the Tabernacle, or afterward (unto the Temple)
weekly, let Philo and Josephus judge. And this appears more plainly by the Book
of God, where we are told that K. Jehosaphat sent abroad his Visitors, who
carried the Book of the Law of the Lord with them, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 9.
and went through all the Cities of Judaea, and taught the people. A needless
Office, had it been as those Authors tell us; if all the people met together
weekly to be taught the Law. But that which follows of Josiah, is more full
than this. Of whom it is recorded, that when Hilkiah the High Priest, in
looking over the decays and ruins of the Temple, had found a book of the Law,
which lay hidden there, and brought the same unto the King; how the good Prince
upon the hearing of the words of the Law, rent his Garments; 2 King. 22.11. and
23.1, 2.
and not so only, but gathered together all the Elders of Judah and Jerusalem,
and read in their ears all the words of the Book, and joined together in a
Covenant with the Lord their God. Had it been formerly the custom to read the
law each Sabbath, every week once at least unto all the people, neither had
that religious Prince been so ignorant of it, nor had the finding of the book
been counted for so strange an accident; nor could it be to any purpose to call
the People altogether from their several dwellings, only to hear the Law read
to them, and go home again, if it were read amongst them weekly on the Sabbath
days, and that of ordinary course. So that whatever Philo and Josephus say,
there was no weekly reading of the Law, either as a distinct and special duty,
or as an ordinary part of the public Liturgy, during the standing of the first
Temple, which was that of Solomon. For further proof whereof, if we but look
into Chronology, it will there appear, that the finding of the book of God
before remembered, did happen in the 3412. yer of the worlds Creation, Tornielli
Annals. A. M. 3412.
not forty years before the desolation of that Temple; in which short space,
the Princes being careless, and the times distracted, we have no reason to
expect such a blessed Ordinance.

But in the second Temple, or rather whilst it stood and flourished, Moses grew
to be read more constantly unto the people, than it had been formerly. Not
every seventh year only, on the feast of Tabernacles, as had before been
ordered and set down by Moses; but upon every Sabbath day, and each solemn
meeting, and sometimes on the weekdays also; nor only in the Temple of
Jerusalem, as it used to be, but in the Towns and principal places of each
several Tribe; and then and there they did not only read the book of
Deuteronomy, which was the book prescribed by Moses, but the whole body of the
Law. Which excellent and useful Ordinance is generally referred to Ezra, a
Priest by calling, and very skilful in the Laws of Moses; who having taken
great pains to seek out the Law, and other parts and portions of the book of
God, digested and disposed them in that form and method, in which we have them
at the present. Of this see Irenaeus, l. 3. c. 25. Tertullian de habitu
mulierum, Clemens Alexandr. Strom. l. 1. Chrysostom. Homil. 8. in epist. ad
Hebraeos, and diverse others. And if we place this Ordinance or Institution
introduced by Ezra, Id. anno 3610.
in the 3610. year of the Creation, which was the time wherein that solemn
reading of the Law was kept, which we find mentioned in the viii. of Nehemiah;
there will occur betwixt that time and the first general Council holden in
Jerusalem 490. years, or thereabouts. Which might be ground enough to the
Apostle to affirm of Moses, that in the old time he had them that preached him,
being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day; Act. 15.21.
and yet not go so high as Philo and Josephus do, to setch the pedigree, or
original rather of the Institution. This then I take to be unquestionable, that
the weekly reading of the Law was brought into the Jewish Church in the time of
Ezra; and being brought in, I take it as unquestionable, that it was used as a
part of the daily Office, an ordinary portion of the public Liturgy. Not to be
read at the discretion of the Minister, as his own choice or chance directed,
and much les as an exercise to take up the time whilst one man tarried for
another coming, until the Congregation were grown full, and fit for other
business; as in some Churches of the Reformation it is used of late; but as a
special portion of the service which they did to God. And this appears by the
division of the Law of Moses into those great sections which they call the
Parasha, being in number 54. which they read in the 52 Sabbaths of the year,
joining two of the shortest twice together, that the whole might be finished in
a years space. Aynsw. Annot. in Genesis 6.
Of this thus write the Hebrew Doctors. It is, say they, a common custom
throughout all Israel, that they finish wholly the reading of the Law in one
year, beginning in the Sabbath which is after the feast of Tabernacles, at the
first section of Genesis; in the second, at These are the Generations of Noah;
in the third, at The Lord said to Abraham, Genesis xii. 1. etc. So they read and
go on in this order, till they have ended the Law at the feast of Tabernacles.
Maim. ap. Aynsw. ibid.
By which it seems that as the form of their public service was not voluntary,
so neither were the parts thereof uncertain, but all set down in rule and order
by the authority of the Church, and the wisdom of the Governors and chief
Rulers in it, as might conduce best to the glory of God, and the edification of
his people. Nor was this all that Ezra did in the advancement of Gods service,
of his public worship. For unto him, appointed thereunto by the Authority of
the Consistory, the Rabbis generally ascribe those eighteen Prayers or
Benedictions, so much in use amongst the Jews. Of which thus Maimony.
Descripsit cunctas benedictiones Ezra, Maim. ap. Seldom in Eutych. Alex. p. 51.
etc. Ezra (says he) composed all those Benedictions, which by the Consistory
were enjoined to be perpetually observed, so that it was not lawful to change
or alter them, neither to add unto them, or diminish from them; every
alteration of those formulas, which by their Wisemen were devised and
confirmed in those Benedictions, being accounted for a fault. And this was
done, as the same Rabbin does inform us in another place, Vt scilicet in
cujuslibet ore been disponerentur, omnesque eas discerent, etc. That every man
might have them in his mouth, and be perfect in them, Id. ap. eundem. p. 44.
and that thereby the prayers of the rude and ignorant might be as complete, as
those of a more eloquent tongue. Of these eighteen the three first, and the
three alst related to the glory of God, the other twelve (as it is noted in the
Gemara Hierosolymit.) ad ea quae humano generi necessaria, Ap. tundem. P^ 43.
to such things as were necessary for the life of man; or as it is enlarged by
Maimony, to all those things quae singulis hominibus habenda in votis, which
either do concern particular men, or are thought necessary to the State or
Nation. These Prayers or Benedictions thus composed, were not alone thought
necessary for all sorts of people, and therefore called by the Jews, preces
officii necessario praestandi, an office of necessity to be performed; Ap.
tund. p. 47.
but used both by Priest and People, as an ordinary part of their public
Liturgy. Whereof we are thus told by Rabbi Maimony. Publicus Minister seu
universitatis aut populi Apostolus liberat plebem ab officio suo hic
praestando, etc. Id. p. 47.48.
The public Minister (or the Apostle, as they called him, of the Congregation)
did ease the people of this service, if when he said the prayers they did
hearken to him, and unto every Benediction answered AMen; for by so doing the
people also are conceived to pray. But this, says he, is only in such cases, w
hen the people is not perfect in those prayers, or cannot say the same by
heart: for they who can repeat the prayers, do not aright discharge their duty
as they ought to do, in case they did not pray themselves with the public
Minister. And so much for the Prayers and Benedictions devised by Ezra. Which
had they been the very first stinted forms of prayer which ever had been heard
of in the Jewish Church, Smectymn. indicat. p. 20.
as some men give out (although indeed it be not so): it would make more than
they imagine, both for the Authority and Antiquity of set forms of worship.

But to return again unto the Reading of the Law, Ezra, besides that by this
institution the reading of the Law of Moses became an ordinary part of the
Jewish Liturgy for the Sabbath days, he caused it also to be read upon the
second and the fifth days (being our Monday and Thursday) that they might not
rest three days from hearing the Law; and at the Evening prayer of the Sabbath
days, because of idle persons, who perhaps were absent at the Morning service.
Id. in Tephillah ubircath. c. 12. cited by H. Thorndike In his religious
Assemblies, c. 8.
The difference was only this, that in these Readings on the by (if I may so
call them) the Minister or the Reader was not tied to read the whole Section,
or Parasha, as upon the Sabbath; but was therein left unto himself, conditioned
that he read no less than ten verses at each several reading, and that there
were three men to read it on the days aforesaid. Now to this reading of the Law
in the Congregation every Sabbath day, was also added at some times, and on
some occasions, the Exposition of the same; and that I find to have been done
two ways, either by way of Comment and Application, or else by reading with the
Law some part of passage of the Prophets, as seemed most parallel unto it. Of
these the first may seem to take beginning from the Act of Ezra, who in that
famous reading of the Law, mention whereof is made in Nehemiah, cap. viii. not
only caused a Pulpit of wood to be provided for that purpose, that so he might
be heard the better; but placed about the same diverse Priests and Levites, to
expound the Text, and give the sense and meaning of it, that so the people
might the better understand the reading. Whereof, as of a thing never used
before, the reason is thus given by Torniellus, because the Hebrew tongue,
wherein the Scriptures were first written, was grown strange unto them.
Torniel. annal. A.M. 3610. n. 9.
Chaldaico seu Syriaco idiomate in locum ejus surrogato, the Syriack or Chaldee
language being generally received in the place thereof. And hereunto agrees
Cunaeus, who says expressly, that whilst the former Temple stood, Interpretatio
magistrorum commentatio nulla, there was no gloss or exposition of the Law,
made (as of course) unto the people: Cunaeus de Repub. Jud. l. 1. c. 17.
That office being supplied, when there was occasion, by such holy Prophets as
God raised amongst them at extraordinary times, and for no ordinary purposes.
But that these Expositions of the Law thus begun by Ezra, were afterward used
constantly amongst the Jews every Sabbath day; as I do no where find it, so I
dare not say it. If so it were, it could not be done presently, but in tract of
time, of which more anon. In the mean time we will behold the second kind of
Exposition which before we spoke of, that which was made by reading with the
Law some part or passage of the Prophets, which came near unto it. The first
beginning of the which the Jews refer unto the furious raging of Antiochus;
furnamed Epiphanes, who had not only defiled the Temple, and forbid the use of
Circumcision, but also did prohibit the reading of the Law of Moses, upon pain
of death. On which occasion, and to prevent the mischief which might thereby
grow, if the reading of the Law should be quite left off; they chose chapters
and divisions out of the writings of the Prophets, which were most answerable
to those parts of the Law of Moses, which were read before; as for this Section
of the Law, In the beginning God Created, etc. They made choice of that in Esa.
xlii. 5. So says the Lord, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, continuing to the
11. verse of the xliii. These fractions of the Law they called Haphtara. And
though the tyranny of Antiochus being over-blown, Christ. Synag. lib. 1. cap. 4.
they fell again unto the reading of the Law of Moses, as was used before; yet
they continued still the reading of the holy Propohets, as finding it a very
wholesome institution; and sometimes joined thereunto such Expositions as the
Scribes and Rabbis made upon the same, according to their several Talents.
Certain I am, that so it was in our Saviurs time, and in the time of his
Apostles. For thus we find in S. Luke's Gospel, that when our Savior came into
the Synagogue of Nazareth, and stood up to read, Luke 4.16. etc.
there was delivered him the book of the Prophet Esaias; and that when he had
read the place, he closed the Book, and gave it again unto the Minister (the
Apostle of the Congregation, as the Rabbis call him) and afterward expounded
and applied the Text. And in his History of the Apostles, we find that Paul and
Barnabas being present at the Synagogue of Antiochia, Act. 13.14, 15.
on the Sabbath day, sat down; and that after the reading of the Law and
Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them saying, Ye Men and
Brethren, if ye have any word of Exhortation for the people, say on, etc. In
which we have at once the custom of those latter times for the expounding of
the Law in the Congregation, as being by this time made a part of Gods holy
Service; as the place and room also which it held in the public Liturgy; that
is to say, next to the reading of the Law and Prophets; as now the Sermon
follows on the reading of the Epistle and the Gospel. As for the gesture
which was used by these several Ministers in the discharge of those distinct
and several Offices, I find that the reading of the Law and Prophets, and the
exposition of the same, was with the face of him that did it toward the face
of the people; whereof see Luke iv. 16. And that the Minister who read the
Prayers (whom they called the Apparitour of the Synagogue) stood with his back
toward the people, his face being turned unto the Ark.

This leads me on unto another Institution not known before the building of the
second Temple, or the times of Ezra, Jerusalem. For where it is supposed by
some that there were Synagogues of the Jews in the time of David, who for the
proof thereof did produce these words, They have burnt up all the Synagogues of
God in the Land, Psalm. lxxiv. the supposition and the proof are alike infirm.
For not to quarrel the Translation which is directly different from the Greek
and Vulgar Latin, and somewhat from the former English, this Psalm if writ by
David, was not meant by him of any present misery which befell the Church. There
had been no such havoc made thereof in all David's time, as is there
complained of. And therefore Calvin rather thinks, ad tempus Antiochi referri
has querinonias, that David, as inspired with the spirit of Prophecy, Calv. in
Psalm. 74.
reflected on those wretched and calamitous times, wherein Antiochus made such
havoc of the Church of God. Nor was there any Use of them in those former
times, because no reading of the Law, of ordinary course, in the Congregation,
as before was said. But when the former course was changed, and that the
reading of the Law to the People of God was not licensed only, but enjoined,
then began the Jews to build them Synagogues; which afterward increased so
strangely, that there was no Town of any moment throughout all Judaea, nor
almost any City where they dwelt as Strangers, in which they did not build some
Synagogue. God certainly had so disposed it in his holy Counsels, that so his
Word might be more generally known over all the world, and a more easy way
laid open for the receipt of the Messiah whom he meant to send; that so
Jerusalem and the Temple there might by degrees be lessened in their
reputation; and men might learn that neither of them was the only place where
they ought to worship. As for their Oratories, which before I spoke of,
although I find not their Original, yet I can tell you of their Use. For this,
says Epiphanius of them. Epiph. Haeres. 80. n. 1.
(...), etc. There were (says he) amongst the Jews without their Cities
certain Oratories, whither the people did sometimes resort to make their
prayers unto the Lord. And this he proves out of the xvi. of the Acts, where it
is said, And on the Sabbath we went out of the City by a Rivers side, where
prayer was wont to be made, verse. 3. i.e. Vbi de more and consuetudine haberi
conventus consueverant, as Beza notes upon the Text. The Latins called them
from the Use they were put unto Proseuchas; as, in qua te quaero Proseucha, in
the Poet Juvenal. Beza in Annot. in Act. 16.13.
And although Beza take those Proseuchas, to be the very same with the Jewish
Synagogues; Juvenal. Sat. 5. Beza in Act. 16.
yet sure there was a special difference between them. For in those Proseuchas
or Oratories they might only pray; in the Synagogues they might not only make
their prayers, but also read the Law and Prophets, and expound the same, and in
the Temple of the Lord, besides those former duties they might offer Sacrifice,
which was not lawful to be done in other places. And to these times, when now
the Jewish Church was settled, and Synagogues erected in almost all places for
reading and expounding the Law of God, we must refer those passages from Philo
and Josephus before remembered, which cannot possibly be made good of the former
times, wherein this people wanted all conveniences for those weekly meetings.

Thus have we seen what care the Rulers of that Church took for providing fit
and convenient places for the performance of Gods public worship, Purim,
ordained by Mordecai and Hester, with the consent and approbation of the whole
people of the Jews, to be obsered on the 14 and 15 days of the month Adar
yearly, throughout their Generations for evermore; Hest. 9.17, etc.
that they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of sending portions
unto one another, and gifts to the Poor. Nor was this all, to make them days of
feasting and good fellowship, and no more than so; for this had been to make
their belly their God, and so by consequence their glory must have been their
shame; but in all probability, there were ordained set forms of praise and
prayer for so great a mercy, and the continuance of the like. Those who
conceived themselves to have Authority of instituting a new Festival to the
Lord their God, could not but know they had Authority of instituting a new form
of prayer and praise, agreeable to the occasion. And so much we may guess by
that which remains thereof; it being affirmed by one Antonius Margarita, a
converted Jew, once one of the Professors (for the tongue I take it) in the
University of Leipsich, Fevardent. in Hest. cap. ult. and Hospinian. de Origin
Fest. fol. 133.
that to this day legunt diebus illis in Synagogis suis historiam istam, they
read upon the days of the said Feast of the book of Hester; and anciently 'twas
not the custom of the Jewish Church to read the Scripture without set forms of
Prayers, and appointed Ceremonies. The like may also be affirmed of the (...),
or the Feast of Dedication. A Feast ordained by Judas Maccabeus, and the Elders
of the Jewish Nation; who having cleansed the Temple and set up the Altar,
(which had been impiously profaned by Antiochus) did dedicate the same with
Songs and Citternes, 1 Maccab. 4.59, etc.
and with Harps and Cymbals; and that being done, ordained that the days of the
Dedication should be kept in their season from year to year, by the space of
eight days, etc. with mirth and gladness. Here we find mirth and gladness, as
before in the feast of Purim. And doubt we not, but there was in the
Celebration of it as much spiritual mirth and gladness (at least in the
intention of the founders) as there was of carnal; although the forth and
manner of it have not come unto us. Our Savior Christ had never honored it
with his blessed presence (as we shall see he did hereafter) if it had been
otherwise. Besides which annual Feasts recorded in the holy Scripture, they had
another which they called festivitatem legis, or the feast of the Law; ordained
by the Rulers of the Church of Jewry, for joy that they had finished the
public reading of the Law in their Congregations. For, as before I told you,
the Jews began the reading of the Law upon the Sabbath after the feast of
Tabernacles, and finished it at 5a readings, against the feast of Tabernacles
came about again. Now it is observed by Joseph Scaliger, that the feast of
Tabernacles beginning always on the 15th. of the month Tisri, and holding on
until the 22d. inclusively; this Festival was always held on the morrow after,
being the three and twentieth of this month. Which Feast as he makes very
ancient, Joseph. Scaliger de emendat. Temp. 1.7.
( cujus cultus institutio vetustissima est, as his own words are) grounding
the same upon the reading of the Law in the time of Ezra: So I conceive their
form of worship on the same, was no less ancient than those times. For whereas
Ezra is confessed, by those who approve not Liturgies, to be the Author of
those 18 Benedictions, Smectymn. Vindicat. p. 26.
so much in Use amongst the Jews of the second Temple; some of those
Benedictions seem to me to be composed for the Meridian of this feast, though
they might elso serve at other times, as occasion was. Of which take this as
most agreeable to the intention of the festival. Cited by H. Thorndike c. 10 of
his Religious Assembl.
Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the King of the world, that have sanctified
us with thy Precepts, and given us command concerning the matters of the Law.
And sweeten, O Lord, the words of the Law in our mouths, and in the mouth of
thy people the house of Israel; and make us all, and our Children, and our
Childrens Children knowers of thy Name, and learners of thy Law for it self.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, which teach thy people Israel the Law. So far the
very words of the Benediction; a Benediction made by the self same Author, who
as it is conceived by Scaliger, did ordain the Festival.

The like Authority was exercised by the Jewish Church in Instituting set and
appointed Fasts for the chastising of the body, and the afflicting of the soul,
Zachary, as viz. the Fasts of the fifth and seventh month, cap. vii. v. 5. The
Fasts of the fourth and tenth months, cap. viii. v. 19. The several occasions
of the which you may see elsewhere. Besides which Annual Fasts, they used to
fast upon the Monday and the Thursday; Jejuno his in Sabbato, said the
Vainglorious Pharisee in S. Lukes Gospel; and many times they did impose upon
themselves a seven days Fast, the better to profess their sorrow and bewail
their sins. Luke 18.12.
For which consult 1 Samuel xxxi. 13. and 1 Chronicles. x. 12. 2 Esdras v. 13, 20. And
we have reason to believe that there were certain and determinate forms of
public worship for all the residue, because we find them on those last. What
was the course observed in reading of the Law upon the second and fifth days of
the week, we have seen before; and shall add only this at present, that they
Assembled in those days in their several Synagogues, not only in the greater
Towns, but the smaller Villages; Maimon. in Megillah, c. 1. n. 6. ap. H.
Thorndike.
as the Rabbis tell us. But for the seven days Fast, the form and order of the
same, according as it was performed by those which dwelt in Jerusalem, was
this as follows, When they prayed after this order in Jerusalem, they went
into the Mountain of the Temple, against the East gate. And when the Apostle of
the Congregation ( the same who in S. Luke is called the Minister, cap. iv.
20.) was come unto the prayer which began with this, He that heard Abraham,
etc. and ended with these words, viz. Blessed be thou, O Lord God our God, the
God of Israel, from generation to generation: The People answered, Blessed be
the name of his glorious Kingdom to all generations, and for evermore. Then
said the Officer of the Synagogue unto the Priests which blew the Trumpets,
Sound ye the Sons of Aaron, sound, and then prayed again. And though it seems
by the Rabbin, Id. in Tanaioth c. 4. n. 14. cited by Mr. Thorndike, cap. of his
Religious Assemblies, etc.
that this prescribed form was fitted only to the Meridian of Jerusalem; yet
there is little question to be made, but that it served also for all the
Synagogues about Judaea; there being no imaginable reason why a prescript form
of public worship (conceive me in the moral parts thereof) which was observed
in the Temple, should not be used in the Synagogues; which in performance of
Gods service, was to take pattern from the Temple. Only some difference there
was in the present case, but such a difference as is a matter of mere nicety,
not of any moment. For when this form was used in the Synagogue, the People
answered Amen at the end of the Prayer: But when they used it in the Mountain
of the Temple, that is, within the outmost compass of it, their Answer was,
Blessed be the name of his glorious Kingdom, etc. as before was said, it being
not usual with the People as the Rabbis note, cited ibid. c. 7.
to answer Amen within the Mountain of the Temple. So punctual were they in
their forms, as not to vary in a word or title, from that which was prescribed
in their public Liturgies. And finally, that they had a prescribed form of
words for their solemn and occasional Feasts, is evident by that of Abel, cap.
ii. 17. where the words occur.

But to look back upon the Celebration of the daily Sacrifices, Rabbis, and
that of the Samaritan Chronicle produced before; we have it thus described by
Jesus the Son of Syrac, an Author of unquestionable credit to the point in
hand. Speaking of Simon the Son of Onias, who was the High Priest at the time,
and his officiating at the Altar, he proceeds as follows. Ecclus. 50.14.
And finishing the Service at the Altar, that he might adorn the Offering of
the most high Almighty, he stretched out his hand to the Cup (wherewith the
Drink Offering was to be made) and poured of the blood of the Grape; he poured
out at the foot of the Altar, a sweet smelling savor unto the most high King
of all. Then shouted the Sons of Aaron, and sounded the silver Trumpets, and
made a great noise to be heard, for a remembrance before the most High. Then
all the People hasted together, and fell down to the Earth upon their faces,
toward the Lord God Almighty the most High. The Singers also sung praises with
their voices, with great variety of sounds was there made sweet melody. And the
People besought the Lord most High by prayer, before him that is merciful, till
the Solemnity of the Lord was ended, and they had finished his Service. Then
went he down, and lifted up his hands over the whole Congregation of the
Children of Israel, to give the blessing of the Lord with his lips, and to
rejoice in his Name. And they bowed themselves down to worship the second time,
that they might receive a blessing from the most High. So far the Author of
Ecclesiasticus, who lived in the latter end of Ptolemy Euergetes King of Egypt,
as himself tells us in his Preface. Now in these words of his, if we mark them
well, we find particularly all the parts of public worship which before we
spoke of. The daily Sacrifice performed by the Priests alone; the moral part of
Gods divine service jointly discharged by Priests and People. The Singers we
find singing Hymns and Songs of Praise to the Lord their God, the People first
making Confession of their Sins, and to that purpose falling flat upon their
faces; and after pouring out their souls in prayer for his grace and mercy; the
High Priest giving of the blessing to the Congregation, as the Lord appointed;
the people bowing down and worshipping at the receiving of the same. And all
this in a regular and prescribed way; nothing in all the course thereof being
left unto the liberty of Priest or People, but the confession of their private
and particular sins, which every one had leave to cast in what mould he would.
As for the reading of the Law and Prophets, it is true we find no mention of it
in this description of the service by the Son of Syrac. But then perhaps the
reason was, because the reading of the Law was only used as an ordinary part of
the public Liturgy on the Sabbath days; and it appears not by the place that
this was done upon the Sabbath. Finally such, and none but such, was the daily
service of the Synagogue, excepting that there was no Sacrifice to be done
therein. Of which this Maimony the learnedest and most exact of all the
Rabbis: Let a man (says he) go always Morning and Evening to the Synagogue,
for his Prayer is not heard always but in the Synagogue. And he that dwells
in a City where there is a Synagogue, and prays not there with the
Congregation, this is he that is called a bad Neighbor. Cited by H. Thorndike,
ut supra.
And certainly, as it is well noted to my hand, he well may be called a bad
Neighbor, who will not lend his Neighbors Prayers the strength of his own;
but himself finds the fruit of his own bad Neighborhood, when his own prayers
want the assistance of his Neighbors.

The mentioning of Jesus the Son of Syrac serves here most fitly as an Usher to
make room for Jesus the Son of God, Jewish forms, in case the Jewish Church had
done amiss in the devising of such forms and other Ceremonies, or wanted good
Authority to enjoynn the same. In those points therefore, wherein he conformed
himself to the Jewish Ordinances, there is no question to be made, but that
those Ordinances were conform to the Word of God. When they were otherwise in
such points as they made the Word of God of none effect, by their traditions,
he therein left them to themselves, and gave no countenance at all unto them by
the authority of his practice. Their Synagogues, for which they had no special
warrant from the Word of God, he liked well enough, and therefore often
honored them with his blessed presence. The weekly reading of the Law and
Prophets, Luke 4.16.
for which there was no order and command of Moses, or of any other of Gods
Secretaries, (for ought which hitherto appears) he approved right well; taking
the book, when it was offered by the Minister, reading the place or lesson
destinate to the present day, and after preaching on the same. Ibid.
The course of public worship in the holy Temple, he esteemed so highly, that
he confirmed the title given unto it in the Prophet Esaias, namely that glorious
Attribute of Domus Orationis, or an House of Prayer. And for the Feast of
Dedication, though of no other institution than merely Ecclesiastical and
humane, he thought it no disparagement to the Lord and Master of the Feast to
keep and celebrate the same with the rest of the people. Joh. 10.22, 23.
It was at Jerusalem the Feast of the Dedication: And Jesus walked in the
Temple in Solomon's Porch. But that wherein he showed himself most punctually
conformable to the Jewish rites, was in the keeping of the Passover. Of which,
Aynsworth in Exodus 12.
thus Aynsworth in his notes on Exodus. These observations of the Jews (says
he) whiles their Commonwealth stood, and to this day, may give light unto some
particulars in the Passover, which Christ kept; as viz. why they lay down one
leaning on another bosom, Joh. xiii. 23. contrary to the first institution of
it; why he rose from Supper, and washed, and sat down again, Joh. xiii. 4, 5,
12. why he blessed or gave thanks for the bread apart, and for the cup apart,
Mark. xiv. 22, 23. why it is said he took the cup after Supper, Luke xxii. 20.
And finally, why they sung an Hymn or Psalm at the end of the Supper, Mat.
xxvi. 30. Beza goes somewhat further yet, and to those points before observed,
adds also this, Ex iis demum intelligitur, quaenam sit illa panis benedictio,
fractio, and porrectio, itidemque poculi mutua praebitio; Reza in Annot. in
Mat. 25.
by which he makes the blessing, breaking and distributing both of the bread
and cup in the blessed Eucharist, to have been borrowed from those Rites. But
he that has gone furthest is the famous Scaliger, who does affirm expressly of
our Savior Christ, Scalig. de Emendat. Temp. l. 6.
nihil immutasse in ritu, that he did vary in no point of circumstance from the
usual rites, save that he changed those words which the Ancients used, in
giving to their guests the Bread and Wine; and substituted others in the place
thereof, more suitable to his intention. So that whatever poor opinion the world
has entertained of late concerning Liturgies and set forms of Prayer; and of
the authority of the Church in ordering matters which concern Gods public
worship: It seems our Lord and Savior was persuaded otherwise, he had not else
so punctually and precisely conformed unto the one, and obeyed the other. And
therefore, O most blessed Savior, since thou did think it no dishonor to
thy glorious Majesty to frame thy self unto those public forms and rites of
religious worship which were prescribed by that Church, wherein thou did
vouchsafe to sojourn for a certain season: Continue unto us that humble
modesty, that we may gladly yield obedience to those forms of worship, which
were prescribed by the Church our common Mother, assisted by as great a measure
of thy grace and Spirit.

Thus having drawn down the beginning and success of Liturgies (or of
prescribed and determinate Forms of Worship, formulas which had been
recommended to them by the former times; we shall proceed to the affairs of the
Christian Church, so far forth as they do concern this present business. And
then I hope it will seem reasonable to the indifferent and sober Reader, that
if a prescribed Form of Worship has been admitted in the world, semper, ab
omnibus and ubique, according to the rule of Lyrinensis, at all times formerly,
in all places too, and by all sorts of people of what Sect soever: It must
needs be a most unheard of novelty to reject them now; and hazard all the
public worship of Almighty God, either upon no Forms at all, or such as no man
is obliged to observe and hold to. A matter which which the very Gentiles,
though men of excellent wits and eloquence thought not fit to do; their gods,
though gods of earth, made of gold and silver, and far worse materials, being
conceived of too great Majesty to be spoken unto, in such an unprepared and
unpremeditated manner, as some men now affect to speak in, to the God of
Heaven. And this we shall deliver in one Chapter only, with as much brevity as
may be; and so pass forward to the Forms or Liturgies used from the first
beginnings of the Christian Church, which is the matter most especially to be
looked into.

CHAP. IV. That anciently the Gentiles had their Liturgies or prescribed Forms
of public Worship.
1. The use of Sacrifice amongst the Gentiles before Moses time. 2. Times,
Priests, and Temples, sanctified and selected by the Gentiles for the public
service of their gods. 3. A general proof, that anciently the Gentiles had
their Liturgies and set forms of Worship. 4. Preparatory forms used at the
Celebration of their Sacrifiees. 5. The rites and forms used in the Sacrifice
it self. 6. Several short forms of words observed amongst the Gentiles, both
Greek and Latin, in their public Sacrifices. 7. Set forms of Prayer used unto
Jupiter, Mars, Janus, Juno, and other of the gods and goddesses. 8. The solemn
form used by the Gentiles, in evocation of the gods of besieged Cities. 9. As
also in devoting themselves, or Enemies to a certain ruin, for preservation of
the Commonwealth. 10. The several gestures of the Gentiles in the act of
public worship, prescribed and regulated. 11. The rites and forms used by the
Greeks particularly, in the solemn Sacrifices. 12. A prescript form of
Matrimony, amongst the Romans.


IT is observed by Epiphanius, Epiphan. in Pan. l. 1. c. 1. n. 5.
that from the time of Adam unto that of Serug, there were no different
opinions in the world about Religion, (...), no sides nor factions fostered by
the Sons of men, in matters which concerned Gods worship; but that Gods
Servants were distinguished from other men, by the piety and integrity of their
conversation. (...). It was the piety and impiety of their lives, (says he)
which made all difference. But in the times of Serug, the people being
scattered and divided into several Languages, and not communicating with each
other as before they used, began to take up several opinions in the things of
God, which brought them at the last unto Idolatry; their errors in the point of
practice being grounded on their mispersuasions in point of judgment. Yet so,
that there accrewed unto them no particular name, by which to difference them
from the rest, till the days of Abraham; from which time forward the world
began to be divided into Jew and Gentile. Id. adv. haeres. 8. number. 2.
(...), as he tells us after. Upon which ground it may be probably inferred,
that in the worshipping of those Idols, Ninus, or whosoever else brought in
Idolatry, retained that form of Sacrifice and public Worship, which they had
seen observed and practiced in the Service of God. For Belus, the Assyrian
Monarch, the Son and Successor of Nimrod (from whom the Jews and Gentiles in
succeeding times borrowed the names of Bell and Baal) being the first whose
Statua or Image was advanced and worshipped, (...), Cyril. Alex. contr. Julian.
l. 3.
as mine Author has it, by those that lived under his Dominion; was the first
also unto whom they offered Sacrifices, and other rites of divine worship,
(...), says the Father plainly. Now Bell and Serug were Contemporaries, as
appears evidently in all Chronology. And therefore when Lactantius tell us of
Meliseus King of Crete, Lactant institut. divin. l. 1. c. 22.
primum diis sacrificasse, that he was the first who offered Sacrifice unto the
Gods; it must be understood, with no doubt, reference to Europe, and these
Western parts of the world. Or else it must be meant that he set forth the
Sacrifices of the gods, after a more pompous and magnificent manner, than
formerly had been accustomed; ac ritus novos, sacrorumque pompas introduxisse,
as the words next following do seem to intimate. Cicero de natura deorum.
So that however it be true which Tully tells us, nulla gens tam barbara, that
there was never any Nation known so rude and barbarous, which was not well
enough persuaded that there was a God; and that it was imprinted in their souls
by the stamp or character of nature, that God was to be Worshipped by them, and
that too in the first place, ((...), said the Grecian Orator) yet for the form
and manner of his Worship, Isocrat. orat. ad Demon.
the Rites and Sacrifices which they used in the first times of their Idolatry,
I rather think they took it on tradition, and from hand to hand, than that the
light of nature did direct them in it. But be this as it will, it comes all to
one, as to the business now in hand; which aims no further than to show that
anciently the Gentiles had their Sacrifices, when yet no Sacrifices were
enjoined by the Law of Moses. And if they had their Sacrifices, as it is plain
they had, and took them up upon the practice of Gods Servants, as it is most
probable they did; we may conceive that with those Sacrifices they did join
such Prayers and Praises, as were agreeable to their occasions and necessities,
when they made their Offerings, accordingly as had been done by the holy
Patriarchs. Unto what purpose did they (...), which is the word that Cyril
uses, were it not that they made their Prayers to those wretched Idols, and
implored their favors?

And it was partly thus in the times succeeding. Israel were disposed and
settled into a Constituted Church, and had their prescribed Rites of Sacrifice,
their Temple, Priests, their solemn and appointed times, and set forms of
Worship; it was not long before the Gentiles had the like. The difference was
no more but this, that the first Sacrifices, and the rites thereof which had
been used amongst the ancient Gentiles, descended on them by tradition; whereas
those later adjuncts of Religious Worship, (pardon theh profanation of the
phrase) were taken up on imitation. And therefore as they had their Sacrifices
and their Altars in the former times, in the unpolished ages of Idolatry; so by
degrees as they grew more exact and punctual in their wicked ways, they set
apart selected times for the performance of their Idol-worship, made choice of
persons to attend that Service, and Consecrated sumptuous Houses to be the seat
or receptacle of those several gods, to whom that service was intended. The
several Gods in Rome, if one went no further, the stately and magnificent
Temples unto them belonging, the several monthly Festivals, and annual
Solemnities, together with those many Colleges of Priests maintained and
founded for the Service of those several Gods, were proof enough of this, if
there were no more. And though we might content our selves with this general
note, yet we will speak a word or two of those times and places, which they had
dedicated to the service of the gods they worshipped; to show that though they
could not reach the height of the true Religion, and knew not the intent of
those legal Sacrifices, which were imposed upon the Jews, yet they resolved to
come as near it as they could, and miss. First for the time, the Grecians
hallowed constantly three days in the every month, Hesied. (...).
viz. the first, the fourth, the seventh. (...), as it is in Hesiod; whereof
the first was consecrated to Apollo, the fourth to Mercury, the seventh again
unto Apollo, as is observed by Alexander ab Alexandro. Alexand. ab Alex. dies
Genial. l. 3. c. 18. Scholiast. in Hesiodum. Plut. in vita Thesei.
And this (the last I mean) is noted by the Scholiast also. A novilunio exorsus
laudat tres, omnes sacras dicens, septimam etiam ut Apollinis natalem
celebrans. Particularly the Athenians did offer unto Theseus their greatest and
more solemn Sacrifice upon the eighth day of October, because of his arrival on
that day from Crete, and kept an half holiday as it were, (...), upon the
eighth day of every month, because of his descent from Neptune, to whom the
eighth of every month had before been Consecrated. The sect of Epicures
hallowed the 20th. day of every Moon, it may be to their god, the belly; others
the last of every month to Pluto. H^spinian de Origin Fest. c. 5.
So for the Romans who came after in respect of time, besides the second day of
every month to the Bonus Genius, and the fifteenth to Minerva, they
consecrated the ninth to Jupiter, which was indeed the greatest and most solemn
of their monthly Holidays; Nundinas Joyis ferias esse ait Gravius Licinius, as
it is noted by Macrobius. Besides which monthly times of worship, Macrob.
Saturnal. lib. 1. c. 16.
and those which ever private man might separate for his own occasions; both
people also had their solemn standing Anniversaries, kept with great pomp, and
celebrated with variety of Rites and Sacrifices; the Catalogue of the which who
list to see, may find them gathered to his hand in that laborious Treatise of
Hospinian, entitled De Origin festorum. By which we see, that though the
Gentiles did not keep the weekly Holiday, which was imposed upon the Jews, yet
they had several days each month, as many as the Jews, though not the same for
public worship; and for the number of their Annual feasts, their times of
pompous and more solemn worship, they went far beyond them. But that wherein
they came most near the Jews, was in the building of their Temples, which in
the Form and distribution of the parts were so contrived, as if their workmen
had proceeded by the pattern of King Solomon's Temple. For as the Temple (taking
it in the circuit and outworks thereof) did contain three parts, viz. the
Courts, the Sanctum, and the Sanctum Sanctorum, according to their several
ministeries by the Law required; so were the Temples of the Gentiles cast into
three parts also, that is to say, the Courts or Areas, Rosinus Antiqu. Romans l.
2. c. 2.
the body of the same which they called Basilicas, and last of all their Adyta,
or more secret places, wherein the worshipped deity was supposed to be. The
Areas of these Temples, and the Porticos, together with the nave or body of
them, were easily accessible to all sorts of people; but for their Adyta, they
were conceived to be (...), not to be trod upon, Jul. Pollux. l. 2. cap. 1.
number. 8.
or looked into but by the Priests. And hereto Caesar does agree, where
speaking of the occulta and remota Templi, the secret and remote parts of their
Temples, which sometimes they called Penetralia, and sometimes (...), he adds
this brief note; Caesar de Belle Civil. l. 5.
Quo praeter sacerdotes adire fas non est, that none were suffered but their
Priests to go into them.

Thus have we found amongst the Gentiles, Temples and Priests, in that which
follows. These they comprised together in a Book or Volume, which was
committed to the Priests for their instruction and direction, to be made use of
in their Sacrifices, or other parts of Worship, as occasion was. So witnesses
Agellius plainly, or A. Gellius, if you will; for I dispute not of the name, so
I have the man. Comprecationes deorum immortalium quae ritu Romano diis fiunt,
expositae sunt in libris sacerdotum Populi Romani, A. Gellius, Noctes Atticae.
l. 13. c. 21.
and in plerisque antiquis orationibus. The Prayers (says he) which after the
Rites and manner of the Romans, are made to the immortal Gods, are all
comprised in the Books belonging to the Priests of the people of Reme, and in
most ancient Prayers (or Orations) which still remain upon record. And this I
take to be an evidence above all exception; as to the quod sit of the point,
that such Forms they had. And these I take it were the Books which Lactantius
calls Pontificum ipsorum scripta; Lactant. de divin. Institut. l. 1. c. 21.
and to the which he does refer his reader to be more thoroughly informed, de
sacrificiis and mysteriis deorum, touching the mysteries or sacrifices of their
several gods. Their Rituals we may rightly call them. For further proof whereof
(if more proof be needful) I would fain know what else should be the meaning of
those verba certa, and solennia, which do occur so often in the ancient writers
of that people; in case they do not mean those set Forms or words, which both
the Priests and People were to use, in Celebrating their accustomed Sacrifices,
or other parts of public worship. What else should be the meaning of these
solennes preces which we find in Ovid. lib. 6. de Fastis; of the solennem
precem quindecim virorum, mentioned in Statius Papinius, lib. 4. Sylv. or of
that of Seneca the Tragedian, Senec. in Dedlpe Act. 2. Sect. 2.


In vota superos voce solenni voca,
Arasque dono thuris Eoi extrue?
No question, but in all those passages, the solennes preces, and solennis vox
are to be understood of those Forms of prayer, which were prescribed unto the
Priests, and by him dictated unto the people. In which regard, as they were
sometimes called verba certa, so they are called other-whiles verba dictata.
For thus the Poet Juvenal -- Dictataque verba praetulit, i. e. as the old
Scholiast does expound it, Juvenal Sat. 6.
dictata a Sacerdote vel haruspice, such words as had been dictated by the
Priest or Augur, according to the public Ritual. Valor. Flaceus Argonautic. l.
1.
And to this purpose that of Valerius Flaceus, Dictat pia vota sacerdos, the
Priest did dictate to the party, the set words or Form, in which the Vow was to
be conceived. And for the Verba certa, which before we spoke of, they are no
other than those words or Forms, which were prescribed in the performance of
these public offices. For thus says Cicero, speaking of some of the Ancients
Generals, who willingly had offered up their lives to preserve their Country;
he tells us of them that they did seipsos diis immortalibus, velato capite,
VERBIS CERTIS pro Repub. devovere. Cicero de aatur. dcorum. l. 2. Varro de
lingu. Latin. l. 5. Festus Pompeius in Minora.
So Varro, the most famous Antiquary of the Latins, gives us this character or
definition of their dies Fasti, that they were such, quibus certa verba
legitima sine piaculo Praetoribus licet fari. And thus the old Grammarian
Pompeius Festus, telling us what is meant by Minora Templa, says that they are
loca aliqua ab Auguribus VERBIS CERTIS definita, places laid out and limited by
the Augurs under a certain Form of words, as in another place he tells us, that
Temples are sometimes called Fana, a Fando; and gives this reason of the same,
quod dum Pontifex dedicat CERTA VERBA fatur.

The Temple being Consecrated, Rosinus, Rosinus Antiq. Romans l. 3. c. 33.
who does at large describe them in this wise, as follows. Cum sacerdos
victimam ad aram adduxisset, stans manu Aram prehendebat, and preces fundebat.
Principium precationis a Jano and Vesta fieri oportehat, quae in omnibus sacris
praecipua numina erant, and in votis nuncupandis compellationem primam
meruerant; inde, quod per eos aditus ad caeteros patere opinio erat. Et
observabatur in ea precatione nt Jupiter Pater Opt. Max. omnesque dii caeteri
Patres advocarentur. Ne quid vero verborum praeteriretur, aut praepostere
recitaretur, descripto praeire aliquem, ruisusque alium custodem dari, qui
attenderet sedulo; alium qui favere linguis juberet and tibicinem canere, ne
quid infaustum audiretur, oportebat. i. e. when the Priest had brought the
Sacrifice unto the Altar, he stood and held the Altar in his hand, (or his hand
rather upon it) and made the ordinary Prayers. His Prayers were to begin with
invocation of Janus and Vesta, as having the chief place in all their
Sacrifices, and being usually first called upon in all their vows and
supplications, on an opinion that by them the way was made more facile to the
other Gods. And 'twas observed that in that Prayer, not only Father Jupiter the
best and greatest was invoked or called upon, but also all the residue of the
greater Deities. And that there might no word be pretermitted or spoke out of
order, the custom was that some did first repeat the solemn words as they were
described in the Ritual, which were said after him by the people present;
others were appointed for overseers, to attend the office; others there were
who did command the people Silence, and set the Musician to his singing, lest
any ominous or unlucky sound should be heard amongst them. This in the way of
preparation. And all this as you see consisted in Prayers and Orizons unto the
gods, that they would graciously accept the intended Sacrifice; and those not
arbitrary, at the discretion of the Priest, but such as were prescribed and
limited both for the method, and the manner. Which being written in a book (or
Ritual as before I called it) the Priest did thence praeire verba, pronounce
the usual and accustomed words, the people saying after him what he thence
pronounced. And whereas it is said by Resnus here, that some of the attendants
used to command the people silence, saying favete linguis, as we saw before;
even those were words prescribed and limited, solemn and formal words in all
public Sacrifices. For thus we find it in the Poet Horace, Favete linguis,
Carmina non prius audita, Musarum sacerdos virginibus puerisque canto; and
Statius Papinius, thus, Lucanum canimus, favete linguis: Horat. Carm. l. 3. ode
1. Statius Sylv. l. 2. Servius in Virgil. Antid. l. 5.
And Servius on those words of Virgil, Ore favete omnes, and cingite
temporaramis, makes this observation, Apto sermon usus est in sacrificiis and
ludis. Nam in sacris taciturnitas necessaria est, quod etiam Praeco magistratu
sacrificante dicebat, Favete linguis. The like we also have in Seneca, in his
Book de beata vita ad Gallionem. But to proceed, as they made way unto their
Sacrifices with certain and determinate Prayers to those several numina, to
whom the service was intended, so when the Sacrifice was ended, and the Rites
performed, they shut up all with Hymns and Praises, of which thus Rosinus. Vbi
quod diis tributum esset conflagrasset, ad epulas ipsi and convivia
convertebantur. Inter vescendum diis lauds canebant. i. e. Rosinus Antiqu.
Romans l. 3. c. 33.
After the portion of the Sacrifice which was appropriated to the gods, was
burnt, they all betook themselves to feast and banque; and in the middle of
their meat, sang Hymns or Songs of praise unto their gods, and playing on their
Cymbals danced about the Altars. The reason of which last is thus given from
Servius, ut nulla pars corporis sit quae non sentiret religionem, that there
might be no part of the body without some sense of religious action, which was
then in hand; the Songs relating to the mind or soul; the dancing to the
motions of the body.

Next for the Sacrifice it self, he describes it thus. Id. ibid.
His peractis, sacrum ab Immolatione sacerdos inchoabat. Fruges aut molam
salsam in caput victimae deponebat, addito thure masculo. Vocabatur Ritus ille
Immolatio, quasi molae in caput victimae collocatio. Deinde vinum aspergebat:
sed priusquam id effunderet, scipulo aut simpuvio ligneo, vel fictili admodum
parvo and ipse leviter delibabat: and astantibus gustandum deferebat, ut
pariter libarent. Vocabatur hic Ritus Libatio. Quo facto setas inter cornua
victimae manu evulsas tanquam prima libamina projiciebat in ignem, conversusque
ad ortum obliquum cultrum a front victimae ad caudam ducebat. Tandem victimam
Diis exhibitam and dedicatam jubebat jugulare ministros; qui quod mact arent
eas Cultrarii and Victimarii, a nonnullis Popae and Agones vocabantur. Reliqui
partim admotis vasculis emanantem cruorem excipiebant, partim victimam
excoriabant and abluebant, partim igne accendebant. Vbi perpurgata erat, mox
Aruspex, Flamen, aut Sacerdos cultro ferreo viscera rimabatur, attenteque
explorabat an perlitatum foret. Non autem manu licebat contrectare viscera, ne
qua offensa pollutis sacris intercideret. Inspectis tandem and exquisitis
singulis, ex omni viscere and membro Ministri parts certas, decisas, farina
farris involvebant, and in calathis sacrificanti offerebant; Sacerdos Aris
imposltas foculo incenso comburebat, quod reddere erat and Litare. Eum ignem ex
olea, lauru, and quercu corticis crassioris, aut cujus caudex cavus fungosusque
esset, accendere vel Numinibus adolere nefas erat, suspecta enim erant ligna
illa, tanquam diri ac mali ominis. So far, and in these words Rosinus; the
sense and substance of the which take from an Author of these times, as
follows, Roman, Histor. Authol. l. 2.^ sect. 2. c. 19.
The Priest or Sacrificer having ended his preparatory Prayers, he laid upon
the head of the Beast a little Corn, together with a Cake made of Meal and
Salt, called in Latin, Mola. From this ceremony, the act of Sacrificing has
been called Immolatio. After this he drank Wine out of an earthen or wooden
Chalice, called in Latin Simpulum or Simpuvium; which afterward was carried
unto all the people, that they might also libare, which is, lightly taste
thereof, which Rite was therefore called Libatio. Every one having tasted
thereof, the rest of the Wine with Frankincense mixed in it, was to be poured on
the Beasts head betwixt the horns; and the Priest plucking off some of the
Beasts hairs which grew between the horns, did cast them into the fire, calling
them his prima Libamina, or first offerings. Then turning his face toward the
East, he drew a long crooked Knife from the forehead of the Beast unto his
tail; commanding his inferior Ministers, which from this Knife were called
Cultrarii, and Victimarii, as also Popae, and Agones, to kill the Beast. And of
the people standing by, some did with Vessels save the blood, others did flay
or skin the Beast, and others washed it. Anon the Soothsayer, Priest, or Flamen
did observe the intrails, and turning and winding them with a knife, which was
called Secespita a secando; for he might not touch them with his hand, for fear
lest some pollution might befall the Sacrifice, and therewithal his hand have
perished. Now after the Soothsayer or Priest had sufficiently turned the
Intrails, and found no ill token therein, then did those Ministers or
Underofficers cut off from every bowl some part or portion, which after they
had rouled in Barley-meal, they presented it in Baskets to the Priests, who
laid them on the Altar, and there burnt them; and this was properly termed
litare and reddere, i. e. to satisfy by Sacrifice, or to pay the Sacrifice
which had been owing to the gods. Add here, that for the fire with which they
used to burn their Sacrifice, it was not to be made of the Olive Tree, nor of
the Bay Tree, nor an Oak of a thicker bark, or which was of an hollow or
spungious body; these trees being of an ominous and suspected quality. Rosinus
Autiq. Romans l. 3. c. 35.
And it is observable withal, Singulis diis victimas suas deputatas esse, that
every god had his distinct and several sacrifice, both in kind and numbers,
which are recited by Rosinus in the place aforesaid, and there may easily be
found. It is enough that we have noted here those determinate Rites, those
prescribed Forms and ceremonies, wherewith their Sacrifices were performed,
that it may thereby be demonstrated how little (or indeed nothing in a manner)
was left unto the Priests discretion, for Form or matter.

But then perhaps it may be said, Grecians in the beginning of their
Sacrifices, to use these words (and these words always) to the people, (...),
i. e. who is here? to which the people did as constantly return this answer,
(...), many men and good. Aristophan.
A proem very pertinent to the work in hand; the gods being thought of too
great majesty, to be attended by a few, and sacrifice a work of too great
piety, to be performed in the presence of a wicked person. In which regard as
well the Grecians as the Romans did use a certain Form of words before they
entered on their Sacrifices, whereby they warned all wicked and unholy persons
not to come too near. Callimachus ap. Servium in Aentid. 6.
The Form used by the Greeks was this, (...), be all profane far hence, from
this holy business. And hereto Orpheus does allude, when he would have the
Temple doors shut against the wicked, lest they should enter in and profane the
ceremony. Orphens (...) sive de Deo.
(...); which words of Orpheus are cited both by Justin M. and by Tatianus, two
very ancient Christian writers, though by the fault of the Transcriber, instead
of (...), which is the true and proper reading, we find there, (...). Which
rather seems to keep the wicked and profane persons in the Temple, Justin Mart.
in Paraenetico.
than to shut them out. Now that it was the shutting out of such, which is here
intended, appears by that passage touching Epiphanius, a famous Sophister,
who having made an Hymn in the praise of Bacchus, in the reciting of the same
((...)) according to the usual Form, (...), Sozomen. Eccl. hist. l. 6. c. 25.
(...).
commanded all unholy and profane to avoid the room. And now I am fallen upon
this Hymn to Bacchus, I shall add thus much, that in the Sacrifices made unto
him, the Priests did thus bespeak the people, (...), Sing ye praise to God; and
thereunto the people answered, (...). O Semeles fili, Ap. Casanbon. in Annal.
Eccl. Exercit. 16. n. 42. Virgil. Aeneid. 6. Silius Ital. de Bello Punico l. 17.
Iacche, largitor opum. But this is somewhat from the purpose, I return again;
and in returning find the self same Form to have been used also by the Latins.
Procul, O procul ite PROFANI, Conclamat vates, totoque absistite luco, as it is
in Virgil, where he describes the Form of Sacrifice which was then in use much
after that, which was collected from Rosinus. The like has Silius Italicus on
the like occasion, Tune puppe e media magno clamore Sacerdos,
Parcite pollutis contingere vincula polmis,
Et procul hinc, moneo, procul hinc quaecunque PROFANAE.


The like has Ovid in his Metamorphosis, where speaking of Medea and her
incantations, he thus brings it in: Ovid. Metam. l. 7.
Hinc Procul Aesonidem, procul hinc jubet ire ministros,
Et monet arcanis oculos removere PROFANOS.


In all which passages the Poets plainly do allude to the usual Forms wherewith
the Priests began their Sacrifices. And yet for further proof thereof, lest
possibly it may be thought that the aforesaid Form of words has more of the
Poet in it than of the Priest, we have Tertullian speaking of those Rites and
Ceremonies wherewith the Gentiles did initiate or begin their Sacrifices, and
therein using this expression, Cum semper impiae initiationes arceant PROFANOS.
Tertul. in Apologet,
This Form, or if you will, those formal words, as they were constantly
observed in the beginning of the Sacrifice, so were there others no less duly
used in the very middle of the same. For when the Priest did pour the Wine upon
the head of the Beast (whatsoever it was) which was intended for the Sacrifice,
(and so he was to do, as was shown before) he always used this Form of words,
Mactus hoc vino inferio esto. And thus observed by Servius in his notes on
Virgil, Arnobius adv. Gentes. l. 7.
Quoties aut thus aut vinum super victimam fundebatur, dicebant, mactus est
Taurus vino vel thure, hoc est, cumulata est hostia, i. e. magis aucta, Servius
in Aeneid. l. 9.
Yet so that any times the Form did vary, according to the service of the god
to whom the Sacrifice was offered. For if the Sacrifice were made to Janus,
then the words ran thus, JANE Pater, M. Cato de re Rustica. c. 134.
uti te strue commovenda, bonas preces been precatus sum, ejusdem rei ergo,
Macte vino inferio esto: but if to Jupiter then thus, JVPITER Dapalis, macte
istace dape pollucenda esto, macte vino inferio esto. Where note that howsoever
there appear a difference in the first part of these two Forms, which were to
be disposed and fitted according to the several occasions of the several
Offerings; yet for the last clause, that which was said upon the pouring of the
Wine on the head of the Sacrifice, there is no difference at all. And note
withal, that the Wine here is called vinum inferium, either ab inferendo,
because it was brought in for that end and purpose to be bestowed upon the
gods; Festus in verborum significatione.
or else as Festus rather thinks, quod in sacrificando infra paterae labrum
ponebatur, because that in the act of Sacrificing, it was placed within the lip
or brim of the platter.

But not to spend more time (all that we have being too little for this
following search) amongst our Critics and Grammarians; from Forms of words
though strictly both prescribed and practiced, let us go on to Forms of
Prayers. Where first, besides that made to Janus before remembered, we have
another of that kind, and on that occasion, said usually in strue Jano
commovenda (now strues was a kind of Cake which the Gentiles offered to their
Gods) and is this that follows. Festus de verborum significatione. Cato de re
Rustica. c. 134.
JANE Pater, te hac strue commovenda bonas preces precor, uti sies volens
propitius mihi, liberisque meis, domo, familiaeque meae. And besides that to
Jupiter Dapalis, which we saw but lately, we have another of the same, made at
the offering of a Cake also, which they called Fertum, thus, JVPITER te hoc
ferto obmovendo bonas preces precor, uti sies volens propitius mihi, liberisque
meis, domo, familiaeque meae; Id. Ibid.
the very same, no more than the change of the oblation, as before to Janus. It
seems that both these Prayers and Offerings were made unto the aforesaid gods,
upon the coming in of Harvest, when they had gathered in their Corn, and
satisfied themselves with the fruits thereof. For theh prosperity of which
fruits, whilst they were yet growing, I find a very formal Prayer to be said to
Mars, at such time as they made Procession to view their Fields, and pray unto
the gods for their blessing on them. But why to Mars, more than to any other of
the gods, that I cannot say; unless perhaps because he was the proper Deity of
the Fratres arvales, a College or fraternity of Priests so named, quod sacra
publica faciunt, propterea ut fruges ferant arva, because they used to offer
public Sacrifice, Rosinus Antiqu. Romans l. 3. c. 6.
that the earth might bring forth her increase. But whatsoever was the reason
of it, I am sure that the Prayer was this, and it is the most complete and
perfect of any one that I have met with. MARS te precor quaesoque uti sies
volens propitius mihi domo familiaeque nostrae. Cujus rei erge, agrum, terram,
fundumque meum, Suovetaurilia (what they were, we shall see hereafter)
circumagi jussi; uti tu morbos visos invisosque viduertam vastitudinemque,
calamitates inteperiasque prohibisses, defendas, averruncesque uti in fruges,
frumenta, vineta, virgultaque grandire, beneque evenire sinas, passores,
pecuaque salva servasses; duisque bonam salutem, valetudinemque mihi, domo,
fawiliaeque nostrae. Harumce rerum ergo, Cato de re Rustica. c. 141. Tibullus
Eltg. l. 2. eleg. 1.
Macte hisce Suovetaurilibus esto. Which Prayer being very full and punctual,
as you see it is, is thus contracted by Tibullus, Dii Patrii purgamus agros,
purgamus agrestes;
Vos mala de nostris pellite limitibus.
And on the other side it is as much extended or drawn out in length by Ovid,
in his Book de Fastis, Ovid. de Fastis lib. 4.
where he describes the Feast which they called Palilia, and thither I refer
the Reader. For other Prayers, but of a different kind, as of a different
occasion from those before, take this of Psyche unto Juno; which though it be
recorded in a fabulous story, is yet according to the Forms which were then in
use, and is this now following. Apuleius de Aurto Asine. l. 6.
Magni JOVIS germana and conjuga, sive tu SAMI, quae querulo partu, vagituque
and alimonia tua gloriatur, tenes vetusta delubra; sive celsae Carthaginis,
quae te virginem, vectura Leonis coelo commeantem, percolit, beatas seeds
frequentas; sive prope ripas Inachi, quite jam nuptam Tonantis, and Reginam
dearum memoras, inclytis Argivorum praesides moenibus; quam cunctus Oriens
Zygiam appellat; sis meis extremis casibus JVNO sospita, meque in tantis
exantlatis laboribus defessam, imminentis periculi metu libera; quod sciam
soles periclitantibus subvenire. And finally, take this for a close of all,
used at the Consecrating of a Grove for religious uses, at which they
sacrificed a Swine or Porker with this solemn Form. Si deus, si dea es quorum
illud sacrum est, uti tibi jus siet porco piaculo facere, Coerare, an old
Latin word, the same with curare in the modern. Extat ap. Caton. de re Rust.
c. 139.
illiusque sacri, coerandi ergo, sive Ego, sive quis jussu meo fecerit, uti id
recte factum siet; ejus rei ergo te hoc Porco piaculo immolando bonas preces
precor, uti sies volens propitius mihi, domo familiaeque meae, liberisque meis.
Harumce rerum ergo, Macte hoc porco piaculo immolando esto. More of these
instances might be produced, were not these sufficient, to show that even the
Gentiles were no strangers to set Forms of Prayer; whether we look upon them in
their solemn Sacrifices, or their occasional devotions.

Now as they used set Forms of Prayer when they applied themselves unto the
gods, Greeks endeavor with such care and cunning, to get into their hands the
Image of Pallas, called the Palladium; Virgil. Aentid. l. 2.
being well assured in their own opinion, that Troy could never be surprised or
forced, till they were masters of that piece. And to this Virgil does allude,
where he complains that the gods had forsook their Altars, and dwelt no
longer in their Adyta, the most retired and inward part of all their Temples,
as before was shown. Id. ibid.
Excessere omnes Adytis arisque relictis Dii quibus imperium hoc steterat, as
the Poet has it. Upon which place it is observed by Servius briefly, ante
expugnationem, evocari ab hostibus numina, propter evitanda sacrilegia; which
is the same in substance with that before. But for a larger and more full
description both of the thing it self, and the reason of it, take this of
Ludovicus Vives; Cum oppugnabantur civitates, eratque in animo Imperatoribus
eas demoliri, ne contra deos bellum geri videretur, iique suis sedibus moveri
inviti, quod nefas erat, evocabantur ex obsessa civitate ab Imperatore
obsidente, ut in urbem victricem volentes migrarent. Ludov. Vives in August. de
Civita. dei. l. 2. c. 22.
And this, says he, did Camillus at the Siege of Veii, Scipio at the
subversion of Carthage, and Numantia, and Mummius at the destruction of
Corinth. Now for the Form or prescribed words of Evocation, which were used
herein, they were these that follow, as they were used by Scipio at the Siege
of Carthage. Si deus, si dea est, cui populus civitasque Carthaginiensis est
tutela, Teque maxim ille qui urbis bujus populique tutelam recepisti, precor
venerorque veniamque a vobis peto, ut vos populum, civitatem Carthaginiensem
deseratis, loca, Templa, sacra, urbemque eorum relinquatis, absque his abeatis,
eique populo, civitati metum, formidinem, oblivionem injiciatis, proditique
Romam ad me, meosque veniatis, nostraeque urbis loca, templa, sacra, urbs
acceptior probatiorque sit, mihique populoque Romano militibusque meis
praepositi sitis, ut sciamus intelligamusque. Si ita feceritis, Macrob.
Saturnal. lib. 3. c. 9.
voveo vobis Templa ludosque facturum. Shorter was this, but to the same effect
and purpose, used by Camillus at the Siege of Veii, when he enticed Queen Juno
to desert the place. Te simul JVNO Regina, quae nunc Veios colis, precor, ut
nos victores in nostram tuamque mox futuram urbem sequare; ubi te dignum
amplitudine tua Templum accipiat. Iivius in hist. R. Decad. 1. l. 5.
It seems the Form increased both in words and circumstance, according to the
growth and puissance of the Roman State, which was far greater in the time of
Scipio, than when Camillus governed the affairs of Rome. Put all together, and
you will think the Tyrians had good reason for what they did, (the dotage of
the times considered) when having Apollo in suspicion that he meant to leave
them, or possibly might be thus enticed from them, they fastened him unto their
Altars with a massy chain, as Plutarch does relate the story. Plut. in vit^
Alexandri.


Thus also when some zealous Patriot had a purpose to devote himself unto
sudden and unavoidable destruction, Greeks and Romans; amongst which, that of
Codrus the Athenian King, and Decius the Roman General, are of most antiquity.
V. Velleium Paterc. hist. l. 1.
And for the Form in which they did it, we have it thus laid down in that of
Decius, when in a war against the Latins, the Romans beginning to give ground,
he said aloud unto theh Priest or Pontifex, who did attend upon the Army,
Poutifex praei verba, quibus me pro legionibus devoveam, that they should
dictate to him the accustomed words, in which he was to dedicate or devote
himself unto the gods, for theh preservation of the Legions. This said, the
Priest appointed him to put on his Gown (which they called toga praetexta) and
with an hood upon his head, and his hand raised up unto his chin, to stand upon
a Dart or Weapon, and to say as follows, Jane, Jupiter, Mars pater, Quirine,
Bellona, Lares, Divi Novensiles, Dii indigetes, Divi quorum est protestas
nostrorum hostiumque, Diique manes, vos precor, veneror, veniam peto feroque
uti populo Romano Quiritium vim victoriamque prosperetis; hostesque populi
Romani Quiritium terrore, formidineque morteque afficiatis. Sicut verbis
nuncupavi, ita pro Republica Quiritium, Diis manibus Tellurique DEVOVE. Which
said he furiously cast himself into the middle of the Enemies, as if he had
been sent by the gods of purpose, Livius in hist. R. Decad. 1. l. 8.
qui pestem ab suis aversam in hosts ferret, to carry all their anger with him
to the adverse party. And that this was the solemn Form used constantly on
those occasions, appears not only by the words of Decius to the Priest or
Pontifex, before remembered, but also by the following practice; the self same
Form, quo pater DECIVS bello Latino se jusserat DEVOVERI, Id. decad. 1. l. 10.
being used after by the younger Decius, on the like occasion, in a War against
the Gauls and Samnites. Such also was the solemn Form which the Romans used
when they devoted any of their Enemies, their Camps and Cities to the same
perdition. A copy or record whereof is still remaining in Macrobius, from whom
take it thus. Dis Paters, Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. c. 9.
sive Jovis Manes, sive quo alio nomine fas est nominare, ut omnes illam urbem
Carthaginem, exercitumque quem ego me sentio dicere, fuga, formidine, terrore
compleatis, quique adversus legiones exercitumque nostrum arma telaque ferent,
uti vos eos exercitus, eos hosts, eosque homines, urbes, agrosque eorum, and
qui in his locis regionibusque agris urbibusque habitant, abducatis, lumine
supero privetis; exercitusque hostium, urbes agrosque eorum quos me sentio
dicere, uti vos eas urbes agrosque capita aetatesque eorum DEVOTAS
consecratasque habeatis, illis legibus, quibus quandoque sunt maxim hosts
devoti; eosque ego Vicorios pro me, fide, magistratuque meo, and pro populo
Romano, exercitibus Legionibusque nostris devoveo; ut me, meamque fidem,
imperiumque Legiones exercitumque nostrum, qui in his rebus gerundis sunt, been
salvos sinatis esse. Si haec ita faxitis, ut ego scidm, sentiam, intelligamque
tunc quisquis votum hoc faxit, ubi faxit, recte facium esto, ovibus atris
tribus, Tellus matter, teque Jupiter obtestor. In the performance of which part
of their devotions, it is observed by my Author, that when the party, whosoever
he was, named the Earth, or Tellus, he stooped unto the ground and touched it;
when he named Jove, he lift his hands up to the Heavens; and when he came to
the devoting of the place or people, he laid them then upon his breast.
Sufficient evidence, that not alone the Forms, but their very gestures were
prescribed and regulated.

For further proof whereof (of the last I mean) if we consult the Latin
Authors of best rank and credit, Gentiles generally making their Prayers upon
their knees, their hands stretched unto the Heavens, their faces looking
toward the East, and their heads uncovered. These are the most considerable
passages in the Act of Worship; and these we shall run over briefly. First that
they prayed upon their knees, and more than so, lay prostrate sometimes on the
earth in the act of Worship, is evident by several testimonies, both of their
own Writers and of the Christian. For Ovid tells us of the Roman Matrons that
genibus nixas dees orasse, that they kneeled on their knees when they made
their Prayers; the like says Livie also, whereof more anon; Ovid. Fastor. l. 4.
and Apuleius brings in Psyche falling on her knees, when she poured forth her
Prayers to Juno. Thus Ovid tells us also of Deucalion and Pyrrha, Apul.
Metamorph. l. 6.
that when they came unto the Temple, Ovid. Metam. l. 1.
Procumbit uterque pronus bumi, they both fell prostrate on the earth. And so
Tibullus of himself, that he would never stick at that, viz. to fall down
prostrate, yea, to kiss the pavement.

Non ego, si merui, dubitem procumbere Templis,
Et dare sacratis oscula limitibus. Tibull. l. 1. Eleg. 5.

More of this kind might be added here, were not these sufficient. And for the
Christian writers, they observe it also: Arnobius noting of the Gentiles,
deorum ante ora prostratos esse, that they fell prostrate when they came before
their gods; limina ipsa osculis converrentes, Arnob. advers. gentes l. 1.
Prudentius in Apotheosi.
and did even sweep the pavement with their kisses. And Prudentius also tells
us of them, genua incurvare Dianae, and plantis Herculis alvolvi, that they did
bow the knee before Diana, and cast themselves down at the feet of Hercules.
It Is true, they used to sit sometimes when as the Priest was at the sacrifice,
and presently as soon as their Prayers were ended: But then it is as true
withal, that by Tertullian, their irreverence therein is much condemned,
Tertull. de orat. l. 12.
who could not patiently endure it, and therefore shows how much he did
dislike that irreverent gesture. For which consult him in his Book de Oratione,
cap. 12. Next for the lifting up of the hands to Heaven, besides that place of
Virgil, Duplices tendens ad sydera palmas, Virgil. Aeneid. 1.


which we learnt when Children, in our Grammars, we find this Rite exceeding
frequent in that Poet; hardly one book in all the Aeneids, in which that
posture is not spoke of. In Ovid it is frequent also, Ad sydera supplex Cressa
manus tollens, Ovid. Mttam. l. 8.

Ipse gubernator tollens ad sydera palmas: Id. Trist. l. 1.



Thus Livie tells us of the matrons before remembered, nixas genibus, supinas
manus ad caelum ac deos tendere, Livius in hist. Romans dec. 4. l. 6.
that being on their knees, they lifted up their hands unto the Heavens, and so
made their prayers. And they are joined together by Lucretius also,

Nec procumbere humi prostratum, and pandere palmas
Ante Deum delubra -- Lucret. l. 5.

More of this we need not. And much there needs not to demonstrate, that they
turned their faces toward the East, in the solemnity of their devotions; the
point being made so universally apparent, by this note of Servius. For whereas
it is said by Virgil, in the description of a sacrifice, Illi ad surgentem
conversi lumina solemn,
Dant fruges manibus salsas: --


The old Grammarian would not have you think that this was spoken of the
Sunrising Jam dudum enim dies erat, Servius in Virg. Aeneid. 12.
For it had long before been day. NOt so, says he, Sed disciplinam
ceremoniarum secutus est, ut orientem diceret spectare eum, qui precaturus
offerat; He only does observe the ancient discipline and ceremonies, that he
who was to pray, should look toward the East. And this may also be collected
from the contrivance of their Temples, which were so fashioned, as the great
Architect Vitruvius notes, ut qui adierint ad aram immolantes, Vitruvius de
Architect. l. 4. c. 5.
ant sacrificia facientes, spectent ad partem coeli Orientem, that they who
offered sacrifice, or made their prayers (for so it follows in the next
words) might look toward the East. Finally, for the uncovering of the head in
the Act of Worship, it was used generally by the Grecians, both in their
Sacrifices and their Prayers, Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1. c. 10. and l. c. c. 6.
and is therefore called Graecus ritus, in Macrobius: And by the Romans also in
the Prayers and Sacrifices made unto Hercules and Saturn, whereof consult
Macrob. lib. 1. c. 8. and 10. and Dionysius Halicarnass. hist. Romans lib. 1. as
also in all acts of worship whatsoever, performed at that great and ancient
Altar, called Ara Maxima, of old erected by the Grecians, Macrob. l. 1. cap. 10.
before the coming of Aeneas into Italy, with his Trojan ceremonies.

And now I am fallen upon the Grecians and their gestures in the Act of
Worship, I will lay down the form and ceremonies, in which their Sacrifices,
which were their greatest Acts of Worship, were performed and celebrated. Of
these I had intended to say nothing here, partly because the punctual practice
of the Romans would give sufficient light and evidence unto the business now in
hand; but principally because the Estates of Greece being very many, and those
too absolute and independent, I doubted I should find but small agreement in
their Rites and Forms. But finding a set Form of Sacrifice used by those of
Athens, painfully collected to my hand by Mr. Francis Rous of Oxon, in his
three books of the Athenian Antiquities; Archaiologiae Atticae l. bri tres. Id.
l. 2. c. 9.
in honor of his learned industry, I will here present it, leaving the
Allegations and Authorities to be consulted in the Authors margin. Thus then
says he, The Priests being purified and prepared, they came and stood round
the Altar, having with them a Basket, in which was the Knife hid, (covered with
flower and salt) wherewith they cut the throat of the Victim. Then they
purified the Altar, going about it with the right hand toward it; which
lustration was made with Meal and Holy Water sprinkled thereon. This water is
called (...), in which they quenched a Firebrand taken from the Altar, with
which they bedewed the standers by, accounting it a cleansing; from whence
(...) was forbidden him, whom they took for a forlorn and polluted wretch. Then
they cast some of the flour on them. And having thus expiated, they cried out,
(...); who is here? to which they made reply, (...), many and good. Then they
prayed, speaking with a loud voice before they began, (...), i. e. Let us pray.
Supplications being ended, they drew the Victim so, as, if it were to the gods
above, the head might look upwards; if it were to the Heroes or Demy-gods, with
his throat downwards. Then they slew him and skinned him, and cutting out
thehuck, shinbones and banch, they covered them with fat, which is called
(...), (whence the gods of the Heathen are said by Nazianzen, (...), to rejoice
in the fat) to the end that they may burn all out in a great flame. For the
Grecians accounted it unlucky, if it did not so consume, and thought that it
was not (...). Upon the (...) they cast small pieces of flesh cut from every
part of the beast, beginning with the shoulder (which in Greek is (...)) from
whence this action is called (...). The reason Eustathius gives, (...), etc.
that they might seem to consume all, which the Athenians did not, being
commanded by Law to carry some of the Sacrifice home. By reason of which
injunction they did so strain courtesy with their gods, that the illiberal or
niggardly sort of people, would sell that which was left, and so make a gain of
their devotion. That which they offered was the haunch-bone, or the entrails,
or somewhat of no great worth; where by entrails you must understand the
spleen, the liver, and the heart, which Homer calls (...). These the ancients
did divide amongst them at Sacrifice to feed on, and afterward cut out the
rest to roast; for when they had finished their devotions, they let loose the
reins to all voluptuousness. For many times they left nothing of their
Sacrifice, especially when they offered unto VEsta; whence the Proverb (...),
to Sacrifice to Vesta, is to eatup all. He also notes from Aristophanes, that
they had their Meat Offerings, and their Drink Offerings; that in their
Meat Offerings, it was required that it should be sound and without blemish,
whether it were an Ox, Sheep, Goat, Swine, or Calf; that he whose poverty was
such that he could not afford a Sheep, or the like, might with acceptance to
the Gods, offer a little Cake or Mola, which by the richer sort was mingled
with Oil and Wine; and finally, that instead of this, the wealthier sort used
to cast frankincense upon the Altar. Such were the prescribed Rites and Forms,
in which the Athenians offered Sacrifice to the gods of Attica: And doubt we
not but that the other States of Greece, as they had gods to whom to Sacrifice,
and Sacrifices for their gods; so were they also regulated by a prescript Form,
in which their gods were to be Worshipped, their Sacrifices to be tendered.

But to return again to the Roman Forms, to put an end to this discourse,
Servius has observed in his notes on Virgil, Servius in Virg. Aeneid. l. 1.
Romani nihil nisi captatis faciebant auguriis, praecipue NVPTIAS, the Romans
did not any thing (says he) without consulting with the Augur, especially in
point of Marriage. In celebrating of the which, as there were certain formal
words, so were there also solemn Sacrifices. First, for the formal words of
Marriage, Boethius does report them thus. Coemptio certis solennitatibus
peragebatur, and sese in coemendo invicem interrogabant, Vir ita, an sibi
mulier materfamilias esse vellet, illa respondebat velle: item Mulier
interrogabat, an sibi vir Paterfamilias esse vellet, ille respondebat velle,
etc. That kind of Marriage (says he) which is called Coemption, Boethius
Comment. in Ciceronis Topica. l. 2.
was done with certain and determinate solemnities, proposing to each other
these Interrogatories. The Man demanded of the Woman, if she would be his
Wedded Wife, and she said, I will: And then the Woman asked the Man, if he
would be her Wedded Husband, and he said, he would; which said, the Man took
the Woman into his hands, and from thenceforth she was his Wife. Next for the
solemn Sacrifice performed at Weddings, there was a Form of Marriage which they
called Confarreatio, because the Married couple used to eat of a Barley cake,
which had been offered in the Sacrifice: From whence perhaps the use of Bride
cakes came first into this Country with the Romans, as many other of their
customs did. And this was Solemnized says the great Lawyer Vlpian, Cited by
Rosinus Antiqu. Romans l. 5. c. 37.
Certis verbis, and testibus december praesentibus, and solenni sacrificio facto,
in quo panis farreus adhibetur, under a certain and prescribed Form of words,
ten Witnesses at the least being present, and a solemn Sacrifice, wherein the
Barley-cake was used, which before we spoke of. The Beast prepared for the
Sacrifice, Varro de re Rustica. l. 2. c. 4.
was commonly a Swine or Porker, as it is in Varro. And if a Sacrifice were
offered, as it seems to be, no question but it was attended with Prayers and
Orizons unto the gods, for the prosperity of the parties. This affirmed plainly
by Valerius Flaccus in his Argonautica.

Inde ubi sacrificas cum conjuge venit ad aras
Aesonides, unaque adeunt, pariterque precari Incipiunt, etc.
Finally, Valor. Flaccus Argonaut. l. 8.
besides the laying down of money at the time of Marriage, in the way of dowry,
from whence it seems to be called Coemption; the Bridegroom used to put a
Ring on the fourth finger of his Spouse, when he made the Contract. The thing
affirmed by Juvenal amongst the Ancients, Juvenal. Sat. 6.
where speaking of a Contract or Espousal, he thus glanceth at it, Jamque a
tonsore magistro Pectoris, and digitis pignus fortasse dedisti. The reason of
it given by Gellius, A. Gellius Noct. Attic. l. 10. c. 10.
and since him by others, because it was observed by the Auatomists, repertum
esse nervum quendam tenuissimum ab eo uno digito ad Cor hominis pergere ac
pervenire, That from that finger there passEd a small and slender nerve to the
heart of man. More of this we may see hereafter, when we are come unto the Form
of Marriage in the Christian Church; to the determinate Forms whereof we are
come at last.

CHAP. V. That in the times of the Apostles Liturgies, or Set Forms of
ministration in the Christian Church, were composed and used.
1. The Jews and Gentiles made one Church, by Christ our Savior. 2. A Form of
Prayer prescribed by Christ to his Disciples. 3. The Institution of the
Christian Sacrifice, with the set Form thereof, by our Lord and Savior. 4.
That the Lords Prayer, with other Benedictions, were used by the Apostles in
the Celebration of the blessed Eucharist. 5. A Form of Celebrating Gods public
Service, prescribed in the first of S. Paul to Timothy, according to the
judgment of the Fathers. 6. The Form and manner of Gods public Service,
described in the first to the Corinthians. 7. The Hymns and Psalms used in the
Church of Corinth, were not voluntary, but prescribed and set; and of the
Music therewith used. 8. That is it probable, that the Apostles ordained
Liturgies, for the public use. 9. What may be said touching the Liturgies
ascribed unto. S. Peter, Mark, and James. 10. The Form of ministering the
Sacrament of the blessed Eucharist, described by Dionysius the Areopagite. 11.
That of the ministering the Sacrament of holy Baptism described by him; and
seconded by the Constitutions ascribed to Clemens. 12. Places appointed in this
Age for Gods public Worship, and honored with the name of Churches.


THus have we taken a distinct and several view of those Forms of Worship, Jews
and Gentiles, whilst they stood divided; whilst they were separated by that
partition wall which the Apostle speaks of, whereby they were indeed divided
both in opinions and affections. But that partition wall being broken down by
our Lord and Savior, Ephesians. 2.14, etc.
he did withal abolish in his flesh that enmity which had been between them,
even the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of
twain one new man; so making peace between the parties, ut reconciliaret ambos
in unto corpore, that he might reconcile both to God, being united in one body
by the Cross of Christ. And indeed how could he do otherwise, who was as well
designed by Almighty God, to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, as to be the
glory of his People Israel? Luke 2.32.
The promise which God made to Abraham was not unto his Seed alone, but to all
the Nations of the World by it: And although Shiloh was to come from the loins
of Judah, yet was he also expectatio Gentium, as the Vulgar reads it, Genesis
49.10.
and to him should the gathering of the People be. Therefore however he was
pleased to declare at first, that he was tnot sent but to the lost Sheep of the
House of Israel, Mat. 10.6.
and did accordingly grant out a limited Commission unto his Disciples; yet he
enlarged it in the end, Mat. 10.5.
giving them an especial charge to go teach all Nations. Id. 28.19.
And when he found them backward in pursuit thereof, he quickened Peter by a
Vision, and called Paul as it were of purpose, Act. 10.11.
to bear his name before the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn them
from darkness unto light, Act. 9.17.
and from the power of Satan unto God. So that although the Jews and Gentiles
were not collected into one body, in our Saviors time, Act. 26.18.
I mean the time in which he pleased to sojourn here upon the Earth: yet being
done by his Authority, and by the conduct and direction of his blessed Spirit,
it can be said of none but him, quod fecit utraque unum, that he made both one,
bringing them both into one Church, Ephesians. 2.14.
and making both partakers of the same communion, who were before at such a
distance, as was conceived to be irreconcilable. Unto the constituting of which
Church, our Savior brought not any thing of Rite or Ceremony, determined
nothing that we meet with in his holy Gospels, touching the time or place of
public Worship, the Form and manner of the same; save that he gave a general
intimation, that Jerusalem should no longer be the place, in which men should
be bound to Worship. Joh. 4.21.
The pains he took were principally spent in points of Doctrine, clearing the
truths of holy Scripture from those false glosses and corrupt traditions, which
had been put upon it by the Scribes and Pharisees; and setting forth a new and
clearer body of Divinity than had been taught the people in the Law of Moses;
that the Father might be worshipped in succeeding times with a greater measure
of the spirit, and a more perfect knowledge of the truth, Joh. 4.23, 24.
than he had been formerly. As for the circumstances and out-parts of Worship,
he left them in the state he found them, that is to say, to the disposing of
the Church, in whose power it was to institute such Rites and Ceremonies as
might apparently conduce to the increase of Piety, and to the setting forth of
Gods praise and glory. Himself had given a personal and most exemplary
obedience to the Church of Jewry, conforming to such Rites and Ordinances
(wherein there was no deviation from the Law of God) as had in former times
been settled by the power thereof. And therefore had no cause of his collecting;
a Church conducted in those points which pertain to godliness, by such a
visible cooperation of the Holy Ghost; especially considering what a fair
example of Conformity he should leave behind him. Besides all people of the
world, both Jews and Gentiles were settled at that time in a full persuasion of
the necessity of set times and determinate places, for the assembling of
themselves together in the acts of Worship; and had their prescribed Forms both
of Prayer and Praise, their Rituals and established Ceremonies; and therewith
also an opinion that those things were to be eprformed by the Priest alone.
Which being agreed on in the general, both people might be brought with more
facility, to fall on some particular conclusions, to which they were inclined
already by their common principles. And so indeed it proved in a short event;
times, places, and set Forms for worship, being unanimously and universally
received amongst them, within a very little while after our Lords departure.
The Jews already had their Synagogues, their Proseuchas or Oratories, as before
was said. How small a labor was it to the blessed Apostles, and their
successors in that work, to turn those Synagogues of theirs into Christian
Churches, for Preaching of the Word of God, and the administration of the
Sacraments; accordingly as they did win upon the Jews to embrace the Gospel?
Nor is this only a bare speculation, it was done de facto, it being recorded in
a book ascribed unto Athanasius, that on the converting of the Jews,
Inhabitants of Beritus, to the faith of Christ, (...), Athanas. de passione
imaginis Dom. nostri. To. 2. gr. l. p. 631.
that the Bishop who had labored in it, converted the Synagogue of the Jews
into a Christian Church, and dedicated it to our Lord and Savior. And for the
Temples of the Gentiles, when once their superstitions were suppressed, and the
Gospel countenanced by Authority, they were converted also to the self-same
use, Vid. Bed. hist. Eccles. 1.
as the Jewish Synagogues had been in other places: Gods Servants being in the
mean time contented with such safe retreats, as their necessities enforced them
to make use of in those fiery times; or with such public places of Assembly,
but mean and under the degree of envy, as either upon sufferance or by special
leave they were permitted to erect. As soon, if not more suddenly, all parties
also were agreed on the times of worship, which was reduced with general and
joint consent unto the first day of the week, the Lords day, or the Sunday,
call it which you will; wherein all members of the Congregation were to meet
together for Gods public Service. A business, wherein the Church proceeded
with great care and wisdom; setting apart one day in seven, to hold the fairer
quarter with the Jews, who were so zealous of a Sabbath; but altering the day
it self, and paring off those legal Ordinances which had made it burdensome,
the better to content the Gentiles. Yet so that they had also their daily
meetings as occasion served, for celebration of the Sacrament of the blessed
Eucharist, in those fiery times. Whereof, as being instituted for the Christian
Sacrifice, and of the Evangelical Priesthood to attend the same, we shall speak
anon.

In the mean time, 1 Cor. 14.
is not only warranted, but enjoined by the Apostles Canon, made for those of
Corinth; and consequently for all Churches else. And that for the avoiding of
Battologies, and all effusions of raw and undigested prayers, besides what has
been shown before to have been generally in use both with Jew and Gentile, in
being bound and regulated by set Forms of Prayer: We have a Form laid down by
our Lord and Savior, both for our use and imitation. And first, that it was
made for our imitation is generally agreed on, even by those, who otherwise
approve not set Forms of Prayer. Calv. in Harm. Evangel.
Calvin does so resolve it, saying, In hunc finem tradita est haec regula, ad
quam preces nostras exigere necesse est, si legitimas censeri Deoque probari
cupimus. And in the words not long before, Non jubet Christus suos conceptis
verbis orare, sed tantum ostendit quorsum vota omnia precesque referri deceat.
The meaning in both passages is no more than this, that Christ obliged not his
Disciples to the very words, but only showed them how they were to pray, and
what to pray for, if they would order them aright, and did desire to have them
acceptable in the sight of God. To this does Musculus agree, besides many
others, whom here indeed I had not named, but that he does translate the Text
in a different manner, from all the rest which I have met with. For whereas
Beza, Calvin, Erasmus, Castalio, Paraeus, and indeed who not, do read it sic
orate, as the Vulgar does: Musculus, to decline the easier all set Forms of
prayer, Musculus in Mat. c. 6.
does translate it thus, ad hunc ergo modum orate, pray according to this
manner, and thereupon infers non dicit, hanc ergo orationem, vel haec verba
proferte, etc. Christ does not say, says he, repeat this Prayer, or use these
words which you hear me speak; but let your Prayers be made by this rule and
pattern which is laid before you. In which, if they intend no more than this,
that Christ our Savior did not so confine his followers to those very words,
but that they might express their minds, and represent their Prayers unto the
Lord in such other Forms as might be serviceable to that end and purpose, for
which Prayers are made; they shall take me with them. I know not any
sober-minded man, who will gainsay them in this matter, if they mean no
otherwise. S. Augustine did so state it many years agone. Liberum quidem est
(says he) aliis atque aliis verbis, eadem tamen, quae haec oration continet, in
orando dicere; sed non est liberum alia and diversa and contraria dicere.
Augustine in epist. 121. ad Probam.
But if they mean that this celestial Form was made for imitation only, not at
all for use, I mean not to be used precisely in our saviors words; I must
needs crave their pardon, if I leave them there. For when it is affirmed by
Musculus, non dicit, hanc ergo orationem, vel haec verba proferte, when it is
said by Calvin, non jubet Christus suos conceptis verbis orare; when it is
thought to be so hard a task to prove from Scripture, Vindicat. p. 23.
that the Disciples were tied to the use of this Form; and that the often
reiterating thereof in our public Liturgy, is judged a matter so impertinent,
as to be reckoned for a stumbling block before the feet of many. Smectymn. p.
12.
I cannot sec but that their meaning is to exclude the use of this divine and
Heavenly Prayer from Gods public Worship, if not from the devotions also of
Gods Saints in private. This if it be their mind and meaning, as by the
practice of some men it may seem to be; I must there leave them to themselves.
Our Saviors dicite delivered plainly and expressly in his holy Gospel, is no
idle word, who being required by his Disciples to teach them what and how to
pray, tells them in plain terms, Dicite, say, Our Father which art in Heaven,
with the rest that follows. And this, as is affirmed by good interpreters,
and very faintly, if at all gainsaid by Calvin (in his hac ale re cum nemine
pugnare volo) was at a different time, and on a different occasion, from that
which by S. Matthew was before related. Though sic, or ad hunc modum, as it is
in Musculus, may serve exceeding well for imitation: yet Dicite, of it self,
without either of them, will not be denied, to serve as strongly for the use.
And sure the Fathers so conceived it. Of whom thus Cyprian, Qui enim fecit
vivere, docuit and orare, ut dum prece and oratione quam filius docuit, apud
patrem loquimur, facilius exaudiamur. He, Cyprian. de Oratione Dominica.
says the holy Martyr, who made us to live, has also taught us to pray, that
while we speak unto the Father in that prayer and orizon which the Son has
taught us, we may be heard with more facility. And not long after, Agnoscat
pater filii verba cum precem facimus; Let the Almighty Father hear the words of
hsi blessed Son, when we make our prayers. The like to which we have in
Chrysostom, if not hence derived, Opus imperfect. in Mat. Homil. 14.
Cognoscit Pater filii sui sensus and verba, that the Heavenly Father knows
right well the words and meanin gof his Son. And what else does Tertullian
mean, when he informs us that this most excellent prayer being then animated by
the spirit, when it proceeded from the divine mouth of our Lord and Savior,
Suo privilegio ascendit in coelum, commendans Patri quae filius docuit, does by
a special privilege ascend to Heaven, Tertul. de Oratione.
commending to the Father those devotions which were taught and dictated by the
Son? Add here the care that has been taken in the times of old, that Children
should be taught this Prayer in their tender years, (for which consult S.
Austin, Sermon. 1. Mat. 2. in Dominica 10. de Christiano nomine, and Council.
Rhemens. cap. 2.) and then I doubt not but it will appear to indifferent men,
that this most excellent Form of Prayer was prescribed for use, and not laid
down only for our imitation, and no more than so.

So then, we have a Form of Prayer prescribed by Christ to his Disciples, go ye
and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Mat. 28.19.
That when the Arrians were suspected not to use the same, but rather to
Baptize in nomine patris, per filium in Sp. sancto, as it is said they did; it
was decreed in the Council of Arles, that if upon examination it did so appear,
Nicephorus hist. Eccl. l. 13. c. 35. Council. Arelatons. Can. 8.
those who had been Baptized in so void a Form, should be a new admitted to
that holy Sacrament. And for the Sacrament of the blessed Eucharist, so far
forth as the Rites and Form of Celebration used by Christ our Savior, are
declared in Scripture, there is no question made amongst Learned men, but they
were Obligatory to the Church for succeeding Ages. The blessing of the Bread,
the breaking of it, and the distributing thereof unto his Apostles; the
blessing of the Cup, and the communicating of the same to all the Company:
those formal Energetical words, Take, eat, this is my Body, and drink ye all of
this, this is the Cup, etc. and all this to be done in remembrance of me: Are
rites and actions so determined, words so prescribed, and so precisely to be
used, that it is not in the Churches power (unless she mean to set up a
Religion of her own devising) for to change the same. And this, I take it, is
agreed on by all Learned Protestants. Certain I am, it was so in the Churches
practice from the first beginning; as may appear to any one who will take the
pains to compare the Rites and Form of administration used by S. Paul and his
Associates in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.24.25.
with that which was both done and prescribed by Christ, according as it is
related in the holy Gospel. A further proof hereof we shall e're long. Nor find
I any difference considerable amongst moderate men, touching the Priest or
Minister ordained by Christ, for the perpetuating of this Sacrament, for the
commemoratingof his death and passion, until his coming unto judgment. The
public exercises of Religion would be but ill performed without a Priesthood;
and that would soon be brought to nothing, at least reduced unto contempt and
scorn, if every one that lists might invade the Office. Our Savior
therefore, when he did institute this Sacrament (or as the Fathers called it
without offense in those pious times, the Sacrifice of the blessed Eucharist,
Cum novi Testamenti novam docuit oblationem, Prenaeus cont. hares. l. 4. c. 32.
to use the words of Irenaeus) give an hoc facite unto his Apostles, a faculty
to them and their successors in the Evangelical Priesthood, to do as he had
done before, that is to take the Bread, to bless to break it, and to distribute
it amongst the Faithful, to sanctify the Cup, and then to give it to the
Congregation, Men of on Orders in the Church, may edere and bibere, as the Lord
appointed; and happy it is, they are permitted to enjoy such sweet refection.
But for hoc facere, that is the Priests peculiar. And take they heed who do
usurp upon the Office, lest the Lord strike them with a fouler Leprosy than he
did Vzzah, 2 Chronicles. 26.20.
when he usurped upon the Priesthood, and would needs offer Incense in the
House of God. These points are little controverted amongst sober men. The
matter most in question which concerns this business, is, whether our Redeemer
used any other either Prayers or Blessings, when he did institute this blessed
Sacrament, than what were formerly in use amongst the Jews, when they did
celebrate their Passover; and if he did, then whether he commended them unto
his Apostles, or left them to themselves to compose such Prayers as the
necessities of the Church required, and might seem best to them and the Holy
Ghost. This we shall best discover by the following practice, in which it will
appear on a careful search, that the Apostles in their times, and the Church
afterward by their example, did use and institute such Forms of Prayer, and
Praise, and Benedictions in the Solemnities of the blessed Sacrament, of which
there is no constat in the Book of God, that they were used at that time by our
Savior Christ. And if they kept themselves to a prescript Form in celebration
of the Eucharist, as we shall shortly see they did; then we may easily believe
it was not long before they did the like in all the acts of public Worship;
according as the Church increased, and the Believers were disposed of into
Congregations.

And first, Hierom. adv. Pelagium. l. 3.
There is a place in Hierome, which may seem to intimate that this was done by
Christ's appointment. Sic docuit Apostolos suos (says that Reverend Father) ut
quotidie in corporis illius sacrificio credentes audeant loqui, Pater noster,
etc. Whether his words will bear that meaning I can hardly say. Certain I am,
they are alleged to this purpose by a late Learned writer, Steph. Durantes de
ritibus Ecelesiae Cathol. l. 2. c. 46.
who saying first, Eam (i. e. orationem Dominicam) in Missae sacro dicendam
Christus ipse Apostolos docuit, that Christ instructed his Apostles to say the
Lords Prayer in the Celebration of that Sacrament (or in the Sacrifice of the
Mass, as he calls it there) does for the proof thereof vouch these words of
Hierome. But whether it were so or not, most sure it is that the Apostles are
reported to have used that Prayer, as often as they Celebrated the Communion.
Mos fuit Apostolorum (says S. Gregory) ut ad ipsam solummodo orationem
Dominicam, oblationis hostiam consecrarent. It was, Gregor. M. Epist. l. 7. Ep.
54. V. Bellarm. de Missa. l. 2. c. 19. Durand. Ration. divinorum. l. 4.
says he, the use or custom of the Apostles to Consecrate the Host or
Sacrament with reciting only the Lords Prayer. Which passage, if he took from
that of Hierome, as some think he did, the one may not unfitly serve to explain
the other. The like says Durand in his Rationale. The Lord says he did
institute the Sacrament with no other words than those of Consecration only;
Quibus Apostoli adjecerunt orationem Dominicam, to which the Apostles added the
Lords Prayer: And in this wise did Peter first say Mass (you must understand
him of the Sacrament) in the Eastern parts. Platina in vita Sixti.
Platina says the like as to S. PETER, Eum ubi consecraverit, oratione Pater
noster usum esse, That in the Consecration of the Sacrament, he used to say the
Lords Prayer, or the Pater noster. See to this purpose Antonius, tit. 5. cap.
2.. 1. Martinus Polonus in his Chronicon, and some later Writers. By which, as
it is clear and evident, that the Apostles used the Lords Prayer in the
Celebration of the holy Mysteries, which is a most strong argument that it was
given them to be used or said, not to be imitated only: So it may seem by
Gregory's solummodo, that they used the Lords Prayer and nothing else. And
therefore that of Gregory must be understood, either that they used no other
Prayer in the very act of Consecration, or that they closed the Form of
Consecration with that Prayer of Christ's; which may well be without excluding
of the words of Consecration which our Savior used, or such preparatory
Prayers as were devised by the Apostles for that great solemnity. For certainly
we must not take the words of Gregory to be so exclusive, as to shut out the
words of Institution, or any of those Prayers or Benedictions which our Savior
used, or the Apostles guided by the Lords example, might think fit to imitate.
To think that willingly, or rather wilfully, they should omit the words of
their Lord and Master, which were so Operative and Energetical, would prove too
great a scandal to those blessed spirits. And therefore Ambrose, when he puts
the question, touching the Consecration of the Elements, Ambr. de Sacramentis.
l. 4. c. 4.
Consecratio igitur quibus verbis est, and cujus sermonibus, by what words, and
by whose it is made or celebrated; makes answer, Domini JESV, by the words of
the Lord Jesus. And if the Elements are to be Consecrated by no other words (as
the continual practice of the Church of Christ seems to say they may not) there
is no question to be made, but that the Apostles used those words of
Consecration, which they had heard before delivered from our blessed Savior.
We could not say they did hoc facere, according to the Lords injunction, if it
had been otherwise. And no less probable it is, that in a work of so great
consequence, they fell not presently upon the words of Institution, making a
bare recital of them, and no more than so; and used not some preparatory
Prayers to set an edge on the devotions of Gods people, according as the Lord
had done before, who blessed the Bread before be brake it, and therefore of
necessity before he gave it. Certain I am, Rabanus Maurus de Institut. Cler. l.
32.
that so it is affirmed by Rabanus Maurus, Cum benedictione and gratiarum
action primum Dominus corporis and sanguinis sui sacramenta dedicavit, and
Apostolis tradidit, quod exinde Apostoli imitati fecere, and successores suos
facere docuerunt, quod and nunc per totum orbem terrarum generaliter tota
custodit Ecclesia. The Lord, says he, first dedicated or ordained the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood with Benediction and Thanksgiving, and gave the
same to his Apostles; which the Apostles after imitating, did both do
themselves, and taught their successors to do it also; so that it is now
generally practiced by the Church throughout the world. Here then we take it
pro confesso, that in the Celebration of the blessed Sacrament, besides the
words of Consecration which our Savior used, the Apostles added the Lords
Prayer: And we conceive it to be probable that they used certain Prayers and
Benedictions by way of preparation to so great a business; of which more anon.

For further proof whereof, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
I exhort therefore that firstof all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and
giving of Thanks, be made for all men; for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. Which
words are generally understood not of private Prayers, but those which are made
publicly in the Congregation. Calv. and Estius in 1. ad Tim. c. 2.
Calvin does so expound it for the Protestant Writers; and so does Estius for
the Pontificians, as is elsewhere noted. And that the Western Church may not
stand alone, Theophylact and Oecumenius do both expound the words, (...), of
the daily service, Theophyl. and Oecumen. in 1. ad Tim.
which from the first beginning had been Celebrated in the Church of God. This
I premise as granted without more ado. Which being so premised and granted,
and the ground thus laid; we are to look upon the building, as before was
said, raised by the Fathers on the place. And here we will begin with S. Austin
first, as one that has more punctually observed the place, and traversed the
whole ground, and each part thereof, than any one that went before him; who
writing to Paulinus, does thus build upon it. August. ad Panlinum. Epist. 59.
Multa hinc quippe dici possunt quae improbanda non sunt, sed eligo in his
verbis hoc intelligere, quo omnis vel paene omnis frequentat Ecclesia; ut
precationes accipiamus dictas, quas facimus in celebratione Sacramentorum,
antequam illud quod est in mensa Domini, incipiat benedici: Orationes, cum
benedicitur, and sanctificatur, and ad distribuendum comminuitur, quam tot am
petitionem fere omnis Ecclesia DOMINICA ORATIONE concludit: Interpellationes
autem (five ut nostri codices habent, postulationes) fiunt cum populus
benedicitur, tunc enim Antistites velut advocati susceptos suos per manus
impositionem misericordissimae offerunt potestati. Quibus peractis and
participato tanto sacramento, Gratiarum actio cuncta concludit, quam in his
etiam verbis ultimam commendavit Apostolus. I have put down the words at large,
because they are so full an Exposition of the several words used by the
Apostles; and not an Exposition only, but an Application, according to the
several parts of the public Liturgies. The sense and meaning of them is as
follows. Many things may be hence inferred (says he) not to be distliked,
but I choose raher so to understand the same, according unto that which I find
observed in every, or at least every Church almost; that is to say, that here
by Supplications we mean those Petitions, which we make in Celebration of the
Sacraments, before we come unto the consecration of the Elements; by Prayers,
the sanctifying and blessing of the Bread and Wine, when it is put into a
readiness to be distributed unto the people, which action or Petition every
Church almost concludes with the Lords Prayer. (Where by the way, we may
observe what place the Lords Prayer had of old in the Celebration.) The
Intercessions are made then, when the people do partake of the public
blessing; for then the Prelates of the Church, like Advocates or Sureties, do
by the laying on of hands, present them to the merciful protection of the Lord
their God. Which ended, and the people being made partakers of so great a
Sacrament, all is concluded or shut up with giving thanks, which therefore is
last spoken of by the Apostle. So far the words of Austin, and it is worthy the
noting, that Venerable Bede making a Commentary on S. Paul's Epistles,
collected out of several passages of this Fathers works, puts down these words
at large, as before recited, Ven. Beda. Comment. in 1. ad Tim. c. 2.
for the full meaning of the place. And if S. Austin was not out in his
Exposition, as I have heard of none that do charge him with it, we have not
only Prayers and Benedictions, used and commanded to be used at the
Celebration; but such a prescribed and determinate Form, as quickly was
received over all the Church, The Commentaries commonly ascribed to Ambrose,
which if not his, are certainly both very pious and of great Antiquity, give us
the matter of those Prayers, which here by the Apostles rule, were ladi first
of all, as a preparatory to the Celebration. Haec regula Ecclesiastica est
tradita a magistro Gentium, qua utuntur sacerdotes nostri, ut pro omnibus
supplicent, Ambr. Comment. in ^. ad Tim. c. 2.
etc. This Ecclesiastical Ordinance (says he) was given by by the Doctor of
the Gentiles, which our Priests use unto this day, making their Prayers to God
for all men. Praying for the Kings of the world, that they may have their
people in obedience, that being governed in peace, they may serve the Lord in
rest and quietness of mind; as also for all those which are in Authority under
them, that they may govern the Commonwealth in truth and equity, with plenty
of all things, that so all tumults and seditions being far removed, joyfulness
may succeed in the place thereof. For it is Bread that strengthens, and Wine
that makes glad the heart of man. They intercede also for all those who are in
misery or necessity, that being delivered from the same, they may praise the
Lord, the Author of all health and safety; finally giving thanks to God for all
those blessings which he affords us in this life, that God may so be praised
from whom, and Christ, by whom so many benefits are bestowed upon us; that all
things being composed and quieted, which might prove dangerous unto the Empire,
we may have liberty to serve the Lord in godliness and honesty. Thus he. And
this I could fain know, how little, if at all, this differs either for matter,
form, or place, from the Prayer entitled, for the Church militan here on
Earth, continued till this day in the Church of England: And that according to
S. Ambrose (if the work be his) Secundum regulam Ecclesiasticam traditam a
Magistro Gentium, conform unto a rule of S. Paul's prescribing. I add but this,
which is observed unto my hand by a very learned and industrious Gentleman (for
I am willing to acknowledge by whom I profit) that in the meaning of the
Apostle, H. Thorndike of Religious Assemb. cap. 10. p. 377.
as well as in the practice of the primitive Church, Prayers and Supplications
were to be made for all men, in the Celebration of the Eucharist, for Kings,
etc. it being neither strained nor forced (as he notes full well) to take the
word (...), or thanksgiving (which S. Paul there uses) in that very sense, in
which it has been used by Clemens and Ignatius, the Apostles Scholars, for the
Celebration of the Eucharist; for the whole action, and all the Prayers and
supplications which it was celebrated withal. For why not thus, as well in this
place of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 14.16.
as in another not so likely, where the Apostle asks this question, HOw shall
he which occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen, at thy giving of thanks,
seeing he understands not what he says? Of which thus Beza in his notes,
Suspicor Apostolum attingere, Beza Annot. in 1. ad Cor. c. 14.
celebrandae Domini coenae ritum, and solennem illam gratiarum actionem. I am,
says he, of an opinion, that the Apostle in this place does point unto the
Rites of Celebrating the Lords holy Supper, and that solemn giving of thanks
which was therein used; a full description of the which, he gives us out of
Justin Martyr, which we shall see anon in its proper place. Whence had the
blessed Sacraments the name of Eucharist, V. Casaubon. in Annal. Eccl. Exerc.
16. n. 40.
if our Grammarians and Philologers be not much mistaken, but from this solemn
giving thanks which was used therein?

Thus am I fallen at last upon S. Paul's Epistle unto those of Corinth, wherein
it is conceived that the performances of the Church are most fully handled, as
they relate unto the public worship of Almighty God. Which though it be, as in
relation to those times in which there were such wonderful effusions of the
holy Spirit, yet being that those effusions were miraculous, and the public
offices of the Church were governed by the immediate inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, there are not many things therein, which may be drawn into example in
these later times, in which we must not look for such effusions: For it is well
observed by Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Homil. 14. n. 18. ad Romans
(...). That many of those miracles which were frequent then, are not to be
expected now. These extraordinary graces were not given but for an
extraordinary end, which was the planting of the Gospel in the midst of
Paganism; or where it was encountered by an obstinate faction of obdurate Jews.
And therefore they that do pretend to such special gifts, as were in those
times necessary for theordering and edification of the Church; may by as strong
a Charter, for ought I can see, lay claim unto the gift of Tongues, and the
power of Healing, and the spirit of Prophecy; which yet I see but few of them
do aspire unto. Passing by those things therefore in this Epistle, which are
not to be drawn into example, if will appear most clearly from the xiv.
Chapter, that to the constituting of Gods public Service in the Congregation,
there went these three parts, Prayer, Praise, and Prophecy; which we have
formerly observed to be the three ingredients that make up the same. This last,
we find much spoke of throughout that Chapter, particularly and by name, verse
1, 3, 5, 22, 29, 31, 32, 39. The other two he joyneth together in one verse, 1
Cor. 14.15.
viz. I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with understanding also: I
will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with understanding also. Himself
informs us what he means by Prophesying, where it is said, that he who
Prophesyeth, speaks unto men to edification, and exhortation, Ibid. v. 3.
both which, as the times then were, there was a great ambition in the Prophets
of the Church of Corinth, for ostentation of their gifts, to utter them in
Tongues not understood by the common people. This is the thing most blamed by
the Apostle in the present Chapter, viz. that in their exhortations to the
people, or explications of the Scriptures, they used to speak in unknown
tongues, and not interpret. Ibid. v. 5. and 27
And that they did the like in the act of Prayer, is conceived by Beza, where
he thus glosseth on the Text, Orabo spiritu, i. e. lingua peregrina quam mihi
dictat spiritus; Be^a in Annot. in 1. ad Cor. 14
I will pray in the spirit, that is (says he) in such an unknown tongue as the
spirit dictates; yet so, that I will pray with the understanding; that is
(says he) in etiam ab aliis intelligar and alios instituam, that I may be
understood of others, for their information. And this might be, I mean they
might affect to pray in an unknown tongue, although the Prayers themselves had
been predetermined of both for Form and matter. Chrysostom, if I understand him
rightly, seems to say no less. For writing on these following words, Else when
thou shall bless with the spirit, ( i. e. says Beza, in peregrima lingua, 1
Cor. 14.16.
in an unknown tongue) how shall he which occupies the room of the unlearned,
say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou
say? He thus gives the sense. (...), Chrysostom. In 1. ad Cor. Homil. 35.
etc. If thu blessest in a barbarous or unknown tongue, the Laity (for he had
said before (...), that by the unlearned there, he meant the Laity) not
understanding what thou say, nor being able to interpret, cannot by Amen;
because not hearing this, (...), that is to say, world without end, with which
the prayer or blessing is concluded, he cannot say Amen unto it. Theophylact
from him to the same effect. (...). Id. ibid. Theophyl. in 1. ad Cor. c. 14.
(...), For whilst thou say world without end, obscurely in an unknown
tongue, he hears not what thou used in the Congregation, were prescribed and
known, or else how could the close or end thereof be so known and certain? Nor
is this my collection only, it is Peter Martyrs too, as well as mine.
Chrysostomus hunc locum tractans, P. Martyr. in 1 ad Cor. c. 14.
etc. So Chrysostom on this place (says he) tell us, that if the people did
not hear these words, (...), they could by no means say Amen. Ex quo loco
habemus etiam primis illis temporibus preces publicas consuevisse per haec
verba in secula seculorum absolvi. And from this place we may perceive, that
world without end, even in those first times, was used in the close of their
public prayers. So far Peter Martyr.

And this may yet appear more plainly by that other part of public worship,
Paul here speaks of, viz. that of singing. For if they did not sing at random,
as the spirit moved them, but did confine themselves unto such Psalms or Hymns
as were received in the Church; it may the better be believed that they did
hearken also to such prayers as their spiritual guides had provided for them.
Now that they did not sing at random, every one as the spirit moved him, needs
no other argument, but that confusion both of tune and matter (especially if
they used also Instruments of Music, whereof more anon) which must needs
follow thereupon; more dreadful than the noise of Babel. Nor is it evident,
that he to whom the spirit did first prompt such a Psalm or Hymn, did like the
Chanter in our Quires, or any other of our Vicars Choral, sign the verse alone,
and then the Congregation sing it after him, as the Quire or Consort. For
though Paraeus seem to be of this question, alios decantare hymnos sacros a
spiritu dictatos vel meditatos, Paraeus in 1. ad Corinth. c. 14.
That some, according to their gifts, did sing some holy Hymns, which had been
dictated by the spirit: Yet I subscribe rather unto that of Calvin, who thinks
that it is meant of David's Psalms, which were accustomed to be sung in the
Christian church, even from the first beginnings of it, according as before in
that of Jewry. Nec vero mihi dubium est (as he states it there) quin ritum
Judaicae Ecclesiae statim ab initio in Psalmis fuerint imitati. Calvin in 1. ad
Cor. c. 14.
Musculus is of this mind also, save that to David's Psalms, he adds such other
Hymns and spiritual songs (sive Psalmos Davidis five alia quaedam cecinerint)
which were composed for the use of the Congregation. Musculus in 1. ad Cor. c.
14.
And certainly it is a matter past all question, that these Celestial songs of
David, and such others (if more such there were) who did contribute to the
making up of the Book of Psalms, have been a special part of Gods public
worship, even from the cradle of the Church. It had not else been grown to so
considerable an esteem in the public Liturgy, in and before the time of
Trajan, (and consequently of S. John) as we find in Pliny; who tells us of the
Christians then, that they did stato die ante lucent convenire, Plin. Epist. l.
10. Epist. 97.
carmenque Christo quasi deo dicere secum invicem, Assemble before light on the
days appointed, and sing praise (or Hymns) to Christ, as God, with one another.
But we shall speak with Pliny more at large hereafter. In the mean time, if any
question should be moved, what the Apostle did dislike in the act of singing,
(for somewhat he disliked most certain;) we answer, as before in the case of
prayer, that he disliked their affectation in singing the accustomed Psalms in
an unknown language. Ambros. in 1. ad Cor. c. 14.
S. Ambrose touches on this string, where he observes homines Latinos Grace
cant are, that many of the Latins used to sing in Greek, being taken only with
the smooth cadence of the words, nescientes tamen quid dicant; but yet not
knowing what they said. But Musculus is more express and positive to the point
in hand, conceiving that the fault here found by the Apostle, was that some of
them used to sing David's Psalms in the Hebrew tongue, Musculus in 1. ad Cor. c.
14.
which was not understood by the Corinthians, being most part Grecians; and
that he therefore did admonish them, sub sua persona, as speaking of himself in
his own person, to sing the Psalms in such a Tongue as might be understood of
the Congregation. If any shall observe yet further from the present Text, that
besides the use of Psalms and Anthems in the Congregation, they used also
Instruments of Music in those early times, when, and as often as they sung
those Hymns or Psalms, per me licet, I will be no hinderance. The word there
used in the Orignial will bear it well. Stephanus, and Constantin. in verbo
(...) Musculus in 1. ad Cor. c. 14. P. Mart. ibid. Beza. ibid.
(...), Citharam pulsantes, fidibus canentes; and (...), proprie de sonitu
fidium dicitur; say no mean Grammarians. And this is noted also by as great
Divines. Psallere proprie est ad instrumentum canere, as we read in Musculus;
(...), apud Graecos non est canere simpliciter, sed ad musicum instrumentum;
and from thence came the Instrument which is called the Psaltery, so says P.
Martyr; the very same words do we find in Beza, who voucheth S. Augustine for
his Author. And although Musculus (upon the place) takes it not for a matter
probable, Primos Christianos musicis instrumentis usos fuisse in Ecclesia, that
the first Christians had the use of Musical Instruments in their public
meetings: Yet being it is said by Calvin, that these first Christians took up
the use of singing Psalms, ad ritum Judaicae Ecclesiae, after the usage of the
Jews, as before was noted, why might they not as well have Instrumental as
Vocal Music in their Congregations, since the Jews used both? But this is only
on the by, I insist not on it. Nor would I be mistaken neither, as if there
were no use of the gift of Prayer, in those Assemblies of Gods people. I deny
not that. All I endeavor to make good, is no more than this, that as in the
first dawning of the Gospel, the Christians in their Acts of public Worship,
did sing David's Psalms, or used such premeditated Hymns as were composed by men
enabled thereunto, for the public use: So there were also certain and set
Forms of prayer, to which the people were accustomed; and unto which, as often as
they were used in the Congregation, they had been taught to say Amen.

But not withstanding, Smectymn. p. 11.
it is said, that conceived prayer was in use in the Church of God before
Liturgies; and a challenge has been made and published, for the Producing any
one Liturgy (rejecting those which are confessed to be spurious) that was the
issue of the first 300. years. This is a two-edged sword, or a gladius anceps,
as the Latins call it; Id. p. 9.
and therefore must be answered with a double ward. For if their meaning be in
the Church of God, that is, in the Assembly of Gods people, in the
Congregation, there was no Liturgy or set Form of worship during the first
three hundred years, because no Liturgy of that time is to be produced; they
may as well conclude, that from S. Paul's coming unto Rome, till the time of
Origin, which was almost two hundred years, there were no Sermons preached unto
Gods people, because none extant of that time. And if they mean by Liturgies, a
regulated course and order to be observed in the officiating of divine service,
according to the definition made by Casaubon, and approved by the Altar of
Damascus, as before was said: Such Liturgies they do acknowledge to be used
both by Jews and Christians, as long in use, Id. p. 6.
for ought they say unto the contrary, as conceived prayers. And if such
Liturgies, Liturgies so defined as before is said, then certainly prescribed
and stinted Forms of Administration, composed by some particular men in the
Church, and imposed on others. Id. ibid.
For what else is an Order observed in Church Assemblies, of praying, reading,
and expounding the Scriptures, administering the Sacraments, etc. as themselves
understand by Liturgy; than a prescribed and stinted Form of Administration?
And for an Answer to their Challenge, in case we cannot show any whole Liturgy,
being the issue of the first three hundred years: Yet if we can produce such
fragments and remainders of them as have escaped the wrack of Liturgies there
were; as a man standing on the shore, may gather from the ribs and Rndera of a
broken ship, that some unfortunate Vessel has been cast away, although he
neither knew the owner of it, nor ever saw it rigged and tackled in her former
bravery. Nor is it so impossible an undertaking, to venture on the showing of a
Liturgy, within the space of time prelimited; if men were not possessed with
prejudice, and took not up too much of their opinions upon trust and credit.
Concerning which I rather shall present the judgment of another man, one every
way above exception for his abilities in learning, than lay down mine own; and
he thus declares it. Breerwood in his Enquiries, c. 26.
I find (says he) recorded in Durandus (but upon what warrant or authority I
cannot find) that till the time of Adrian the Emperor ( which was about 120
years after Christ) their Liturgies were all Celebrated in the Hebrew Tongue;
and that then the Oriental Church began first to Celebrate them in the Greek.
Indeed methinks it is possible that the Christians of the Gentiles might in
honor of the Apostles, retain the Apostles Liturgies, in the very Tongue
wherein by the Apostles themselves they had been first ordained. For it is not
to be doubted, but many years passing, (about ten) after our Saviors
Ascension, before the Apostles left Syria, and sundred themselves to preach the
Gospel abroad in the world among the Gentiles, and foreign Nations. It is not
to be doubted, I say, but the Apostles while they remained in Jewry, ordained
Liturgies in the Jewish Tongue for the use of those Jews, whom they had
converted to Christianity: Which Liturgies by the Christian Disciples of the
Jewish Nation, dispersed in many Provinces of the Gentiles, might together with
Christian Religion be carried abroad, and gladly entertained among the
Gentiles. This is possible I say, but if it be also true (as I have not
observed any thing in Antiquity that may certainly impeach the truth of it:)
Yet that which is spoken of Durandus of those Liturgies in the Hebrew Tongue,
must be understood (I doubt not) of the Hebrew, then vulgar and usual, that is
to say, the Syriac Tongue. In all which disputation one may clearly see, that
he takes it for a granted and undoubted truth, that the Apostles did ordain
Liturgies for the use of the Church: The point in controversy being only this;
whether or not they did ordain them in the learned, or the vulgar Hebrew.

Next to descent unto particulars, Bibliotheca Patrum, in Greek and Latin,
ascribed to Peter, James, and Mark; which if not theirs (and whether they be
theirs or not, is adhuc sub judice) are certainly exceeding ancient, as ancient
doubtless as the third Century; though true it is they have not come unto our
hands without the intermixture of some unwarranted additions. And if we look
upon them well, we may easily find, that whose soever names they carry, they
are indeed the ancient Liturgies of those several Churches, whereof those holy
men had once been Bishops: and they whose Liturgies they were, were willing, it
seems, to derive their pedigree as high as possibly they could, to add some
luster to them by the names of such eminent persons. The Liturgy ascribed unto
S. Peter, what is it for the main and substance, but the foundation or the
ground of the Roman Missal? as may appear, comparing the Canon of the one, with
the forms and order of the other, Biblioth. Patr Gr lat. To. 2.
according as they are laid down together in the Bibliotheca. And if that
Isidore of Sivil be not much mistaken, S. Peter has a better claim to that, or
somewhat of this kind, than the name and title. By whom we are informed,
Ordinem Missae vel orationem quibus oblata Deo sacrificia consecrantur, primum
a sancto Petro institutum esse, that the order of the Mass, and the prayers
thereof, wherewith the Sacrament (or Sacrifice) is consecrate, was Instituted
first by S. Peter; and is the very same (says he) cujus celebrationem uno
eodemque modo universus peragit orbis, Isidor. Hispal. de offici is divin. l.
1. c. 15.
which is now universally received over all the world. He means the Western
world, you must take him so. That attributed to S. Mark, if scanned and
canvassed with a diligent eye, will be discerned to be no other than the
Liturgy of the Church of Alexandria, of which he was the first Bishop, as is
elsewhere proved; and will appear to be so on painful search, by the agreement
which it carries with that of Cyril, one of S. Marks successors in that See,
and a prime pillar of the Church in the time he lived: As also by comparing it
with the Ethiopick Liturgy derived from Alexandria, as the mother City, and
extant with it in the bibliotheca, whither I refer you. But that whereof there
is the greatest evidence, is that ascribed unto S. James; which if not his, is
questionless the ancient Liturgy of the Church of Jerusalem, of which he once
was supreme Pastor under Christ our Savior. The publisher hereof in Greek and
Latin gives us this short note, Biblioth. patrum Gr. lat. To. 2. p. 1.
S. Cyrillum Hierosol. Catechesi quinta Mystagogica plura ex illa mutuatum.
That Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, in the fifth of his Mystagogical
Catechizings, did borrow many things from hence. And certainly the observation
is exceeding true, as will appear on the examination and comparison of the
several passages, which are still extant in them both. Baron. in Annal. Eccles.
anno 35 1.
Now Cyril B. of Jerusalem, lived about the year 350, and was then at his
height both for power and credit; and if we grant the Liturgy ascribed to
James, to be but 60 years before him, it must needs fall within the compass, of
the first three hundred. This though it be enough, we will venture further, and
ask what inconvenience would ensue, if this Apostle be affirmed for the Author
of it? I mean as to the main and substance of it, though not of all the
intersertions and additions which are found therein. That S. James did compose
a Liturgy, is proved by Sixtus Senensis out of Proclus, sixtus Senes. Biblioth.
Sanct. l. 2. Council. Trullan. can. 32.
sometimes the Patriarch of constantinople, a man of special eminence in the
Ephesine Council. The Fathers of the Synod, surnamed of Trullo, affirmed of
James, whom they avow for the first Bishop of Jerusalem, (...), that he did
leave a Liturgy behind in writing, alleging the Authority thereof, for proof
that water was to be mingled with the wine in the blessed Sacrament; Liturgia
Jacobi in Bilioth. p. 13. Cassand. in Liturgicis.
which passageis still extannt in the Liturgy, entitled to him. And when we
find in Hegesippus, as he is cited by Eusebius, Eum ab Apostolis primum
constitutum fuisse Episcopum and Liturgum, as Cassander reads it: Why may we
not conceive that he had that adjunct, as the first Author of a Liturgy for the
public use? This may be said in the behalf thereof, if one list to plead it.
And were there nothing else to persade me otherwise, than that it is affirmed
by Rivet, has omnes profectas esse ab inimico homine, Smectym. vindicat. p. 28.
etc. that this with those before remembered, proceeded from that Enemy, who
sowed his Tares in the middle of the good Seed whilst the Servants slept: I
should not much be set against them. Although I honor Rivet for his parts in
learning, I never held his words for Gospel; no not although they come
apparelled in the Gospel phrase. That it is ancient, yea and holy too, they
have not the courage to deny; and yet have so much confidence, which I wonder
at, as to ascribe them to the Devil, to whom I hope, no holy thing whatever is
to be ascribed. Neither Rivet, nor any of the Moderns are so competent Judges
in this point, as the Fathers in Trullo, nor of like credit with S. Austin, who
speaking of that noted passage of Sursum Corda, used in the Liturgy of his
time, and long time before, says they were Verba ab ipsorum Apostolorum
temporibus petita, words borrowed from the times of the very Apostles.

This being said touching the Liturgies themselves, Pontificians, will be the
famous Areopagite, even Dionysius, one of S. Paul's first fruits in Athens. I
know the Books ascribed unto him, have been much questioned in these searching
days, whether his or not. Nor do I mean to meddle in so vexed a question. And
therefore, though I rank him here, according to the time and place assigned him
by the learned men of the Roman party; yet I desire no further credit should be
given him, than that which he affirms is made good by others, who lived most
near the time assigned unto him. Now for the Celebration of the Sacrament of
the blessed Eucharist, he describes it thus. Dionys. Areopag. de Eccl.
Hierarchia, p. 89. edit. gr. lat.
'O (...) etc. The Bishop having ended the Preparatory Prayers, said usually at
the holy Altar, does then and thence begin to cense the place, till he has
compassed it about. Returning back unto the Altar, he begins the Psalms, the
Clergy which are present, singing with him. Then do the Ministers read the holy
Scriptures ((...)) in their appointed and determinate order. Which done, the
Catechumeni, and such as are possessed with unclean spirits, or are under
penance, are removed out of the Church; (...).
those only being left behind who were to be partakers of the holy Mysteries.
The Ministers, some stand before the Church-doors to keep them shut, others
attend those Ministrations which appertain unto their Order. Some of whom
chosen for that purpose, present the Bread and Cup of Benediction upon the
Altar, (...), a general Confession being first made by the whole Congreation.
(...).
Then does the Bishop say the Prayers, and give the peace (or kiss of peace) to
all the company; who having saluted one another (with an holy kiss) the
Diptychs are forthwith recited. After the Bishop and the Priests having washed
their hands, the Bishop standing against the middle of the Altar, (the Priests
and Ministers being round about him, and giving praise to God for all his
works) proceeds unto the Consecration of the Elements, being then presented to
the public view. Which being thus Sanctified, and publicly set forth to view,
(...), he first partakes thereof himself, and then exhorts others to do the
like. The blessed Sacrament being thus given and received, (...), he finally
descends to the giving of thanks, and so dismisseth the Assembly. This is the
Form of ministration laid down before us in the Books ascribed to this
Dionysius; in which I see not any thing which may advantage those of the Church
of Rome, unless it be the use of censing; but I see much which makes against
them, viz. the giving of the whole Communion, sub utraque specie. For should
you stumble at the Altar, which is mentioned here, Ignatius who lived in these
very times, Irenaeus who lived but little after, S. Cyprian, and almost who not
amongst the Ancients, will lend an helping hand for to raise you up. And if you
would sum up the Form which is described here at large, we have the daily
Service, which I conceive to be those leading Prayers which the Bishop first
said at the holy Altar; the Psalms, the reading of the Scriptures in a
prescript order, which possibly may be the Epistle and Gospel, as we call them
now; then the dismission of all such who are not fitted to communicate, the
placing of the Bread and Wine on the holy Table, the general confession of the
peoples sins to Almighty God, the kiss of peace and mutual salutation, with the
commemoration of the Righteous. After all this, the Prayer of Consecration, and
the participating of the blessed Sacrament, and finally Thanksgiving for so
great a blessing. In all which, there is nothing that I can see (except it be
the act of censing, as before is said) which savoureth not of primitive and
Apostolical purity; nothing but what is worthy of the name and piety of
Dionysius; nothing but what we may observe in other Worthies, near about the
time, which is assigned unto this Author. Finally, if the Author be not
Dionysius, which I will not take upon me to determine, yet doubtless he is very
ancient; and for the Books ascribed unto him, Petr. Molinaeu^ in tract. de
Altar. c. 7.
they are acknowledged by Du Moulin to be utilia and bonae frugis, which is as
much as need be said in the present case.

Let us next look upon the Form of Baptism, Eucharist, in which respect it is
the same with (...), and is expounded so by Balsamon; Balsam. in not is ad
Council. Sardic.
yet does it signify most commonly the whole course And therefore Bellarmine
was foully out when he made this note, a patribus Graecis vix aliter accipi,
quam pro minifterio sacrificii Eucharistiae offerendi; Bellarm. de Missa. l. 1.
c. 1. Dionys. de Eccles. Hierarch. p. 77. edit. gr. lat. (...).
that it was seldom used otherwise by the Greek Fathers, then for the
Celebrating of the Sacrifice of the holy Eucharist. But let that pass cum
caeteris errorbus, and go we on unto our business, to the Form of Baptism;
which we find thus described by the said Dionysius. The day being come in which
the party is to be Baptized, and the Congregation being Assembled in the holy
Church, (...), etc. The Bishop sings some Psalm contained in the Scripture, the
whole Assembly joining with him; then doing reverence toward the holy Table,
he turns unto the party offered unto Baptism, and asks him for what cause he
comes; who being taught by his Surety, first making known his ignorance and
want of God, desires that he might be admitted to these things which pertain to
godliness. The Bishop next letting him know the rules of a Christian life,
demands if he will conform unto them; (...).
the which when he has promised to do, his name together with his sureties,
are enrolled in the public Registers. This done, (...), the bishop says the
holy Prayer, which when the whole Assembly have consented to, by saying Amen,
the Deacon does prepare himself to strip him and disrobe him of his Clothes,
and placing him toward the West with his hands lift up, requires him to bid
defiance unto Satan thrice; (...) and saying to him the set and solemn words of
Abrenuntiation, when he has thrice repeated them, he is turned toward the
East, and wills him, having both his hands and eyes heaved up to Heaven, to
join himself to Christ, and Gods holy Word. Which having promised, and thrice
made profession of his faith, the Bishop lays his hand upon him, and prays
over him. Then being disrobed, the Priests bring the Oil or chrism, wherewith
the Bishop does thrice sign him with the sign of the Cross, and after
delivers him unto the Priests, who carry him unto the Font, where calling
upon God to bless and sanctify the waters, and singing to the Lord one of the
song or Psalms made by the inspiration of the Holy ghost, the party is called
by his Name, and thrice dipped in water, one of the persons of the blessed
Trinity being particularly named and called upon, at each several dipping or
immersion. This done, they cloth him all in white, and bring him back unto the
Bishop, who once more anointeth him with the Oil or Chrism, and so pronounces
him to be from that time forwards a meet partaker of the blessed Eucharist. So
far, and to this purpose, Dionysius. But then withal you must observe, that
this was in baptismo Adultorum; and that there was not so much ceremony in the
Baptism of Infants, although it was the same in both for the main and
substance. Now for the Form of Abrenuntiation, we find it thus laid down in the
Constitutions ascribed to Clemens; of which it may be said as was before of
Dionysius, that though they be not his whose name they carry, yet are they
notwithstanding very ancient; and do exceeding well set forth the Forms and
usages of the primitive Church. Clement. Constitut. l. y. c. 42.
The Form is this. (...), etc. i. e. I forsake the Devil and all his works, his
pomps and service, his Angels and inventions, with all things under his
command. Which done, he does rehearse the Articles of his belief in this Form
that follows; (...), I believe in one unbegotten and only true God Almighty,
Father of Christ, maker of all things, and in our Lord Jesus Christ, his only
begotten Son, etc. Next after follows a set Form of prayer used by the
Bishop, in Consecrating of the Oil or Chrism, and sanctifying of the Water. And
finally this prayer to be said by them who were newly brought into the Church
by Baptism. Id. ibid. c. 47.
(...), etc. Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, give me a body
undefiled, a pure heart, a watchful mind, knowledge without error, together
with the presence of the holy Spirit, that I may both attain and hold fast the
truth, without doubt or wavering, through Christ our Lord, with whom be glory
unto thee in the Holy Ghost, world without end, Amen. The sum of what is said
before in these two last Authors, Clemens I mean, and Dionysius, because the
Writings attributed to them, are by the Learned thought to be none of theirs;
we shall find presently confirmed in the words of those who lived shortly
after, and are of an unquestioned credit amongst all Divines, both of the
Protestant party, and the Church of Rome. In the mean time we will sit down and
repose our selves; concluding here so much of the present search, as may be
found in any of the Writings of the holy Apostles, or such as claim the
reputation of being Apostolical men, the Scholars and Successors of the blessed
spirits, though now disclaimed for such by our choicer judgments. And yet
before I leave this Age, I will see if any thing occur in St. Ignatius,
touching a Form of Common Prayer, or Invocation used by the Christians of his
time; who being said to be that Child on whom our Savior laid his hands,
saying, Except ye receive the Kingdom of Heaven as a little Child, etc. But
howsoever questionless the Apostles Scholar, and Successor to S. Peter in the Sea of Antioch, has informed us thus, in his Epistle to the Magnesians, of
which no scruple has been raised amongst Learned men, omnes ad orandum in idem
loci convenite, una sit communis precatio, una men's, una spes in charitate,
Ignat. Epist. ad Magness.
etc. By which it seems, that as the Magnesians had a Church or meeting
place, to which they usually resorted as a House of Prayer, of which more
hereafter; so they had also una Communis precatio, one certain Form of
Common Prayer, in which they all concurred as if spirited by one soul, and
governed by one hope, in charity and faith unblamable in the Lord Christ Jesus.
Which is as much as we could look for in those times, and from a man whose
writings are not many, nor of any greatness, his custom being to express
himself as briefly as the nature of Epistles could invite him to.

That in this Age, Easter, together with that of Whitsontide, as we call them
now, in honor of the Resurrection of their Lord and Savior, and of the coming
down of the Holy Ghost, according to the Annual Revolution of those great
occasions. That which has most been doubted for this Time and Age, is, whether
the Christians had their places of public worship, and whether those places
of worship had the name of Churches; both which, I think, may be concluded in
the affirmative by convincing arguments. And first it is affirmed for an old
Tradition in the Church of Christ, and proved so to be by Adricomius out of
several Authors, that the Coenaculum or upper Chamber, in which the Apostles
met together after Christ's Ascension, was by them used for a place of public
worship; Luke 22.12.
this being said to be that Room in which our Savior Instituted the blessed
Sacrament of his Body and Blood, the same in which the Apostles met for the
choice of one, in the place of Judas, Act. 1.13. Act. 2.1. Act. 6.4, 6. Act.
15.6.
the same in which the Holy Ghost descended on them at the Feast of Pentecost,
the same in which they were Assembled to elect the seven. And finally, the same
in which they held the first General Council for pacifying the disputes about
Circumcision, and other ceremonial parts of the Law of Moses. This was called
then by the name of Coenaculum Sion, or the upper Chamber of Sion, supposed by
some to have been a part of the House of Simon the Leper, but howsoever of some
Disciple of rank and quality, who willingly had devoted it to the use of the
Church; it being the custom of such men in those early days, when they were not
suffered to erect more magnificent Fabrics, to dedicate some convenient part
of their dwelling houses for the Assembling of Gods people, and the acts of
worship. Thus find we in the Recognitions of Clemens, that the House of
Theophilus in the City of Antioch (to whom S. Luke dedicated both his Gospel
and Book of Acts) was by him converted to a Church for the use of Christians;
and in the Acts of Pudens, whom we find mentioned by S. Paul in the second to
Timothy, that he gave his House unto the Church for the same use also; and such
an House, or such an upper Chamber rather so given and dedicated, is that
thought to be in which S. Paul preached at Troas, and from a window whereof
Eutychus fell down, and was took up dead. Act. 20.8.
But to return again to the Coenaculum Sion beforementioned, certain it is,
that in relation to those duties of Religion which were there performed, it was
enclosed afterward with a beautiful Church, commonly called the Church of
Sion; and by S. Cyril, a godly Bishop of Jerusalem, (...), Cyril. Hier. catech.
16.
the upper Church of the Apostles, in which the Holy Ghost is there said by him
to have fallen upon them; begirt in following times with the Cells or Lodgings
of religious persons in the form of a Monastery, of which Bid thus: In
superiori montis Sion planicie, Beda Tom 3. de locis sanctis.
monachorum cellulae Ecclesiam magnam circundant, illic, ut perhibent, ab
Apostolis fundatam, eo quod ibi spiritum sanctum accepere, in qua etiam locus
coenae Domini venerabilis ostenditur: That is to say, in the uppermost plain of
Mount Sion, the Cells of Monks begirt a fair and spacious Church there founded,
as it is affirmed, by the holy Apostles, because in that place they had
received the Holy Ghost, and where they show the place in which the Lord did
institute his holy Supper. Where by the way this Church is said to have been
founded by the Apostles, not that they built it from the ground, but because
being given unto them by some godly and devout Disciple, it was by them
Consecrated for a place of Gods public worship. Now that the Christians of
this time had the like places for public worship, as well in other Cities as
in Jerusalem and Troas, is evident enough from a remarkable passage in S. Paul's
Epistle, according to the Exposition of the ancient Fathers. What (says the
Apostle) have ye not Houses to eat and drink in, 1 Cor. 11.22.
or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? Where by the
Antithesis or opposition between common Houses destinate unto eating and
drinking on the one side, and the Church of God designed unto Religious uses on
the other side, it appears plainly unto me, that by those words Ecclesiam
Dei, or the Church of God, we are not to understand the Congregation, or the
men assembled, but the very place of the Assembly. And to this sense the
general current of the Fathers gives a strong assurance, none speaking more
plainly than S. Austin, and therefore I shall give you his words at large. Aug.
qu. 57. sup. Levit.
Ecclesia homines sunt (faith he) de quibus dicitur; ut exhiberet sibi
gloriosam Ecclesiam. Hanc tamen vocari etiam ipsam domuml orationem, idem
Apostolus testis est, ubi ait; Nunquid domos non habetis ad manducandum and
bibendum; aut Ecclesiam Dei contemnitis? That is to say, the word Ecclesia, or
the Church, does properly signify those men, of whom it is said by the
Apostle, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church; and yet that it
does also signify the House of Prayer or public worship, is testified by the
same Apostle, saying, Have ye not Houses to eat and to drink in, or despise you
the Church of God, etc. See to the same effect and purpose S. Basil in his
moral, Reg. 30. The Commentaries on S. Paul's Epistles, ascribed to Hierome, 1
Cor. 11. Sedulius on the same Epistle; St. Chrysostom upon the place; and
finally, the same affirmed by Theodoret, Theophylact, and Oecumenius (all good
men and true) to whom for further satisfaction I refer the Reader. The like
Argument may be also borrowed from those Texts of the Apostle, in which he
makes mention of the Church which was in the House of some particular persons,
whom he there remembers; the church which was in the House of Aquila and
Priscilla, Romans 16.4, 5. and again, 1 Cor. 16.19. The Church that is in the
House of Nymphas, Col. 4.15. The Church that was in the House of Philemon, in
the first words of that Epistle. Where clearly he intends not by that
expression the Christian Families of those persons, whom he there remembers,
but the Assemblies of Gods people convened together in their Houses, which they
had dedicated to those pious and religious exercises, as by many other godly
persons had been elsewhere done. For where he mentions the Families of such
godly Christians, who had not given their Houses, or some convenient parts
thereof, to this public use, he does it in a different expression, and of less
significancy; as the House of Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 4.19. The Household of
Aristobulus, Romans 16.18. The Household of Narcissus, verse. 11. Asyncritus, etc.
and the Brethren that are with them, verse. 14. Philologus, etc. and all the
Saints that are with them, verse. 15. Brethren, and Saints, and Households, in
the Texts last mentioned, but Churches in the Text before; because the Houses
of those men, or some parts thereof had been converted into Churches for the
public use, as the Houses of these last were not. And for this Exposition of
these Texts of Scripture, I must ingenuously confess my self indebted to Joseph
Mede (a man of most acute and discerning judgment) who taking his hint from
Oecumenius, has very rationally pressed and enforced this Argument. This
therefore being taken for granted, as I think it may, we have not only set and
appointed places for Gods public worship in Jerusalem, Troas, and Corinth, but
also at Laodicea, where Philemon, at Colosse where Nymphas, at Rome where
Aquila and Priscilla had their Habitations; and questionless in many other
places accordingly, and these too honored by the Spirit of God with the name
of Churches. Which makes it the more strange unto me, that the name of Church
(as it denotes the public meeting place of Gods people, the material Church)
should grow so much into contempt in these later days, that our own Sectaries
at home should in derision call those Holy places, by the name of Steeple
houses; or that the Hugonots in France, in opposition to the Papists, should
call them Temples, choosing to symbolize rather with the Jews, than their
Christian Brethren.

CHAP. VI. What does occur concerning Liturgies and Set Forms of worship,
betwixt the death of the Apostles, and the Empire of Constantine the Great.
1. The Form observed in Baptism, and ministration of the Eucharist, and in the
Celebrating of the Sundays Service, according unto Justin Martyr. 2. The order
used in Baptism, and in the public Meetings of the Congregation, in
Tertullians time. 3. That in those times the use of Psalms and Hymns was
intermingled with the other parts of public worship. 4. Tertullian cleared
from a wrong sense imposed on him, in the point of worship, by some late
Writers. 5. The course and order of the ministration, according to the Author
of the Constitutions, who lived about those times, in their account who place
him latest. 6. The order of reading holy Scripture in the Congregation,
prescribed and regulated in those times. 7. Proofs for a public Liturgy or
Set Form of Prayer, from the works of Origin. 8. As also from the Writings of
S. Cyprian. 9. Touching the Prayer prescribed by the Emperor Constantine, for
the use of his Army. 10. That prescribed Forms of prayer were not occasioned by
the Arian or Pelagian Heresies, as it is supposed. 11. What was decreed
conducing to Set Forms of prayer, in the ancient Council of Laodicea. 12.
Several Offices or Set Forms of Prayer at that time in use, agreeably untot he
several sorts of people in the Congregation. 13. A list of serveral solemn
Festivals, appointed by the Church for Gods public worship in these early
days. 14. Churches erects by the Christians in these two Ages for the public
duties of Religion.


WHat does occur concerning Liturgies or set Forms of prayer, John the Apostle,
and the establishment of the glorious reign of Constantine the Emperor: During
which time, the Church was always struggling between hope and fear, whether to
conquer and bring in the Gentiles, or be mastered by them. And yet in those
uncertain times, we find apparent certainty of those public Forms which we are
in quest of; and that not only for the Ministration of the holy Sacraments, but
also for the Cement of Baptism, I find it thus in Justin Martyr. (...), etc.
Whosoever is perssaded, Justin Martyr in Apol. secunda p. 93. edit. gr. lat.
and does believe that those things which we teach are true, and does resolve
to live accordingly, are taught to fast and pray, and call on God for the
remission of their sins; the whole Church also fasting and praying with them;
then are they brought by us to a certain place, in which water is, and are
regenerated in the same manner as we were before; being Baptized in the Name of
the Lord God, Father of all things, and of Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost.
This laver, as he after tells us, is called (...), Illumination, because the
minds of those who dispose themselves to learn those things, are enlightened by
it. Then he proceeds, and lets us know, Ibid. p. 94.
(...), etc. That after the party was Baptized, Id. ibid. p. 97.
they brought him to the place of the Congregation, whither the Brethren were
Assembled, (...), animo intento, says the Latin, with all the earnestness
they could; that they might all be found fit and worthy to know the truth, and
become fruitful of good works, that so they might be found to have been
faithful keepers of Gods Commandments, and finally, enjoy everlasting life.
Which prayers being ended, (...), We salute one another with an holy kiss. This
is the Form summed up in brief by Justin Martyr; in which, if we find not any
thing of the Cross, the several Abrenuntiations, nor any of the other
Ceremonies spoken of before: It was not that they were not then in use, (as we
shall show very shortly) but that the Father purposed to express no more
concerning Baptism, than the very substance of that Sacrament. And now being
fallen on Justin Martyr, we will from him, before we leave him, describe the
Form used int he Celebration of the blessed Eucharist, together with the course
and order of the Sundays service. First, for the Sundays Service, it was thus
as follows. Id. p. ^8.
(...), etc. Upon the Sunday, all which Inhabit in the Towns or Villages do
meet together in one place; and there the Commentaries of the Apostles, and
Writings of the Prophets, (...) as much as serves for that time are read unto
us. The Reader having done, the Bishop or President of the Congregation, makes
an Oration, exhorting the people to the following of those godly lessons, and
instructions which are laid before them. Then we rise all together, (...), and
send our prayers up to the Lord. Our prayers being finished, and Bread, and
Wine, and Water being offered or presented in a readiness, the Bishop, (...),
or if you will, the President of the Congregation, did offer up prayers and
thanks giving to the Lord with all his might. Where by the way, the word in the
Original is (...). Which howsoever it be turned by Langius into quantum pro
virili sua potest, Smectymn. p. 1.
and that by some translated thus, according unto his ability; as if the Bishop
did not pray by a present Liturgy, but according to his own abilities in the
gift of prayer; yet plainly here it means more than (...), in the former place,
to show the earnestness he used in the performance of his office. Now for the
ministration of the Eucharist, Justin Martyr. Apol. 2. p. 97.
he describes it thus, (...), etc. Prayers being done, we salute one another
with an holy kiss. then is presented to the President Bread, with a cup of
Water and Wine, who receiving them, gives praise and glory unto God the Father
of all things, in the name of the Son and Holy Ghost, and rendereth thanks unto
the Lord in that be does vouchsafe these his Creatures to us; which prayers and
giving of thanks being ended, the people which are present do with a joyful
acclamation say Amen. The President having thus Consecrated the Eucharist, (for
so I take it is the meaning of these words, (...)) and the people having
testified their assent thereto, those who are called Deacons distribute unto
every one there present, the Consecrated Bread and Wine, and carry it to those
who are absent. (...). This nourishment, says he, is called by us Eucharist,
whereof it is not lawful unto any to be partakers, but such as do believe our
Doctrine, and have been Baptized for the remission of their sins, and purpose
to form their lives according unto their profession. This was the course, or
order of divine service in the time of this holy Martyr, in which we have an
intermixture of prayers and praises, the reading of the holy Scriptures, and
then the Sermon, (as now the Sermon follows on the reading of the Epistle and
Gospel) and after all, the Celebration of the Eucharist, the whole being shut
up with thanksgiving to the Lord our God. A clearer illustration of this course
we shall see anon.

Mean while proceed we to Tertullian, Aquam adituri, ibidem, sed and aliquanto
prius in Ecclesia sub Antistitis manu contestamur nos renuntiare Diabolo, and
pompae and Angelis ejus. Dehinc ter mergitamur, Tertul. de Corona Militis.
amplius aliquid respondentes quam Dominus Evangelio determinavit. We go, says
he, unto the water, and there, as not long time before, we promise in the hands
of the Bishop, that we will renounce the Devil, and his pomps, and his Angels.
Then are we thrice dipped into the water, making more answers (to the
Interrogatories proposed unto us) than the Lord prescribed in his holy Gospel.
And for the Cross, though we find nothing in this place, we have it surely in
another, viz. in that so celebrated speech of his, Id. de resurrectione Carnis.
Caro signature, ut anima muniatur; that is to say, the flesh is marked or
signed with the sign of the Cross (for of that he speaks) that the soul may
be defended and fortified against all assaults. Next let us look on their
Assemblies, their customs and behavior there; and he makes this relation of
the course or order used by the Christians of his time in the Congregation.
Coimus in coetum and congregationem, ut ad Deum quasi manu fact a precationibus
ambiamus orantes. Ea vis Deo grata est. Oramus etiam pro Imperatoribus, pro
Ministris eorum and potestaibus, pro statu seculi, pro rerum quiet, pro mora
finis. Cogimur ad sacrarum literarum commemorationem, si quid praesentium rerum
qualitas aut praemonere cogit aut recognoscere. Certe fidem sanctis vocibus
poscimus, spem erigimus, fiduicam figimus; Tertullian Apologet. cap. 39.
disciplinam nihilominus praeceptorum inculcationibus densamus. We meet (says
he) in an Assembly or Congregation, that we may besiege God in our prayers, as
with an Army. Such violence is acceptable unto God. We pray for Emperors and
their Ministers, and Potestates, for the state of the whole world, the quiet
government of the affairs thereof, and for the putting off of the last day. We
are assembled to commemorate or hear the holy Scriptures, if the condition of
our present state does either need to be premonished or reviewed. Assuredly by
the repetition of those holy words, our faith is nourished, our hope assured,
our confidence confirmed; yet so, that the severity of discipline is
strengthened by the frequent inculcating of Gods Commandments. In which
description of their meetings, there is no mention of the Eucharist, not that
it was not Celebrated then in all public Assemblies, but because as Cassander
well observes, ad Paganos and nondum initiatos sermo haberetur, he did address
his whole discourse to Heathen-men, such as were not yet initiated in the faith
of Christ; to whom the Christians of those times imparted not the knowledge of
the holy Mysteries. In other of his books, especially in those entitled ad
uxorem, there is enough of that.

Nor is it to be thought, because Tertullian speaks not of the present place,
Justin Martyr in the passage produced before, that they sung no Psalms, nor
gave that part of worship no convenient place in the performance of their
Service. We find that, and the course of their public worship thus pointed at
unto us in another place. Jam vero prout Scripturae leguntur, aut Psalmi
canuntur, aut adlocutiones proferuntur, Id. de Anima cap. 9.
aut petitiones delegantur; ita inde materae visionibus subministrantur. Now
(says he) as the Scriptures are read, or Psalms sung, or Exhortations made, or
Prayers tendered, so is matter ministered unto her visions. Where we may see that
singing of the Psalms was in use amongst them, as well as any other part of
public worship, of what sort soever. Conceive by singing here, as in other
Books and Authors about this time, such singing of the Psalms as is now in use
in the Cathedrals of this Kingdom, after a plain tune, as it is directed in the
Rubricks of the Common Prayer book; and not the singing of the Psalms in Meter,
as has been used, and is still in Parochial Churches. The singing in those
times in use was little more than a melodious pronunciation, though afterward
upon occasion of a Canon made in the Council of Laodicea, it came to be more
perfect and exact, according to the rules of harmony; and in St. Austins time
was so full and absolute, that he ascribes a great cause of his conversion to
the powers thereof, calling to mind those frequent tears, quas fudi ad cantus
Ecclesiae tuae, which had been drawn from him by this sacred Music, by which
his soul was humbled, and his affections raised to the height of godliness. But
whatsoever was the Music of these first times, Music assuredly they had in
their public service, as Tertullian tells us, whom we may credit in this
point. And if we please to look, we may be also sure to find the same in that
place of Pliny, which before we touched at; Which here take more at large in
the Authors words. The Christians on examination did acknowledge, Plin. Ep. 97.
l. 10. and Euser. hist. Eccl. l. ^. c. (...).
quod soliti essent state die ante lucem convenire, carmenque Christo tanquam
Deo canere secum invicem; seque sacramento non in scelus aliquod obstringere,
sed ne furta, ne larocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne
depositum appellati abnegarent: His peractis morem sihi discedendi fuisse,
rursusque coeundi ad capiendum cibum promiscuum tamen and innoxium. They did
confess (says he) that they were accustomed to assemble on their appointed
times, before daylight, and to sing Hymns or Songs of praise to Christ, as to
a god, amongst themselves; and to bind themselves by Oath or Sacrament, not to
the doing of any wickedness, but not to commit Thefts, Robberies, or
Adulteries, demanded; and this being done, they used to depart, and then meet
again to eat together, their meat being ordinary, and the manner of their
eating inoffensive. Which last was added, as I take it, to clear them of the
slander which was raised against them by their malicious Enemies; who charged
them with eating humane flesh, and the blood of Infants, as you may see in most
of the Apologies which the Christians published in those times. Note also that
their meeting thus to eat together, which is here last spoken of by Pliny, was
for their Love Feasts, or (...), described so fully by Tertullian in his
Apologetick; and by him also joined to the description of their course or order
at their public meetings.

But here perhaps it will be said, Vindication of Smectymn. p. 19
And that although Tertullian do describe a set course and order, yet he is
quite against a set From of prayer; where he says, That the Christians of
those times did in their public Assemblies pray, sine monitore quia de
pectore, without any prompter but their own hearts. Smectym. p. 7.
And say they, that it should be so, the same Father (as they call him) proves
in his Treatise de Oratione. Sunt quae petuntur, etc. There are some things to
be asked according to the occasions of every man; the lawful and ordinary
prayer (that is the Lords prayer) being laid as a foundation, it is lawful to
build upon that foundation other prayers, according to every ones occasion. So
they, and to them it may thus be answered, that either those two passages of
Tertullian are ill laid together; or else they must be understood of private,
not of public prayer. For that the latter place is meant of those private
prayers, which every man may make for his own occasions, is beyond all
question. And in their private Prayers it is not denied, but men may use what
words and what Forms they please; so they consider as they ought, what it is
they ask, and of whom they ask it. And if this place be meant of private
prayer, as by the Authors drift and scope it appears to be; then must the other
passage be so understood, or else they are ill laid together, as before was
said. Now that the other place so insisted on, is also meant of private, not of
public Prayers, will appear by this, that there Tertullian speaks of the
private carriage of the Christians, and of their good affections to the Roman
Emperors; but medleth not with their behavior as a public body, assembled and
convened for a public end. For if he should, it must needs sound exceeding
harshly, that every Member in the Congregation should be left unto the liberty
of his own expression; and their Devotions, if so ordered, could be entitled
nothing less than Common Prayers, by which name Justin Martyr calls them, as
before was shown. But that we may the better understand Tertullians meaning, we
will first take the words at large, Tertullian Apologet. c. 30.
and then conjecture at the sense. The words are these, Illuc suspicientes
Christiani manibus expansis, quia innocuis; capite nudo, quia non erubescimus;
sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus; precantes sums omnes semper pro omnibus
Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus
fortes, senatum, fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum, and quaecunque hominis
vel Caesaris vota sunt. We Christians looking toward Heaven, pray with our
hands stretched out to protest our innocence; bare-headed, because not ashamed;
without a Monitor, because by heart; an happy Reign, a secure House, valiant
Soldiers, faithful Counselors, an industrious People, and whatsoever else the
Prayers of a private man (for it is hominis not hominum) or those even of the
Emperor himself, can extend unto. And this he shows to be the subject of
those Prayers which he himself did use to make for the Roman Emperors, in the
words next following, Haec ab alio orare non possum, quam a quo me scio
consecuturum. I pray for all this to no other than to him alone, of whom only I
am certain to obtain the same. And sure Tertullian was a private person; nor de
we find that he prayed thus with others in the Congregation; or if he did, yet
being the heads are certain which are spoke of here, the Form may also be
prescribed for ought appears unto the contrary, which was used there. And for
the Monitor, it is true, the Gentiles had of old their Monitors, not only to
direct them in what words, but to what God also they should make their Prayers.
Which thing the Christians needed not, who knew they were to make their Prayers
unto God alone; and being accustomed to pray in the Congregation, according to
the Form prescribed, for the Emperors safety, and the prosperity of his
affairs, could without any Monitor or Prompter pray by heart for those things
which concerned the weal and safety of the Emperors, and those who were in
Office and Authority by, and under them. What the Prayers were, used by the
Christians of those times, it is hard to say, there being so little of them
extant in Authors of unquestioned credit; but that they used set Forms of
prayer, is not hard to prove, as we shall see in the next Century, when we have
looked into the works of Origin, and spent a little time in S. Cyprians
writings. If in their Books, one of which was cotemporary with Tertullian, the
other living very near him, if not with him also, we find prescribed Forms of
prayer: I hope it will be granted without great difficulty, that in Tertullians
time they had prescribed Forms, although those Forms appear not upon good
record.

But first before we come to that, Clemens: The Author of the which, whosoever
he was, lived about these times, and may perhaps be credited in a matter of
fact, although of no Authority (with the Learned) in a point of Doctrine. Now
he describes both the Churches and the service thus. (...), Constitut.
Clement. l. 2. c. 57.
etc. When thou (he speaks unto the Bishop) do call the Congregation to
Assemble, as being the Master of the Ship, command thy Deacons as the Mariners,
that places be provided for the Brethren, who are as passengers therein. First
let the Church be built in form of an Oblongum, looking toward the East; and
let the Bishops Throne or Chair be placed in the midst thereof; the Presbyters
sitting on each side of him, and the Deacons ready and prepared to attend the
Ministry; to whom it appertains to place the lay people in their ranks and
seats, and set the Women by themselves. Then let the Reader from the Desk or
Pulpit placed in the middle of the people, read the Books of Moss; as also
those of Josuah, Judges, Kings and Chronicles, and that of Ezra, touching the
return from Babylon, as also those of Job and Solomon, and the sixteen
Prophets. (...), etc. Two Chapters being read, let one begin the Psalms of
David, and let the people answer the Acrosticks, i. e. the closes, or the
burden of the song, as we use to say. Then let the Acts be read, and the
Epistles of S. Paul, which he inscribed to several Churches by the suggestion
of the Holy Ghost. Afterward let the Presbyter or Dacon read the Gospels which
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John have left behind them. And whilst they read the
Gospel let the people stand, and hearken to the same with silence. For it is
written, Take heed and hearken O Israel; and in another place, Stand thou there
and hearken. Then let the Presbyters speak a word of Exhortation to the people,
not all at once, but one by one, and the Bishop last. This done, all of them
rising up, and turning toward the East, ( the Catechumeni and those which are
under Penance, being first departed) let them direct their Prayers to God,
after which some of the Deacons are to attend upon the Sacrifice of the holy
Eucharist; others to have an eye on the Congregation, and to see that silence
be well kept. Then let the Deacon which assists the Bishops, thus bespeak the
people, (...). Let no man here have malice against his Brother; let no man
harbor any dissimulation: Which said, the men salute the men, the women those
of their own Sex, with an holy kiss. After, the Deacon says the Prayer for the
whole Church, the universal World, and the parts thereof; as also for
fertility, for the Priests, the Magistrates, for the Bishop and King, and the
peace of all. (...), etc. This done, Id. l. 8. c. 22.
the Deacons are to bring the offerings to the Bishop, laying the same upon the
Altar; the Priests assisting on each side, as the Disciples do their Master.
Then the Bishop praying to himself, together with the Priests or Presbyters,
and being arrayed in a white Vesture, standing at the Altar, and maing the sign
of the Cross upon his forehead, shall say, The Grace of God Almighty, and the
love of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you
all; and all the people shall return this Answer, And with thy spirit. Then
shall the Bishop say, Lift up your hearts, and they reply, We lift them up unto
the Lord. The Bishop thus, Let us give thanks unto the Lord; the people next,
It is meet and right so to do. And then the Bishop, It is meet, right, and our
bounden duty above all things, to praise thee the true God, who wast from all
eternity, before the foundation of the world was laid. Finally, this being
done, let the Bishop give unto the people the blessing of peace. Id. l. 2. c.
57.
And as Moses did command the Priests to bless the people in these words, The
Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his Face to shine upon thee, and
grant thee peace: So shall the Bishop use this Form. Conserva Domine populum
tuum incolumen, etc. Preserve O Lord thy people in safety, and bless thine
inheritance which thou possessest, and have purchased with the Blood of Christ,
and call a Royal Priesthood, and holy Nation. Afterward let him go to the
Consecration, all the people standing, and praying softly to themselves; and
the Oblation being made, let every one severally receive the Body and Blood of
our Lord and Savior, coming in order thereunto, and with fear and reverence;
the Women being also veiled or covered, as becomes their Sex. And whilst that
this is doing, let the doors of the Church be shut, that neither any Infidel or
Unbaptized person be present at it. So far, and to this purpose Clemens, or
whosoever was the Author of the Constitutions; which how it does agree with the
public Forms, still extant on record in the works and monuments of such
Ancient Writers, of whom there is no question amongst Learned men, we shall see
anon.

One thing must first be taken into consideration, and that is, England,
declaring, The Preface to the Book of Common Prayer.
How it was so ordered by the ancient Fathers, that all the whole Bible (or the
greatest part thereof) should be read over once every year; intending thereby,
that the Clergy, and especially such as were Ministers of the Congregation,
should (by often reading and meditation of Gods words) be stirred up to
godliness themselves, and be more ale to exhort others by wholesome Doctrine,
and to confute them that were Adversaries to the truth: And further, that the
people by daily hearing of holy Scripture read in the Church, should
copntinually profit more and more in the knowledge of God, and be the more
inflamed with the love of his true Religion. And certainly it was a good and
godly institution, savouring most abundantly of the primitive wisdom; though
now, I know not how it comes to pass, it be made a matter of no moment, sive
biennio, sive triennio absolvatur lectio sacrae Scripturae; Altar Damasc. c.
10. p. 633.
whether the Scriptures be read over in two years or three, so it be read at
all in the Congregation. So little thanks or commendations has this unhappy
Church of England, for laboring to revive the ancient orders of the Primitive
times, and to bring the people of the Lord to be acquainted with his holy Word.
But it is said, that in the Primitive times, there was no such custom, but all
was left, both for the choice and number of the Lessons, arbitrio Ecclesiae,
Id. Ibid.
to the discretion of the Church; that is to say, for nothing else can be the
meaning, to the discretion of the Minister. And this they prove from that of
Justin Martyr produced before, where it is said, that they did read the
writings of the Prophets and Apostle, (...). i. e. as they translate it, quoad
tempus fert, as the time would bear. But (...), if translated rightly, is
indeed quantum licet, as much as is lawful and permitted: which quite
destroys their meaning, and confirms the Churches. (...), concedo, admitto.
Hinc (...) impersonaliter, exponitur licet, locus est, facultas est, in the
common Lexicon. v. Stephant Thesaurum.
And this appears further by the best classick Authors; (...), non licebat
manner, in Xenophon; (...), quam primum licuerit, in Herodotus; so in others
also. And that it was thus in the ancient practice appears very plainly by
that of Austin, (though of a later standing than the times we speak of) where
it is said, that in the meeting or assembly for religious Worship, scripturarum
divinarum lecta sunt solennia, Augustine. de civit. Dei. l. 22. cap. 8.
the solemn and appointed Lessons out of holy Scripture were read unto the
Congregation. And if they were solennia then, that is, set out, determined and
appointed for times, and seasons: I cannot think thatthey were otherwise in
these former days, unless it were on extraordinary and great occasions; in
which that course might possibly be dispensed withal; as in the times of
persecution, and the like extremities.

And so we come unto the third age of the Church; Origin, who grew into esteem
and credit in the beginning of this Century, and so continued till the midst.
By him it is observed, and exceeding rightly, in Ecclesiasticis observationibus
nonnulla esse hujusmodi, quae omnibus quidem facere necesse est, nec tamen
rationem eorum omnibus patere; that in the usages of the Church there are many
things which of necessary are to be done by every man, although the reason of
them be not known to all. Origin in Numer. cap. 4. Homil. 5.
Which said in general, he thus descends unto particulars: Nam quod genua
flectimus orantes, and quod ex omnibus coeli plagis ad solam Orientis partem
conversi orationem fundimus, non facile cuique puto ratione compertum. Sed and
Eucharistiae sive percipiendae, sive eo ritus quo geritur explicandae, vel
eorum quae geruntur in baptismo, verborum gestorumque and ordinum, atuqe
interrogationum ac responsionum, quis facile explicet rationem? Et tamen omnia
haec operta and relata portamus super humeros nostros cum ita implemus ea and
exequimur, ut a magno Pontifice and ab ejus filiis tradita and commendata
suscepimus. For when we kneel (says he) in the time of Prayer, and that of all
the points in Heaven we turn unto the East when we make our prayers; I think
the reason why we do so is not known to any. Or who can readily assign a reason
of those Rites and Ceremonies, used both in the receiving of the Eucharist, or
at the consecrating of the same; or of those many things which are done in
baptism, the words and gestures, the order there observed, the Interrogatories
and the Answers? And yet all these we undergo, whether revealed or hidden from
us, when we do so fulfill and perform them all as they have been commended and
delivered to us, either by our great Bishop, or his Sons. Here then we have an
evident proof, that therer were several Rites and Ceremonies used by the
Christians of this time in the officiating of divine Service: several words and
gestures used, both in the celebration of the Eucharist, and administration of
baptism, and diverse Interrogatories with their prescribed Answers to be used
therein. Which Interrogatories doubtless are the same, which we recited out of
Clemens in the former Chapter; and which this Author also does recount in
another place. Id in Numer. cap. 21. Homil. 12.
Recordetur unusquisque fidelium, cum primum venit ad aquas Baptismi, cum
signacula fidei prima suscepit, and ad fontem salutaris accessit, quibus ibi
tunc usus sit verbis, and quid denunciaverit Diabolo: non se usurum pompis
ejus, neque operibus ejus, neque tellis omnino servitiis and voluptatibus ejus
pariturum. Let every faithful Christian call to remembrance what words he used,
what he denounced against the Devil, when first he came unto the waters of
Baptism, and received the first signs of Faith, how he renounced all his pomps
and works, and did profess that he would never yield obedience to his lusts and
pleasures. So that a prescribed Form there was of abrenunciation, in the
Sacrament of holy Baptism: and think we that there was not also a prescribed
Form of Prayer, in the time of Origin? Himself shall tell you that there was;
and more than so, shall give us such a fragment of a prescribed prayer, as by
that piece we may conjecture at the whole. For thus says he, Frequenter in
oratione dicimus, Id in Hieremiam cap. 15. Homil. 11.
Da omnipotens, da partem cum Prophetis, da cum Apostolis Christi tui, tribue
ut inveniamur ad vestigia unigeniti tui. We say this often in our prayers, Give
us Almighty God, give us our portion with thy Prophets and with the Apostles of
thy Christ; and grant that we may tread the footsteps of thine only Son. In
which, says he, we ask we know not what; for in effect we say no otherwise,
than make us to be hated as the Prophets were, to fall into calamity and
persecution as the Apostles did, A prayer this was no question, and a
prescribed prayer, said often by the people, in their public worship. And what
else think we were those prayers which in another place he calls (...), those
solennes preces, as the Latin has it: which he says there, they used (...),
Id contra Celsum lib. 6.
constantly and of duty both night and day, that is, at Morning, and at Evening
prayer. Assuredly it is not likely, that if there were prescribed prayers, such
as he calls solennes preces, in the times of Origin: men should be left at
liberty in Tertullians days, being so small a time before, to use extemporary
prayers in Gods public worship, of their own fancies and devising.

The like we may affirm of S. Cyprian also, in whom mention more than once is
made, Solennia which were used in the celebration of the blessed Eucharist.
Solennibus adimpletis, calicem Diaconus offerre praesentibus coepit; Cyprian.
Sermo de lapsis.
the solemn prayers (and therefore a set Form of prayers) being finished, the
Deacon began to offer the Cup or Chalice to such as were present. And in
another place speaking of the Cup, he calls it Calicem solenni benedictione
sacratum, the Cup which had been consecrated with a solemn (or set Form of)
benediction. Of which we may conclude as before we did, that if the Forms were
solemn or prescribed in S. Cyprians days, they were not likely to be otherwise
in Tertullians time: whatever other fancies have been railed about it. And that
they used the solenn or set Form of words in the ministration of holy things,
in S. Cyprians days, besides the general proof before produced, appears most
plainly in his book de Oratione; where we have it thus. Id de oratione Dominica.
Ideo and Sacerdos ante Orationem, Praefatione praemissa parat fratrum mentes,
dicendo Sursum corda: ut dum respondet plebs, Habemus ad Dominum, admoneatur
nihil aliud se quam Dominum cogitare debere. Therefore (says he) the Priest
before the prayer (that of consecration) does by a Preface readily prepare the
minds of the Brethren, saying, Lift up your bearts: that when the people make
this answer, We lift them up unto the Lord, they may be put in mind, that they
must think of nothing but the Lord, when they are pouring out their prayers.
This passage of the Preface (as our and it is also to be found in those ancient
Liturgies of Rome, Jerusalem, and Alexandria, assigned unto SS. Peter, James,
and Mark, as before was said. Liturgia S. Petri in Biblioth. SS. Patrum.
That attributed to S. Peter, thus: (...). to which the people make this
answer, (...). The very same with that of Cyprian. And so is also that of.
Mark, or rather of the Church of Alexandria, save that the word (...) is left
out, and it runs simply thus, (...). In that ascribed to S. James there is some
difference, the Priest saying thus, Liturgia S. Jacobi, in Biblioth.
(...). i. e. Let us lift up our minds and hearts; to which the people answer
there, (...), It is meet and right so to do. But this I take to be an error in
the Copy, that being the answer of the people to another invitation of the
Priest, viz. to that of Gratias agamus Domino, Let us give thanks unto the
Lord: And so it seems to be by that which follows of the Priest, in S. James
his Liturgy: who on the peoples saying it is meet and right, goes forwards in
the usual Form, (...), it is very meet and right and our bounden duty, etc. But
to return again unto S. Cyprian, we may conjecture by this piece, that in his
time there was a whole and perfect Liturgy, though it be not come unto our
hands. And there is another passage in that very book, de Oratione, which points
us to that Form of abrenuntiation, which was then used by the Church in holy
Baptism. Cyprian de oratione Dominica.
Potest autem tualis abjecimus, cibum nobis tantum petamus and victum. That
passage in the Pater noster, Give us this day our daily bread, may be thus
interpreted, that we which have renounced the World, the riches and the pomps
thereof by the benefit of faith and grace spiritual, should only crave of God
our Meat and Victual. In which we have the matter, although not the Form: but
that a Form there was, we were showed before out of the Constitutions ascribed
to Clemens: and will now further prove it by Tertullian also, who thus brings
it home. Aquam ingressi, Christianam fidem in suae legis verba profitemur;
Tertullian. de spectaculis. c. 1.
renunciare nos Diabolo, and pompis ejus and ejus, ore nostro contestamur
Entering, says he, into the water, we make profession of the Christian faith,
in the very words of his own law: and with our own mouth do contest, that we
renounce the Devil and his pomps, and Angels. Compare these words with those of
Clemens formerly delivered; and tell me, if you can, where the difference
lies. And there is another passage in that book of Cyprians, which points us to
the hours of prayer, at that time in use; viz. The third, the sixth, the ninth.
Which having showed to have been formerly in use with Daniel, and other holy
men of God, he adds, that besides those hours observed of old, Orandi spatia
and sacramenta creverunt, Cyprian de orat. Dominica.
the times and the occasions of prayer were both increased. Nam and mane
orandum est, ut resurrectio Domini matutina oratione celebretur; recedente item
sole ac die cessante necessario orandum est, etc. For in the morning we must
pray, that the Lords resurrection may be celebrated by our Morning prayer; and
when the Sun is down and the day determined, we must needs pray also, that
praying for the returning of the light, we may desire of God our Saviors
coming, who will conduct us all unto light eternal. So great assurance have we
of the point in hand, both for the Form and hours of prayer, from this book of
Cyprians, that any further search were almost unecessary. Now lest it may be
said, as I know some say, that this is none of Cyprians true and genuine
writings, but thrust upon him by some Sciolist of a later standing: S. Austin
shall come in for witness, who very frequently does attest unto it, as viz.
Epist. 47. and 107. lib. de gratia, and libero arbitrio. cap. 13. and lib. 1.
contra Julianum, and de bono perseverantiae, cap. 2. Finally to dismiss S.
Cyprian, the Magdeburgians, though no great Friends unto the ancient usages of
the Church, were so convinced, (or satisifed, to say the least) with this book
of his; that they resolve it for a certainty, past all peradventure, that
anciently there were set Forms of public prayer. Histor. Ecclesiast. Cent. 3.
cap. 6.
Formulas denique precationum absque dubio habuernunt, as they state it there;
and for the proof thereof refer us to this book of Cyprians.

This being thus proved, great must be our loss, who are so unhappily deprived
of the best improvement, the Church made of her peace and happiness, Smectymn.
p. 9.
during the first three hundred years. No question but the Liturgies which were
then composed did savor strongly both of the piety and affectionof those
blessed times. Whether the blessed Constantine was herein as unhappy as our
selves; or whether he needed not have composed a Form of Prayer for his Guard
to be used by them on the Lords day, but rather might and would have taken them
out of the former Liturgies, if there had been any: will prove a very easy
Quaere, with whatsoever confidence it be made a difficulty. For certainly there
might be former Liturgies, and yet no Form of prayer found in them for that use
and purpose, for whch that prayer was made by blessed Constantine. For we have
now a Liturgy in the Church of England (and it is my prayer we may long have
it, naugre the machinations of unquiet Men) in which are many Forms of prayer
for Gods public worship: yet not so many, nor so suitable to all occasions, but
that some Men make bold to set forth their own. Besides the Emperors Army did
consist as the time then were, Eusebius de vita constant. l. 4. c. 18.
partly of Christians, and partly of the Gentiles: and possibly it had not
proved such an easy matter to bring the Gentiles to the use of a Form of
prayer (the Christian Soldiers being suffered to repair unto the Church upon
Sundays, and there to make their prayers to the Lord their God) which had been
wholly taken from the Liturgies of the Christian Church. But for the prayer
enjoined by the blessed Constantine, Ibid. cap. 20.
it was as follows, Te solum Deum agnoscimus, te Regem profitemur, te
adjutorem invocamus, per te victorias consecuti sumus, per te hosts
superavimus, a te and praesentem felicitatem consecutos fatemur, and futuram
adepturos speramus; tui omnes supplices sumus, a te petimus ut Constantinum
Imperatorem nostrum, una cum piis ejus liberis, quam diutissime salvum and
victorem conserves. In English thus. We do acknowledge thee for the only God, we
confess thee to be the King, we call upon thee as our helper and defender: by
thee alone it is that we have got the victory, and subdued our Enemies; to thee
as we do refer all our present happiness, so from thee also we expect our
future. Thee therefore we beseech that thou wouldst-keep in health and safety,
our noble Emperor Constantine, with his hopeful progeny. This was the very
Form imposed. And I believe the blessed Constantine would never have troubled
himself to compose this Form, had he not though that set and prescribed Forms
of prayer had been very necessary, and more to be considered of, than the
extemporary prayers of his ablest Ministers. For doubtless, in a CAmp, wherein
there were so many of the Gentiles, there must be some Priests, to offer
sacrifice unto the Gods whom those Gentiles worshipped. And it is told us by
Eusebius, Id.
that he had always in his Camp for divine Offices diverse Priest and Bishops,
Chaplains in ordinary to his Majesty: and it were hard if none of them could
have made a shift, to vent some short extemporary prayers for the use of the
Army. The blessed Constantine had been most unhappy, if it had been so: and
pity 'twas, that some of those who are so vehemently bent against all set
Forms, had not been Preachers to his Army. Assuredly they would have eased him
of that needless trouble. Especially since we are told, what liberty every Man
might take unto himself, in praying both what and how he listed.

For as they say, this liberty in Prayer was not taken away, nor set and
imposed Forms introduced, Smeclymn.
until the time that the Arian and Pelagian Heresies did invade the Church: and
then because those Heretics did convey and spread their poison, in their Forms
of Prayer and Hymns, the Church thought it convenient to restrain the liberty
of making and using public forms. A piece of Learning not more new, than
strange, to us who never heard of the like before: and such as in conclusion
does destroy it self. For if upon the spreading of the Heresies before
remembered, the Church thought it convenient to restrain the liberty of making
and using public Forms: there must be public Forms before, both made and used
in the Church; and therefore sure they came not in upon that occasion. And if
the Arians and Pelagians had a mind to disperse their poisons, and do it with
the greater freedom: they might have done more to purpose (a thing which we
observe by too sad experience) in arbitrary and extemporary prayers of each
Man's devising, than being tied and limited by a prescript Form, how well soever
fitted and contrived to advance their ends. That which they mean, if they mean
any thing, is this, that in the time when Chrisostom was Bishop of
Constantinople, the Arians held their Congregations without the City. But grew
at last unto that boldness, that when the Orthodox Professors held their
public meetings as on all Saturdays and Sundays they used to do, the Arians
got within the gates, (...). Socrat. hist. Eccl. 6. c. 8. and Sozomen. hist.
Eccl. l. 8. c. 8.
and there sung certain Hymns and Anthems, Quire-wise or alternatim, answering
one another, which they had fitted to their lewd and impious tenets. This they
continued for the greatest part of the Night, and at daybreak singing thee
Hymns of Songs even in the middle of the City, they went out again to their own
places of Assembly. This when it was observed by Chrysostom to allure many
simple Men to that wicked faction; he called out some of his own flock, (...),
who falling on the same course, and being intent on this Night-musick, might
both suppress the insolency of the Arian party, and confirm his own people in
the faith. This is the story which they aim at, and this makes nothing to the
purpose. For what has this to do with set Forms of prayer, so long in use
before the time of Chrysostom? Or if it had, yet all that Chrysostom did on
this occasion, was not to take away or restrain the liberty of making and using
public Forms; but rather to increase those Forms which were made before. For
it is said plainly in the story, (...), that he increased the wonted prayers, by
adding those Night-anthems to the public service. But they say still that some
restrain there was, of a former liberty, Socrat. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 8.3.
and such as was brought in upon occasion of those Heresis of which before we
spoke: it being first ordained, say they, in the Council of Laodicea, that none
should pray pro arbitrio sed semper eaedem preces, that none should use liberty
to vary in Prayer, but use always the same Form. Somewhat indeed was done in
that ancient Synod, Smectym. p. 7.
and somewhat also to this purpose; but neither so as is delivered, nor on that
occasion. Not upon that occasion doubtless. For if Baronius rightly calculate
the times, as I think he does, the Council of Laodicea, with those of Arles,
Ancyra, V. Baron. Annal. Eccl. To. 3. and 5.
and Neocaesarea, was holden in the year 314. the Arian Heresy began not till
the next year after, and the Pelagian near an hundred years from that, An. 413.
Chrysostom not being Bishop of Constantinople, until the year 397. or
thereabouts. So that the Fathers in this Council, must needs be all inspired
with the spirit of Prophecy, seeing they could provide such a certain remedy,
so many years before the mischief.

Now as this Council did not any thing on this occasion, so whatsoever it was
they did, it was not so, as is delivered. The Canon pointed to, is this,
Council. Laodicen. Can. 18.
(...). That the same Office of Prayers should be always used, both in the
Morning and the Evening, at nine and night (for so I take it we must render
(...), rather than post off both services till the afternoon.) These are the
words, which though they serve most evidently for set Forms of pryaer, composed
by men of eminency for the Churches use, and then imposed upon the Clergy by
the Churches power; yet we are told that the Forms herein spoken of, were of
every several man's own composing; and that the meaning of the Council was no
more than this, viz. To forbid men from varying their own prayers as they
listed, Smectymn. p. 7.
nd to enjoin them still to use the same. By what Authority the Canon may be
thus perverted from its proper meaning, Vindication. p. 20.
I am yet to seek. But sure I am, that never was the mind or meaning of that
ancient Synod; or if it had, they would have put it in such terms whereby their
mind and meaning might have been discovered in the former times. But Zonaras,
whose glosses and interpretations I find sometimes approved by these later
Scholiasts, gives us another meaning of the Canon, and no doubt a truere; sure
I am, more agreeable to truth of story, and the condition of those times. And
he expounds the same directly contrary to that which is by them intended; and
makes the meaning to be this, That no man should have liberty to compose Forms
of prayer, or to recite them in the Congregation; but only to adhere to those
in Gods public Service, which had been countenanced and confirmed by long
proscription, Zonaras Comment. in Council. Laodicen.
(...). So his own words are. And this is quite against set Forms of ones own
devising. Nor could a worser choice in all antiquity have been pitched upon, to
countenance set Forms of ones own devising, than was this notable Synod of
Laodicea; wherein there is so much determined for settling the received Forms,
and abrogating such abuses as had been crept into the same, as in no other
public monument of this time and age. Three of which Canons I shall here
produce, and those three which immediately precede that now in question. By
that we may perceive most manifestly, how little hope is to be found from
Laodicea, how cold the wind blows from those Eastern parts. The first takes
care to regulate that part of public Worship, which did consist in singing
Hymns or Psalms to the praise of God, determining that none besides the
ordinary and appointed Singers should go up into the Desk (or Pulpit) and sing
out of the Parchments in the Congregation. (...). Cancil. Laodicen. Can. 15.
That is the substance of the Canon. And that, as it excludes all other persons
from singing in the Church, but the public Singers, such as were called unto
that Office; so it excludes all other Books of that condition, from being
brought into the Church, but the public Parchments, such as were framed and
authorized for that very service. Yet so that I conceive with Balsaman, that is
to be understood no otherwise, than that it was not lawful unto every man to go
into the Pulpit, Balsam. in Council. Laodicen.
(...), to name the Psalm, and to begin it (as some about this time had
presumed to do:) it being permitted, as he notes, after the Psalm was so
begun, (...), that Laymen of what rank soever, if they had tuneable voices, or
could sing their parts, might then join with them, asin consort, to make up the
Harmony. The next care taken by this Council was, that the Gospels and other
parts of the holy Scripture might be read upon the Saturday, or the old Jewish
Sabbath. (...). Whereof the reason is thus given by Balsamon, Council. Ladoic.
Can. 15.
because that day had been formerly spent in Feasting, (...), and that the
people used not to assemble on it, Balsamon, in Can. 16. Laodicen.
for religious offices; which to redress it was determined by this Canon, that
on that day as well as others, (...), all sorts of Ecclesiastical ministrations
were to be performed. The last was for the ordering of the Psalms, concerning
which it was ordained that between every portion of the Psalms (for they
divided the whole Psalter, (...), Id. in Canon. 17. Council. Laodic. Can. 17.
into several portions) (...), some part of holy Scripture should be
intermingled, lest else the people might be tired with continual singing. Here
then we have certain prescribed Rules and Orders for the officiating of Gods
public Service, the Palms divided into Portions, those Portions intermingled
with the reading of the holy Scripture, a prescribed office ordered for the
Saturday, and finaly, a punctual direction not only who should name or begin
the Psalm, but from what Book it should be read.

But there is another Canon of this Council which looks more backward, does
indeed give as full a view of the several parts and Offices of the public
Service, as any other of that time whatever. The first part of the Service we
have seen before in Justin Martyr, that which he calls (...) the
Common Prayers of the Church, at which all sorts of people were and might be
present. This ended with the Sernion, as we saw before. And we shall see now
more particularly what they had to do, after that was done. For howsoever it
may seem in that place of Justin, that presently upon the conclusion of the
Sermon, they went unto the Celebration of the blessed Eucharist; yet that is on
a supposition, that there were none present but Believers only, and such as
were prepared to Communicate. But being that in those severe Ages of the
Church, they had not only Catechumeni, such as desired to be admitted into the
bosom of the Church, and had not yet received that Sacrament of Baptism; but
such as having been Baptized, were for their lapses and offenses put to open
Penance; as well as godly and religious persons, against whom no bar could be
pretended; the Offices of the Church were to be so fitted, that every one of
these conditions might not want his part. And this is that which we find
described in this Canon thus. (...), Council. Laodicen. Can. 19.
etc. After the Bishop has done his Sermon, let first the prayer be said for
the Catechumeni; they being gone, the prayers for such who are under penance,
are to be dispatched; and when they have received Imposition of hands, and are
also gone, then let the prayers for the faithful be thrice made thus, (...),
etc. the first softly, every man secretly to himself, the second and the third
aloud, which done, the Peace, (or kiss of peace) is to be given, and so they
are to go to the Oblation. And let none but such as be in Orders enter within
the rail, (...), or come within the place where the Altar stands, to receive
the Sacrament. So far the Canon of the Council, by which it is apparent that
each sort of Auditors had a peculiar course or Office, besides that part of
public Service in which they joined all together, as before was said. But
whether the prayers here spoken of were left at liberty, to the discretion of
the Minister, or in a prescribed and determinate Form, we must see elsewhere.
And in my mind we cannot see it at a fuller view, than in the Constitutions
ascribed to Clemens, undoubtedly more ancient than the times we speak of, where
we find it thus; (...), etc. All rising up, let the Deacon go into some eminent
place, and say, Constitut. Apost. lib. 8. c. 5.
None of the hearers, none of the unbelievers depart the place. And silence
being made, he says, (...), Pray ye hearers. And all the faithful shall pray
for them with a good devotion, saying (...), Lord have mercy upon them. Then
let the Dacon thus proceed, Id. cap. 6.
(...), etc. Let us all pray to God for the Catechumeni, that our good God of
his abundant love to mankind would graciously hear their prayers, and give
them help, minate their understandings, instruct them in knowledge, and teach
them his Commandments, etc. (...), etc. Moreover let us beseech God for them,
that having obtained remission of their sins by Baptism, they may be meet
partakers of the holy Eucharist, and dwell for ever with the Saints, etc. Now
unto every point or period contained in this solemn prayer, the people
answered, (...), Lod have mercy on them, after the manner of the Litany; and
the whole prayer being ended, they bowed their heads under the Bishops hands,
by whom they were dismissed with a Benediction, conform unto the Canon of the
Laodicean Council, which before we spoke of. Which done, the Deacon standing as
before, said thus, (...), Depart ye Catechumeni in peace. ( The Ite missa est,
in the Western Churches, is the same with this.) Then follow prayers for the
Engergumeni, or such as were possessed with unclean spirits: And that being
ended, together with another for the Baptized or Illuminati, the Deacon said,
(...), Pray ye devoutly which be under Penance; and then goes on. Id. ibid.
cap. 8.
Pray we for those which be under Penance, that God would show them the way of
repentance, accept their Recantation and Confession, and finally beat down
Satan under their feet, etc. the people still subjoyning unto every clause,
(...), Lord have mercy on them. Thus much and more unto this purpose in the
Constitutions. And I the rather am inclined to admit these Forms, or to resolve
it at the least, that set Forms they had for these several Offices; because the
Minister by whom they were performed, was of no higher Order than a Deacon. For
had the prayers been left to the discretion or ability of him that made them,
assuredly, the Bishop or the Presbyters, being men of greater gifts, and more
practiced in them than the Deacons were supposed to be, would not have left a
business of that weight and moment to be discharged by men of the lowest Order,
themselves attending on the service, as if not concerned. And so much for, and
on occasion of the so Celebrated Council of Laodicea, one of the ancientest
upon true record, in the Church of Christ.

You see by this, Constantine, and long time before, the Church was sorted and
disposed into ranks and files; and every sort of men had a particular Form of
Service fitted and framed thereunto, besides those Common Prayers wherein all
did join. We will next see whether they were not in condition, as well to
amplify the times, and beautify the places of Gods public worship, as to
agree upon the Forms; and then we will go forwards in our purposed search, till
we have set the business above all gainsaying. And for the times we showed
before, with what a general consent they had transferred the Jewish Sabbath, on
the which God rested, unto the first day of the week, on the which Christ rose.
Nor was it long before they had their daily meetings, and thereon their set
hours of Prayer, Morning and Evening, as was proved before from S. Cyprians
words. To which was after added, as appears by the Council of Laodicea before
remembered, an hour of prayer at nine of the Clock, Council. Laodicen. Can.
(...), says the Text; which hours are still observed at nine of the Clock,
(...), says the Text; which hours are still observed in all the Cathedrals of
this Kingdom. Besides these, as their numbers multiplied, and their affairs
were crowned by God with peace and happiness, they instituted several Annual
Festivals to be observed with greater solemnity and concourse of people, than
any of their ordinary Assemblies, in memory of especial blessings which God had
given them by his Son, or conferred on them by his Saints. Of these, the Feasts
of Easter and Whitsontide, as they are most eminent, so they are most ancient,
as being instituted in the times of the Lords Apostles; to which were added in
short time, the two days next following, that so those seacred Festivals might
be solemnized with the greater measure of devotion; in which regard, Easter is
called by Gregory Nyssen, Gregor. Nyssen. Homil. 1. de Paschat.
(...), or the three days Feast. See of this also, Augustine de Civitate Dei, l.
22. cap. 8. The Feast of Christis Nativity, began if not before, in the second
Age. Theophilus Caesariensis, who lived about the times of Commodus and Severus
makes mention of it, and places it on the 25th. of December, quocunque die 8.
Calend. Januar. venerit, so his own words are, as we still observe it. A
Festival of so great erninency, that Chrysostom entituleth it (...), the mother
or Metropolis of all other Feasts. Chrysostom. Orat. de Phalagon.
See for this also in Nicephorus, where it will be found to have been
universally received before the time of Dioclesians persecution; who burnt many
eminent Christians at Nicomedia, whilst they were Celebrating this great
Festival in the House God. Niceph. histor. Eccl. l. 7. c. 6.
That of the Incarnation was ordained in the beginning of the third Century,
there being an Homily of Gregory surnamed Thaumaturgus, who lived, An. 230.
entitled de Annunciatione B. Virginis; another (for of this there is made some
question) writ by Athanasius, who lived in the beginning of the following Age,
whereof there is no doubt amongst Learned men. That of the Passion or
Good Friday, as we call it now, is of the same Antiquity, as the other was; for
we find mention of it in the Books of Origin. Origin contra Celsum. l. 4.
And for the Feasts of the Apostles, Evangelists, and other blessed Saints of
God, they took beginning most of them in the time of Constantine, who by his
Edict gave command to all the Deputies and Lieutenants of the Roman Empire,
that the memorials of the Martyrs should be duly honored, Eusebius. de vita
Constat. l. 4. c. 23
and solemn Feasts to be appointed for that end and purpose, most of which
brought their Fasts or Vigils along with them. The Church lost nothing of that
power by our Saviors coming, which she enjoyed and practiced in the times
before; but did ordain both Feasts and Fasts too, if she saw occasion, and as
she found it might conduce to the advantage of Gods public worship. Now as
the Christians of these two Ages did augment the Times, so they increased the
places also of Gods public worship. In the first Age they had their meeting
or Assemblies in some privage Houses, which being separated from all profane
and common use, were by the Owners dedicated to Religious exercises, and
therefore honored in the Scriptures with the name of Churches. But as they
grew in numbers, so they grew in confidence, and in these Ages had their
Churches visible and obvious to the eyes of all men. Witness hereto Ignatius
the Apostles Scholar, and Successor to St. Peter in the Sea of Antioch, who
lived in the beginning of the second Century, and writing to the Magnesians (an
Epistle hitherto unquestioned by our modern Critics) does exhort them thus:
Omnes ad orandum in idem loci convenite, Ignat. Epist ad Magnes.
una sit communis precatio, una men's, una spes in charitate, etc. That is to
say, Assemble all together in the same place, to pour fourth your prayers unto
the Lord, let there be one Common Prayer amongst you, one mind, one only hope,
in love and an unblamable faith in Jesus Christ, run all together as one man to
the Temple of God, as to one Altar, as to Jesus Christ, the High Priest of the
uncreated and immortal God. Witness hereto for the middle of this second
Century, two several Epistles of Pope Pius the first, (and those unquestioned
hitherto) which we shall have occasion to make use of in the last Chapter of
this Tract, and the sixth Section of that Chapter. And finally, witness
hereunto for the close thereof, these words of Clemens Alexandrinus, where
speaking of the spiritual Church, or the Congregation of Gods Elect, he does
phrase it thus. (...). Clem Alex. Strom. lib. 7.
I call not now (says he) the place but the Congregation of Gods Elect by the
name of the Church. By which it is mosT plain and evident, that the word
Ecclesia, or the Church, signified in his time, as well the place of the
Assembly, as the general body of the Congregation, or Elect of God. Now that
these Churches mentioned by Ignatius in the first beginning, and specially by
Clemens in the latter end of this second Century, were not only some rooms in
particular houses, or the whole houses of some men dedicated and applied to
Religious offices, will appear most plainly by that of Gregory Thaumaturgus in
the following Age, where he divides the Churches extant in his time into five
parts or distributions, Greg. Thaumat. Canon. ep.
according to the remoter or nearer admission then given to Penitents; a
distribution which few houses built for private uses, though afterward
dedicated to Gods service, and no one room in any house could be capable of.
But it appears more plainly, by that great number of Churches or places of
Gods public worship, which either were destroyed or taken from the Christians
in the persecution of Aurelianus, and restored again by Galienus the Roman
Emperors; for which consult Eusebius, Hist, eccl. lib. 7. cap. 12. But it
appears most plainly by another passage in the said Eusebius, where speaking
of the peaceable times which the Church enjoyed immediately before the
Persecution raised by Dioclesian, he tells us of the Christians. Antiquis illis
aedificiis haud quaquam amplius contenti, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. Lib. 8.
amplas spatiosasque in omnibus urbibus ex fundamentis erexerunt ecclesias.
That is to say, That not contenting themselves longer with those ancient
edifices which had been built unto their hands in the times forgoing, they
erected large and goodly Churches from the very foundation in all the Cities of
the Empire. By which last evidence, it appears that the Christians had in
most Cities, some Churches or places of Assembly of an old erection, as old
perhaps as the last times of the Apostles; and that those old erections being
grown unable to contain their multitudes, they were necessitated to build new
ones of a larger size, and of capacity proportionable to such infinite numbers.
Which places of Assembly, as they first called Ecclesiae, as they also did the
Congregation of Assembly it self; so in the middle of this Age, they began to
be called Dominicae by the Latins, and in the same signification by the Greeks
Kuriacae, from which last word, the English word Church, and the Kirk of the
Scots, are very probably supposed to have been derived. From this time forwards
the Christians spared no cost to adorn their Churches, the Fabrics more
magnificent than they had been formerly, the Ornaments within proportionable to
the outward beauties, the Altars furnished with rich plate, even to the envy
and astonishment of the spightful Gentiles. Insomuch as Felix a Pro-consul, in
the time of Julian the Apostate, a little after the middle of the following
Century, at such time as the Churches were given up unto spoil and rapine, is
said to have cried out on the sight thereof, (...). That is to say, Behold, in
what rich Vessels they administer to the Son of Mary. So little was it thought
in those happy times, that there should one day come a generation of men
professing piety, who should deface those Altars, and destroy those Temples,
and cry, Down with them, down with them even to the ground. But of this great
increase of Churches, with their Solemnities and Forms of Dedication, we shall
speak more hereafter in the close of all.

CHAP. VII. Apparent proofs for Liturgies and Set Forms of Worship, betwixt the
Reign of Constantine, and S. Austin's Death.
1. The Form of Baptism described by Cyril of Jerusalem, conform unto the
ancient patterns. 2. As also of administering the blessed Eucharist. 3.
Conclusive proofs for Liturgies or Set Forms of worship in S. Basils time. 4.
And from the writings of S. Chrysostom. 5. The Liturgies of Chrysostom and
Basil vindicated; and the Objections answered which are made against them. 6.
Liturgies or Set Forms of worship in the Western Churches, by whom, and what
degrees established. 7. Proofs for the ancient Liturgies, and prescribed Forms
of worship, from S. Austin's works. 8. What was decreed concerning Liturgies or
prescribed forms of worship in the African Councils. 9. The Form of ordering
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, prescribed and regulated. 10. A prescribed Form
of Marriage and Set Rights of Burial, used anciently in the Church of CHRIST.
11. Touching the habit used of old by God's Priests and Ministers, in the
officiating his Divine Service in the Congregation. 12. Several Gestures used
by God's people in the Congregation, according to the several parts of Public
Worship. 13. A brief Essay concerning the Antiquity of the Gloria Patri; the
time when it was first made a part of the public Liturgies, and the accustomed
gesture at the pronouncing of the same.


WE are now come nto the settled ages of the Church, Gentiles fury: and so in
probability are like to see a fuller and more perfect view of her public
Forms; than in those more remote and dangerous times, in which she durst not
stand so much in the open light. The times from Constantine unto S. Austin,
were the most glorious and triumphant, that ever were beheld by the militant
Church: within which compass we intend to contain our selves, and to conclude
the search which we have in hand. And first we meet with Cyril, a right godly
Bishop, who in his mystagogical Orations made by him in his younger years,
Hieron. de illust. Scriptor.
upon the Rites and Mysteries of the holy Church, presents us with such pieces
of the ancient Liturgies (that of Jerusalem especially) that by them we are
well assured of the whole, that some such there were, though we are so
unfortunate not to have them now. The first contains the Rites of Baptism, in
which it is declared, that those who are admitted to it, (...). Being brought
within the porch unto the place of Baptism, and standing with their aces
toward the West, are commaned to stretch forth their hands, and to desie the
Devil, as if present by them. The Form of which defiance or Abrenunciation he
delivers thus, Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. Myslag.
Renuntio tibi Satana, and omnibus tuis operibus, and omni pompae illius ( or
tuae rather) and omni tuo cultui; the very same with that which we have seen
before of the former times. This done, the party which is to be baptized,
(...), being turned from the West towrads the East, is bid to say, Credo in
patrem, and filium, and spiritum sanctum, and in baptisma poenitentiae. That is
to say, I believe in the Father; and in the Son, and in the holy Ghost, and in
the baptism of repentance. This said, and being brought further into the
Church, (...), Id. Catech. 2.
they put off their clothes, to show, that they put off the old man with all
his works: and being thus naked are anointed with the holy Chrism. Thence being
brought unto the Font ((...)) every one of them is interrogated whether he does
believe in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: and
having made confession of thehir faith (according as we saw before from the
Constitutions) they were thrice dipped into the water, in memory of our
Saviors lying in the grace three days, (the formal words of Baptism, being
therewithal pronounced, though not here expressed.) Which done, the party is
again anointed on the forehead, nostrils, Id. Catech. 3.
ears, and breasts, (upon the reasons there declared) (...), and clothed in
white garments; Id. Catech. 4.
which concludes the action. But here it is to be observed, that this last
anointing was in the way of confirmation: it being the custom of those times,
in the baptizing of all such as were Adulti, or of riper years, to minister
both Baptism and Confirmation at the same time, as our incomparable Hook
rightly notes. And note withal that in the anointing of the forehead in his
later Unction, Hooker Eccles. Politic. l. 5. 66. Cyril. Catech. mystagog. 4.
Tertull. de resurrect. carnis.
the party baptized was signed with the sign of the Cross, (...), as the Father
there. Which is no more than that so celebrated passage of Tertullian, Caro
signatur ut anims muniatur, declares to be the ancient and unquestionable
practice of the Church of CHRIST.

Next for the celebration of the Eucharist, he describes it thus. Cyril.
Catechis. mystagog. 5.
(...), and to the Priests that stand about the Altar, and then says aloud,
Complectimini and osculemini vos invicem, embrace and kiss ye one another;
which is done accordingly; and this in token of that Union both of hearts and
souls, which is and ought to be between them. Then says the Priests, Sursum
corda, or, Lift up your hearts; the people answer, We lift them up unto the
Lord: The Priest again, Let us give thanks unto the Lord; the people say,
Dignum and justum est, or, It is meet and right so to do. And by this place (I
note this only by the way) we make up the breach in S. James his Liturgy, being
the ancient Liturgy of the Church of Jerusalem, as before was said: which
breach we showed and touched at obiter, in the former Chapter. (...), etc. Then
(says he) we make mention of Heaven, Earth, and Sea, and all the Creatures
reasonable and unreasonable, and also of the Angels and Archangels, and the
Powers of Heaven, praising God and saying, Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus Dominus
Deus Sabbati. By which celestial Hymns we do not only sanctify our selves, but
beseech our good and gracious God, that he would send his holy Spirit on the
gifts presented, (that is to say, the Bread and Wine) that so the Bread may be
made the Body of Christ, and the Wine his Blood. Then do we call upon the Lord,
(...), for the general peace of all the Churches, the tranquillity of all the
World, for Princes and their Armies, for our Friends and Brethren, for all that
be in need, sickness, or any other adversity, and in a word, for every one that
wants help from the hands of God. The rest that follows as a part of this
general Prayer, upon the alteration of the Form and Person, viz. from (...), We
call upon the Lord, in the third person, unto (...) in the second person; is
most judiciously concluded by Dr. Rivet, Rivet. Critici sacri, l. 3. c. 10.
to be the fraud and forgery of some Impostor: whose judgment in the same I
heartily both applaud and follow. But to proceed with that which is received
for true and genuine, and of unquestionble credit. This general Prayer being
thus concluded, follow tht at, (...), Cyril. Cateches. mystagog. 5.
which Christ our Savior gave unto his Disciples; the Lords Prayer he means:
and meaning so, shows plainly that the Church conceived how the Lords Prayer
was given to be said and used, not to be imitated only. Then says the Priest
thus, Sancta Sanctis, unto the holy all things are holy, or holy things are for
holy persons; the people answering, Unus sanctus, unus Dominus, JESUS CHRISTUS,
That is to say, there is but one Holy, one Lord, JESUS CHRIST. Then sangt the
Priest the divine Hymns, exhorting you to the communion of the holy Mysteries,
and saying, Gustate and videte quam fuavis est Dominus. O taste and see how
good the Lord is. This said, they came to the Communion, not with their hands
spread out, nor disjoined singers, but with the left hand placed under the
right, receiving the Lord's body in the palms of their hands (lest any of the
consecrated Bread should fall to the ground;) and therewith (viz. to the
Priests prayer when he gave the same) each one said AMEN. After they had
received the Communion of the Body of CHRIST, they received the Cup also of his
Blood (where still we have the whole Communion, sub utraque specie, what ever
new Doctrines have been coined at Rome) not stretching out the hands, (...),
but falling down, as when Men are in the Act of Worship or Adoration, they said
AMEN, as formerly at the receiving of the Bread. (...). Last of all, tarrying
for the parting or concluding Prayers, they gave thanks to God, who had
vouchsafed to make them worthy of his holy Mysteries. This was the course, and
these the footsteps of the Forms observed of old times in the Mother Church,
the holy City of Jerusalem. And if we may conjecture ex pede Herculem, what
the dimensions were of the body of Hercules, by the proportion of his foot; we
may be well conjecture by these evident footsteps, what the whole bodies were
of the ancient Liturgies.

From Cyril on unto St. Basil, another famous Bishop of the Eastern Churches.
Psalms, and regulating the manner of that Melody, he had somewhat innovated,
contrary to the received custom of the Church: was forced to make his own
Apology, and send it to the Clergy of Neo-Caesarea. Basil. Ep. 63.
Thus then says he, (...), etc. The Rites (says he) which we observe amongst
us, are such as are agreeable and consonant to all the Churches of God. Our
people rising in the night do before day repair unto the Chapel or house of
Prayer: and having made confession of their sins to God, in sorrow, tears, and
great compunction of the Soul, they rise at last from Prayer, and take
themselves unto the Psalms. Being divided into two parts, they sing as it were
in turns, one second another, or Quirewise (as is used in our Cathedrals) so
taking time to meditate on the words of God, and therewithal making our hearts
and minds more attent thereto. Then one to whom that charge or Office
appertained, began some other Psalm or Hymn; and all sung together after him:
by which variety of singing, (...), some Prayers being interserted or mingled
with it, they past over the night: and on the dawning of the day, all of them
joined together, (...), as if they had but one heart and one mouth amongst
them, and sung unto God a Psalm of Confession (most likely one of the seven
penitential Psalms;) and after every one made in his own words a profession of
his penitence; and so all returned. Where note, that howsoever this Form of
Service was fitted only for a company of private Men, who had embraced the
Monastic life; and to be used only by them in their private Oratories: yet the
most part thereof was borrowed from the public Forms, at that time extant in
the Church. Of the which Rites or Forms retained amongst them, were the
beginning of their service with a confession of their sins, then p rayers to
God, and then the singing of the Psalms. That which was singular herein, and
needed the Apology, was that they met together before day, and spent more time
upon the Psalmody, than in reading, or preaching of the Word, or in
Common Prayer, or any of the other parts of public Worship. Basil could tell
as well as any, wherein the Form of Service used amongst his Monks, agreed with
that which was received and used in public Churches; and wherein it differed:
as having took the pains to compose a Liturgy, or rather to complete and
polish, and fit unto the public use, such as had formerly been extant. And
though that Copy of it which occurs in the Bibliotheca, and in the writings of
Cassander, have some things in it which are found to be of a latter date; yet
we shall clear that doubt anon, when we come to Chrysostom, against whose
Liturgy I find the like Objections. Mean time take this of Basil for a pregnant
Argument, that in his time, and long before it, the Service of the Chruch was
not only ordered by Rules and Rubricks; but put into set Forms of Worship:
which we have noted in his Books De spiritu sancto, and is this that follows.
For speaking there touching those public Usages which came into the Church
from the tradition of the Apostles, Easil. de sancto spiritu. c. 27.
he instanceth in these particulars. (...), etc. The signing with the sign of
the Cross all those who place their hopes in Christ, what writing teaches?
that in our prayers we should turn toward the East, where is it taught us in
the Scripture? And then, (...), Those words of invocation wherewithal in the
holy Eucharist we consecrate the Bread, and Cup of Benediction, which of those
blessed Saints have left in writing? For not content with those things which
the Apostles or the Gospel have committed to us, many things have been added
since, both in the way of preface and of conclusion, which are derived from
unwritten Tradition -- And not long after thus of Baptism, having first spoke
of consecrating the Water, of the Chrism or Oil, and the three Dippings then in
use: Those other things, says he, which are done in Baptism, viz. (...), the
Abrenuntiation which is made to Satan and to all his Angels, out of what
Scripture is it brought?

Next for S. Cyrsostom, Chrysostom. in 2. ad Corinth. hom. 18.
It is no now, says he, as in the old Testament, wherein the Priests eat this,
and the people that: it being unlawful for the people to eat those things which
were permitted to the Priest. It is now otherwise with us. For unto all is the
same Body, and the same Cup presented. And in our very prayers it is easily
seen, how much we attribute unto the people. (...), etc. For both those who are
possessed with the devil, the Energumeni, and those who yet are under penance,
both by the People and Priest ((...)) common Prayers are made: and we say all
one and the self same Prayer, even that which is so full of mercy. Where by the
way, though in the Greek it be, (...), they say all one Prayer, yet in the
Latin it runs thus, omnes unam eandemque precem concipiunt: which would make
well for unpremeditated and extemporary Prayers, if it were possible that all
the Congregation, both Priest and people, should fall upon the same conception.
But to go on. (...) etc. Again, says he, (...)
when we repel all such from the holy Rayls, which cannot be partakers of the
holy Table: there is another Prayer to be said, and we all lie alike upon the
ground, and all rise together. Then when the Peace (or sign of peace) is
mutually to be given, and taken, we do all equally salute (or kiss) each other.
Thus also in the celebration of the sacred Mysteries, as the Priest prays for
the people, so do they for him: these usual words, (...), And with thy Spirit,
importing nothing else but this. And finally, Et cum spirtu tuo. Gratlas agamus
Deo.
that Prayer, wherein we give thanks to the Lord our God, is common unto both
alike: the Priest not only giving thanks to God, but the whole Assembly. For
when he has demanded their suffrage first, and they acknowledge thereupon,
(...), Dignum est and justum.
that it is meet and right so to do, then he begins the holy Eucharist. Nor is
it strange, nor should it seem so unto any, that the people should thus hold
conference with the Priest o Minister, considering that they sing those holy
Hymns, together with the Cherubins, and the powers of Heaven. So he. And all
this out of question, Ideo cum Angelis and Archangelis.
must needs be understood of prescribed Forms, such as the people said by
heart, or could read in Books that either lay before them, or were brought with
them: such as they were so thoroughly versed in, as to make answer to the
Minister upon all occasions. For what else were those common Prayers, those
(...) which he speaks of; what else that (...), that one self-same Prayer, that
Prayer so full of mercy in which all did join? were they not so determinate the
prescribed that all could say them with the Minister? And were not those
returns and Answers, so prescribed and set, that all the people knew their Q.
and were not ignorant of their turn, when they were to speak? Several other
passages of the ancient Liturgies, might here and there be gathered from this
Fathers writings, if one would take the pains to seek them. But I shall save
that pains at present, and indeed well may. For what need search be made for
pieces, when we have the whole, a whole and perfect Liturgy of this Fathers
making: unless it be to show of what ancient pieces the whole work is made.

For in the Bibliothecae Paetrum in the writings of Cassander, Henry Savil;
there is an entire Liturgy, which bears his name. (...). So it is entitled.
Chrysostom. opera Vol. 6. edit. Savilianae.
The like we find under S. Basils name, both in Cassanders writings, and the
Bibliotheca. The question is, Whether they are the works of those, whose names
they carry. For my part, I conceive they are, for the main and substance,
though not without some abstractions and additions in the change of times: and
hope that when such Arguments are answered, which are produced unto the
contrary, it will appear so unto others. And first for that of Basil, it is
objected by Hospinian, Veterem translationem cum Graeco exemplari, and nova
versione non convenire: Hospinian. ^isi. Sacrament. l. 9. cap. 14.
That the old translation agrees not either with the new, or the Greek
Originals. Assuredly, a very gentle Argument, such as will do no hurt at all to
any understanding Disputant; and therefore purposely omitted, as I think by Dr.
Rivet, who in his censure of those Liturgies did consult that Author. And yet
this is the only argument of moment which is made against it: which being so
gentle as it is would require no answer. Or if it did, and that the difference
of translations from one another, or if the old translation from the Greek
Original, be a sufficient argument to discharge this Liturgy; there could not
very many works of the old Greek Fathers be affirmed for theirs: their old
translations being so incongruous, so manifestly different from the Authors
mind, as by continual observation they are found to be. The next Objection, if
it may be called so, is of a gentler strain than this: it being charged also by
Hospinian, that in the commemoration of the dead, Basilii and Chrysostomi nomen
legitur, Id. ibid.
the names of Basil who must alive, when he made this Liturgy, and that of
Chrysostom, who lived after him, do both occur. But there is no such matter to
be found in the Original, extant in the Bibliotheca Patrum, nor the translation
of the same thereunto annexed: which plainly shows the old translation (if
thence the Argument were taken) did differ very much from the genuine Copy.
Besides, the same Objection being made against the Liturgy of S. Chrysostom, we
shall there meet with it; for there indeed the same commemoration is to be
found. Besides which, it is noted by Hospinian also, that in this Liturgy there
is this prayer for Pope Nicolas. Nicolai Sanctiffimi and universalis Papae,
longa sint tempora; whereas Pope Nicolas lived not (says he) till the year
857. which was 500 years after Chrysostoms death; and that there is a prayer
for the Emperor Alexius, the first of which name began his Reign, An. 1080.
and not before. Id. ibid.
To which we say, that neither in the Copy extant in the Bibliotheca, nor in
that published by Sir H. Savil, are either of these two last errors to be
found, which shows they came not out of the Originals. Secondly, That possibly
the business of Pope Nicolas may be nothing but a mere mistake: For whereas he
that published that old translation, which as it seems Hospinian met with, had
found Sanctissimi and universalis Papae N. (which N. we know is used
indefinitely for (...) in the Greek) he out of his abundant ignorance of a
Nicolas Nemo, makes Pope Nicolas. Or had it been Pope Nicolaus in the ancient
Copies, Hospinian, who objects the same, might with small search have found
some Patriarchs of Constantinople, of that very name; and they we know did use
to call themselves Universal Bishops, for 'twas the thing which Gregory the
great so stomached in them. But then it will be said, that every one of those
Nicolai lived after Chrysostom was dead; and that Alexius was not Emperor
until 700 years after his decease. Most true, for every man of sense must needs
conceive, that the names of Emperors and Patriarchs must needs be changed, as
the old die, and new Successors come in place: Or else we should collect an
excellent Argument for the Church of Rome, in finding prayers for the deceased
in S. Chrysostoms Liturgy. Might not one say as well, that certainly, the
Liturgy now used and established in the Church of England, is not the same
which was set forth and published in Q. Elizabeth's Reign, because the name of
our dread Sovereign Lord K. Charles does occur therein; and that there is a
prayer in it for Q. Mary and the Royal Issue? Id. ibid. Rivet. Critici. sacri.
l. 4. c. 3.
But finally, it is objected by Hospinian, and this as well as that Rivet
builds on also, that Carolus Calvus in a Letter to the Ravennates, says that
the Liturgy used in the Church of Constantinople, was that of Basil, and not
Chrysostoms: Quod mirum esset si Chrysostomus ejus Ecclesiae Archiepiscopus,
Liturgiam composursset; which had been strange says Rivet, if Chrysostom,
which was Archbishop of that City, had composed a Liturgy. However, by their
own confession we have a Liturgy of S. basils making, and that it is somewhat
worth the having; and it shall go exceeding hard but we will have another of S.
Chrysostoms also. For it is noted to my hand by our Learned Brerewood, from
Jeremy, a late Patriarch of Constantinople, that in the Greek Churches or
Festivals they use the ancient Liturgy of Basil, and on common days that of
Chrysostom. Brerewoods enquiry, cap. ult.
By which it seems that carolus Calvus, or whosoever gave him that
intelligence, was an Holy Day man; and took no notice of the Service of that
Church upon common days.

Thus have we found two Liturgies for the Eastern Churches, Western Church
would not take it well, if we should leave her worse provided than the Eastern
was. Now that there were by this time, and before, set and established Forms of
prayer in the Western parts, is evident by those remainders or fragments of
them, which we produced from Cyprian for the Church of Africa, from Justin and
Tertullian, for the Church of Rome; both which, though born in other Countries,
yet did live there most. Which Liturgy, that I mean of Rome, as it might have
its first grounds from S. Peter, whose name it carries; so were there many
helping hands put to it, in succeeding times, to make up the work. Of which
thus Platina. Platina in Xysti. l.
Nuda primo haec erant and omnia simpliciter tractabantur. Petrus enim ubi
conseeraverat oratione Pater noster, usus erat. Auxit haec mysteria Jacobus
Episcopus Hierosolymitanus; auxit Basilius, auxere and alii. Nam Celestinus
missae introitum dedit, Gregorius KYRIE-ELEISON, Gloria in excelsis
Telesphorus, etc. These things, says he, at first were but plain and naked.
For Peter when he Consecrated, used the Pater noster; James Bishop of
Jerusalem much increased the mysteries; the like did Basil and some others.
Celestine made the Introite, Gregory added to it the Kyrie eleison, Telesphorus
the Gloria in excelsis, Xistus the first, put to it the trisagion, or, Holy,
holy, holy Lord God of Hosts; Gelasius the Collations, (perhaps the Collects.)
The Gospel and Epistle were brought in by Hierom, the Allelujah borrowed from
Jerusalem, the Creed from the Council of Nice; the Commemoration of the dead
by Pope Pelagius, the kissing of the Pax by Innocent the first; and Agnus Dei
was not sung, says he, till the time of Sergius. If so, then as not Rome it
self, so neither was the Liturgy of Rome made in one day. It took up longer
time than so, to come unto that bulk and greatness, in which now it stands. But
out of doubt a Liturgy it had in the best times of it: So had the Church of
Millain, those of France, Spain, England; not every where the same, nor much
different from it. Facies non omnibus una, Nec diversa tamen, qualem decet esse
Sororum, as once the Poet said in another case. And so it stood until the
Western Empire was conferred on the Kings of France, who by their power, and
the importunity of the Popes of Rome, settled the Roman or Gregorian Missal over
all the West. Till those times they had several Liturgies, as before was said.
That of the Church of Millain, called commonly Officium Ambrosianum, not
because made by him originally, but because he reduced it to a better and more
settled Form, is extant still, and used by special sufferance in the Church of
Millain to this very day. So also for the ancient Liturgy of the Church of
Spain, which they call the Mosarabick Liturgy, Bellarm. de Missa. lib. 2. c. 18.
which received great increase both for Form and Order from Isidorus
Hispalensis, and therefore is most commonly ascribed to him; it is still used
in Toledo by the like permission. Id. Ibid.
By whom the Liturgy of Spain was first composed or settled, it is hard to say;
that Country yielding but few Writers, whose works have come unto our hands;
But sure a Liturgy they had, long time before the birth of Isidore, and that
most punctually observed in the Cathedrals or Mother-Churches. From which, when
the Parochial Churches began to vary, as it seems they did, the Council of
Girona, ( Concilium Gerundense the Latins call it) An. 517. recalled them to
their ancient duty; enjoining them to hold conformity in all the acts of
public worship with the Mother Church, the chief Cathedral of the Province;
and that as well for the order of the service, the Psalmody, the Canon, as the
use and custom of the ministration. Council. Gerund. Can. 1.
Sicut in Metropolitana Ecclesia agitur, ita in Dei nomine, in omni
Tarraconensi Provincia, tum ipsius Missae ordo, quam psallendi vel ministrandi
consuetudo servetur. So the Fathers ordered. By which it does appear most
fully, that anciently the Church of Spain had its proper Liturgy, a prescribed
Form of ministration; and that not only fitted for the use of the Cathedrals,
or Mother-Churches; but such to which the Parish Churches were to yield
conformity. And for the Gallick Church, though they have now no other Liturgy
than that which they received from Rome, power and practice of the Emperors of
the Caroline race being most operative at home in their own dominions; yet
anciently she had a Liturgy of her own, (for which see Beda's History of the
Church of England, l. 1. c. 27.) as had other Churches. Concerning which it was
thus ordered at the Council of Vannes, a City of Gallia Lugdunensis, Council.
Veneticum. Can. 15.
ut intra Provinciam nostram sacrorum, and ordo (or rather ordinis) Psallendi
una sit consuetudo, That in that Province there should be one Uniform course in
all sacred Offices, and in the order of singing, from thenceforth observed.
This was in An. 453. or thereabouts. Not that there had not been before those
times a settled and established Liturgy in the Church of France, but that too
many had presumed (as is since done in other places) to neglect their rules,
and venture on new Forms of their own devising. Finally, for the Liturgy of the
Church of England (for of the British Rites or Forms there is nothing certain)
it seems to be coeval with the Church it self, whether we look upon the same as
Reformed or Planted; not borrowed or derived from Rome, as both the Papist and
the Nonconformist bear the world in hand, but fitted to the best edification
of this people, ex singulis quibusque Ecclesiis, Beda in bist. Eccl. l. 1. c.
27.
our of the Rituals and received Forms of the most flourishing Churches at that
time in being, when first the Gospel was made known to the English Nation. The
passage is at large in Beda, and thither I refer the Reader.

Nor was it otherwise than thus in the African Churches, West. For, besides
what was noted from S. Cyprian in the former Chapter, we find some fragments of
the ancient Liturgies in S. Augustine also. Take this, although not all, as a
taste for all. Quod ergo in sacramentis fidelium dicitur, ut Sursum corda
habeamus ad Dominum, August. de bone perseverant. c. 13
munus est Domini; de quo munere ipsi Domino Deo nostro gratias agere, a
Sacerdote post hanc vocem (illi) quibus hoc dicitur admonentur, and dignum and
justum esse respondent. Wherefore (says he) that in the Sacraments of the
Faithful, it is said, That we lift up our hearts unto the Lord, is the Lords
own gift; for which, all they who have affirmed so of themselves, are after
admonished by the Priest to give thanks to God, which they acknowledge in their
answer to be meet and right. See to the same effect, Epist. 156. and in other
places. Which with the rest before observed out of other Fathers, make it clear
as day, with what an high injustice they proceed against this blessed Church of
England, who have accused her for prescribing Responsories to be said by the
people, the Minister being (as they say) ordained by Scripture to be the
peoples mouth to God. Which Responsories, I am sure, Smectymn. p. 12.
I dare boldly say it, are freer of Impertinencies and Tautologies (though they
charge this on them) than any of the best of their extemporary prayers, be they
whose they will. And with as little justice do they use S. Austin, whose words
they bring to prove that it was free for Christians to pray as their occasions
did require, Vindication, p. 17.
without being limited to prescribed prayers. This they are brought to prove
indeed, they say well in that. For they are thus brought in, in another place,
viz. And to the same purpose (that there were then no such stinted Liturgies)
S. Austin in his 121. Ep. Liberum est, etc. It is free to ask the same things
which are in the Lords prayer, Smectymn. p. 7.
aliis atque aliis verbis, sometimes one way, and sometimes another. But does
this prove, think they, that in those times there were no stinted Liturgies,
which is the matter to be proved? I cannot possibly believe they think so,
whatsoever they say. The Father in that place, as they know full well, speaks
of private prayer, and shows, that in addressing our desires to God, we are
not bound to use the very syllables and words of the Lords prayer only. I trow,
none ever said we were. Certain I am, that there is no such doctrine preached
by any of the Sons of the Church of England. Besides, if there were public
Liturgies in S. Austins times, as they seem to grant, because they say, they
will not peremptorily say there were not; Vindication, ibid.
and we say they are peremptory enough, when there is ground for it: Then
certainly, whatever might be done in private, it was not free nor lawful to ask
the same thing in the public service of the Church, aliis atque aliis verbis,
in other words than were prescribed in those Liturgies. And so the testimony
out of Austin is neither so full unto the purpose, as they did intend, nor has
it proved the matter it was brought to prove. Id. ibid.
So far was that good Father from decrying either the benefit or use of public
Liturgies, that, as we saw before, he derives their petigree not only from the
Apostles times, ( ab ipsts Apostolorum temporibus as his own words are) but
also from their words and warrant; and therefore was not like to countenance so
bold a freedom of praying in Gods public worship with what words we listed, or
indeed any other than the prescribed Forms.

But this being only his opinion as a private man, Balsamons collections are
called the Canons of the Council of carthage, and so they are in that of
Zonaras; but as collected by Justellus are called in general, the Canons of the
Church of Africa; there is one runs thus entitled. De precibus quae debent
fieri ad Altar. Touching the prayers to be made at the Altar. Codex. Can.
Eccl. Africn. c. 103.
Hoc quoque placuit ut precationes quae in Synodo confirmatae sunt, sive
Praefationes, sive Commendationes, sive manus impositiones, ab omnibus
peragantur, and omnino aliae adversus fidem nunquam proferantur: sed quae a
sapientioribus colleciae sunt dicentur. i. e. It seems good unto us (say the
Fathers) that those prayers which have been approved of in the Synod, whether
that they be Prefaces or Commendations, or laying on of hands (that is, in
Ordination, as I conceive, and I will tell you why anon) be performed by all;
that none which be against the faith be said in public, but only such as have
been formerly composed by wise and understanding men. This Canon, if it were
made in any time, between the year 395. and 430. it is most likely that S.
Austin had a hand in the making of it, for so long he sat Bishop of the Church
of Hippo. v. baron. in Annal. eccl. An. 395.430. Binius in editione Council. To.
1.
For if it were decreed in the third of Carthage, which seems to have a touch
of something of it, Can. 23. it must be then An. 397. as it is ranked by
Baronius: if in the Council of Milevis, whither some refer it, it falls into
the year 416. by the same account; at one of which S. Austin was, and at both
of them might be present, for ought I know unto the contrary. But the truth is,
the Canons of these African Councils are much disordered in all collections of
them which I yet have seen: This Canon in the collection made by zonaras, being
the 117th. in that of Balsamon, Can. 106. in the Code published by Justellus,
his 103. and amongst those ascribed to the Milevitan Council, it is in rank the
12th. But howsoever it be placed in this rank or that, it seems it was not made
without good occasion. For as it is observed by Balsamon, Balsamon. notae in
Council. Carth.
(...). Some Bishops then, as since some Presbyters have done, endeavored to
introduce new Forms of their own devising. And yet it was not only the Bishops
fault; some of the Priests was no less active in the Innovation, Zonaras in
Council. Carthagin. Can. 117.
and unto them it is referred by Zonaras. (...), as he tells us there. And this
not only in the ministration of the daily prayers, but (...), in the very act
of Ordination, in which the Bishop laying hands, (...), upon the head of him
that was to be ordained, used certain prayers. Fically, he resolves that in all
the several Acts of public Worship, before remembered, the prayers confirmed
((...)) not first devised in that Synod should be only used, (...), Id. ibid.
and that no new ones brought into the Church by any one, whosoever he was,
should be entertained. The reason of the which as it is touched before, so is it
more expressly manifested in that of the Milevitan Council, if it were of that,
Ne forte aliquid contra sidem, Council. Milevit. Can. 12.
vel per ignorantiam vel per minus studium sit compositum, lest else perhaps,
either through ignorance or want of care, something against the rule of Faith
be composed and published. So then, this was no new restraint, and much less
the first, whereby the liberty of Prayer, or praying by a Form of ones own
devising, was prescribed and limited, as some give it out: Smectymn. p. 7.
but a Reviver only or a Confirmation of the ancient Canons, by which it had
been limited and prescribed before. As for the Canon of the third of Carthage,
in which it seems to be permitted to the Minister, to use such Prayers in the
officiating Gods divine Service, concerning which, cum fratribus
instructioribus contulerit, he had before conferred with the learned Brethren:
Id. Ibid.
when they can prove that Canon to be made in the third Council of Carthage, I
shall bethink my self of an Answer to it. But sure I am, that in the third
Council of Carthage, Caesario and Attico Coss. as it is said to be in all
Collections of the Councils, were made but 24 Canons as it is in balsamon, but
five and twenty as in zonaras, whereof this is none. And no less sure, that it
is told me by Baronius, haud omnes in hac Synodo sanciri, that all the Canons
attributed to this Council, were not made therein: Baron. Annal. Eccla An. 397.
n. 46.
nor is it to be found in the Collection of the Canons of the Councils of
Carthage either of Zonaras or Balsamon, or in the Codex Canonum published by
Justellus; and therefore in all probability made in none at all.

Next look we on the other parts of the public Liturgies, Ordination, whereas
the ancient Form thereof had been interrupted, and many of the Rulers of the
Church had been too sensibly indulgent to their own affections in the
dispensing of the same: it pleased the Fathers in the fourth Council of
Carthage, not so much to ordain and constitute new Forms, and Ordinances, as
revive the old. A Council of that note and eminance, that as the Acts thereof
were approved and ratified by Pope Leo the great (if that add any thing unto
them); Binius in titulo Council. To. 1. p. 587. edit. Col. Id. Ibid. p. 591.
so by the same the following Ages of the Church did use to regulate and
dispose the public Discipline. Adeo ut hoc Concilium Ecclesiae disciplinae ad
pristinam consuetudinem revocatae, quasi promptuarium, semper meritoque apud
posteros habitum fuit, as says Binius truly. Now amongst those, they which
first lead the way unto all the rest, declare the Form and manner to be used in
all Ordinations, whether of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; or of inferior
Officers in the Church of Christ. And first for Bishops, especial care being
taken for an inquisition into their Doctrine, Life, and Conversation: Council.
Carthag. IV. can. 1.
it is decreed, that when a Bishop is to be ordained, two other Bishops are to
hold the Book of the holy Gospel over his head; and whilst one of them does
pronounce the blessing, the rest there present lay their hands upon his head.
Episcopus cum ordinatur, Ib. Can. 2.
duo Episcopi panant and teneant Evangeliorum codicem super caput and cervicem
(or rather verticem) ejus; and uno super eum fundente benedictionem, reliqui
omnes Episcopi qui adsunt, manibus suis caput ejus tangant. So the canon goes.
And this is still observed in the Church of England, save that the laying of
the Book on the parties head, is turned (and as I think with more significancy)
into the putting of the same into his hand. Then for the ordering of the
Priest, or Presbyter it is thus declared. Presbyter cum ordinatur, Episcopo eum
benedicente, and manum super caput ejus tenente, Ib. Can. 3.
etiam omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt manus suas juxta manum Episcopi
super caput illius teneant. When a Presbyter is to be ordained, the Bishop
giving the benediction, (or saying the words of Consecration) and holding his
hand upon his head, all other Presbyters then present are to lay their hands
upon his head, near the hand of the Bishop. And this is also used and required
in the Church of England, save that more near unto the Rule and prescript of
Antiquity, three Presbyters at least are to be assistant in laying hands upon
the party to be ordained. And last of all for that of Deacons it was thus
provided, solus Episcopus qui eum benedicit, manum super caput illius ponat,
Ibid. Can. 4.
that the Bishop only who ordains, should lay his hand upon his head. The
reason of the which is this, quia non ad Sacerdotium, sed ad ministerium
consecratur, because he is not consecrated to the Office of Priesthood, but to
an inferior ministry in the house of God. Nor is the Deacon otherwise ordained
than thus, in the Church of England. Here are the Rites, the visible and
external signs: but where I pray you are the Forms, the prescribed words and
prayers which are now in use? I answer, that they are included in those two
phrases, benedicere, and fundere benedictionem, to bless, to give the
benediction, or pronounce the blessing. For as a Writer of our own very well
observes, Benedicere hic nibil aliud est quam verba proferre, Mason de Minist.
Angl. l. 2. cap. 17.
per quae horum Ordinum potestas traditur: To bless, says he, or give the
benediction, is nothing more nor less, than to say those words by which the
power of Order is conferred on every or either of the parties which receive the
same. And that the Form of words then used, was prescribed and set, not left
unto the liberty of every Prelate, to use what Form of words he pleased, so he
kept the sense, we saw before in that of Zonaras: where he affirmed, that the
Canon formerly remembered about the using prescribed Forms in the Church of God,
did reach to Ordination also: (...). In Ordinations, Zonaras in Council. Carth.
Can. 117.
says the Scholiast, the Bishop or Chief Priest laying his hands on him that
came to be ordained, was to recite the usual and accustomed Prayers. Statas
preces exequi solitus est, as the Translator of the Scholiast. And this may be
observed withal, that though this Council be of good antiquity, as being held
An. 398. yet almost all the Acts thereof, and those especially amongst the
rest, were rather declaratory of the ancient Customs of the Church of CHRIST,
Baron. Annal. Eccl. An. 398.
than introductory of new: as both Baronius and Binius do affirm and justify.

That which remains, Marriage, and Rites of Burial; to which a little shall be
added of those pious Gestures used by them in the Act of public Worship: and
that being done, I shall conclude. And first for Marriage, there is no question
to be made, but that from the beginning of Christianity it has been celebrated
by the Priest or Minister, with public Prayers and Benedictions, and most
times with the celebration of the blessed Eucharist; whereof thus Tertullian.
Vnde sufficiam ad felicitatem ejus matrimonii enarrandam, Tertullian ad uxorem.
l. 2.
quod Ecclesia conciliat, and confirmat oblatio, and obsignatum Angeli
enunciant, Pater ratum habet? How can I be sufficient, says this ancient
Writer, to declare the happiness of that Marriage, which the Church celebrates,
the Sacrament confirms, which being solemnized is proclaimed by the Angels,
and ratified by our heavenly father? To add S. Ambrose to Tertullian, a latter
to a former Author, may be thought impertinent, yet being a Father of the
Church, and one against whom no exception lies, take him with you also; and
you shall find in him, Ambros. Epist. 70. ad Vigilium.
Conjugium sacerdotali benedictione sanctificari oportere, that Marriage was to
be sanctified with the Priests blessing. The Ring in Marriage is as ancient as
Tertullian also, who mentions it in his Apologetick, cap. 6. and it is given
says Isidore by the Bridegroom to his Spouse or Wife, Vel propter mutuae fidei
signum, Isidor. Hisp. de officiis. l. 2. c. 59.
vel ut eodem pignore eorum corda jungantur; either to testify their mutual
faith, or rather for a pledge of that Conjunction, which is agreed upon between
them, both in heart and mind. The reason it is put on the fourth Finger was
observed before; which lest it should be thought to be merely gentile, you
shall also have it from a Christian Author, Id. ibid.
Quod in eo vena quaedam sanguinis ad cor usque perveniat; because there goes
a vein from thence to the very heart. That the Brides anciently went to Church
in white Apparel, appears in the same Author also; though it was mixed with
Purple then, which is now disused: and that they were conducted to the Church
by Paranymphs or Bridemen, as we call them now, is no less evident, but from an
antienter Record. Where it is said, Sponsus and Sponsa cum benedicendi sunt a
Sacerdote, a parentibus suis vel Paranymphis offerantur: Council. Carthag. IV.
Can. 13.
That both the Bridegroom and the Bride, must be conducted to the Church to
receive the benediction of the Priest, either by their Parents or their
Bridefolks. Finally, to the making of a Marriage in those early days, Isidor.
Hispal. de divin. fficiis. l. 2. c. 19.
they had their Tabulas dotales, their Writings and Instruments of Dowry; by
which the married couple became possessed of each others goods; from whence it
comes that in the Liturgy of the Church of England, the Man does actually endow
his Wife with all his worldly goods, and that in facie Ecclesiae even in the
sight and hearing of the Congregation. Next for their Form or Rites of Burial,
not to speak any thing of those preparatory actions which were done within
doors, in the embalming of the Body, and making it ready for the Sepulture: the
Corpse was brought unto the Grave with Psalms, and spiritual Hymns; and being
had into the Church, the Priests and people said the accustomed Prayers, such
as were destinate to that business. This we shall clearly see by those Funeral
Rites with which the body of Macrina, the Sister of Gregory Nyssen, was brought
unto her burial, as himself describes it. Gregor. Nyssen. de vita S. Macrinae.
The Bier, says he, being carried by Men of eminency in the Clergy, was on
both sides attended by no small number of Deacons and other Ecclesiastical
Officers, (...), each with a Taper in his hand. And this was not without some
mysters; (...), the Psalmody continued most melodiously from the beginning to
the end, in consort, not unlike the so much celebrated Song of the three
Children: The space betwixt the house from whence we came, and the
burial-place, being seven or eight furlongs; so that by reason of the throng
which hindered us from hasting forward, we spent all the day. (...), etc. Being
come within the Church, we set down the Bier, and first betook our selves to
Prayer ((...)) which moved much sorrow in the people; then unto Psalms again,
which were much interrupted by the cries and lamentations of the Virgins, which
were then in place. But we requiring them by signs, to keep silence, (...), and
the Deacon preparing unto Prayer, and crying to the people in the accustomed
words, they put themselves into a posture of Prayer, though with much ado.
Prayers being done, the Body was committed to the Grave; and all the company
departed to their several houses. A short collation being prepared at an house
near hand for the principal Mourners: to which were sometimes added the poor
and needy, the Widow and the fatherless Child, pupillos and viduas saturantes,
as it is in Origin. Origin. lib. 3. in Job.
More of these Rites who list to see, let him consult for the first part
hereof, the Psalmody, Nazianzen. orat. in laudem Caesarii, Hierom in vita S.
Pauli, and his Epistle ad Eustochium de Paulae obitu; s. Chrysostom, Homil. 70.
ad populum Antiochen. Augustine. Confessionum l. 6. c. 12. And for the latter
part, the Prayers accustomably used in those Solemnities, see Cyprian, Epist.
l. 1. Ep. 9. austin Confession. l. 6. c. 12. Paulinum in vita S. Ambrosii,
Cyrillum Hierosol. Catech. mystag. 5. Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 4. c. 71. and
others. Finally for the Funeral Sermon, although condemned of late, in some of
the Reformed Churches, there is no Man so much a stranger to antiquity, none
who has ever looked into the works of the fathers, Basil or Ambrose, Nazianzen
or Nyssen, and indeed whose not; who finds them not to be exceeding frequent in
those pious times. For by that means the Dead were honored in the
commemoration of their faith and piety; and those who were alive received both
comfort and instruction, in being persuaded to the imitation of their very
Examples. Sic and defunctis praemium, and futuris dabatur exemplum, as Minutius
has it.

Next for the Rites and Gestures which were in use, white, and the significancy
thereof to denote that Holiness, wherewith the Ministers of God ought to be
apparelled: and seems to have been much of the same condition both for use and
meaning, with the Surplice still retained in the Church of England. This we
find clearly evidenced in the Constitutions ascribed to Clemens, as may be seen
in the sixth Chapter of this book, number. V. and there the Reader may observe it.
Besides which, being as I take it, of unquestioned credit, to the point in
hand; S. Hierom tells us in the general, that in the act of Ministration, they
used a different Habit, from what they ware at ordinary days and times. Religio
divina alterum habitum habet in ministerio, alterum in usu vitaq, communi;
Hieronym. in Ezekitl. c. 44.
which is sufficient for the general, that it was so anciently. And what this
different Habit was, he tells us more particularly in his reply against
Pelagius who it seems disliked it: and asks him what offense it could be to
God, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or those of any other inferior Order,
Id. adv. Pelag. lib. 1.
in administratione sacrificiorum candida vest processerint, did in the
ministration of the Sacraments bestir themselves in a white Vesture. Nor was
this white Vesture taken up in the West parts only, which some observe to have
been more inclinable to superstition than the Eastern were: it was received and
used in the East parts too, as appears by Chrysostom. Who showing the Priests
of Antioch, of which Church he was, unto how high a Calling the Lord had called
them, and how great power they had to repel unworthy Men from the Lords Table;
adds, that they were to reckon that for their Crown and glory; and not that
they were privileged to go about the Church in a white garment. Chrysostom.
Hom. 83. in Matthew.
(...), as he pleads it there. So ancient is the use of white Vestments, during
the time of ministration in the Church of Christ: and from those elder days it
came down to ours, being received long since in the Church of England. For in
the Constitutions made for the Province of Canterbury by Archb. Walter, it was
decreed, with a praecipimus ut qui Altari ministrat suppelliceo induatur,
Linwood, Provincial de officio Archidiaconi.
that he who ministered at the Altar should be attired in his Surplice. And in
the reformation of this Church, both in the times of King Edward the VI. and
Qu. Elizabeth of blessed memory: when as the Church was freed from those
massing garments which superstition in the declining times of piety had
introduced into the same: the Surplice was thought fit to be still retained by
reason of its ancient and unspotted pedigree from the Primitive times. I know
it has been said by some, that the first use hereof was heathenish, and that
it was first borrowed from the Priests of Egypt: and I know well the Priests of
Egypt, were at their public Sacrifices, arrayed in white. S. Hierom so informs
me, Hierom. in Ezekiel. c. 44. Pliny, Natural. hist. lib. 19.
saying, Vestibus lineis uti Aegyptios sacerdotes: and so does Pliny also in
his Natural History, who tells us, Vestes lineus sacerdotibus Aegyptiis
gratissimas esse. And I could add, that so it was in many of the Pomps and
Sacrifices of the Romans also, of which, thus Virgil in the Aeneids.

-- Puraque in Vest Sacerdos
Setigerae foetum suis, intonsamque bidentem
Attulit --
Upon which words it is observed by Servius, param vestem dici, qua festis
diebus uti consueverant sacrificaturi; Servius in Virg. Aeneid. l. 12.
that on the Festivals, the Priests who were to sacrifice were clothed in pure
and unspotted Vestures. But this seems better, as I take it, to show the
general use hereof amongst all Nations whatsoever, that either worshipped the
true God, or adored the false: than to be used as an argument to disgrace the
Habit. For they which have been pleased to object that such a garment as the
Surplice, had anciently been worn by the Priests of Isis, in their idolatrous
and wretched sacrifices: might have observed as well, that before that time it
had been imposed by the best Kings of Judah on the Priests and Levites, when
they sung praises unto God, Vid. chap. 3.
as was shown before: And if they should object from thence that it is Jewish
at the best, and so not fit to be continued in a Christian Church: they may
remember if they please, that though it was a garment of the Priests and
Levites, yet was it none of those that were appointed or imposed for the legal
Sacrifices, but only was for the moral Service of Almighty God. This makes it
evident, that as the white garment of the Priest or Levite was used in the
moral service of God, before it had been taken up by the Priests of Egypt; so
was it also used in the Primitive Church, before it came to be abused by the
Church of Rome.

Next for those Rites which were alike common both to Priest and people, Justin
Martyr, who showing that the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles were read
unto the people in the Congregation; and that being done, the President or
Bishop went unto the Sermon; then adds, (...), they all rose up together,
Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2.
and betook themselves unto their prayers. And in the place of Basil before
remembered, the Monks are said to rise up from their prayers, (...), and to
proceed unto the Psalms. Which, as it shows that there were several gestures in
the Act of Worship; so I conceive that sitting was the gesture which was used
during the Lessons, Psalms, and Sermon: At other times they used to stand, as
at the Creed, the Gloria Patri, and at the reading of the Gospel. Their
standing at the Creed was anciently used to show their readiness in standing
for the Faith, and the profession of the same before persecuting Judges, never
imposed by any Canon or decree of Council, for ought I can find, but taken up
on the Authority of ancient practice, and afterward much strengthened by a
decree for standing up at the holy Gospels, of which the Creed was but the
summary or Abstract. It was not long before the same gesture had been taken up
(for I find not that it was imposed by public Sanction) at the reading also
of the Creed, as being the sum and substance of the holy Gospels. Et cum
Symbolum est verbum Evangelicum quoad sensum ergo illud stando sicut Evangelium
dicitur. Durand rationale divin.
Of standing at the Gloria Patri, we shall speak more at large in the following
Section. And as for the standing at the Gospel, it was decreed, if not before,
by Pope Anastasius, by whom it was ordained, Platina in vita Anastasii. l.
says Platina, Ne Sacerdotes ullo modo sederent, sed curvi and venerabundi
starent, cum evangelium caneretur aut legeretur in Ecclesia. But by his leave
the Decretal, from which this must be taken, goes a great deal further, and
does not only reach the Priests, but caeteros omnes praesEntes, all who were
present in the Church. Anastas. Ep. ap. Binium. in To. 2. Council.
And doubtless 'twas in use before, though but now enjoined; Sozomen blaming it
in the Alexandrians, (and he lived long before the time of Anastasius) that at
the reading of the Gospels, (...), the Bishop stood not up as in other places.
Sozomen. hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 19.
Yet you must understand it so, that they used not to stand upright, sed curvi
and venerabundi, says the letter decretal, but with the bowing of the body, as
in the way of adoration; and more than so too, if the name of Jesus did occur
in the reading of it, they used with all reverence and duty to bow the knee;
which in those parts and times was the greatest sign both of humility and
subjection. Of this we need no other witness than the great S. Ambrose, whose
speaking in his Hexaemeron, Ambros. in opera Hexaem. l. 6. c. 9.
touching the particular office of each several member; he makes the bowing of
the knee at the name of Jesus the proper duty of that part. Kneeling they used
both in the act of Prayer and Invocation, as also in the participation or
receiving of the blessed Sacrament. First, in the act of Prayer or Invocation,
for when Tertullian blamed it in the Gentiles, that they did assidere sub
aspectu contraque aspectum ejus, Tertullian. de Orat. cap. 12. Origin. in
Numer. Homil. 5.
sit down irreverently before their Gods, as soon as they had done their
Prayers: And when as Origin asks the reason, quod genua flectimus orantes, why
we should kneel upon our knees in the time of Prayer; both of them put it out
of question, that in the act of Prayer or Invocation, the Christians of those
early times were upon their knees. Next for the reverence which they used in
the time of Participation, the least that can be said of them is, that they
received the Sacrament upon their knees. What else can be the meaning of that
of Ambrose, where he informs us of the Christians of his time, that they did
carnem Christi in mysteriis adorare, adore the flesh of Christ in the holy
mysteries; Ambros. de Sp. S. lib. 3. c. 12. Chrysostom. Homil. 3. in Ephesians.
or that of Chrysostom, (...). When thou See all things ready at the great
Kings Table, the Angels ministering at the same, the King in presence, and thou
thy self provided of a Wedding garment, cast thy self down upon thy knees at
least, and so Communicate. And what else think you caused the Gentiles to
accuse the Christians living in S. Austins time, for worshipping Ceres and
Bacchus, two good Belly-gods; August. contra. Faustum. Man. l. 20. c. 13.
but that they were observed to kneel when they received the Bread and Wine in
the blessed Eucharist? And all this done with hands stretched out, and heads
uncovered, manibus expansis, Tertullian. Apologet. c. 30. Basil. Ep. 63.
capite nudo, as Tertullian has it; and as S. Basil does observe of Gregory
Nazianzen, (...), that he used not to be covered in the time of prayer. Add,
that they turned toward the East in the act of worship, whereof consult with
Justin Martyr, in his Book of Questions and Answers ad Orthodopes, Qu. 118.
Tertullian in his Apologetick, chap. 16. Origin in his 5. Homily on the Book of
Numbers; not to say any thing of those who came after them: And then we have a
perfect view of the most usual and material orders, used by the Primitive
Christians in Gods public service.

Before I do conclude this Age, I shall subjoyn some few notes on the Gloria
Patri, retained on so good grounds in this Church of England, so often repeated
in the divine service of the same; so solemnly and reverently pronounced by
those who either understand their own Christian duties, or the intentions of
the ancient holy Catholic Church. And those remembrances I shall reduce unto
these three heads. First, I shall show the Antiquity and Original of it:
Secondly, when, and by what Authority it became a part of the public
Liturgies: And thirdly, in what posture Gods people used to put themselves, as
often as there was occasion to pronounce the same.

Concerning the Antiquity of the Gloria Patri, Nice, or the times immediately
succeeding; and that it is by them conceived to have been framed of purpose for
a Counterpoise to the Arian Heresy, and to train up the people in the right
persuasion of the holy Trinity. And were it so, it need not be ashamed of its
Original, or look into the world for a better petigree; the space of 1300 years
and more, being abundantly sufficient to procure it credit, and set it far
enough above the reach of contentious men. But yet S. Basil who lived near that
Council, Basil. de Sp. S. c. 27. Id. ibid. c. 29.
goes a great deal higher, and fetches the Original of it (...), from the
tradition of the Apostles; and cites some of the ancient Fathers, and amongst
them S. Clemens, the Apostles Scholar, and Dionysius of Alexandria, who died
long time before this Council, and in whose writings this doxology was expressly
found. For the Apostles being commanded by their Lord and Savior to teach and
Baptize all people in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, there is no question to be made, but that in due conformity to their
Masters pleasure they did accordingly proceed; and for a preparatory thereunto
required of such as were to be added to the Church, a solemn profession of that
Faith, into which they were to be Baptized. And this Confession of the Faith he
calls (...), the Original and mother as it were of that Doxologie, then and of
long time used in the Church of Christ. Id. ibid. c. 27.
And then it follows in these words, (...). i. e. That as they had received,
so they did Baptize, and as they did Baptize, so they did believe, Id. ibid.
Ep. 78.
and as they did believe, so they also glorified. But they Baptized in the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; and they believed in the
Father, and in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost; and therefore also had some Form
of ascribing Glory to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; which was the Form
remaining on record in those ancient Fathers, whose names there occur. And this
he further proves by an ancient ceremony used of old at Candle tinding, which
he ascribes also (...), to the tradition of the Fathers; but by which of them
devised or first introduced, that he could not tell. Only he notes, that at
the first bringing in of the Evening lights, the people were accustomed to say
these words, (...). We glorify or praise the Father and the Son, Id. de Sp. S.
cap. 29.
and the Holy Spirit of God; (just as we used to say in these Western parts
upon the very same occasion, God send us the light of Heaven.) Which as the
Father calls, (...), an ancient Ceremony, an old Form of words; so does he
tell us therewithal, (...), that the observation of the same was not imputed
unto any (as the other is) either for superstition or impiety. In Nicephor.
hist. Eccl. l. 18. c. 51. edit. gr. lat.
The Scholiast or Nicephorus (whosoever he was) does observe this custom, and
gives us the whole Form at large of this (...). whither I refer you; this being
only by the way.

It Is true, the following words, Sicut erat in principio, etc. which make up
the whole frame of this Doxologie (as it is now used in the Church) came not in
till afterward, upon occasion of the spreading of the Arian Heresy, by which
it was most impiously maintained and taught, erat quando non erat, that there
was once a time when the Son was not, and so not coeternal with his heavenly
Father. And though I cannot say with the Learned Cardinal, that this addition
was put to it in the Council of Nice, Baron. Annal. Eccl. An. 325.
because I find it not in the Acts of that Council, or otherwise than by him
ascribed unto it; yet certainly it was adjoined unto it much about that time,
and questionless on that occasion. And so much is affirmed in the Council of
Vaisons in France, Council. Vasens. c. 5.
Concilium Vasense and Vassionense the Latins call it: Where it is said,
Propter haereticorum asTutiam qua Dei filium non emper cum Patre fuisse, sed a
tempore coepisse blasphemant, in omnibus clausulis post Gloria Patri, and filio
and filio and spiritui sancto, dicitur, sicut erat in principio, and nunc est,
and in secula seculorum. Which points both to a former usage in some other
Churches where this addition was received (whereof more anon) and to the crafty
malice of the Arian Heretics, for a most sovereign Antidote to whose poisons
it was first devised. A further proof of which I shall show you presently.

Such being the Antiquity and use of this Doxologie, Nicephorus ascribes it
unto Flavianus Patriarch of Antioch, An. 380. or thereabouts; who as he says,
(...), by the advice and help of Chrysostom (being then a Minister in that
Church) did first ordain it. Niceph. Eccles. Hist. l. 18. cap. 51.
But certainly it was of longer standing in the Church than so. For it is said
by Sozomen, that when Leontius the Arian was Bishop of that See, which was in
the year 350. some five and twenty years, no more, after the Council of Nice,
the people being divided in opinions about the Deity of our Savior, did so use
the matter, that when they met to glorify the name of God in the Congregation,
Sozom. Eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 20.
and sung the holy Anthems Quire-wise ((...) in the Authors words) as the
custom was, (...), they manifested their dissent from one another in the
conclusion of those Hymns or Anthems; the Orthodox Professors using the whole
Form as it was prescribed by the Church, and saying, Glory be to the Father and
to the Son, Theodoret. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 24.
and to the Holy Ghost, As it was in the beginning, etc. The Heretics
pronouncing it with this alteration, Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in the
Holy Ghost, etc. to make it serviceable to their sense. And for Leontius
himself who was most observed, he did so mutter the whole Doxologie between his
teeth, (...), and passed it over with such silence as the Author has it, that
the most diligent stander by could hear no more from him but (...), world
without end, Amen. Id. ibid.
This makes it evident, that as this Form of giving glory to each person of the
blessed Trinity, was the (...), the badge or cognizance by which the Orthodox
Professors were distinguished from the Arian Heretics; and therefore called
most properly by renowned S. Basil, (...), Basil. Ep. 78.
the evidence or demonstration of a sound belief; so presently upon the first
completing of it, it came by general consent to have a proper place in the
public Liturgies, and was accustomably repeated in the Eastern Churches at the
conclusion of such Hymns or Anthems, as were composed and sung to the honor of
God. Which also is affirmed in these words of Cassian, an ancient Writer,
Cassian. l. 2. cap. 8.
viz. Hac glorificatione Trinitatis per omnem Orientem solere Antiphonam
terminari, that throughout the East, the Anthems were concluded with that
Doxologie, that Form of giving glory to the blessed Trinity.

Now as the Eastern Churches used to add this formula to the conclusion of such
Hymns or Anthems, as they composed for Gods service in the Congregation; so was
it added in the Churches of these Western parts, at the close of each of David's
Psalms, which made up a great part of the public Liturgies, by the persuasion
of S. Hierom. Who living in the Eastern parts for a certain time, and noting
with what fruit and benefit the Doxologie was added there at the end of the
Hymns, addressed his Letters to Pope Damasus (who entered on the Sea of Rome,
An. 367.) advising or desiring, call it which you will, ut in fine cujuslibet
Psalmi, that at the end of every Psalm, he would cause this Doxologie to be
added, viz. Gloria Patri, etc. Sicut erat in principio, etc. Ext. in Concilior.
Tom. 10. inter Epistolas and Decr. Damasi.
To the intent that the profession of the faith set forth by the 318. Bishops
in the Council of Nice, in vestro ore pari consortio declaretur, should be
avowed and published with a like consent in all the Churches of his
Patriarchate. I know indeed some Learned men are of opinion that this Epistle
is not Hieroms; and perhaps it is not. But whether it be his or not (which I
will not stand on) most sure it is that Damasus did the thing which that Letter
speaks of in the Churches of his jurisdiction. Of which thus Platina in his
life: Instituit quoque ut Psalmi alternis vicibus in ecclesia canerentur,
Platina in vita Damasi.
utque in fine little haee verba ponerentur, Gloria Patri and filio, etc.
Damasus (says he) ordained that the Psalms should be sung Quire-wise (or by
each side of the Quire in turns) and that at the end of every Psalm they should
add these words, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc. Which being thus
ordained in the Churches of the Roman Patriarchate, became forthwith admitted
also into other Churches of the West, as appears plainly by that Canon of the
Council of Vaisons, which you had before; which I choose rather to refer with
the Collector of the Councils to the time of Theodosius the 2d. who lived after
Damasus, than with Baronius to the year 337. when no such Form to which that
Canon does relate, had gotten any footing in the Western Liturgies. Now the
said Canon taking notice of a former usage of some other Churches, where this
Doxologie was added at the end of the Psalms, ordains the like to be observed
in the Churches of France, quod and nos in universis Ecclesiis nostris dicendum
esse decrevimus, Council. Valens. Can. 5.
as their words there are. And to this purpose, besides that of Cassian (which
we shall presently produce for another point) we may add these words of Pope
Vigilius (he began his Popedom, An. 535.) who in his Epistle unto Eleutherius
gives us this short note, In fine Psalmorum ab omnibus Catholicis ex more dici,
Gloria Patri, and filio, etc. That is to say, Ep. Vigilii. in Council. Tom. 2.
that Gloria Patri, was subjoyned at the end of the Psalms, according to the
ancient custom, by all Catholic persons.

As for the gesture which was used both by Priest and People at the repeating
of this Doxologie, Cassian, who tells us, that in the Province of Gaul
Narbonnoyse, where he then lived, it was the custom of the Church, Cassian.
lib. 2. cap. 8.
in clausula psalmi omnes astantes concinere cum clamore, Gloria Patri, etc.
That at the close of every Psalm, the whole Congregation standing up, did sing
together with a loud voice, Glory be to the Father, etc. Contrary to the custom
of the Eastern Churches. In which it is to be observed, that the singularity
noted by that Author to have been used in those Countries at the pronouncing of
the Gloria Patri, was not, in that the Congregation stood upon their feet at
the repeating of the same, which was most like to be the custom of the East
Churches also; but that it was subjoyned in Gaul Narbonnoyse, (as in all
Churches of the West) at the end of the Psalms, whereas it was used only in the
East at the end of the Anthems, as before was shown you from this Author. Now
Cassian was S. Chrysostoms Scholar, if not his Convert, and lived about the
year 430. before the Church was overgrown with needless Ceremonies, or that the
native piety of the true Religion was overshadowed by the superstitions of the
Church of Rome. It Is true, we find not any Canon which enjoined this gesture,
but that it was first taken up by the voluntary usage and consent of Christian
people, who might conceive that gesture to be fittest for it, in regard that it
contained not only a bare Form of giving glory to the Lord, but also a
profession of the Christian Faith in the great mystery of the holy undivided
Trinity, and therefore fit to be pronounced in that very posture, in which from
all Antiquity they rehearsed their Creed. And being so taken up, as before was
said, it has been still retained in the general practice of the Church to this
very day, not by any Canon of the Church, or decree of Pope, or other
Ecclesiastical Constitution; but ex vi Catholicae consuetudinis, by force of a
continual Catholic custom which in such points as these has the power of Law.
For though in Articles of the Faith, which are the credenda of the Church, we
may say with Hierom, Hieron. advers. Jovinian.
Non credimus quia non legimus, We are not bound to submit our belief unto
them, but as they are expressed in the Word of God, or else deduced from the
same by plain and evident illation; yet in the outward Forms of Worship, which
are the Agenda of the Church, we must say with the good Fathers of the Nicene
Council, (...), Council. Nicen. Can.
Let ancient customs be observed and prevail amongst us. And this is that for
which S. Basil pleads so heartily in the very case of this Doxologie. Where
first he lays it for a ground, (...), etc. That if we take away all unwritten
usages from the Church of God, as being of no efficacy in his public service,
we shall do great detriment to the Gospel, (...). and in conclusion make the
preaching of the Word but a powerless name. Basil. de Sp. S. c. 27.
Of which kind, he accounts and names the signing of the true Believers with
the sign of the Cross, (...), their turning toward the East when they said
their prayers, the Form of Consecrating the Bread and Wine in the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the hallowing of the Water for the Sacrament of
Baptism, the trina immersio used of old, (...), and the renouncing of the Devil
and his Angels, still in use amongst us. And of this kind was that particular
gesture which is now in question, not recommended to our observation by any
particular Law or Canon; but only by successional tradition, and the continual
practice of the Christian Church, which is Authority sufficient for a greater
matter.

And in this track the Church of England went at her Reformation, when she
ordained according to the ancient Canons, that at the end of every Psalm
throughout the year, and likewise at the end of Benedictus, Benedicite,
Magnificat, and Nunc dimittis, shall be repeated, Rubric before Te Deum.
Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the beginning, etc. But for the
gesture to be used, referred it to the ancient practice of the Church of
Christ, as formerly the Church had done in the self same case. Which practice
has been constantly preserved since the Reformation, in all the Cathedrals of
this Kingdom, in the Chapels Royal, and in some Parish Churches also; to
which, and to the usage of the primitive times it is more just and reasonable
that all particular persons should conform themselves, than that the ancient
and unblamable usages of the Church of God should be changed and varied
according to the wild affections of particular men. The Church is now as much
in danger to be infected and destroyed by the Socinian Blasphemies, as ever
heretofore by the Arian Heresies; and therefore this Doxologie as necessary in
these present times, and to be said with as great reverence and solemnity by
all good Christian people, as in those before. We cannot better make profession
of our faith in the holy Trinity, than by this Form, and in the constant
uniformity of that ancient Gesture, which has been recommended to us from the
purest Ages, and the most glorious lights of the Christian World.

CHAP. VIII. Touching the Dedication of Churches, and the Anniversary Feasts
thereby occasioned.
1. Dedication of Religious places used anciently by all Nations, and the
Reasons why. 2. A Repetition of some things that were said before, with
reference and application to the point in hand. 3. The Tabernacle consecrated
by Gods own appointment; and the consequents of it. 4. Antiquity of the like
Dedications amongst the Romans, and by whom performed. 5. The Form, and
Ceremonies used in those Dedications by the Ancient Romans. 6. The Antiquity
and constant usage of such Dedications in the Church of Christ. 7. Titulus and
Encoenia what they signify in the Ecclesiastical notion. 8. The great
Solemnities and Feasts used by the Jews and Gentiles, in the Dedication of
their Temples. 9. As also by the Primitive Christians. 10. Dedication Feasts
made Anniversary by the Roman Gentiles. 11. And by the Christians in the times
of their greatest purity. 12. Continued till our times in the Church of
England. 13. The Conclusion of the whole, and the Authors submission of it to
the Supreme Powers.


HAving thus found out Liturgies and set Forms of Worship in the best and
purest times of the Christian Church, holy Actions should be celebrated in an
holy place, and places are not otherwise hallowed, than by the Dedication of
them unto holy Use. For howsoever in themselves they be but ordinary Houses,
made of Lime and Stone, and may be put to any use which the Founder pleases;
yet being once consecrated by the Word and prayer, they become forthwith Holy
Ground, and carry with them such an awful reverence in Religious minds, as is
not given to other houses, houses to eat and drink in, as the Scripture calls
them. And so we are to understand that of Thomas Aquinas, who in the stating of
this Question, has resolved it thus: Quod Ecclesia and Altar, and alia
hujusmodi inanimata consecrantur, non quia sunt gratiae susceptiva, Thom. 3.
par. qu. 83. Artic. 3.
sed quia ex consecratione adipiscuntur quandam spiritalem virtutem, per quam
apta redduntur divino cultui: Churches, says he, Altars, and things inanimate
are not therefore consecrated, because they are susceptible of any divine Grace
conferred upon them; but because they do obtain thereby some spiritual fitness,
which before they had not, and which does render them more proper for Religious
Offices. Besides which influence which they gain by these Consecrations on the
minds of such who piously refort unto them, they are thereby exempted also from
the power of those by whom they were first built or founded, who otherwise
might challenge a propriety in them. That which the ground and charge of
building made the house of Man, is made by Consecration the House of God; and
being once dedicated to his holy Service, the property thereof is vested in
him, and in him alone. The Founder cannot take it back, or reserve any part of
it for his own private use or pleasure, without sin and sacriledg. Such was
that of Ananias, Acts 5.2.
who when he sold his House kept back part of the money; as if he would divide
the sum betwixt God and himself. The Gentiles by the light of Nature had
discerned thus much, and therefore in the Consecration of their Temples they
did use these words, Se ex profano usu and humano jure, Templum, cellam, Alex.
ab Alex. Genesis Dier. l. 6. c. 14.
mensas, arulas, quaeque eo pertinent eximere: That is to say, That they exempt
from the right of Men, and all profane and common usage, the Temple, Table,
Vaults and Altars, and all things which pertained unto them, appropriating them
unto the service of that God, to whom the Fabric was intended in the
Dedication. A matter of such general use, that it was commonly observed both by
the Patriarchs before the Law, by the Jews under the Law, by the Gentiles
without the Law, and finally by the Christians, (being a body made up both of
Jews and Gentiles) in the times of the Gospel. In looking over whose
proceedings touching this particular, and thereby justifying the right use of
those Dedications, we will first search into the Antiquity, Universality, and
first Authors of them, next into the great Solemnities and magnificent Feasts,
accustomably observed in them; and finally on the Annual Revolution of those
solemn Feasts, appointed by all sorts of Men in memorial of them.

And first for laying down the Antiquity and first Authors of them, Patriarchs,
and some of the godly Princes of the House of Jacob. And first, whereas the
Scripture tells us of Abraham, that he planted a Grove in Beersheba, and
called there on the Name of the Lord, Genesis 21.33.
the everlasting God: The meaning of which place is by Expositors left
uncertain, as before we noted; yet the succeding practice both of Jews and
Gentiles, in consecrating Groves for superstitious and Idolatrous Uses,
(mention whereof is very frequent in the Scriptures) makes it plain and evident
that they concdeived this planting of a Grove by Abraham, was but the
consecrating of it to the service of God, for invocating on the Name of the
Lord Jehovah. Greater Antiquity than this, as we need not seek; so a more holy
Author of those Dedications we can hardly find. And yet the practice and
Authority of Jacob is not much short of it, either in point of reputation or
respect of time; of whom it is recorded, that he took the Stone which he had
put for his Pillow, Genesis 28.17.
and set it up for a Pillar, and poured Oil on the top of it, and then, and not
till then that it was thus consecrated, he called the name of the place BETHEL,
which by interpretation is the House of God. Look what effect this Act of Jacob
did produce, and we shall find first, that God took unto himself the name of
the God of Bethel, as a place dedicated for his Worship, Genesis 31. v. 13. And
secondly, that in reference to this Consecration, it was thought the fittest
place for Jacob, even by God himself, to offer sacrifice to the Lord, and to
pay his vows, Genesis 35.16. Nor can I doubt but that when Jeroboam the Son of
Nebat, made choice of Bethel, 1 Kings 12.9.
to be the seat for one of his Golden Calves, he had respect unto the
consecration of this place by the Patriarch Jacob; there being otherwise many
places in his new gotten Kingdom of more convenience for his Subjects, and less
obnoxious to the Power of the Kings of Judah, than this Bethel was. The Act of
Jacob in consecrating the Stone at Bethel, gave the same hint to Jeroboam to
profane the place by setting up his Golden Calves; as Abraham's Grove, gave to
the Idolatrous Jews and Gentiles for polluting the like places with as impure
abominations. And probable enough it is that by these Acts of Abraham and
Jacob, the Macchabees proceeded to the Dedication of the Altar, when profaned
by Antiochus; though they made use only of their own Authority in honoring
that work and the celebration of it with an Annual Feast, of which see Macc. 1.
Chap. 4. v. 59, etc. Which Feast being countenanced by our Savior, as is
elsewhere said, gave the first ground unto the Anniversary Feasts of Dedication
used in the best and happiest times of Christianity; De Eccles. Officiis. l. 1.
c. 3.
of which thus Isidore of Sivil, Annuas Festivitates dedicationis, Ecclesiarum
ex more veterum celebrari in Evangelio legimus, ubi dicitur, facta sunt
Encoenia, etc. Where we have both the custom and the reasons of it, that is to
say, the ancient practice of Gods people amongst the Jews, occasionally
mentioned and related too in the holy Gospel. This being repeated and applied,
we must next see by what Authority Gods people afterward proceeded on the like
occasions.

Greater Authority we find for the Dedication of the Tabernacle, Grove or
Pillar, which before we spoke of, even the command of God himself; who though
he had appointed it to be made, prescribed as well the matter as the Form
thereof, descending even unto the nomination of the Workmen that were to take
care of the Embroydery of it, did not think fit it should be used in his
public Worship, till it had first been dedicated to that end and purpose. For
thus says God to Moses in the way of Precept: And thou shall take the
anointing Oil and anoint the Tabernacle, and all that is therein, and shall
hallow it, and all the Vessels thereof, and it shall be holy, and thou shall
anoint the Altar of the Burnt-offering, and all his Vessels, and sanctify the
Altar, Exodus 40.9, 1.
and it shall be an Altar most holy, etc. And thus did Moses in conformity to
the Lords Commandment, of whom it is affirmed, Thus did Moses according to all
that the Lord commanded him, so did he. That is to say, he reared up the
Tabernacle, hallowing the Tabernacle and the Altar, and the Vessels of it as
the Lord commanded, and then, and not till then, was it thought fit for the
Acts of Sacrifice, and to be honored with the presence of the Lord their God.
For as it follows in that Chapter, first Moses offered on the Altar (so
prepared and consecrated) a Burnt-Offering and a Meat Offering as the Lord
commanded, ver. 29. And secondly, A Cloud then covered the tent of the
Congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle, v. 34. No
Fathers need be called in here to explain these Scriptures, which every one can
understand, who is able to read them, and every one who understands them may
conclude from hence, that God had never took such order for consecrating of the
Tabernacle, the Altars and other Vessels of it, had he not meant to leave it
for a Document and Example to succeeding times, that no place should be used
for his public Worship, till it was sanctified with Prayer, and set apart by
some Religious Ceremonies for that holy purpose. According to which great
Example, we find a solemn dedication of the Temple, when first built by
Solomon, performed by Prayer and Sacrifices in most solemn manner, 1 Kings 8. A
second Dedication of it, when first restored by Zorobabel, in the time of Ezra,
where it is said, That the children of Israel, Ezra 6.16.
the Priests and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the Captivity
kept the Dedication of this House of God with joy. And finally, Josephus
tells us, Antiq. Juda. l. 15. c. 14.
that when Zorobabels Temple was pulled down by Herod, and built again after a
more magnificent manner than before it was, with what alacrity and pomp the
Jews did celebrate the Dedication of the same. A Temple gloriously set out to
the outward view ( immensae opulentiae Templum, it is called by Tacitus as
before was said) and dedicated by the Founder with as great magnificence, of
which more hereafter. Sufficient evidence to prove, that whether the Temple be
considered as a House of prayer, or a place for Sacrifice, it was not to be
used for either, not sanctified and set apart for those holy Actions. Having
thus seen what was done in those solemn Acts of Dedication, by the Lords own
people, as well before as under the Law of Moses; let us next see how far those
Actions of Gods people have been followed by the ancient Gentiles, who though
without the Law of Moses, yet were instructed well enough by the light of
Nature, that Sacred Actions were not to be used in unhallowed places.

And here to go no further than the Roman story, being the best compacted,
Gentiles; we have in the first Infancy thereof a Temple dedicated by Romulus
unto Jupiter Feretrius, of which thus Livy. Jupiter Feretri (inquit Romulus)
haec tibi victor Rex Regia arma fero, Templumque iis Regionibus quas meo animo
metatus sum, dedico, sedem opimis spoliis quae Regibus Ducibusque hostium
caesis, me Autorem sequentes posteri ferent. Unto which words of Romulus, being
the formal words of the Dedication; Livy adds his own, Hist. Romans Dec. 1. l. 1.
Haec Templi est origo, quod omnium primum Romae sacratum est: That is to say,
this is the Original of that Temple, which first of all was dedicated in the
City of Rome. Concerning which, we are to know, that Romulus having vanquished
Tolumnius a poor neighboring King, in the head of his Army, and brought his
Armor into Rome in triumphant manner, designed a Temple unto Jupiter, from
hence named Feretrius, for the safe keeping and preserving of those glorious
Spoils. And having so designed the Temple, thus bespeaks the gold; viz. O
Jupiter Feretrius, I by this favor made a Conqueror, do here present unto
thee these Royal Arms, and dedicate or design a Temple to thee in those Regions
which in my mind I have marked out for that great purpose, to be a seat for
those rich Spoils, which Posterity following my example, having slain Kings or
such as do command in chief, shall present unto thee. Which formal words did so
appropriate that place to the service of Jupiter, that afterward it was not to
be put unto other uses. This done by Romulus himself; but afterward when Numa
had brought in Religion, and that the Priesthood was established, though Kings
and Consuls might design and dedicate, that is to say, prepare a Temple for
their Gods (for so the word does signify in their ancient Rituals) yet the
Consecration of them was appropriated to the Pontifex maximus, and the chief
Priest did usually perform that Ceremony, as appears plainly by the case of
C. Flavius. For whereas by the Laws of Rome it was permitted only unto Consuls,
or such as did command in chief, to erect Temples for the Gods, Cornelius
Barbatus then chief Priest, was required by the people notwithstanding to
consecrate the Temple of Concord built by this Flavius, though a Man of no
public Office in the Commonwealth; of which Livy thus. Aedem Concordiae in
area Vulcani summa nobilium invidia dedicavit; coactusque consensu populi
Cornelius Barbatus Pontifex maximus verba praeire, cum more majorum negaret
nisi Consulem aut Imperatorem posse Templum dedicare. In Hist. Romans Decad. 1.
l. 9. in fine.
Where note, that Templum dedicare in the Authors language, is only to erect
and prepare the Temple, and to declare unto what Deity it was intended, which
was the point that formerly had been permitted only unto Kings, Consuls, and
chief Commanders, and therefore not allowable to this C. Flavius, being a mean
and private Man: and then that verba praeire to dictate or direct the words by
which it was to be blessed and consecrated was the High Priests Office, which
this Cornelius Barbatus was compelled to do by the common people, because that
it was contrary to their ancient custom to grant that honor to so mean a Man,
as this C. Flavius. The like performed by Plautus Elianus being then chief
Priest of the Romans, in the Consecration of the Capitol, when the foundation
of it was new laid in the time of Vespasian, of which more hereafter; and so
Vopiscus tells us of the Emperor Aurelianus, that having subdued Zenobia the
gallant Queen of the Palmireni, he gave order unto one of his Ministers to
build a Temple with the Spoils of the conquered people: which done, he adds,
that he would write unto the Senate, ut Pontificem mittat qui dedicet Templum,
Fla. Vopis. in vita Aurel.
requiring them to send the Pontifex or chief Bishop, by whom it might be
consecrated accordingly. An Office questionless which had not been appropriated
to the Pontifex maximus, if there had not been some certain Form, some
appointed Ceremonies, accustomably used in those Consecrations, which none but
Men of that high place were by Law to execute.

Now that there was some certain Form, Pompeius Festus an old Grammarian, by
whom the Latin word Fanum (which signifies a Church or Temple) is derived from
fando; and so derived upon this reason, quod dum Pontifex dedicat, certa verba
fatur, because the Pontifex or chief Priest speaks certain words (that is to
say, a certain and set Form of words) in the Dedication. Which Form of words,
or some part of them at the least, together with the other Rites and Ceremonies
used in those Solemnities, I cannot better show than in that Summary or
Abstract of them which Alexander ab Alexandro, has drawn up in this manner
following. Genial. Dier. lib. 6. c. 14.
Ea vero consecratio vel a Consule vel Imperatore accenso foculo fit, cum
Tibicine, verbis priscis and solennibus, praeeunte vero Pontifice maximo
praefante carmen, capite velato and concione advocata, ac jussu populi: That is
to say, The Consecration was performed by the Consul or chief Commander of the
Army, a small fire in a Pan or Chaffing-dish being carried by them, or before
them (as the use then was) the Crier with a loud voice using the old and solemn
Form of words, as they were dictated by the Pontifex or chief Priest, the
Pontifex or chief Priest repeating a set and certain Song with his head
covered, the whole body of the people being called together, and their command
required to make good the Acts (which last clause touching the Authority or
Command of the people, was only in the time of the Popular Government, and was
not used when the Emperors had obtained the State) And then it follows in
the Author, Templi vero consecratio fiebat, ut qui Templum aedemvre dedicaturus
erat, postem tenens accenso foculo, and advocato Numine cui Templum aedesve
sacrantur, etc. That is to say, Which done, the consecration was dispatched in
this manner following, the Founder of the Temple (for so I understand the word
Dedicaturus in the present place) laying fast hold on one of the Posts or
Pillars of it, with a small Fire-pan in his hand, as before was said, and
calling on the Deity to whom the House or Temple was by him intended, did
openly declare, That he exempted from the right of Men, and all profane and
common usage, the Temple, Tables, Vaults, and Altars, and all things which
pertained unto them, ( the Latin of which words we have seen before (eaque
conceptis verbis ipsi Numini (tunc Numen nominat) divina humanaque omnia
consecrare. And that he dedicated and appropriated to that sacred Deity (which
Deity he then also named) those and all other both Divine and Humane things, in
express words framed and premeditated for that purpose. The like has Servius
noted on these words of Virgil, In medio mihi Caesar erit, Templumque tenebit,
that is, says he, I will bestow this Temple on him, the Author using in this
place a word or term frequent in the Pontifical of the ancient Romans, or such
a word as the Roman Pontifex did use in those Dedications. Nam qui Templum
dicabat postem tenens dare se dicebat Numini, Georg. l. 3.
quod ab illo necesse fuerat jam teneri, and ab humano jure discedere, i. e.
For he that was to dedicate the Temple, laying hold on one of the Posts or
Pillars of it, declared that he bestowed it upon the Deity, which by that Deity
was even then to be holden and enjoyed, and to be alienated for ever from the
right of Man. Where by the way, this holding of the Post or Pillar by the
Founder, was in the name of the very Numen, to whom the Temple was intended;
and was like the holding the Ring or Key of the Church-door, by him that is
inducted to the cure of Souls, whereby he takes possession of it in the name of
God. I have laid down these passages at large in the words of the Author, that
we may see, that there were verba prisca and solennia, an ancient and set Form
of words accustomably used in those Consecrations; though the whole Form, and
all the solemn words which were used therein are no where extant in my Authors
for ought I can find.

We are now come unto the Christians, where we shall find, Cyril, a right godly
Bishop of Jerusalem, speaks of a Church in that City, called commonly the upper
Church of the Apostles, not called so, because dedicated to them, but because
dedicated by them: and therefore said by Beda, to be Ecclesia ab Apostolis
fundata, of the foundation of the blessed Apostles, because being given to
them, for the use of the Church, it was by them dedicated and appropriated to
Gods public service. Of this we have spoke more at large in the last Section
of the fifth Chapter of this Narration, and therefore shall not here repeat it.
In the next Century we find Pope Pius writing thus in an Epistle to Justus
Viennensis a chief Friend of his in the Year 158. or thereabouts. Plus P. ad
Just. Vienn.
Soror nostra Euprepeia (sicut been recordaris) titulum domus suae pauperibus
assignavit; ubi nunc cum pauperibus nostris commorantes, Missas agimus. Our
Sister Euprepeia has turned her House into a Church (remember what was said of
this, in the last Section of the sixth Chapter) for the use of the poor
servants of Christ, where now abiding with our said poor Brethren, we celebrate
the Mass or Sacrament of the blessed Supper. And in another Epistle to the same
Justus, thus. Pastor Presbyter Titulum condidit and digne in Domino obiit: That
is to say, Pastor the Priest or Presbyter, has built a Church, and so died
worthily in the Lord. Why we have rendered Titulus by the word Church, and how
those places being at first but private Houses, were turned into Churches for
public use, we shall see anon; in the mean time we may take notice, that
neither of these two Epistles have hitherto been questioned by our modern
Critics, nor ranked amongst those counterfeit Decretals, whose authority has
been so deservedly abrogated by the learned Protestants. In the next Century
after him lived Felix the first, who entered on the Sea of Rome, An. 272. and
not long after him lived Marcellinus, succeeding in the same See, An. 296. of
the first of which it is affirmed by Metaphrastes, that he consecrated the
House of Cecilia, and of the second by Damasus, that he consecrated the House
of Lucina, making them thereby Churches (or places of Religious worship) for
the use of Christians. But these being times of persecution, afford us not so
clear nor so frequent evidences, as the Age next following; in which, the first
glad sight which the Christians saw were the Encaenia, the Dedication of those
Churches, which either had been taken from them, and profaned by Idolatry, or
otherwise were laid waste, and made unserviceable in those fiery times. No Man
more forward in this work than the Emperor Constantine, who having founded the
Temple of the holy Martyrs in Jerusalem, prepared himself for the ENCAENIA or
Dedication of the same: (...), etc. as in the Title of the fourth Chapter de
Land. Constant. Eusebius has it. De laud. Constable. l. 4. c. 40.
Thus Athanasius writing unto the Emperor Constantius, and speaking of a
Church not consecrated, prays that the Emperor might live to see it done,
and celebrate the Ceremonies of it. Athan. Apol. ad Constant.
Tu tamen interim Deo dilectissime Auguste vivas multos annorum recursus, and
solennia Dedicationis perficias, as the Latin has it. Thus not to wander into
more particulars in these Eastern Churches, the Author of the Panegyric in
Eusebius tells us once for all, that never any King but Christ had filled all
Countries and Cities of the World with these Dedications. Quis Rex, etc. omnem
locum, Regionem and Civitatem, Eusebius. l. 10. c 4.
tam Graecum quam Barbaricum, regalibus suis Palatiis, divinorumque Templorum
Consecrationibus adimplevit? as the words there are. A matter judged so
necessary in those early times, that the Arians charged it as a grievous crime
on Athanasius, that he had celebrated Divine Service in a Church not
consecrated; for which he thus Apologizeth to the angry Emperor: Encaeniorum
Festium non celebravimus religiosissime Auguste, etc. And so proceeds, showing
the necessity, which did enforce him to do; namely, the incapacity of all other
Churches thereabouts to receive the multitudes then assembled, the unresistable
importunity of the people, and such other impulsions. The like clear evidence
we have for the Western Churches, there being a Sermon of St. Ambrose,
entitled De Dedicatione Basilicae, Ambros. Sermon. 89.
preached at the Dedication of a Church built by Vitalianus and Majanus, the
ground of his Discourse taken from the good Centurion, of whom the Jews told
our Savior in St. Luke's Gospel, Luke 7.5.
That he loved their Nation, and had built them a Synagogue. Ambros. Epist.
lib. 10. Ep. 85.
The same Father writing to his Sister, speaks of a Church which himself had
consecrated, Nam cum Basilicam Dedicassem, etc. And writing unto Felix Bishop
of Como, invites him to the consecration of a Church then newly built by one
Bassianus, requiring him not to fail of his being there, in regard that he had
promised for him, Ne duos Sacerdotes redarguas, te qui non affueris, and me qui
tam facile promiserim. Id. Epis. 5. l. 1.
The like authority we have from Paulinus also, another Bishop of those times,
invited by Sulpitius Severus his especial Friend. Ad Basilicam quae proxime in
nomine Domini consummabitur, Paulin. Nol.Epist. 11.
dedicandum. To be present at the dedicating of a Church of his foundation, as
soon as it was finished and made fit for those sacred Ceremonies. More of this
Argument, both in the East and Western Churches we shall see hereafter, when we
are come to the magnificent Feasts and great Solemnities used anciently by the
Christians in these Consecrations.

In the mean time, Titulus of the Romans, and the Encaenia of the Greeks, to be
considered and explained. The word Titulus in the former Section we have
rendered Church, according to the Ecclesiastical notion of it: Churches being
called Tituli by the Roman Christians of those times, either because by their
Dedication the name of Christ our Lord was as it were inscribed upon them (as
the manner then was to set the names or Titles of the Owners upon their Houses
and possessions) or because they gave a Title of Cure or Denomination to the
Presbyters who officiated in them, and to whose charge they were committed at
that time, as they do now unto the Cardinals in the Church of Rome. Plat. in
vit. Evarist.
That he assigned unto the Presbyters or Priests of Rome their several
Churches: the Roman Presbyters till that time officiating in their turns, or as
their Bishop did appointed them, in the Church Episcopal. Thus are we to
understand that passage of Rabanus Maurus (cited in the last Section of our
first Chapter) where speaking of Jacobs anointing the Pillar, he tells us of
him, erexit Lapidem in Titulum, vocans eum locum domum Dei, De institut.
Cleric. l. 1. c. 14.
that by so doing he erected the Pillar into a consecrated place or Church,
calling it by the name of Bethel or the House of God. His meaning is, that by
the anointing of this Pillar, the place did after get the Title of a Church, or
reputation of a Temple, by the name of Bethel. And thus we are to understand
that passage in the Canon Law, in which it is decreed, that Bishops shall admit
none into holy Orders, sine merito and Titulo, that is to say, not being
sufficiently qualified in respect of merit, and not provided of some Church to
officiate in. For should the word Titulus be interpreted of any Academical or
Civil Title, any Man graduated in the Universities, or dignified with the Title
of Gent. Esquire, etc. and otherwise of sufficiency in point of Learning, might
challenge Orders from the Bishop, which was the thing the Canon did purposely
strike at, the better to prevent the multitude of wandering clerks, who having
no Churches of their own, would thrust themselves into other Men's Cures, to the
dishonor of their Order, the great disturbance of the Church, and the
confusion of all sacred and spiritual Offices. What inconveniences the gross
neglect of this prudent Canon has brought upon the Church in these latter
times, Notius est quam ut stilo egeat, is too well known to be related. And
finally, thus the word Titulus must be understood in the two Epistles of Pope
Pius, which before we spoke of, according to the Ecclesiastical notion of it in
those elder times. The next word here to be explained, is the Greek (...)
promiscuously used both for the Act and Ceremonies of the Dedication, and for
the celebration of the Feasts of such Dedications, either once or annually. The
word derived from (...), which is to consecrate and devote to an holy use; and
it is so taken in the 9th Chap. to the Heb. v. 19. where it is said, (...). In
the first institution of which Festival, as it related to the Jews, in the Book
of Maccabees, the days thereof are called, (...), the days of the Dedication of
the Altar. Macca. 4.59.
But in the Gospel of St. John, in one word, (...), i.e. Encaenia, for so both
Beza and the vulgar translation read it: the word as it denotes both the
Dedication, and the Festivals of it, being continued long after in the Church
of Christ. A word so frequently used by the old Greek Fathers, that it
occurreth no less than seven times in one Column of the Greek and Latin Edition
of Athanasius, that is to say, in his Apology to Constantius the then Roman
Emperor. More of this we shall see hereafter in some following Sections. Now I
note only for the close, Atha^. Tom. 1. fol. 685.
that the Dedication of Churches or places for Religious Worship, has all the
characters of Antiquity, universality and consent of people: Semper, ubique,
and ab omnibus, as Vincentius Lerinensts has it, which are required unto the
knowledge or notification of an Apostolical Trandition, as this seems to be.

Our second rank of Arguments to prove the high esteem which the Dedication of
sacred places had in former times, is taken from the great Solemnities,
Solomon's Temple, and we shall find, that there assembled at that time, and on
that occasion, the Elders of Israel, and all the heads of the Tribes, the chief
of the Fathers of the children of Israel, 1 Kings 8.1. All the men of Israel,
v. 2. the Priests and Lveites, v. 4. Nor were the Sacrifices short of this
great Assembly, it being said, that Solomon sacrificed to the Lord 22000 Oxen
and 120000. Sheep, v. 63. so many that they could not be told nor numbered for
multitude, ver. 5. Here is sufficient not only for a solemn Sacrifice, but a
Royal Feast, sufficient for the entertainment of a million of people, and such
a Royal Feast indeed was made by Solomon, to add the greater honor to the
Dedication of of that glorious Temple. For so it follows in the Text. 1 Kings
8.65.
And at that time Solomon held a Feast and all Israel with him, a great
Congregation, from the entering in of Hamath, unto the River of Egypt, before
the Lord our God seven days and seven days, even fourteen days. The second
Temple, as it was short of this in bigness and external beauties, for which see
Esr. c. 3. v. 12. so fell it short also in the Pomps of the Dedication, the
people being then in a low condition, impoverished by their long Captivity, and
not fully settled. And yet the Scripture does inform us, Ezr. 6.16, 17.
That the children of Israel, the Priests and the Levites, and the rest of the
children of the Captivity, kept the Dedicatio of this House of God with joy.
And offered at the Dedication of this HOuse of God, an hundred Bullocks, two
hundred Rams, and four hundred Lambs. For short indeed of the magnificence of
Solomon's in those glorious days, described so fully in the 4th of the 1st of
Kings, and yet agreeable enough to their present fortunes, as before was noted.
Of the Solemnities and Feasts of the Dedication in the time of Judas Maccabeus,
we have spoke already, and shall speak more thereof anon, that being the
Original of the like Annual Feasts in the Church of Christ. Proceed we next
unto the Dedication of this Temple when new built of Herod, of which Josephus
tells us thus. (...). That is to say, Joseph. l. 15. c. 14.
They celebrated a great Feast in honor of the restoration of the Temple.
Which being told us in the general, he next after adds, That the King offered
300 Oxen unto God, and the rest of them, each one accoring to his ability
offered so many Sacrifices, as that scarcely they may be comprehended in
number, for that their multitude exceeded their estimate. The Romans guided by
Example or the light of Nature, performed these Dedications with as great
solemnity, (as probably with as sumptuous Feasts) as the Jews had done in the
times before them. Concerning which, besides what has been said already, we
need but look upon the Dedication of the Capitol, in the time of Vespasian; the
pomp and order of it thus described by Tacitus, first in the way of Preamble or
preparation. Cor. Tacit. hist. l. 4.
Vndecimo Kal. Julias, serena luca, spatium omne quod Templo dicabatur,
evinctum vittis coronisque ingressi milites, quibus fausta omina, felicibus
Ramis. Dein Virgins vestales, cum pueris puellisque Patrimis Matrimisque aqua
rivis and fontibus amnibusque hausta perluere. That is to say, on the 11th of
the Kalends of July, or 21 of June, being a goodly fair day, the whole Plot of
the Temple was bound and tied about with Fillets and Garlands. The Soldiers
whose names had lucky significations, entered in with Olive-branches in their
hands for so I think the Author means by felicibus ramis.) Afterward the
vestal Virgins, with Boys and Girls that had both Father and Mother alive,
washed it with waters fetched from Rivers, and Springs and running streams. It
follows in the Author, Tum Helvidius Priscus Praetor praeeunte Plato Eliano
Pontifice, lustrata Bove Taurisque area ( or rather suovetaurilibus area, etc.)
Then Helvidius Priscus the Praetor, Plautus Elianus the chief Pontifex
dictating the solemn words of the Dedication ( for so I understand the word
praeeunte in that place) hallowed the Floor with a solemn Sacrifice of a Swine,
a Sheep, and a Bullock, and laying the Entrails upon a green Turf, calling
first upon Jupiter, Juno, Minerva, and the rest of the Godsprotectors of the
Empire, That they would prosper the work, exalt and advance this their own
Habitation, begun by the devotion of Men, with their divine and celestial
power, the Magistrates, and Priests, the Senate and Gentlemen, with a great
part of the people pressing with great desire and joy, to behold the
Ceremonies. And though this seems to be the Dedication only of the Area or
Plot of ground, on which the Capitol was built, yet it shows very plainly
withal, with what solemnity and pomp of Ceremonies the ancient Romans used to
celebrate their Dedications.

But for the Christians it is evident and clear enough, Constantine, but they
kept those Dedications, as with great Solemnties, so also with magnificent
Feastings, called therefore (...), Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 10. c. 3.
Dedication Feasts: celebrated with a great concourse of Prelates and people
from all parts, and solemnized with public Prayers and eloquent Orations; one
of which is extant still in Eusebius, hist. Eccl. lib. 10. cap. 4. So when the
Emperor Constantine had founded the Temple of the holy Martyrs in Jerusalem,
he prepared himself for the (...), or Dedication of the same, inviting
thereunto most of the famous Prelates of those parts, all which he entertained
and feasted in a sumptuous manner. Which with the pomp and other the
Solemnities of the Dedication, see in Eusebius, de laudibus Constantini, lib.
4. chap. 40.43, 44, 45. as also in Theodoret, hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 31. To
this Nicephorus thus adds, Erat is decimus quartu^ Septembris dies, qui ab eo
tempore in Ecclesia Hieresolymitana quotannis, Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 50.
public ab omnibus Festus and celebris agitatus est, octo ex ordine diebus
conventibus celebrandis; as Langius the Translator reads it, for I have not the
Original now by me. It was, says he, the 14. day of September, which from that
time forwards was annually kept holy in the Church of Jerusalem, by allsorts of
people; the Church being then assembled in an holy Congregation, for eight days
together. But this belongs more properly to another place, and there we shall
again meet with it. Nor was the Ceremony or Religious part of these Dedicatiosn
performed with less solemnity than with joy and Feasting; that part thereof
belonging anciently to the Bishop, as proper and peculiar to him, and not
communicable unto any of inferior Orders; and that as well to add the greater
reputation to that sacred Action, as to preserve the dignity and esteem of the
Episcopal calling; and of this the Dedication of a Church in Millain, by St.
Ambrose Bishop of that City spoken of before, may be a very fit Example, as
indeed it is. A matter of so high repute, that the Popes at last began to draw
it to themselves, that so they might the better correspond in all manner of
Prerogative with the old Pontifex maximus in the time of the Romans. For thus
Gelasius, who entered on the Popedom, An. 492. Nobis patefactum est, Do Consec.
lib. cap. 27.
quod absque praecepto, sedis Apostolicae, nonnulli factas Ecclesias, vel
Oratoria sacrare praesumant: We are informed, says he, that some amongst you
do presume to consecrate Churches and Oratories, without the leave and license
of the Sea Apostolic. Which is to be understood with reference to the Bishop
of the Roman Patriarchate, which properly and Originally were under his
jurisdiction, as their proper Primate, and not to any other Bishops of Italy,
much less of France, Illyricum, or remoter Countries: and so we are to
understand him in his first Epistle, inscribed to the Bishops of Lucania,
another of the Suburbicarian Provinces, which made upon that Patriarchate, in
which he positively declares, Ne quis Ecclesias, non petitis pro more
praeceptionibus, consecrare audeat, that none of them should consecrate any new
built Church, without leave from him according to the ancient custom; where we
may note, that this restraint or prohibition, was laid upon the Bishops only,
as they who only in themselves, were capable of officiating in that sacred
Action. And being it was a sacred Action, and such an Action as was to be
performed by none but Bishops in their several charges, I cannot doubt but that
there was some set and appointed Form, in which that Action was then celebrated
by those reverend persons;though what that Form was, of what particular
Ceremonies, what Prayers and Benedictions it did then consist, I have not found
amongst the Authors of those times, at least in such unquestioned Authors as I
dare rely on.

Our third and last rank of Arguments to prove the reat esteem in which these
Dedications were held of old, Jewry, was that of Judas Maccabeus, who having
kept the Dedication of the Altar eight days together, ordained, that the days
of the Dedication of the Altar should be kept in their season from year to
year, by the space of eight days, etc. The like done also by he Romans in the
time of their Gentilism; Maccab. c. 4. v. 56.59.
which whether it were done in imitation of the Jews, or that the Jews took up
this custom to hold conformity with the Romans, (who then were grown
considerable in the eye of the world) it is hard to say. But for the Romans,
sure it is that they observed the Anniversary of many of their Dedications in a
Festival way; whereof, if we consult the Roman Calendar, we shall find them
thus disposed of in their several Months. Jan. 11. Carmentalia, Juturnae aedes
dicata in Campo Martio. 16. Concordiae Templum a Camillo ex voto positum.
Febru. 1. Sospite Templi dicatio. May 25. Templum Fortunae datum Jun. 1.
Monetae aedis Dedicatio. 4. Herculis aedes in Circo. 5. Templum fidei sponsori
Jovis. 6. Vestae Templum dicatum. 7. Mentis Templum dicatum. 28. Quirini
Templum in colle Quirino. August 1. consecratio Templi Martis. Sept. 14.
Capitolii Dedicatio ab Horatio. This was before the rebuilding of it by
Vespasian. These Dedication Feasts are specified, as before is said, in the
Roman Calendar, as being generally observed. And others questionless there were
of inferior none, peculiar only unto certain Provinces and Cities, and not so
universally received as the former were. And here we must observe withal, that
all the Dedications mentioned in the Calendar, are put down as Festivals, and
not as memorable actions happening on such and such a day, as some may possibly
conceive. For Dempster in his Comment upon the Calendar, reckons them every
one as Annual Festivals, and gives this Title to the Months in their seeral
order. De Januario and ejus diebus Festis, de Februario and ejus diebus Festis,
and sic de caeteris: Besides that, all of them are accounted such by Ovid, in
his Book de Fastis. So frequent were those Festivals amongst the Romans, and so
Religiously observed both by Jews and Gentiles.

And being thus Religiously observed by the Jews and Gentiles, Isidore, as
before was noted; or had not Isidore given it for the ground thereof in the way
of Position, we might have found it well enough by the first example of this
kind in the way of practice. The first Anniversary Feast of this nature, which
we find in Ecclesiastical History, is that of the 14. of September, held
Annually in Jerusalem (as before was told us from Nicephorus) in memory of the
Dedication of the Church of the Holy Martyrs, so solemnly Celebrated by the
Emperor Constantine, and held by them eight days together without
intermission; which was as much as had been done in the Encaenia of the Jews,
before remembered, proposed (no question) for their patter in that Annual
Festival. The like occurreth in Greg. Nazianz. (...), etc. De Encaeniis
honorandis lex vetus est, eaque praeclare constituta, vel potius de Templis
(and not de rebus novis, as it is foolishly translated) per Encaenia honor
complectendis. Not once for all, but every year by way of Annual remembrance.
For so it follows in the Author, (...), Orat. 43. in initio.
Idque non semel tantum verum saepius, nimirum qualibet anni conversione diem
eundem advehente; where we may see, that as they kept these Feasts Annually on
the same day of the year, so they pretended to that Institution of the
Maccabees for the ground thereof. The Father adds a further reason. Ne
alioqui res pulchrae progressu temporis evanescant, atque oblivionis gurgite
obscuratae dilabantur; lest otherwise such famous things might be forgotten in
long tract of time, and be at last quite buried in the grave of oblivion. There
are also two Sermons of St. Austins, entitled, in Anniversario Dedicationis
Ecclesiae, being the 152 and 153. of those De tempore. And howsoever that these
Sermons inscribed De Tempore, have been suspected by the Learned Critics of
this Age, not to be St. Austins; yet Perkins running them over in particular,
makes no exception against them, or either of them; neither do any other of the
Protestant Doctors, as appears by Rivet in his Specimen Critici Sacri, lib.
4. c. 16. This makes it clear and evident, that these Anniversary Feasts were
not taken up on the Authority of Pope Felix the fourth, (as some untruly have
suggested) who came not to the Sea of Rome until the year 520. many years after
the decease of Gregory Nazianzen, and some years also after the death of S.
Augustine; though true it is, that by the Authority of that Pope, they became
more frequent than they had been formerly, there being a Decretal to that
purpose, published by him in the words ensuing. Solennitates dedicationum
Ecclesiarum and sacerdotum solenniter sunt per singulos annos celebrandae, ipso
Domino exemplum dante, etc. The Feass of the Dedication of Churches and
Consecration of Bishops (for so we understand by Sacerdotes in that place and
time) are to be Celebrated yearly according to the Lords example, who went up
to Jerusalem with the rest of the people, to solemnize the Feast of the
Dedication, as the Scripture tells us. Where we may see, that the Pope builds
not this injunction on his own sole power, but as that power was countenanced
by our Saviors practice. And now I am gone a little beyond my bounds (that is
to say, the death of St. Augustine) to which I had limited my self. I shall
make bold to pursue this Argument so far, till I have brought these
Dedication-Feasts to our present times. For Felix having made the Decretal
before remembered, found such conformity thereunto in the Western Churches, that
in the Council of Mentz, An. 8 13. there was made a Catalogue of the Festival
days, which generally were then observed, as Easter, the Ascension,
Whitsontide, etc. and in the close of all, similiter etiam Dedicatio Templi;
where plainly the Encaenia or Dedication-Feasts of particular Churches is
placed in no lower rank, as it relates to the solemnity of the same, than
Easter, Whitsontide, or any other of the greater and more eminent Festivals.
The like was also done in the Council of Lons, An. 1244. where we shall find a
larger Catalogue of Holy Days than we had before, there being many added since
the Council of Mentz. And in that Catalogue of the Feasts of Festival days, the
Dedication Feasts of particular Churches stand in the same terms as before they
did, whereof see the Decretal, de Consecratione, Did. 3. c. 1.

Now to come nearer to our selves (that I may give some satisfaction in this
point to those who desire it of me) there was a Council held at Oxon, Lindwood.
An. 1222. where amongst other Ordinances tending to the good Government of the
Church, the Festivals were divided into three several ranks. In the first rank
whereof were those, quae omni veneratione servanda erant, which were to be
observed with all reverence and solemnity. Of the which sort were omnes dies
Dominici, and all the other Festivals, yet observed amongst us, together with
many Festivals of the Blessed Virgin, which we keep not now; and in conclusion,
Festum Dedicationis Ecclesiae cujuslibet in sua Parochia, Feasts of the
Dedication of particular Churches, which in their several Parishes were to be
observed with the same reverence and solemnity which the others were. So also
in a Synod of Archbishop Islips, Lind. lib. 2. tit. de feriis.
who was promoted to that See, An. 1349. it was decreed, that on the principal
Feasts there named, there should be a more strict and precise restraint from
work and labor than had been before. And among them we find the Dedication
Feasts of particular Churches to be as high in their esteem, as any of the
greater Festivals. By that which has been said, it appears most evident,
that the Dedication-Reast was to be Annually observed in each several Parish,
and that it was to be observed as solemnly as any of the greater Festivals; and
that it was to be observed and celebrated on that very day of the week, month,
and year, whereon the Church was Consecrated at the first. Which being found to
draw along with it no small inconvenience, it pleased King Henry VIII. An.
1536. to send out his Injunctions amongst other things for restraint of
Holy Days. In which Injunctions, that which does most concern this business,
are these two particulars. 1. That the Dedication of Churches shall in all
places throughout this Realm, be Celebrated and kept on the first Sunday of the
month of October for ever, and upon no other day. 2. That the Feast of the
Patron of every Church within this Realm, called anciently the Church Holy Day,
shall not from henceforth be kept and observed as an Holy Day, as heretofore
has been used. But that it shall be lawful to all and singular persons,
resident or dwelling within this Realm, to go to their work, occupation, or
mystery, and the same truly to exercise and occupy upon the said Feast, as upon
any other workday, except the said Feast or Church Holy Day be such, as must be
else universally observed and kept as an Holy Day by this Ordinance following.
Acts and Monum. part. 2. P 387.
Now how far these Injunctions were observed in these particulars, whether they
determined on the death of the Lord Cromwell, by whose Authority in the
Convocation House they were first set out, and recommended to the King, I am
not able to determine upon any certain. But forasmuch as I am able to
conjecture by my own observation, or collect from conference with old people, I
think the point may thus be stated. That is to say, that in such places where
the day of the Dedication of the several Churches, or the Church Holy Day, as
they call it now, be worn out of memory, they either are observed on the first
Sunday in October, or the next Sunday after Michaelmas-day (which is called the
Festum Dedicationis Ecclesiae in the Martyrologie) or not kept at all. But
where there is any constant Tradition of the day or time of the Dedication of
particular Churches, or of the Festivals of that Patron, or Tutelary Sain, to
whose name or memory (according to the custom of those darker times) the said
Churches had been formerly dedicated; in all such places, as I take it, the
Festivals have been transferred to the Sunday following, and then observed with
great joy and cheerfulness in liberal entertainments, harmless sports, and
manlike exercises. And in this estate they did continue in many parts of this
Realm, by the name of the Feasts or Wakes of such and such places respectively,
till the preciseness of some Ministers, and the severity of some Magistrates,
prohibiting all lawful Recreations on the Lords day, brought them both out of
use and credit, which gave occasion to the King to revive the Declaration of
King James, touching lawful sports, and thereby to restore those Feasts to
their former frequency; for which consult his Majesty's Declaration, bearing
date the 18th. of October, in the nineth year of his Reign, An. 1633. But it is
time to close this Corollary (somewhat extravagant I confess, but not
impertinent altogether to my main design) and therewithal to conclude this
Narrative of Liturgies and set Forms of worship; to the officiating whereof
Churches, and Churches Dedicated, are of so great use.

Thus have I drawn together for the public use, what I have met withal, Moses,
is nothing so unparalled a discourse as some men have made it; and that there
were such stinted Liturgies as that, for which the Church of England pleads
in Tertullians time, Smectym. p. 6.
and some time before, how strange soever they have made it. This, if it be
made good, it is all I look for; because I did propose no further in the
undertaking. My purpose only was, to draw down the descent and petigree of
Liturgies and set Forms of public worship, as far as any of the Jewish or our
Christian Antiquaries could conduct me in it (taking the practice of the
Gentiles in upon the by,) without descending to particulars, either this or
that. Not that I think the Liturgy of the Church of England may not be
justified and approved in all parts thereof, in all the Offices and
ministrations comprehended in it; or that it may not easily be proved to be
truly Christian, Humble Remonstrance, p. 13.
and to have nothing Roman in the whole composure; but that I should but actum
agere, and fall upon a point already handled. The learned pains of our
incomparable Hooker in this very kind, made up of so much modesty and judgment
as that whole work is, has too off long since those exceptions, which had been
made against the several Offices, and whole course thereof, by those unquiet
spirits who first moved these Controversies. Who so desires a through
Vindication of it, boty for Form and matter, he may find it there. This which
is done, in all humility I tender to the acceptance of all Orthodox and
Religious men, whose service it was principally intended for; and next to the
censure of the Supreme Powers, before whose Bar the cause of Liturgy is brought
to receive its sentence. If it can balance with the one, it cannot but do
service to the other, in preservation of that Form and Order which has made
her glorious. However I have done my duty, humbly submitting the success to
Almighty God, to whom be praise and glory now and evermore.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE TOUCHING THE FORM of PRAYER, Appointed to be used by
PREACHERS BEFORE THEIR SERMONS, Can. 55.

By PETER HEYLYN, D. D.

Mat. vi. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye. LONDON, Printed by M. Clark,
to be sold by C. Harper. 1681.

THE PREFACE.
IT was about the year 1636. when the Unlicensed Press, which had been almost
out of work since the time of the old Martin Mar-prelat, began to teem again
with a new brood of Libellous Pamphlets, the Females of Sedition, as a Learned
Gentleman truly calls them; in which the Bishops were reproached with
Innovating in the Worship of God, here by Law established, in order to some
dark design to bring in Popery. The ancient usages of the Church, grounded on
Law, required by Canon, and Authorized by the stamp of Supreme Authority, had
lien so long under the Rubbish of neglect and discontinuance, by the remisness
(to say no worse of it) of the former Government, that the endeavor of
reducing them to use and practice, was forthwith clamorously branded with the
odious name of an Innovation; though when it came unto the trial, the
Innovation lay at their doors who had raised he clamor. Amongst which
Innovations so unjustly charged, there was none made a greater and more general
noise, than the requiring a set Form of Prayer to be used by Preachers before
their Sermons, imputed by H. E. to the late Archb. as an act of his, and yet
confessed (so much he was transported by his spleen and passion) to be
prescribed in the Canon of 603. full 30 years before that Prelate had attained
the Sea of Canterbury.

During these heats, I was requested by the Right Reverend Father in God, the
Lord Bishop of W. to ease him of some pains, in searching into the constant
practice of this Church since the Reformation, as to that particular; as also
to consider of the grounds and motives which might induce the Bishops of those
times to compose the Canon in which that Form had been prescribed; that haing
satisfied himself in all points which concerned that Argument (toward which my
poor endeavors were not likely to contribute much) he might with greater
confidence require the Clergy of his Diocese to conform unto it. An employment
which I undertook with a ready cheerfulness, as one that had been always
trained up in the School of obedience, and looked upon the just motions of my
Superiors, as in the nature of commands. What satisfaction this discourse then
gave unto hisLordship, I forbear to add, and what contentment it may give to
the Reader now, I forbear to guess. The fate of Books depends not in these
times, as in those before, on the capacity of the Reader, but on his private
interess, so as it is not to be hoped that such as are approved by some, will
be liked of all, though most of those who may mislike, may give no sufficient
reason for it. All therefore which I have to do, is to submit it to the
judgment of the equaland unbyassed Reader, from whom I am as willing to receive
satisfaction in any controverted point, as to use my best endeavors to give it
to him. And so good Reader, I conclude with those words of the Poet,

Tu vergo, si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
If thou have better reasons, lend me thine,
Or otherwise make bold with these of mine.
A BRIEF DISCOURSE, Touching the Form of Prayer, etc.
1. The Introduction to the whole. 2. The Canon of the year 1603. 3. The
meaning and purpose of that Canon. 4. The Injunction of Qu. Elizabeth to the
same effect. 5. The Injunction of King Edward VI. to the same effect. 6. The
like Injunction of King Henry VIII. 7. The ground and reason of the Injunction
of that King, and the exemplification of it in the practice of Bishop Latimer.
8. The difference between Invocation, and that bidding of Prayer which is
required by the Canon. 9. The Canon justified by the practice of Bishop
Andrews. 10. By the practice of Bishop Jewel in Qu. Elizabeth's time. 11. By the
practice of Archbishop Parker, in King Edwards time. 12. By the like practice
of Bishop Latimer in that Kings time also. 13. More of the practice of Bishop
Latimer in this point. 14. The same proved also by the practice of Bishop
Gardener. 15. The result arising both from the precept and the practice of the
Church herein. 16. How the now Form of Prayer, by way of Invocation was first
taken up. 17. No Prayer by way of Invocation used by the Ancients in their
Sermons. 18. The Prayer appointed by the Canon, and Injunctions used rather
heretofore as a part of the Sermon, than as a preparation to it. 19. Bidding of
Prayer more consonant unto the meaning of the Law, than any set Prayer in the
way of Invocation. 20. Bidding of Prayer more proper for the place or Pulpit,
which was not made for Prayer, but for Exhortation. 21. The like concluded from
the posture of the Preacher also. 22. Some inconveniences arising from the Form
of Prayer by Invocation. 23. More inconveniences of that nature by accusing
the Liturgy as defective. 24. The conclusion and submission of the whole to
his Lordships judgment.


INventae erant Epistolae, ut certiores faceremus absentes, si quid esset quod
eos scire, aut nostrum, aut ipsorum, interesset. Epistles were devised, as
Tully writes to Curio, to this end and purpose, that we might certify the
absent, of those things which are most proper for their knowledge and our
relation: They are our Messengers for love, our Posts for business, our Agents
in the managing and dispatch of the weightiest Affairs, such as most nearly do
concern us; which being a chief Use and Benefit of Letters, no marvail, if they
have been used in all former Ages, not only to maintain an intercourse between
Friends in point of Amity, but to lay down in them our resolutions, as occasion
is, in point of Controversy. The several Writings in this kind of the ancient
Authors, as well the Christian as the Gentile; what are they but so many
precepts and directions, by which to regulate our Conversations, or reasons and
authorities on the which to rest our judgments. Upon which ground (my most
Honored Lord) I have adventured to declare by this way of Letter what I have
found upon due search, in answer to the proposition which your Lordship
recommended to me, touching the Form of Prayer appointed in the Canon, to be
used by Preachers before the Sermon. Of which, such question has been made in
these busy times, whether it ought to be by way of Invocation, as a formal
Prayer; or else by way of Exhortation, as a bidding of Prayer: For resolution
of the which, I shall first lay down the very Canon, and after briefly show
unto you what is most like to be the true intention of it, out of the public
Monuments of this Church, and constant practice of those men who are above
exception for the point in hand, and also by such other pregnant reasons, as I
have thought most proper to confirm the same.

Can. 55. The Form of a Prayer to be used by Preachers before their Sermons:
The body of it, is this.

Before all Sermons, Lectures, and Homilies, Preachers and Ministers shall move
the people to join with them in Prayer, in this Form, or to this effect, as
briefly as conveniently they may: Ye shall pray for Christ's holy Catholic
Church; that is, for the whole Congregation of Christian people dispersed
through the whole world, and especially for the Churches of England, Scotland,
and Ireland: And herein I require you most especially to pray for the Kings
most excellent Majesty our Sovereign Lord, James King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Supreme Governor in these his
Realms, and all other his Dominions and Countries, over all Persons, in all
causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal: Ye shall also pray for our gracious
Queen Ann, the noble Prince Henry, and the rest of the Kings and Queens Royal
Issue. Ye shall also pray for the Ministers of Gods holy Word and Sacraments,
as well Archbishops and Bishops, as other Pastors and Curats: Ye shall also
pray for the Kings most honorable Council, and for all the Nobility and
Magistrates of this Realm, that all, and every of those in their several
callings, may serve truly, and painfully, to the Glory of God, and the edifying
and well-governing of his people, remembering the account they must make. Also
ye shall pray for the whole Commons of this Realm, that they may live in true
Faith and fear of God, and humble obedience to the King, and Brotherly Charity
one to another. Finally, let us praise God for all those that are already
departed out of this life in the Faith of Christ, and pray unto God, that we
may have grace to direct our lives after their good examples, that this life
ended, we may be made partakers with them of the glorious Resurrection in the
life everlasting: Always concluding with the Lords Prayer.

Eliz. being still in force) but to reduce her Ministers to the ancient usage
of this Church, which had been much neglected, if not laid aside. The Canons
then established were no late Invention, as some give it out, but a Collection
of such Ordinances and pious Customs as had been formerly in use since the
Reformation; which being scattered and diffused in several Injunctions, Orders,
and Advertisements, published by K. Henry VIII. K. Edward VI. and Q. Eliz. or
in the Canons of particular Convocations in those times assembled, or otherwise
retained in continual practice, was by the care and wisdom of the Clergy in the
Synod at London, An. 1603. drawn up together into one body, and by his Majesty
then being Authorized in due form of Law: And being so Authorized by his
Majesty, the Canons then made had the force of Laws, and were of power to bind
the Subjects of all sorts according to their several and respective
concernments, as fully and effectually as any Statute, or Act of Parliament can
bind the Subject of this Realm, in their goods and properties: For which
consult the Statute, 25. H. 8. cap. 19. and the practice since. Which as it may
be said of all, so more particularly of the Canon now in question, of which it
is to be considered, that the main body of the same had been delivered formerly
almost verbatim in the Queens Injunctions, published by her Royal and Supreme
Authority, in the first year of her Reign, Anno 1559. which I will therefore
here put down, that by comparing both together, we may the better see the true
intention of that Canon; and what is further to be said in the present business.

The Form of bidding the Prayers to be used generally in this uniform sort; and
then the body of it is this: Ye shall pray for Christ's holy Catholic Church,
that is, for the whole Congregation of Christian people, dispersed throughout
the whole world, and especially for the Churches of England and Ireland: and
herein I require you most especially to pray for the Queens most excellent
Majesty, our Sovereign Lady Eliz. Queen of England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, and supreme Governor of this Realm, as well in causes
Ecclesiastical as Temporal: You shall also pray for the Ministers of Gods holy
Word and Sacraments, as well Archbishops and Bishops, as other Pastors and
Curats: Ye shall also pray for the Queens most honorable Council, and for all
the Nobility of this Realm: That all, and every of these in their callings may
serve truly and painfully, to the glory of God, and edifying of his people,
remembering the account they must make: Also you shall pray for the whole
Commons of this Realm, that they may live in true faith, and fear of God, in
humble Obedience; and brotherly Charity one to another: Finally let us praise
God for all those that are departed out of this life in the faith of Christ,
and pray unto God, that we may have grace to direct our lives after their good
example, that after this life, we may be made partakers of the glorious
resurrection in the life everlasting. These are the very words of the
Injunction, wherein it is to be observed, that as the Canon has relation to
this Injunction, so neither this Injunction, nor any thing therein enjoined was
of new erection, but a Reviver only of the usual Form which had been formerly
enjoined and constantly observed in King Edwards days, as we shall see by
looking over the Injunction published (and the practice following thereupon) in
the said Kings Reign.

Edward the 6. is in this Form following: The Title thus, The Form of bidding
the Common prayers: and then the Form it self: You shall pray for the whole
Congregation of Christ's Church, and especially for this Congregation of
England, and Ireland, wherein first I commend to your devout prayers the Kings
most excellent Majesty, supreme Head immediately under God, of the Spiritualty,
and Temporalty of the same Church, And for Queen Katharine Dowager, and also
for my Lady Mary, and my Lady Elizabeth, the Kings Sisters: Secondly you shall
pray for my Lord Protectors grace, with all the rest of the Kings Majesty's
Council: for all the Lords of this Realm, and for the Clergy, and Commons of
the same; Beseeching Almighty God to give every one of them in his degree,
Grace to use themselves in such wise, as may be to Gods glory, the Kings
honor, and the weal of this Realm: Thirdly you shall pray for all them that be
departed out of this world in the faith of Christ, that they with us, and we
with them at the day of Judgment, may rest both Body and Soul with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven. This was the Form first published in
the beginning of the Reign of King Edward VI. and it continued all his time,
save that the latter clause was altered, and that for praising. God for Saints
departed put instead thereof, as we may see in Bishop Latimers Sermon preached
at Stanford, whereof more anon.

Edwards time, and no less clear are we for King Henry's also, especially for
the latter part thereof, in which the use of Bidding prayers, or moving the
people unto prayer had by him been imposed upon the Clergy, before this time
the people had been trained up in a very gross ignorance, not knowing
explicitly the Articles of their belief, accustomed to a Latin service in
their public Churches, and to a daily stint of Pater-nosters, and Ave-Maries
in the Latin tongue which few or none of them understood. But that King, having
taken on himself the Title of supreme Head of the Church of England, and adding
of the same to the style Imperial, viz. Anno 1535, there issued out an order by
his Authority in this Form that follows. This is an Order taken for
Preaching, and Bidding of Beads in all Sermons to be made within this Realm.
First, Whosoever shall Preach in the presence of the Kings Highness, and the
Queen's Grace, shall in the bidding of Beads pray for the whole Catholic
Church of Christ, as well quick as dead, and especially for the Catholic
Church of this Realm, and first, as we be most bounden, for our Sovereign Lord
King Henry the VIII. being immediately next under God the only supreme Head of
this Catholic Church of England. And for the most gracious Lady Qu. Anne his
Wife, and for the Lady Elizabeth Daughter and Heir to them both. And no further.

Item the Preacher in all other places of this Realm, not in the presence of
the Kings said Highness, and the Queens Grace, shall in the bidding of the
Beads, pray first in manner, and Form, and word for word as is above ordained,
and limited: Adding thereto in the second part, For all Archbishops, and
Bishops, and for the whole Clergy of this Realm, And specially such as the
Preacher shall name of his devotion; And thirdly for all Dukes, Earls,
Marquess's, and for all the whole Temporalty of this Realm, and specially for
such as the Preacher shall name of devotion: And finally for the souls of all
them that be dead, and specially for such as it shall please the Preacher to
name. So far the very words of the Injunction, as it relates unto the business
now in hand, which differs very little, if at all, in Form and fashion (though
there be some difference in the matter) from those which followed in the Reign
of K. Edward VI. and Q. Eliz. both of which out of question took their hint
from hence.

supreme Head of the Church of England, as before is said, did before this, by
Proclamation dated June 9. An. 1534. declare, and signify his Royal pleasure,
that all, and all manner of Ecclesiastical persons should teach, preach,
publish, and declare in all manner of Churches, the said his just Title, Style,
and Jurisdiction, on every Sunday, and high Feast throughout the year, which
after was enjoined in the Injunction of the year, Anno 1536, set out by the
Lord Cromwell, being then Vicar General, with the Kings authority: As also in
the Injunctions of King Edward the 6. An. 1547. which again was revived in the
Queens Injunctions, Anno 1559. As after in the first Convocation of King James
in the year 1603. And besides this, it was appointed in the said Injunctions of
King Henry the 8. that the Preacher or Parochial Priest should every Sunday, in
the Pulpit rehearse distinctly the Lords prayer, the Articles of the Creed, and
the ten Commandments in the English Tongue, for the better instructing of the
people in their duties both to God and Man, which being ordered at the same
time as the bidding of the Beads in the Forni spoken of before, was first
enjoined, shows plainly the intention and effect of both, to be no other than
to instruct the people in the principles of faith and piety. So that as well to
teach the people how to pray, and what things they chiefly were to pray for, in
the public meeting, as to make known unto them the Kings just Title, by which
they were to recommend him in their devotions, the Form before remembered of
Bidding prayers, or Beads was prescribed the Priests, by them to be proposed
unto the people in their several Sermons: For instance of the which, in point
of practice in the said Kings time, we need but look upon a Sermon of Bishop
Latimers (being that before the Convocation, Anno 1536. which was the 28. of
King Henry's Reign) In which being entered on his matter, as the use then was,
he thus bids the prayers. That all that I say shall, may turn to the glory of
God, your Souls health, and the edifying of Christ's Body. I pray you all to
pray with me unto God, and that also in your Petitions, you desire that these
two things he vouchsase to grant us. First a mouth for me to speak rightly:
next Ears for you, that in hearing me, you may take profit at my hands, and
that this may come to effect, you shall desire him unto whom our Master Christ
bad, we should pray, saying even the same prayer which Christ himself did
Institute. Wherein we shall pray for our Sovereign Lord the King, chief, and
supreme Head of the Church of England under Christ, and for the most excellent,
gracious, and virtuous Lady, Queen Jane his most lawful Wife, and for all his,
whether they be of the Clergy, or Laity, whether they be of the Nobility, or
else other his Grace's Subjects; humbly beseeching Almighty God, that every one
of us, even from the highest to the lowest, may in his degree, and Calling,
earnestly endeavor to set forth the glory of God, and the Gospel of his Son
Christ Jesus, that so living in his fear, and love, we may in the end of our
days depart out of this life in his friendship and favor. For these graces and
what else his wisdom knows more needful for us, let us pray, as we are
taught, saying: Our Father, etc. Put all that has been said together. and the
sum is this. That if we do interpret the Canon of the year 1603. by the Queens
Injunctions, and construe both of them, according to the Injunctions in King
Edwards and King Henry's days, we shall see plainly, that the Form of prayer
appointed by the Canon is no new Invention, neither obtruded on the Church by
the Bishops of these times, on a design to stint the Spirit (as some now give
out) or on a like design of Archbishop Bancroft, and the Prelates of his time
(as is said by others:) but carried and transmitted from hand to hand, since
the very first beginning of the Reformation; nor did it stand thus only in
point of Law, not being reduced unto practice, but stood thus also in the
practice of our Predecessors (though not so frequently in these last as the
former times) as shall be presently made good by Witnesses and Proofs of
unquestioned credit.

Canon, and Injunctions being laid together, there will be little difference
found between them, in sum, and substance (except that praying for the dead,
used in the latter times of King Henry the 8. and the beginning of the Reign of
King Edward the 6. has since been changed into praising God for their
departure in the faith, and Gospel of our Lord and Savior) and at all nothing
in the Form, or any circumstance considerable in the present business: for if
we look upon the prayer therein appointed, we shall find these four things to
be considered. 1. The substance, or matter of it being the heads therein
recited, viz. the Catholic Church, the Kings Majesty, the Qu. the Royal issue,
the L Ls. spiritual, and temporal. 2. The phrase, or garb of speech, wherein
the matter is expressed in those words, or in other to the same effect. 3. The
quantity of time, which is allowed for those expressions, as briefly as
conveniently we may: and last of all the Form thereof, being the point that is
most in question, which plainly is to be by way of exhortation; Ye shall pray,
and I require you most especially to pray; and not by way of Invocation, with
an immediate address to Almighty God, as Men use it now: Therefore as in King
Edward's, and the Queens Injunctions it is called a Bidding of Prayers: the
Form of bidding prayers generally to be used after this uniform sort, and the
Form of bidding the Common Prayers. The Form of bidding the Beads in King
Henry's Injunction; So in the Canon it is called a Moving: it being therein
ordered, that before all Sermons, Lectures and Homilies, Preachers and
Ministers shall move the people to join with them in prayer, etc. Bidding and
Moving, are two words, but to one effect; for when we bid the people pray, we
move them to it: and in the Congregation, we have no way to move the people but
by that of bidding, or exhorting. Prayer as Saint Basil has defined it, (...),
is requiring of some good from the hands of God, and does imply a punctual, and
immediate address unto him, which is the peoples office to the Lord Almighty:
Bidding of prayer, as the Injunctions, or moving Men to pray, as the Canon has
it, is the Priests office to the people: wherein he not only exhorts them to
the performance of that Duty, but lays them down a Summary, and brief recital
of those things, which they are to pray for as members of that one mystical
Body, whereof Christ Jesus is the Head: Now where it is alleged by some, who
have turned Bidding into Praying, that in the Canon it is not ordered
precisely, that Ministers shall move the people to join with them in prayer, in
this Form, that follows, but only in this Form, or to this effect. It Is true,
what they allege as unto the words, though not as to the use they make
thereof: For by these words to this effect, the Church has no intent, or
meaning, to give Men liberty to devise new Forms of Prayer, nor indeed could
she if she would (as before we noted) or to desert as well the usage of those
Men, which had been most obedient to her public Orders, as the Injunctions, on
the which, the said use was founded: Wherefore these words, to this effect,
must have no reference to the Form, and manner of expression (for it is called
in the Canon a moving of the people to join in prayer) but only to the words
and phrase, it being not the Churches purpose to bind her Ministers precisely
to the words, which are there laid down, but that in that very Form of words,
or other words to that effect, they should move the people to be mindful of
those particular Heads, for which they were to join with him at the close of
all in the Lords prayer, as appears plainly by that passage of the Prayer in
Bishop Latimers, spoken of before.

Aristotle (...). Eth. l. 1.
For those who have the best authority to interpret Canons (I mean my LLs. the
two Archbishops, with the greater part of the Bishops) have and do use no other
Form than that of Bidding or of Moving. And so do also many ancient Doctors,
both in the Universities, and Cathedral Churches; who being originally
accustomed to the Form of Bidding, have not yet turned their style to a Form of
Praying: But since to speak of those, who are now alive, may possibly be
subject to misconstruction, we will take Counsel with the dead, whose actions
of this kind may be our example, and their proceeding in this point our
warrant: of these I will make instance of five alone (though I could in more)
all of the Hierarchy, all Men of high esteem in their several times, and
therefore such as may be followed with most safety in the present business: Of
these the last in course of time was the most Learned Bishop Andrews, of whom,
to say no more, we may say with safety, that he was Canonum observantissimus,
who being, as he was, a practiced Preacher long time before and after the
making of the said Canon, did use no other Form of Prayer, than that of
Bidding: All those, that heard him cannot but confess, that so it was, and in
the body of his Sermons collected by my Lord of Canterbury, that now is, and my
Lord of Ely, that then was, there are some Tracts, and footsteps of it, which
make it evident unto those that heard him not. For this consult his 3d Sermon
in Lent, Anno 1593. his sixth in Lent 1596. his sixth for Whitsuntide, Anno
1613. More specially in his second of the holy Ghost, Anno 1608. in which
immediately upon the division of his Text, as his custom was, he thus moves the
people, or which both comes to one, he thus bids the prayers. But for that
there is no speaking of the Spirit, without the Spirit, nor bearing neither; to
the end, that hearing, and speaking he may help our infirmities, etc. And in
his ninth Sermon of the Fifth of November, 1617. the division ended, as before,
he thus proceeded: That these be done, and that they may be done, and that
those things which shall be spoken, may tend to this, that they may be done,
etc. Which last two passages being preambles, or introductions unto his form of
bidding Prayers, give us an hint of that which we may find laid down at large
in his Latin Sermons extant in his opuscula, collected by the same most
Reverend Prelates; particularly in that before his Sermon Preached pro forma,
when he went out Doctor, and that at the departure of the Prince Elector
Palatine; in both of which, he calls upon his Audience to join with him in
Prayer by way of bidding, moving, or inviting, Invitemus huc numen, precemur,
preces offeramus, and such like phrases: All which thus laid together, do most
plainly show that he did go that way, which was prescribed by the Injunctions,
revived and ratified in the Canon, and traveled by those Worthies that went
before him.

Jewel, who lived and flourished after the setting out of the Queens
Injunctions, and dyed long time before the making of the Canon: In a collection
of his Sermons by John Garbrand of Oxon, Printed 1583. there are these three
passages, which declare most plainly how he did understand the said Injunction,
one giving light unto the other. Of these, the first occurs in that upon the
first of Haggai, where having spent two leaves upon the entrance to his matter,
and made division of his Text, we find it in a line by it self, and a different
character, this word Pray, and that noting out the place in which his Form of
bidding prayer was at that time used: More fully in his Sermon upon Romans 13.12.
where having entered on his matter, he thus moves the people, or as the Style
then was, thus bids the Prayers. But before I proceed to declare further
that which is to be spoken at this present, let us turn our bearts to God, even
the Father of lights, that it may please him to open the Eyes of your
understanding, and to direct all our doings to his Glory. Most fully, and
indeed as fully as may be to this purpose, in that on Luc. 11.15. where having
read his Text, he does thus move the people to join in prayer. That it may
please God so to order both my utterance and your understanding, that
whatsoever shall be spoken or heard, may turn to the glory of his holy name,
and to the profit and comfort of his Church. Before I enter into the exposition
of these words, I desire you to call upon our gracious God with your earnest
and hearty prayer; and here I commend unto you Gods holy Catholic Church, and
therein the Queens most excellent Majesty, by the especial grace of God, Queen
of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the true, ancient, and Apostolic
Faith, and the highest Governor next under God of this Church of England, etc.
that as God of his mercy has marvellously preserved her to the possession of
her right, to the great comfort of all her Subjects hearts, and to the
Reformation of the Church, so it may please him to aid and increase her with
his holy Spirit, to the continuance and performance of the same. The Queens
most Honorable Council, with the residue of the Nobility; the good Estate of
both of the Universities, and all other Schools of Learning, the only Nurseries
of this Realm; the Bishops and Preachers, that the number of them may be
increased, and that they may have grace to set forth the truth of Gods Gospel,
as their duty is, diligently, sincerely, soberly, timely, and faithfully: And
the whole Commons of this Realm, and specially such as speak ill, or think ill
of Gods holy Word, that they may have grace to regard the Salvation of their
Souls, to lay aside all blind affection, to hear the Word of God, and so to
come to the Knowledge of the truth. This is the Form by him then used, which
plainly is by way of Exhortation, not of Invocation, a Form of Bidding prayer,
according as it is prescribed in the Injunction, and no direct prayer, with
address to God, as is now devised against the Injunction and the Canon. And
here it is to be observed, that in this Form of Bishop Jewels, there is not
only a conformity to the Injunction, that is by Bidding and Exhorting only, but
that therein he recommends unto them those particular heads which in the said
Injunction are contained, the last excepted: As for the words, or phrase of
speaking, he uses not the same precisely, which are laid down in the
Injunction, but other words amounting to the same effect; which also shows,
that whatsoever liberty is given us in the Canon by these words, or to this
effect, by no means gives us any power to change the Form of moving, bidding,
or exhorting, but only shows to what effect they must, and may bid, move, or
exhort the people.

The next in order of Ascent (for so we purpose to proceed) is Archbishop
Parker, the first Archbishop of Canterbury in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, who being
Pro-vice-chancellor of Cambridge in King Edwards time, and preaching at the
Funeral (there) of Martin Bucer, in the conclusion of his Sermon, does thus
begin his Exhortation ad preces (as it is there called) or (which comes both to
one) does thus bid the prayers. Vt igitur velum ignorantiae cordibus nostris
detrahetur, and discutiatur ab oculis invidiae caligo, atque profunda
cogitatione, and consideratione hunc tristem casum pro occasion a Deo oblata
confiteamur, etc. Coram Deo clemente, and misericorde nos prosternamus, and
piis precibus ab eo misericordiam invocemus. In quibus Commendo vobis Ecclesiam
Catholicam, Sanctam Dei Communionem, ut cum digna confessione, etc.
progrediatur in cognitione ejus voluntatis, and in Domini nostri, and
Salvatoris fide persistat; orate insuper pro omnibus iis, qui per errorem atque
infidelitatem manifesto deprehenduntur extra Ecclesiam, vel qui hypocritica
dissimulatione habentur de eadem (cum sint revera synagoga Satanae) ut vocem
Christi summi Pastoris unanimes audiant, and efficiamur unum ovile, unum grex,
uno ore, and cord gloriam tribuentes Deo Patri Domini nostri Jesu Christi.
Orate pro Ecclesia Anglicana and Hibernica, and ambarum supremo capite proxime
a Christo Illustrissimo and Clementissimo Domino nostro Rege Edwardo ejus
nominis sexto, etc. Precemur etiam pro nobis ipsis, ut quemadmodum Patres
Veteris Testamenti versabantur in continuis votis, and expectatione primi
adventus Servatoris nostri in carne, etc. sic and nos sub novo testamento,
sobrie, pie, and just vivamus in hoc mundo, acerrima cupiditate secundum ejus
adventum manentes, and una cum dormientibus Fratribus plenam redemptionem
Corporum nostrorum ejus glorioso corpori conglutinandorum sitientes, consociati
Abrahamo, Isaaco, Jacobo, etc. This I have here set down in the Latin tongue,
according as I find the same in the opera Anglicana of the said Martin Bucer,
page 898. which if it be compared with the Kings Injunctions, will manifestly
appear to be conform thereto in each particular (the special recitation of the
Kings Sisters, the Protectours Grace, the Clergy and Nobility being all
included, though cut off with, etc.) and comes also very near to that of
Bishop Jewel before remembered, both of them keeping to the Form of bidding,
moving, or exhorting, but taking to themselves the liberty of their own
expression for the phrase and style, according to the purpose and effect of the
said Injunction. And it is worth our noting too, that presently upon the end of
this exhortation, or bidding of the Prayers, used by Dr. Parker, there
follows in the book these words, Hic factae sunt tacitae preces. By all which
we may perceive most evidently, that it was then the peoples practice, and is
now our duty immediately upon the bidding of the Prayers, or on the Preachers
moving of the people to join with them in Prayer, as the Canon has it, to
recollect the heads recommended to them, and tacitly to represent them to the
Lord in their devotions, or otherwise to comprechend them in the Paternoster,
with which the Preacher, by the Canon, is to close up all.

Edward the sixth, we will next look on Bishop Latimer, the fourth of these
five Prelates, whom before I spoke of, who living in King Henry and King
Edwards times, and in their times using that Form of bidding Prayers, which is
prescribed both in the Canon and Injunctions, shows plainly, that the ancient
practice in this kind was every way conform to the present Canon, and the old
Injunctions. And first to keep our selves to King Edwards Reign, we have eight
passages in his Sermons, preached in that Kings time, whereby we may perceive
what the usage was, six of them laid down in brief, and two more at large; the
two last being as a comment on the former six; of the six brief, the first
occurs in his 2d. p. 33.
Sermon before King Edward thus: Hitherto goes the Text, That I may declare
this the better to the edifying of your Souls, and the glory of God, I shall
desire you to pray, etc. So in his third before the King, p. 42.
March the 22. Before I enter further into this matter, I shall desire you to
pray, etc. And in the fourth, March 29. That I may have grace so to open the
remnant of this Parable, that it may be to the glory of God, and edifying of
your souls, I shall desire you to pray, in the which prayer, etc. And in the
5th. Sermon before the King on the 6th. of April, p. 51.
having entered on his matter, he thus invites them to their Prayers: And that I
may have grace, etc. So in the sixth, April the 13th. This is the story, and
that I may declare this Text, so as it may be to the honor of God, and the
edifying of your souls and mine both, I shall desire you to help me with your
prayers, in the which, etc. The last is in a Sermon before that King, p. 108.
Preached at the Court in Westminster. An. 1550. where he does it thus, Here
therefore I shall desire you to pray, etc.

Edward, April 19. 1549. Thus, This day we have in memory [Christs] bitter
passion, and death, the remedy of our Sin. Therefore I intend to treat of a
piece of the story of his passion; I am not able to treat of all: that I may do
this the better, and that it may be to the honor of God, and the edification
of your Souls and mine both, I shall desire you to pray, etc. In this prayer, I
shall desire you to remember the Souls departed with laud and praise to
Almighty God, that he did vouchsafe to assist them at the hour of their death:
I shall desire you to pray, etc. And in the which, etc. What mean these and
caetera's? That we shall see most manifestly in his Sermon Preached at
Stamford, p. 88.
October. 9. 1550. which shows indeed most fully; that the Form of bidding
Prayers then used, was every way conform to the Injunction of King Edward VI.
and very near the same, which was prescribed after by the Queens Injunction.
For having as before proposed his matter, he thus bids the Prayers. And that I
may at this time so declare them, as may be for Gods glory, your edifying, and
my discharge, I pray you to help me with your prayers; in the which prayer,
etc. For the Universal Church of Christ through the whole world, etc. for the
preservation of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth, sole Supreme Head
under God, and Christ, of the Churches of England and Ireland, etc. Secondly,
for the Kings most honorable Council. Thirdly, I commend unto you the Souls
departed this life in the Faith of Christ, that ye remember to give laud,
praise, and thanks to Almighty God for his great goodness and mercy showed unto
them in that great need and conflict against the Devil and Sin, and that gave
them in the hour of death faith in his Sons Death and Passion, whereby they
conquer, and overcome, and get the victory: Give thanks I say for this, adding
prayers and supplications for your selves, that it may please God to give you
like faith, and grace to trust only in the death of his dear Son, as he gave
unto them: For as they be gone, so must we, and the Devil will be as ready to
tempt us, as he was them, and our sins will light as heavy upon us, as theirs
did upon them, and we were as weak and unable to resist as were they. Pray
therefore that we may have Grace to die in the same faith, as they did, and at
the latter day to be raised with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and be partakers
with Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven, for this and all other graces, let us say
the Lords prayer.

Latimer we will join another of the same time, and as high a calling, which is
Dr. Gardener Bishop of Winchester, of whom, whatever may be said in other
respects, in this it cannot be objected, but that he followed the Form and
Order then prescribed; for in a Sermon Preached before King Edward VI. Anno
1550. being the Fourth of that Kings Reign, before the naming of his Text, for
ought appears, he thus bids the Prayer. Most honorable Audience, I purpose by
the grace of God to declare some part of the Gospel, that is accustomably used
to be read in the Church at this day, and that, because without the special
grace of God, neither I can speak any thing to your edifying, nor ye receive
the same accordingly, I shall desire you all, that we may jointly pray all
together for the assistance of his grace. In which prayer I commend to Almighty
God your most excellent Majesty our Sovereign Lord, King of England, France,
and Ireland, and of the Church of England and Ireland, next and immediately
under God here on earth Supreme Head, Q. Katharine Dowager, my L. Mary's grace,
and my L. Elizabeth's grace, your Majesty's most dear Sisters, my L. Protectors
grace, with all others of your most honorable Council, the Spiritualty and
Temporalty. And I shall desire you to commend unto God with your prayers, the
Souls departed unto God in Christ's Faith, and among those most especially our
late Sovereign Lord King Henry VIII. your most noble, Father; for these, and
for grace necessary, I shall desire you to say a Pater-nosler, and so forth.
Which Form of his agrees most exactly with that order in the Kings Injunction,
not altered then in that clause, for the Saints departed; which (as it seems)
continued till the alteration of the public Liturgy, Anno 1552. and then was
changed with the same: In other things no difference between him and that other
Form, which was commanded and set forth by the Queens Injunction, and between
him and Bishop Latimer, so little, that it may seem to be in words more than
meaning: In both we have a clear and pregnant evidence, that then they used no
proper and direct address to God in a formal Prayer of their own devising, but
only laid before the people some certain heads they were to pray for, which in
the Language of that time was called Bidding of prayer.

Henry's days, but that I think no question can or will be made in that
particular, considering the severe temper of that Prince in exacting full
obedience unto all his Mandates; or if there be, that Form of Prayer which we
find used by Bishop Latimer in his Sermon Preached before the Convocation, in
the 28th. of that Kings Reign (which before we spoke of) may serve once for all
without further Instances, which brings the precept and the practice to the
like Antiquity.

Put all that has been said together, and the sum is this: That if we do
interpret the Canon of the year 1603. by the Queens Injunctions, and construe
both of them according to the Injunctions in King Edwards and King Henry's
days, seconded by the constant practice in all times succeeding, we shall see
plainly, that in the intention of the Church we are to use no Prayer before our
Sermons by way of Invocation to God, but somewhere in them, or before them to
use a Form of Bidding prayer by way of Exhortation to the Auditory: This said,
we will declare in brief how the new Form of Prayer by way of Invocation, and
address to God (which is now generally taken up) came in use amongst us, and
afterward lay down some reasons, not so much to oppose that Form of Invocation
lately taken up, as to establish and confirm the other Form of Bidding prayers,
founded upon the Canon, the Injunctions, and the ancient practice.

Puritan faction, who laboring with might and main (...), as the saying is, to
overthrow the public service of this Church, then by Law established,
endeavored to advance in the place thereof an Arbitrary and Extemporary Form
of Prayer, of every ptivate man's devising, and that not only before, but after
Sermon. Calvin had so appointed in Geneva, and Knex in Scotland, and rather
than not have it so in England also, the Brethren were resolved to put all in
hazard. This when they could not compass with their noise and clamor, they
fell upon a way which came somewhat near it, and was more likely far to effect
their purpose. Their Lecturers and Preachers, yea, and followers too, not
coming to the Church till the Service ended, and their own Prayer was to begin.
The Book of dangerous practices and positions, writ as was thought by Bishop
Bancroft (though not then a Bishop,) will give us some of those examples; take
one among them for a trial, and you shall find him boast himself, that every
Sabbath (so he called it) not meddling with the Liturgy prescribed he used to
Preach unto his people, Ego singulis sabbatis, si non alius adveniens locum
suppleat (cum praescripta liturgias formula nihil habens commercii) in coetu
concionem habeo. What he professed for himself was then the practice of them
all (some of them as it is observed in the Conference at Hampton Court, being
content to walk in the Churchyard till Sermon time, rather than to be present
at public prayer) and is still, I fear used by many Lecturers in and about the
City of London. Thus having limited all Gods Service unto Preaching, and some
Extemporary Prayer of their own devising, they brought the people at last unto
this persuasion, that in the public Liturgy there was nothing but a mere
formality which the Law enjoined. Their Arbitrary and Extemporary Forms of
Prayer savouring only of the Spirit, and true devotion, which when they could
not bring about at the first attempt, they practiced with a counterfeit Devil
to undertake it: The seven of Lancashire, when they were taught by Mr. Darrel
to play the Demoniacks, were also taught by him to promote the cause. As often
as any of those Ministers, who were conformable to the Church, and kept
themselves unto the Forms of the public Liturgy, did come to visit them, and
in their hearing read some Prayers out of the Common Prayer Book, the Devil was
as quiet as any Lamb, as if he were well pleased with that Form of Service, or
that there was not any thing in those Prayers, or the men that used them, to
trouble him or disturb his peace. But when as Mr. Darrel and other Brethren of
the Nonconformity approached in sight, who used to fall upon him with whole
volleys of raw and indigested Prayers of their own devising (such as they had
prepared and fitted for the present occasion) then were the wicked Spirits much
more troubled, and perplexed extremely, whereby you may perceive, that even the
Puritans also had a kind of Holy Water, with which to fright away the Devil,
lest else the Papists should in any thing have the start before them. And
whereas the Injunction had restrained the Clergy to some certain heads by them
to be commended to the Peoples prayers, these men took neither care of the
Form, or matter of the said Injunction; not of the Form, for they directed
their address to Almighty God in manner of a formal prayer, as has since been
used against the Canon; nor of the matter of the same, for they began their
Prayer with a long confession, or a discourse rather of their own uncleanness,
and the corruption of man's nature, filled it with praise and thanksgiving for
particular blessings, even for their Godly friends and acquaintance, and ended
it with a kind of a charm or transubstantiating, as viz. That the words which
they should speak, might not be entertained as the words of a mortal man, but
as they were indeed the words of the immortal and living God. (For in that very
style I have heard it often) nay, they went so far in the end, that the
Visitation of the Sick prescribed by the Church was quite laid aside, their
weak estate being reduced unto that prayer also. Those which were dangerously
ill, or but ill at ease, sending their Bills abroad to several Preachers, by
them to be remembered in their Pulpit prayers. Hereto they also had reduced
particular Thanksgivings for the recovery of such persons as had been visited
with Sickness, or had escaped any present danger of what inferior rank soever
it were, which grew so common at the last (and in late times too,) that being
once to Preach in the Church of Westminster, before many of the Nobility, and
many other persons of great note and honor, the Verger there brought me a
Ticket in these words, viz. N. N. of the Parish of St. Martins, Shoemaker,
having lately had a dangerous fall, and now being pretty well recovered,
desires this Congregation to give thanks for him. So that this Prayer of theirs
became at last the (...), the general plaster for all sores, the common
receptacle for all suits, the universal comprehension of all pious offices: The
Service of the Church being thought mean while to be ineffectual; nay, by I
know not what strange means it found such entertainment among them also, who
otherwise were not ill affected unto the order of the Church, that in the end
the usual Form of Bidding-prayers was in a manner laid aside by all sorts of
men, and is now forced to plead its Birthright, and seek for repossession as
ex post liminio, which it does as follows.

constat of any Form of Prayer by way of Invocation used, or to be used before
the Sermon, Lecture, Exercise, or Homilies, call it what you will: The
exposition of the Law in Ezras time, which was a Lecture at the least, if not a
Sermon, Nehem. 8.
was nakedly delivered without any prayer, so were the Sermons of the Prophets.
Our Saviors Sermon on the Mount had no Prayer before it, that we can meet
with; Matt. 6.9.
but there was in it questionless a Bidding of Prayers, and a particular Form
laid down, after which to pray; for it is said there, we shall pray after this
manner: those of the Apostles also were delivered in the self same manner,
though in those times in the which no public Liturgy was as yet universally
agreed upon, a formal Prayer before the Sermon might be thought, more
necessary. In the next Ages, when as the Church was settled, and certain Forms
of Prayer prescribed (made either by the Apostles or Apostolic men) we find
not any for this purpose: Nor is there only a non liquet of it in the public
formulas, but nothing to be found, which reflects that way in any of the
Sermons, Homilies, or Expositions of the Ancient Doctors either Greek or
Latin. As for the later times, when as the service of the Church was brought
unto that Form wherein it now continues, for the most part in the Church of
Rome, the Sermon commonly was an enarration, or an explication of the Gospel,
for the day appointed, or otherwise some of the Homilies of the Holy Fathers,
and needed no much preparation thereunto, as is now required. Nor does that use
continue only in the Church of Rome, but also in the Lutheran Churches (as they
call them) as appears plainly by the Writings of Dietericus, and other
Doctors of that party. A thing so universally received among them, that in the
alteration of Religion made in Brandenburg, Anno 1614. It was declared by the
Elector amongst other things; Evangeliis, and Epistolis, quae diebus Dominicis
explicantur and quotannis repetuntur, Pastores non ita astrictos esse debere,
ut ipsis non liceat alium aliquem insignem textum biblicum praelegere, and pro
concione tractare; By which we may perceive that in the Lutheran Churches the
Sermons are no other than a brief enarration of, or on the Gospel, and Epistle
for the day appointed, and so but little need of preparatory Prayers, as before
I noted; so that as not of old in the former times, so neither in the Lutheran
Churches, or any others of the Reformation, which retain any Tract, or footstep
of the ancient Liturgies (as God be thanked here we do) is there a show of any
thing (that I can meet with) to countenance and conclude a set Form of Prayer
made before the Sermon according to the Preachers own conceptions, either in
prescript or in practice. Geneva which first bred it, does alone retain it, and
those which on her commendations have since took it up.

Bidding Prayers, that at the first, when it was introduced into the Church, it
rather was a part of the very Sermon, one of the Principal instructions therein
delivered, than any preparation to it: In the Injunctions of King Henry VIII.
it is commanded that the Curates should in their Sermons, or Collations,
declare unto the People the Kings Supreme Authority, for which end especially,
the use of Bidding-Prayers seems to me to be first ordained, and being so
ordained, and withal brought into a Form (as it still continues) it was for
ought we know at the Preachers pleasure to bring it in into his Sermon, where
he thought most fit, Ten times at least in Bishop Latimer, we find this Form of
Bidding Prayers. In the first whereof being that before the Convocation, he
spends three leaves and more ere he comes unto it; two almost in the 2. and 6.
before King Edward. Eight almost, being well near half his Sermon in that
before that King at Westminster, Anno 1550. and in the other six he does not
use it till he be entered on his matter, as by what has been said before does
at full appear; Nay by the Rule laid down in the Queens Injunction, it seems it
was not to be used till the end of the Sermon: and therefore no such necessary
preparation to it, as it is now conceived, and made. For presently on the
conclusion of the said Form of Bidding prayers, it follows thus in the
Injunction: And this done, show the Holy Days, and Fasts. This by our present
Liturgy (confirmed in Parliament before the setting out of the said
Injunctions) is ordered to be done after the Homily, or Sermon: and might seem
inconvenient, if not absurd, should it be done in the middle of the Sermon,
much more between the Prayer, and the Sermon, which also seems to have been put
to practice in King Edwards time: Dr. Parker not descending to the Bidding of
prayers (or to his Exhortation ad preces, as it is there called) till he was
come to the conclusion of his matter in the close of all. Now where the Canon
has appointed, that the Form of Prayer there recited be used by Preachers
before the Sermon, i. e. before the substance of it (the preface and division
being only a manuduction thereunto, and no parts thereof) as Bishop Andrews
always used it, or else between the Text, and Sermon, as others no less eminent
than he have been accustomed to do: Or if it must needs be interpreted to be
before them both, as the most would have it, we must then think the Church was
pleased to yield a little unto the current of the time, in which that fashion
generally had been taken up: And that the Church regarded not so much the
circumstance as the main and substance, which was to lay before the people some
heads of prayer, and thereby to cut of those long, and tedious prayers, so much
used of late, under pretense whereof so many Widows houses had been devoured,
and all the public service of the Church neglected.

Bidding prayers is more agreeable to the Law, than their new Form of
Invocation, which is expressly, and directly against the same: For in the
Statute 2. and 3. of King Edward VI. Cap. 1. as afterward in the first of
Queen Elizabeth Cap. 20. (whereas afterward in the first of Queen Elizabeth
Cap. 20. (wherein the Common Prayer Book now in use was confirmed, and
established:) It is enacted, That if any manner of Parson, Vicar, or whatsoever
Minister, that ought, or should sing, or say Common prayers, etc. shall
wilfully, or obstinately standing on the same, use any other Rite, Cermony,
Order, Form, or manner of celebrating the Lords Supper openly, or privily, or
Mattens, Even-song, administration of the Sacraments, or other open prayer [N.
B.] than is mentioned, and set forth in the said Book, He shall lose, and
forfeit to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, for his first
offense the profits of all his spiritual Benefices, and Promotions, coming, and
arising in one whole year next after his conviction, and also for the same
offense shall suffer imprisonment by the space of nine Months without bayl, or
mainprise, etc. and so from one punishment unto another, until at last they
come on the third offense, to Deprivation, and imprisonment perpetual. Now lest
there should be any doubt, what is here meant by Open prayer, The said two
Statutes thus expound it: Open prayer in and throughout this Act is meant, that
prayer, which is for others to come unto, and hear either in common Churches or
private Chapels, and Oratories, commonly called the service of the Church: so
as it seems by this Statute, that whosoever uses in the Church any open
prayer, i. e. such prayer as is made for other Men to come unto, or hear, which
is not mentioned or set forth in the Common Prayer book, makes himself subject
unto all the penalties in the same contained: which thing considered as it
ought, it is not to be thought, that in the Convocation of 1603. the Church did
order, or permit by the aforesaid Canon any Form of prayer, or Invocation,
which was repugnant to the Statutes standing still in force, but only purposed
to continue the usual Form of Bidding prayer, or exhortation unto Prayers,
which was agreeable thereto.

Pulpits were made of old for public speeches to the people and not for
Prayers unto the Gods; the Pulpit for Orations being often mentioned in Heathen
Writers (call it Suggestum, rostrum, pulpitum, or what else you will) but never
any mentioned in them, as a place for Prayer: And so in sacred matters also,
the Pulpit has been used for publishing the Law in reference to Mount Sinai,
whence it first was published; Neh. v. 4. Matthew. 5.6, 7. Deuteronomy. 27.13.
and for the preaching of the Gospel in reference to the Mount, where it was
first preached, and for the denouncing of Gods Judgments on the Disobedient, in
reference to Mount Ebal, whence the Curse was threatened: But that the Pulpit
should be used as a place to pray in, when there are other places destinate to
that holy Use, was never heard of, as I think, till these later Ages, when all
things seemed to tend to Innovation; Sure I am in the Church of England there
was no such meaning; for in the 83. Canon, it is ordained, that the
Parishioners shall provide a comely and decent Pulpit, to be set in a
convenient place, and to be there seemly kept for the preaching of Gods Word:
Nothing else in the Canon is expressed, but only preaching of Gods Word; and
therefore I may safely say nothing else was meant: especially there being
another seat appointed for the public prayers, Can. 82. For further proof of
which, let us but look unto the Rubric before the Commination where is said,
as follows. After Morning prayer, the people being called together by the
tolling of a Bell, and assembled in the Church, the English Letany shall be
said after the accustomed manner, which ended, the Priest shall go into the
Pulpit and say thus. Here seems to be another Use of the Pulpit, besides that
of preaching, but indeed it is not. The threatenings of Gods Judgments being
many times as necessary to, and for Gods people, as the endearments of his
mercies, and both the preaching of his Word: Now whereas after the said
Commination there are some certain reconciliatory Psalms, or Prayers, that
follow after; those are not to be said within the Pulpit, but where the Letany
had been said before; for so it is declared in the next Rubric. Then shall
they all kneel upon their knees, the Priest, and Clerk kneeling, where they are
accustomed to say the Letany, shall say this Psalm: which plainly shows, that
in the intention of the Church, the Pulpit was not made for a place for the
Priest to pray in, but rather for a place wherein to teach the people, how they
were to pray, which is the Bidding prayers in the Canon meant.

Pulpit; for Pulpits being made as before was said, for Speeches, Sermons, and
Orations unto the people, the Speaker, Orator, or Preacher was of necessity, or
ordinary Course, to turn himself unto the people, that so they might the better
both see, and hear him, as in such things is still accustomed; whereas in times
of Prayer, the Priest, or Minister, ought to turn his face to the upper end of
the Church, looking toward the East, and so his back to be toward the people;
I say that so he ought to do, at least if he intend to follow either the
prescript of this Church, or most true antiquity. The Christians of Tertullians
time were generally accused for worshipping the Sun, because that in their
prayers they turned their faces to the East: Inde suspicio quod innotuerit nos
ad Orientis regionem precari: Apol. p. 16.
as he there informs us where (nos) no question was not meant of the people
only, but of Priest, and people. And for the Church of England, Rubr. after the
Psalm.
it is appointed in her Rubric that at the reading of the Lessons the Minister
which reads, shall stand, and turn him so, as he may be best heard of all such
as be present; which shows plainly, he was to look another way, when he said
the Prayers: And lest it may be said, that the other way was not directly from
the people, but askew upon them (which yet would ill become the Preacher) we
find it among other things objected by the Puritan faction in Queen Elizabeth's
time, not only that the Ministers did say some part of Divine Service within
the Chancel, where he must needs look askew upon them, but that at other times
his face was turned away from them altogether: whereof see Hooker l. 5. Sect.
30. which makes me wonder by the way, that all, or most part of our
Reading-pews should be of late so placed, that contrary both to the Churches
Order, and the ancient practice, the Minister, when he reads the Prayers,
looks downwards toward the lower end of the Church, and not unto the East, as
he ought to do; so then the Preacher in the Pulpit turning himself unto the
people, and making himself the object of their Eyes, as he of their attentions,
cannot be thought to pray to God, but if he pray at all, to the people rather:
and on the other side, the Form of Bidding prayers being by way of Exhortation,
and so purposed, does fit as well the posture of the Preacher, as it does the
place.

Bidding prayers, stands more with the intention of the Church, than that of
Invocation, because it does avoid some inconveniences, and absurdities which do
arise upon the other; For first, whereas the Church prescribes a set Form of
prayer in her public Liturgy, from which it is not lawful for any of her
Ministers, either to vary, or recede; she did it principally to avoid all
unadvised effusions of gross and undigested prayers, as little capable of
piety, as they are utterly void of Order, and this she did upon the reason
given in the Milevitan Council, viz. lest else through ignorance, or want of
Care, any thing should be uttered contrary to the Rule of Faith, ne forte
aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam vel per minus studium sit compositum,
as the Canon has it: But were men suffered to enjoy a liberty of Praying, and
saying what they listed before their Sermons, in vain had the Church bound us
to set Forms of prayer in the common Liturgy, upon several penalties, when men
might afterward run riot how they pleased in their particular prayers before
their Sermons, without blame or censure: And though perhaps in some Churches of
the Reformation, in which there is no public Liturgy, or set Form of Divine
Service, to which both Priest and people, are obliged to conform themselves, it
may be lawful for the Preacher to use such prayers both before and after
Sermon, as the consideration of that great work, and the necessities of the
people may invite him to; yet it is otherwise with us in the Church of England,
where all these points are carefully provided for in the Book of
Common Prayers, which in these other Churches are made the Subject of the
Preachers. Now where some men conceive they obey the Canon, in case they pray
in that Form, or to that effect, those who do so conceive it, show in their
deeds, that they as little care for the effect, as for the Form, we plainly see
by the effects, what that effect of theirs would tend to, what is the issue of
that liberty, which most Men have taken: too many of that sort, who most stand
upon it, using such passages in their prayers before their Sermons, that even
their prayers in the Psalmists language are turned into Sin: And for the
brevity therein required [as briefly as conveniently they may] they neglect
that also: and study to spin out their prayers to a tedious length against all
convenience. Besides, whereas the Church intends nothing more in her public
Canons than an uniformity in Devotion, this leaving men to themselves in such a
special part of Gods public Service as that now is made, would bring in a
Confusion, at the least a Dissonancie, and so, destroy that blessed Concord,
which the Church most aims at: Both which absurdities or inconveniences, call
them what you will, are happily avoided by that Order of Bidding prayers, by
the Church intended.

Invocation, is that, it does accuse the public Liturgy as insufficient, and
defective: For were it thought that the Confession in the Service Book, and
those particular Prayers, Collects, Hymns, Thanksgivings, and Ejaculations,
which are therein used, were either perfect in themselves, or acceptable unto
God, to what end should we add a prayer of our own devising? that were to light
a Candle before the Sun, and therefore they that stand upon it, do in effect,
as much as if a man should say, my Friends, and Brethren make no account of any
thing, which you hear from the Common Prayer Book, in which is nothing to be
found but the voice of Man, but hearken unto me, and by me what the Churches
say to the Spirit; or as a Puritan Tradesman once served my old Chamber-fellow
Mr. L. D. meeting one time by chance at Dinner, my Chamber-fellow being the
only Scholar in the Company, was requested to say Grace, which he did
accordingly; and having done, the Tradesman, whom before I spoke of, lifting up
both his hands, and whites to Heaven, calls upon them, saying, Dearly beloved
Brethren, let us praise God better; And thereupon began a long Grace of his own
conceiving. The case is just the same in the present business: Nor had those
Men, who first invented those new Forms of Prayer, obtruded them so easily upon
the Church, but that withal they labored to persuade weak Men, and did
persuade them at the last, that questionless such prayers were better, and more
powerful far than any by the Church appointed: Now all this fear of bringing
down the reputation of the Liturgy, and practicing to advance our private
prayers above the public, are easily avoided by that Bidding of prayers
enjoyed by Queen Elizabeth, and King Edward VI. and before that, in use in the
Church of England, as does appear most plainly in King Henry's time, and
therefore questionless it was the meaning of the Canon, that it should
continue. And being it was the meaning of the Canon, of them that made it, that
the said Form of Bidding prayers (for avoiding the inconveniences and mischiefs
before recited) should be still continued; the Prelates of the present times,
have greater reason to see it carefully, and duly put in execution, by how much
the mischiefs and inconveniences, arising from neglect thereof, and from the
liberty which some Men take unto themselves of praying what, and how they list
in the Congregation, are now more sensibly apparent than ever formerly.

Other absurdities, or inconveniences in this kind I could produce, but that
these few may serve as a taste for the rest, and I am loath to go beyond the
compass of a Letter, although I cannot but be fearful, that I have passed the
bounds thereof already: However I was willing rather to trespass somewhat on
good manners, than to be wanting in the least degree to your desire: Beseeching
you as favorably to accept, those Considerations, as they are cheerfully and
faithfully digested by me in obedience to the intimation of your Lordships
pleasure, which in all matters tending to the Churches service, carries the
force of a Command upon all the studies and endeavors of

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Humble Servant.

THE UNDECEIVING OF THE PEOPLE In the point of TITHES.

Wherein is showed, I. That never any Clergy in the Church of God has been, or
is maintained with less charge to the Subject, than the established Clergy of
the Church of England. II. That there is no Subject in the Realm of England,
who gives any thing of his own, toward the maintenance of his
Parish-Minister, but his Easter-Offering. III. That the change of Tithes into
Stipends, will bring greater trouble to the Clergy, than is yet considered; and
far less profit to the Country, than is now pretended.


By PETER HEYLYN, D. D.

1 COR. IX. 7. Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? Who planteth a
Vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and
eats not of the milk of the flocks.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, to be sold by C. Harper. 1681.

TO THE READER.
THE Lands of Bishops and Cathedrals, being put to sale, there remains
nothing to support a sinking Ministry but Parochial Tithes; and upon these the
eyes of Avarice and Rapine were so strongly fixed, that all endeavors to
preserve them were almost grown desperate. The Horseleach and her Daughters in
the book of Proverbs are always on the craving hand; nothing but Give, Give, to
be heard amongst them. Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo, in the
Poets lauguage. When they have once tasted the sweets of blood, they never lose
their hold till full, and when full, not satisfied. The Prey when brought
within the view must be hunted close. And to this end the Anabaptists on the
one side, and the Adjutators on the other so bestirred themselves, that
Petitions against Tithes were hammered in all parts of the Kingdom, the
Parliament continually vexed with their importunities, the vulgar Landholders
fooled into an opinion that they should have those Tithes themselves which
before they paid unto the Clergy; the common Tradesman and Artificer which had
none to pay, opening as wide as any of the rest to make up the Cry. In this
Conjuncture of Affairs, Anno 1648. I published a short and plain Discourse,
entitled, The Undeceiving of the People in the point of Tithes, under the name
of Ph. Treleinie, the letters of my own name being transposed into that in the
way of Anagram. For though I was then sequestered from my Church-preferments, in
a condition rather of paying than receiving Tithes, and consequently could have
no Self Ends in it, as the case then stood: yet I was fearful lest the work of
avowed for mine, should be neglected as the product of corrupted Interests of
one that wholly advocated for his own concernments. What benefit redounded by
it unto some, what satisfaction unto others, I had rather thou should hear
elsewhere than expect from me. All I shall add now is but this, that I hope it
will not be less profitable unto them that read it, nor read by any with more
prejudice and disaffection, now I acknowledge it for my own, than when it came
before them in a borrowed name; and so fare thee well.

The Undeceiving of the People In the Point of TITHES.
AMongst those popular deceits which have been set abroad of late to abuse the
people, there is not any one which has been cherished with more endearments,
than a persuasion put into them of not paying Tithes: Partly, because it
carries no small show of profit with it, but principally, as it seems a
conducible means to make the Clergy more obnoxious to them, and to stand more
at their devotion than they have done formerly. Upon these hopes, it has been
the endeavors of some leading men to represent it to the rest as a Public
grievane, that the Clergy being but an handful of men in comparison of all the
rest of the Kingdom, should go away with the tenth (or as some say, the sixth
part) of the fruits of the earth; and that the Minister sitting still in his
contemplations, should live upon the sweat of other men's brows, and taking
pains amongst the people but one day in seven, should have the tenth part of
their Estates allotted to them for their maintenance. And it is no marvail, if
some few on these mis-persuasions, have importuned the High Court of Parliament
from time to time with troublesome and clamorous Petitions to redress this
wrong, and put them up also in the name of whole Counties (although the
generality of those Counties had no hand therein) to add the greater credit and
authority to them. In which design, although they have prevailed no further on
the two Houses of Parliament, than to be sent away with this general promise,
As in the answer to those those of Hartford, Kent, etc.
That in due time their Petitions should be taken into consideration; and that
it was the pleasure of the several and respective Houses, that in the mean
season they should take care that Tithes be duly paid accordin to Law; yet they
which have espoused the quarrel will not so be satisfied. For when it pleased
the Lords and Commons to set out an Ordinance, bearing date November. 8. 1644.
for the true payment of Tithes and other duties, according to the Laws and
customs of this Realm; there came out presently a Pamphlet entitled, The
Dismounting of the Ordinance for Tithes, followed and backed by many a
scandalous Paper of the self-same strain. And when it seemed good to the said
Lords and Commons, on the precipitancy of some of the Clergy under
Sequestration, to set out their Additional Ordinance of the ninth of August,
Anno 1647. it was encountered presently with a scurrilous Pamphlet, entitled, A
Preparation for a day of Thanksgiving to the Parliament for their late
Ordinance for Tithes, newly mounted and well charged with treble damages, for
the peoples not giving the Tenth part of their Fstates to the Clergy or
Impropriators. And this, according to the style of those Petitions, is said to
be the Result of the Parliaments Friends in Hartfordshire; though I am verily
persuaded that few, if any of the Gentry and men of quality in the Country were
acquainted with it. But be it the result of few or many of the Parliaments
Friends (though I conceive they are but back-friends to the Parliament, who set
so slight a value on their Constitutions) the Title does afford two things
worthy consideration: First, that the maintenance of the Clergy here by Law
established, is said to be by giving to them the tenth part of every man's
Estate: And secondly, that the blow goes higher than before it did, and aims
not only at the devesting of the Church of her ancient Patrimony, but at the
depriving of the Gentry of their Impropriations, which many of them hold by
Lease, many by Inheritance, all by as good a title as the Law can make them. I
know there has been great pains taken by some Learned men to state the
Institution and Right of Tithes, and several judicious Tractates have been writ
about it; which notwithstanding have not found such entertainment as they did
deserve; partly, because being written in an Argumentative way, they were above
the reach of the vulgar Reader; but principally, because written by men engaged
in the cause, and such as might be biased with their own interesse in it. For
my part I, am free from all those engagements which may incline me to write any
thing for my private ends, being one that pays Tithes and such other duties
as the Laws and Ordinances do enjoin. And though I sit far off from the
fountain of business, and cannot possibly see at so great a distance, what
might best satisfy the doubts and clamors of unquiet men; yet I shall venture
to say somewhat in a modest way toward the Undeceiving of the People in this
point of Tithes, whose judgments have been captivated by those mis-persuasions
which cunningly have been communicated and infused into them. And I shall do it
in a way (if I guess aright) which has not yet been traveled in this present
point; such as I hope will satisfy all them of the adverse party, but those
who are resolved beforehand, that they will not be satisfied. For whereas the
whole controversy turns on these three hinges: First, that the maintenance
allowed the Clergy, is too great for their calling, especially considering the
small number of them: Secondly, that it is made up out of the tenth part of
each man's Estate: And thirdly, that the changing of this way by the payment of
Tithes into that of Stipends, would be more grateful to the Country, and more
easy to the Clergy: I shall accordingly reduce this small discourse unto these
three heads. First, I will show that never any Clergy in the Church of God has
been, or is maintained with less charge to the Subject, than the established
Clergy of the Church of England. Secondly, that there is no man in the Realm of
England, who pays any thing of his own toward the maintenance of his Parish
Minister, but his Easter-Offering. And thirdly, that the changing of Tithes
into Stipends, would bring greater trouble to the Clergy than is yet
considered, and far less profit to the Country than is now pretended. These
Propositions being proved, (which I doubt not of) I hope I shall receive no
check for my undertaking, considering that I do it of a good intent, to free
the Parliament from the trouble of the like Petitions; and that the common
people being disabused, may quietly and cheerfully discharge their duties
according to the Laws established, and live together with that unity and godly
love which ought to be between a Minister and his Congregation. This is the sum
of my design, which if I can effect, it is all I aim at: And with this
Declaration of my mind and meaning, I trust this short discourse of mine will
be, if not applauded, yet at least excused. First then I am to prove this point.

I. That never any Clergy in the Church of God, has been, or is maintained
with less charge to the Subject than the established Clergy of the Church of
England.
For proof of this, we must behold the Church of God, as it stood under the Law
in the Land of Canaan, and as it now stands under the Gospel in the most
flourishing parts of Christendom. Under the Law, the Tribe of Levi was
possessed of 48 Cities, and the Territories round about them, extending every
way for the space of 2000 Cubits, which in so small a Country was a greater
proportion, than the Rents received by the Clergy of all the Bishopric and
Chapter Lands in the Realm of England. Then had they besides Tribes (whereof
more anon) the firstborn of Mankind, and all unclean Beasts, which were
redeemed at the rate of five Shekels apeece, amounting in our money to 12 s. 6
d. and of the Firstlings of clean Beasts, their blood being sprinkled on the
Altar, and the fat offered for a burnt-offering, the flesh remained unto the
Priests. Of which, see Numb. 18. v. 15, 16, 17, 18. They had also the First
fruits of wine, Levit. 2.3. and 7.5.7.
oil, and wool, Deuteronomy. 18. v. 4. yea, and of all things else which the earth
brought forth for the use of man; the first fruits of the dough, Numb. 15. v.
20, 21. the Meat Offerings, the Sin Offerings, the Trespass-offerings, the
Shake-offerings, the Heave-offerings, and the Shewbread: Levit. 7.33, 34. Ib.
v. 8.
As also of all Eucharistical Sacrifices, the Breast and the Shoulder; of
others, the shoulder and the two cheeks, and the maw: and the whole
burnt-offering, they received the skin. Then add, that all the Males of the
Tribes of Israel were to appear thrice yearly before the Lord, and none of them
came empty-handed: And that if any had detained any thing in part or in whole,
which was due by Law, he was to bring a Ram for an offering, to make good that
which was detained, and to add a fifth part to it in the way of Recompense.
Besides, these duties were brought in to the Priests and Levites without charge
or trouble. And if any for their own ease desired not to pay in kind, but to
redeem the same for a sum of money; the estimation of the due was to be made by
the Priest; and a fifth part added, as before, for full satisfaction. Lev. 27,
12, 13.
In a word, such, and so many allowances had the Priests and Levites, that
setting by the Tithes of their Corn and Cattle, and of all manner of increase,
their maintenance had far exceeded that of the English Clergy; and adding unto
these the Tithes of all Creatures tithable, it does more than double it. For in
the payment of their Tithes, by the Lords appointment, there was not only a
full tenth of all kinds of increase, but such an imposition laid on all kinds
of Grain, as came to more than a sixth part of the Crop it self; insomuch that
of 6000 bushels, 1121 accrued unto the Priests and Levites; 4779 remaining only
to the Husbandman. For first, out of 6000 bushels (and so accordingly in all
after that proportion) a Sixtieth part at least, (and that they termed the
Therumah of the evil eye, or the niggards First Fruits) was to be set apart for
the first fruits of the threshing-floor, which was one hundred in the total.
Out of the residue, being 5900 bushels, the first Tithe payable to the Levites,
which lived dispersed and intermingled in the rest of the Tribes, came to 590
bushels; and of the residue being 5310 bushels, 531 were paid for the second
Tithe unto the Priests, which ministered before the Lord in his holy Temple; yet
so, that such as would decline the trouble of carrying it in kind unto
Jerusalem, might pay the price thereof in money according to the estimate
which the Priests made of it. To which a fifth part being added (as in other
cases) did so improve this Tithe to the Priests advantage; as that which being
paid in kind, was but ten in the hundred, being thus altered into money, made
no less than twelve. Now lay these several sums together, and of 6000 bushels,
as before was said, there will accrue 1121 to the Priest and Levite, and but
4779 to the Lord or Tenant. By which account the Priests and Levites in the
tithing of 6000 bushels, received twice as much within a little, as is
possessed or claimed by the English Clergy, even where the Tithes are best
paid, without any exemptions, which are so frequent in this Kingdom.

But then perhaps it will be said, that the Levites made up one of the twelve
Tribes of Israel, and having no inheritance amongst the rest but the Tithes and
Offerings, besides the 48 Cities before mentioned, were to be settled in way of
maintenance correspondent unto that proportion. But so (they say) it is not in
the case of the English Clergy, who are so far from being one of twelve or
thirteen at most, that they are hardly one for an hundred; or as a late
Pamphlet does infer, not one for five hundred. Who on this supposition,
Tithe-gatherers no Gospel Ministers.
that there are 500 Men and Women in a Country Parish, the Lands whereof are
worth 2000 l. per annum, and that the Minister goes away with 400 l. a year of
the said two thousand; concludes, that he has as much for his own particular,
as any Sixscore of the Parish, supposing them to be all poor or all rich alike;
and then cries out against it as the greatest Cheat and Robbery that was ever
practiced. But the answer unto this is easy, I would there were no greater
difficulties to perplex the Church. First, for the Tribe of Levi, it is plain
and evident, that though it pass commonly by the name of a Tribe, yet was it
none of the twelve Tribes of Israel, the House of Joseph being sub-divided into
two whole Tribes, those namely of Ephraim and Manasses, which made up the
Twelve. And secondly, it is as evident, that it fell so short of the proportion
of the other Tribes, as not to make a Sixtieth part of the House of Jacob. For
in the general muster which was made of the other Tribes, of men of 20 years
and upwards, such only as were fit for arms and such public services, the
number of them came unto 635500 fighting men; to which, if we should add all
those which were under 20 years, and unfit for service, the number would at
least be doubled. But the Levites being all reckoned from a month old and
above, their number was but 22000 in all, (of which see Numb. 1.46. and 3.39.)
which came not to so many by 273. as the only Firstborn of the other Tribes:
And therefore when the Lord took the Levites for the Firstborn of Israel, the
odd 273 were redeemed according to the Law at five Shekels a man, and the money
which amounted to 1365 Shekels was given to Aaron and his Sons, Numb. 7.47, 48.
Which ground so laid according to the holy Scriptures, let us next take a view
of the English Clergy, and allowing but one for every Parish, there must be
9725. according to the number of the parish Churches; or say ten thousand in
the total, the residue being made up of Curates officiating in the Chapels of
Ease throughout the Kingdom; and reckoning in all their Male-children from a
month old and upwards, the number must be more than trebled. For although many
of the dignified and beneficed Clergy do lead single lives, yet that defect is
liberally supplied by such Married Curates as do officiate under them in their
several Churches. And then, as to the disproportion which is said to be between
the Clergy and the rest of the people, one to five hundred at the least; the
computation is ill grounded, the collection worse. For first, the computation
ought not to be made between the Minister and all the rest of the Parish, Men,
Women, and Children, Masters and Dames, Menservants and Maidservants, and the
Stranger which is within the gates; but between him and such whose Estates are
Titheable, and they in most Parishes are the smallest number. For setting by
all Children which live under their Parents, Servants, Apprentices, Artificers,
Daylabourers, and Poor indigent people; none of all which have any interest in
the Tithable Lands: The number of the residue will be found so small, that
probably the Minister may make one of the ten, and so possess no more than his
own share comes to. And then how miserably weak is the Collection which is made
from thence, that this one man should have as much as any Sixscore of the rest
of the Parish, (supposing that the Parish did contain 500 persons) or that his
having of so much were a Cheat and Robbery? And as for that objection which I
find much stood on, that the Levites had no other Inheritance but the Tithes
and Offerings, Numb. 18.23. whereas the English Clergy are permitted to
purchase Lands, and to Inherit such as descend unto them; the Answer is so
easy, it will make it self. For let the Tithes enjoyed by the English Clergy
descend from them to their Posterity, from one Generation to another, as did
the Tithes and Offerings on the Tribe of Levi: And I persuade my self that none
of them will be busied about Purchasing Lands, or be an eyesore to the people
in having more to live on than their Tithes and Offerings. Till that be done,
excuse them if they do provide for their Wives and Children, according to the
Laws both of God and Nature. And so much for the Parallel in point of
maintenance, between the Clergy of this Church and the Tribe of Levi.

Proceed we next unto the Ministers of the Gospel at the first Plantation,
during the lives of the Apostles, and the times next following; and we shall
find, that though they did not actually receive Tithes of the people, yet they
still kept on foot their right; and in the mean time, till they could enjoy
them in a peaceable way, were so provided for of all kind of necessaries, that
there was nothing wanting to their contentation. First, that they kept on foot
their Right, and thought that Tithes belonged as properly to the Evangelical
Priesthood, as unto the Legal, seems evident unto me by S. Paul's discourse, who
proves Melchisedechs Priesthood by these two arguments: First, that he blessed
Abraham: And secondly, that he Tithed him, or received Tithes of him. For
though in our English translation it be only said, that he received Tithes of
Abraham, which might imply that Abraham gave them as a gift, or a
Free-will-offering, and that Melchisedech received them in no other sense: Yet
in the Greek it is (...), which in plain English is, that he Tithed Abraham,
and took them of him as his due, Heb. 7.6. If then our Savior be a Priest
after the order of Melchisedech, as no doubt he is, he must have power to Tithe
the people as well as to Bless them, or else he comes not home to the Type or
figure: Which power of Tithing of the people, or receiving Tithes of them,
since he exercises not in person, it seems to me to follow upon very good
consequence, that he has devolved this part of his power on those whom he has
called and authorized for to bless the people. Certain I am, the Fathers of the
Primitive times, though they enjoyed not Tithes in specie, by reason that the
Church was then unsettled, and as it were in motion to the land of rest, (in
which condition those of Israel paid no Tithes to Levi) yet they still kept
their claim unto them, as appears clearly out of Origin, and some other
Ancients. And of this truth I think no question need be made amongst knowing
men. The only question will be this, Whether the maintenance which they had
till the Tithes were paid, were not as chargeable to the people as the Tithes
now are (supposing that the Tithes were the Subjects own.) For my part I
conceive it was, the people of those pious times not thinking any thing too
much to bestow on God, for the encouragement of his Ministers, and the reward
of his Prophets. They had not else sold off their Lands and Houses, and brought
the prices of the things which were sold, and laid them at the Apostles feet,
as we know they did, Acts 4.34, 35. but that they meant that the Apostles
should supply their own wants out of those oblations, as well as the
necessities of their poorer Brethren. I trow, the selling of all, and trusting
it to the dispensing of their Teachers, was matter of more charge to such as
had Lands and Houses, than paying the tenth part of their House-rent, or the
Tithe of their Lands. And when this custom was laid by, (as possibly it might
end with the Apostles themselves) the Offerings which succeeded in the place
thereof, and are required or enjoined by the Apostolical Canons, were so great
and manifold, that there was nothing necessary to the life of man, as Honey,
Milk, Fowl, Flesh, Grapes Corn, Oil, Frankincense, Fruits of the season, yea
Strong drink and Sweetmeats, which was not liberally offered on the Altars, or
Oblation-Tables: Insomuch as the Author of the Book called the Holy Table,
name, and thing, etc. according to his scornful manner, says of them, that
they were rather Pantaries, Larders, or Storehouses, than so many Consecrated
Altars. And though he make those Canons but as so many Pot-guns, yet as great
Critics as himself esteem otherwise of them, as his Antagonist in that quarrel
proves sufficiently. And as for that particular Canon which requires these
Offerings, it is but an exemplification or particularizing of that which is
more generally prescribed by S. Paul, Gal. 6.6. where he enjoyneth him that is
taught to communicate to him that teaches him, in omnibus bonis, in all his
goods, as the Rhemists read it very rightly, and not in all good things, as our
late translation. Now this Injunction reaches to all sorts of people, to the
poor as well as to the rich, as it appears plainly by a passage in S. Cyprians
works, where he upbraids a wealthy Widow for coming empty-handed, and without
her Offering to the Altar of God, and eating of that part of the Sacrifice
which the poor had offered. Locuples and and dives in dominicum, sine
sacrificio venis, and partem sacrificii quod pauper obtulit sumis. Cyp. de
piet. and Eleemos.
To the improvement of the maintenance of him that teaches, not only the rich
men were to offer out of their abundance, but the poor Woman also was to bring
her Mite. They had not else come home to S. Paul's commandment, which reaches
unto all sorts of people without any exception; to every one according to that
measure of fortune which God has given him: Which clearly shows, that though
the payment of Tithes fall heavier upon Landed men, than possibly it might do
in the Primitive times, before the Church was in a condition to demand her
rights; yet speaking generally of the people of a Church or Parish, the charge
was greater to them then, than it has been since; the greatest numbers of the
people being freed from Tithes, (because they have no Lands from whence Tithes
are payable) who could not be discharged from the communication of their goods
and substance without a manifest neglect of S. Paul's Injunction. More than this
yet, besides what was communicated in a private way, for the encouragement and
support of him that taught; which we may well conceive to be no small matter:
The public Offerings of the people were of so great confequence, as did not
only serve to maintain the Bishop, according to his place and calling, and to
provide also for the Priests or Ministers which served under him; but also to
relieve the Poor, and repair their Churches. Beda in histor. Eccles. l. 1.
And therefore certainly the faithful of those times were generally at more
charge to maintain their Ministry, than the Subject is with us in England; the
greatest part of which by far pay no Tithes at all to the Parish-Minister, and
no man any thing at all toward the maintenance of the Bishop, as in former
days.

Follow we our design through several Countries, and we shall find the Clergy
of most parts in Christendom, either more plentifully endowed, or else
maintained with greater charge unto the Subject, than the Clergy of the Church
of England. In France, the Author of the Cabinet computes the Tithes and
temporal Revenues of the Clergy, besides provisions of all sorts, to 80
millions of Crowns; but his account is disallowed by all knowing men. Bodin
reports from the mouth of Monsieur d'Alemant, one of the Presidents of
Accounts in Paris, that they amount to 12 millions, and 300000 of their Livres,
which is 1230000 l. of our English money; and he himself conceives that they
possess seven parts of twelve of the whole Revenues of that Kingdom. The book
inscribed Comment d'Estat gives a lower estimate, and reckoning that there are
in France 200 millions of Arpens, (which is a measure somewhat bigger than our
Acre) assigns 47 millions, which is near a fourth part of the whole, to the
Gallican Clergy. But which of these soever it be we think fit to stand to, it
is resolved by them all that the Baise-maine, which consists of Offerings,
Churchings, Burials, Diriges, and such other casualties, amounts to as much
per annum, as their standing rents: Upon which ground, Sir Edwin Sandys
computeth their Revenue at six millions yearly. In Italy, besides the temporal
Estate of the Popes of Rome, the Clergy are conceived to have in some places a
third part of the whole, but in most a moiety. In Spain, the certain rents of
the Archbishopric of Toledo, are said to be no less than 300000 Crowns per
annum, which is far more than all the Bishops, Deans, and Prebendaries do
possess in England. In Germany, the Bishops for the most part are powerful
Princes; and the Canons of some Churches of so fair an Intrado, and of such
estimation amongst the people, that the Emperors have thought it no
disparagement to them, to have a Canons place in some of their Churches. And as
for the Parochial Clergy in these three last Countries, especially in Spain and
Italy, where the people are more superstitious than they be in Germany, there
is no question but that the Vailes and Casualties are as beneficial to them, as
the Baise-main is to the French.

But here perhaps it will be said that this is nothing unto us of the Realm of
England, who have shook off the superstitions of the Church of Rome, and that
our pains is spent but to little purpose, unless we can make good our Thesis in
the Churches Protestant. We must therefore cast about again; and first,
beginning with France, as before we did, we shall find that those of the
Reformed party there, not only pay their Tithes to the Beneficiary, who is
presented by the Patron to the Cure or Title; or to the Church or Monastery to
which the Tithes are settled by Appropriations; but over and above do raise a
yearly maintenance for those that minister amongst them. Just as the Irish
Papists pay their Tithes and duties unto the Protestant Incumbent, and yet
maintain their own Priests too by their gifts and offerings; or as the people
in some places with us in England, do pay their Tithes unto the Parson or Vicar
whom the Law sets over them, and raise a contribution also for their Lecturer,
whom they set over themselves. In other Countries where the Supreme Governors
are Reformed or Protestant, the case is somewhat better with the common people,
although not generally so easy as with us in England. For there the Tithes are
taken up by the Prince or State, and yearly pensions assigned out of them to
maintain the Ministers; which for the most part are so small, and so far short
of a Competency (though by that name they love to call it) that the Subject
having paid his Tithes to the Prince or State, is fain to add something out of
his purse toward the mending of the Stipend. Besides, there being for the most
part in every Church two distinct sorts of Ministers; that is to say, a Pastor
who has Cure of souls, and performs all Ministerial offices in his
Congregation, and a Doctor (like our English Lecturers, which took hint from
hence) who only medleth with the Word. The Pastor only has his Stipend from
the public treasury, the Doctor being maintained wholly (as I am credibly
informed) at the charge of the people; and that not only by the bounty or
benevolence of Landed men, but in the way of Contribution, from which no sort
of people of what rank soever, (but such as live on Alms, or the poor Man's box)
is to be exempted. But this is only in the Churches of Calvin's platform, those
of the Lutheran party in Denmark, Swethland, and high Germany, having their
Tithes and Glebe as they had before; and so much more in Offerings than with us
in England, by how much they come nearer to the Church of Rome, both in their
practice and opinions, (especially in the point of the holy Sacrament) than the
English do. And as for our dear Brethren of the Kirk of Scotland, who cannot be
so soon forgotten by a true born English man, the Tithes being settled for the
most part on Religious houses, came in their fall, unto the Crown, and out of
them a third was granted to maintain their Minister; but also ill paid while
the Tithes remained in the Crown, and worse than alienated to the use of
private Gentlemen, that the greatest part of the burden for support of the
Ministry, lay in the way of contribution, on the backs of the people. And as
one ill example does beget another, such Lords and Gentlemen as had right to
present to Churches, following the steps of those who held the Tithes from the
Crown, soon made Lay-fees of all the Tithes of their own demesnes, and left the
Presentee such a sorry pittance, as made him burdensome to his Neighbors for
his better maintenance. How it stands with them now since these late
alterations, those who have took the National Covenant, and I presume are well
acquainted with the Discipline and estate of the Scottish Kirk (which they have
bound themselves to defend and keep) are better able to resolve us. And so much
for the proof of the first proposition, namely, That never any Clergy in in the
Church of God, has been, or is maintained with less charge of the Subject,
than the established Clergy of the Church of England. And yet the proof hereof
will be more convincing, if we can bring good evidence for the second also;
which is,

II. That there is no man in the Kingdom of England, who pays any thing of
his own toward the maintenance and support of his Parish Minister, but his
Easter-Offering.
And that is a Paradox indeed, will the Reader say. Is it not visible to the
eye, that the Clergy have the tenth part of our Corn and Cattle, and of other
the increase and fruits of the Earth? Do not the people give them the tenth
part of their Estates, says one of my Pamphlets? Have they not all their
livelihoods out of our purses, says another of them? Assuredly neither so, nor
so. All that the Clergy does receive from the purse of the Subject, for all the
pains he takes amongst them, is two pence at Easter. He claims no more than
this as due, unless the custom of the place, (as I think in some parts it is)
bring it up to six pence. If any thing be given him over this by some bountiful
hand, he takes it for a favor, and is thankful for it. Such profits as come in
by Marriages, Churchings, and Funeral-Sermons, as they are generally small, and
but accidental: so he is bound unto some special service and attendance for it.
His constant standing fee, which properly may be said to come out of the
Subjects Purse for the administration of the Word and Sacraments, is nothing
but the Easter-offering. The Tithes are legally his own, not given unto him by
the Subject, as is now pretended, but paid unto him as a Rentcharge laid upon
the Land; and that before the Subject, either Lord or Tenant, had any thing to
do in the Land at all. For as I am informed by Sir Edward Coke in his Comment
upon Littletons Tenures, lib. 1. cap. 9. Sect. 73. fol. 58. It appears by the
Laws and Ordinances of ancient Kings, and especially of King Alfred, that the
first King of this Realm had all the lands of England in Demesne, and les
grands manours and royalties, they reserved to themselves, and with the remnant
they for the defense of the Realm enfeoffed the Barons of the Realm with such
jurisdiction as the Court Baron now has. So he, the professed Champion of the
Common Laws. And at this time it was, when all the Lands in England were the
Kings Demesne, that Ethelwolph, the second Monarch of the Saxon race (his
father Egbert being the first which brought the former Heptarchie under one
sole Prince) conferred the Tithes of all the Kingdom upon the Church, by his
royal Charter. Of which, thus Ingulph Abbot of Crowland an old Saxon Writer:
Anno 855. Rex Ethelwulfus, omnium Praelatorum and Principum suorum qui sub ipso
variis Provinciis totius Angliae praeerant gratuito Consensu, tunc primo cum
decimis terrarum and bonorum aliorum sive catallorum, universam dotavit
Ecclesiam per suum Regium Chirographum. Ingulph.
Anno 855. (which was the 18. of his Reign) King Ethelwulph with the consent of
his Prelates and Princes which ruled in England under him in their several
Provinces, did first enrich the Church of England with the Tithes of all his
Lands and Goods, by his Charter Royal. Ethelward an old Saxon, and of the blood
Royal does express it thus Decimavit de omni possessione sua in partem Domini,
and in universo regimine Principatus sui sic constituit. Ethelward.
: He gave the Tithe of his possessions for the Lords own portion, and ordered
it to be so in all the parts of the Kingdom under his command. Florence of
Worcester in these words: Aethelwulphus Rex decimam totius Regni sui partem, ab
omni Regali servitio and tributo liberavit, and in sempiterno Graphio in Cruce
Christi, pro Redemptione Animae suae and Praedecessorum suorum uni and trino
Deo immolavit. Florent. Wigorn.
King Ethelwolfe for the Redemption of his own soul, and the souls of his
Predecessors, discharged the tenth part of his Realm of all Tributes and
Services due unto the Crown, and by his perpetual Charter signed with the sign
of the Cross, offered it to the three-one God. Roger of Hovenden has it in the
self same words: and Huntingdon more briefly thus; Totam terram suam propter
amorem Dei and Redemptionem ad opes Ecclesiarum decimavit. Henr. Huntingd.
That for the love of God, and the redemption of his soul, he tithed his whole
Dominions to the use of the Church. But what need search be made into so many
Authors, when the Charter it self is extant in old Abbot Ingulph, and in
Matthew of Westminster, and in the Leiger Book of the Abbey of Abingdon? which
Charter being offered by the King on the Altar at Winchester in the presence of
his Barons, was received by the Bishops, and by them sent to be published in
all the Churches of their several Diocesses: a clause being added by the King
(says the Book of Abingdon) That whosoever added to the gift Qui augere
voluerit nostram donationem, augeat omnipotens Deus dies ejus prosperos; siquis
vero mutare vel minuere praesumpserit, noscat se ad Tribunal Christi redditurum
rationem, nisi prius satisfactione emendaverit.
, God would please to prosper and increase his days; but that if any did
presume to diminish the same, he should be called to an account for it at
Christ's Judgment Seat, unless he made amends by full satisfaction. In which, as
in some other of the former passages, as there is somewhat savouring of the
error of those darker times, touching the merit of good works; yet the
authorities are strong and most convincing for confirmation of the point which
we have in hand.

Now that the King charged all the Lands of the Kingdom with the payment of
Tithes, and not that only which he held in his own possession, is evident both
by that which was said before from Sir Edward Coke, and by the several passages
of the former Authors. For if all the Lands in the Kingdom were the Kings
Demesnes, and the King conferred the Tithes of all his Lands on the Church of
God, it must follow thereupon that all the Lands of the Realm were charged with
Tithes before they were distributed amongst the Barons for defense of the
Kingdom. And that the Lands of the whole Realm were thus charged with Tithes,
as well that which was parted in the hands of Tenants, as that which was in the
occupancy of the King himself, the words before alleged do most plainly
evidence, where it is said that he gave the tenth of all his Lands, as Ingulph;
the Tithe of his whole Land, as Henry of Huntingdon; the tenth part of his
whole Kingdom, as in Florence of Worcester; the tenth part of the Lands
throughout the Kingdom, in the Charter it self. And finally, in the Book of
Abingdon, the Charter is ushered in with this following Title, viz. Quomodo
Ethelwolfus Rex dedit decimam partem regni sui Ecclesiis, that is to say, how
Ethelwolf gave unto the Church the tenth part of his Kingdom. This makes it
evident, that the King did not only give de facto, the Tithe or the tenth part
of his whole Realm to the use of the Clergy; but that he had a right and a
power to do it, as being not only the Lord Paramount, but the Proprietary of
the whole Lands; the Lords and great Men of the Realm not having then a
property or estates of permanency, but as accomptants to the King, whose the
whole land was. And though it seems by Ingulph their consents were asked, and
that they gave a free consent to the Kings Donation; yet was this but a matter
of Form, and not simply necessary, their approbation and consent being only
asked, either because the King was not willing to do any thing to the
disherison of his Crown, without the liking and consent of the Peers; or that
having their consent and approbation, they should be barred from pleading any
Tenant-right, and be obliged to stand in maintenance and defense thereof
against all pretenders. And this appears yet further by a Law of King
Athelstanes, made in the year 930, about which time not only the Prelates of
the Church as formerly, but the great Men of the Realm, began to be settled in
Estates of permanency, and to claim a property in those Lands which they held
of the Crown; and claiming, so begun (it seems) to make bold to subduct their
Tithes. For remedy whereof, the King made this Law, commanding all his
Ministers throughout the Kingdom, that in the first place they should pay the
Tithes Ut imprimis de meo proprio reddant Deo decimas; and Episcopi mei
similiter faciant de suo proprio, and Aldermanni mei, and Praepositi mei.
of his own estate, (that is to say, that which he held in his own hands, and
had not estated out to his Lords and Barons) and that the Bishops did the like
of that which they held in right of their Churches; and his Nobles and Officers
of that which they held in property, as their own possessions or inheritance.
By which we find that Tithes were granted to the Clergy out of all the Lands in
the Kingdom, and the perpetual payment of them laid as a Rentcharge on the
same, by the bounty and munificence of the first Monarchs of this Realm, before
any part thereof was demised to others. And if perhaps some of the great Men of
the Realm had Estates in property (as certainly there were but few, if any,
which had any such Estates in the times we speak of) they charged the same with
Tithes by their own consent, before they did transmit them to the hands of the
Gentry, or any who now claim to lay hold under them.

So then, the Land being charged thus with the payment of Tithes, came with
this clog unto the Lords and great Men of the Realm; and being so charged with
Tithes by the Kings and Nobles, have been transmitted and passed over from one
hand to another, until they came to the possession of the present owners. Who
whatsoever right they have to the other nine parts, either of Fee-simple,
Lease, or Copy, have certainly none at all in the Tithe or tenth, which is no
more theirs, or to be so thought of, than the other nine parts are the
Clergies. For whether they hold their Lands at a yearly Rent, or have them in
fee, or for term of life, or in any other tenure whatsoever it be, they hold
them, and they purchased them on this tacit condition, that besides the rents
and services which they pay to the Lord, they are to pay unto the Clergy, or
unto them who do succeed in the Clergies right, a tenth of all the fruits of
the Earth, and of the fruits of their Cattle, and all creatures titheable,
unless some ancient custom or prescription do discharge them of it. And more
than so, whether they hold by yearly rent, or by right of purchase, they hold
it at less rent by far, and buy it at far cheaper rates, because the land it
self and the stock upon it is chargeable with Tithes, as before was said, than
they would do, or could in reason think to do, were the Land free from Tithes,
as in some places of this Realm it is. To make this clearer by Example of an
House in London, where, according to the Rent which this House is set at, the
Minister has 2 s. 9 d. out of every pound in the name of a Tithe: Suppose we
that the rent of the House be 50 l. the Ministers due according unto that
proportion, comes to 6 l. 17 s. 6 d. yearly; which were it not paid, and to be
paid by Law to the Parish-Minister, there is no question to be made, but that
the Landlord of the House would have raised his Rent, and not content himself
with the 50 l. but look for 56 l. 17 s. 6 d. which is the whole Rent paid,
though to diverse hands. And if this House were to be sold at 16 years purchase,
the Grantee could expect no more than 800 l. because there is a Rent of 6 l. 17
s. and 6 d. reserved to the Minister by Law, which is to be considered in the
sale thereof; whereas if no such Rent or Tithe were to issue out of it, he
would have as many years purchase for the sum remaining, which would inhaunce
the price 110 l. higher than before it was. Now by this standard we may judge of
the case of Lands, though by reason of the difference of the Soil, the well or
ill husbanding of grounds, and the greatness or smalness of the stock, which is
kept upon them, it cannot be reduced to so clear a certainty. But whatsoever
the full Tithe of all be worth to the Minister, we may undoubtedly conclude,
that if so much as the Tithe comes to yearly, were not paid to him, the
Landlord would gain it in his Rent, and the Grantee get it in the sale: no
benefit at all redounding to the Tenant by it, nor any unto him that buyeth it.
Or if we will suppose with one of my Pamphlets, (and let it be supposed this
once for our better proceeding) that he who officiates in a Parish where Tithes
are paid in kind without any subtractions, has the fifth part of every landed
man's Estate, that is to say, four pounds in every 20 l. per annum: the
Purchaser or Tenant, be he which he will, may positively build on this in his
better thoughts, that if four pounds in twenty were not paid to the Minister,
the Tenant must pay to his Landlord, and the Purchaser must buy it at the same
rates, as he did the rest of the Land. But being that neither the Tenant pays
Rent for it, nor the Purchaser has it in his grant from him that sells the
Land unto him: the Tithe of the increase of their Land and stock, and other
creatures titheable in their possession can be none of their own; but must be
his, and only his, whom the munificence of Kings and Princes, confirmed by so
many Laws and Statutes, have conferred it on, His part indeed it is, not ours,
(not the tenth part of our Estates, as my Pamphlet says) and he receives it of
us as a Rent or Duty, transmitted to us with the Land from one hand to another;
not as a matter of gift, or an act of courtesy.

If then we pay not any thing of our own to the Parish Minister, which arises
to him from the increase of Corn and Cattle, and other creatures titheable by
the Law of the Land; I think it cannot be affirmed by discerning men, who are
not led aside by prejudice and prepossessions, that we give any thing at all of
our own unto them, more than our Easter-Offering, be it more or less. It Is
true, some Statutes have been made about the payment of personal Tithes, out of
the gains arising in the way of Trade: and I remember Dr. Burgess writ a book
about it, for which he stands as highly censured by the Independent, As in the
book called Tithe-gatherers no Gospel-Officers.
as for other things by those of the Prelatical party. But then I think it is
as true, that either those Statutes were drawn up with such reservations, or
men of Trades have been so backward to conform unto them, that little or no
benefit has redounded by them to the Parish-Minister, more than to show the
good affections which the Parliaments of those times had unto the Clergy. And
if we pay nothing of our own toward the maintenance of the Clergy, out of the
increase of our grounds and stock, as I have plainly proved we do not; and that
no benefit come unto them from the gains of Trading, as I think there comes
not: if those small vailes and casualties which redound unto him from
Marriages, Churchings, and the like occasions, be given unto him for some
special service which he does perform, and not for his administration of the
Word and Sacraments; I hope my second Proposition has been proved
sufficiently, namely, that there is no man in the Kingdom of England who pays
any thing of his own toward the maintenance of his Parish-Minister, but his
Easter-Offering: If so, as so it is for certain, there has been little ground
for so great a clamor as has been lately raised about this particular: less
reason to subduct or to change that maintenance which the piety of our Kings
have given, and the indulgence of succeeding Princes have confirmed in
Parliament, without any charge unto the Subject. Which change, though possibly
some specious colors may be put unto it, will neither be really beneficial to
the Clergy or Laity. And that conducts me on to my last Proposition, viz.

III. That the change of Tithes into Stipends will bring greater trouble to the
Clergy, than is yet considered; and far less profit to the Country, than is
now pretended.
This is a double Proposition, and therefore must be looked on in its several
parts: first, in relation to the Clergy, whose ease is very much pretended; and
next in reference to the Occupant, whose profit only is intended in the change
desired. It is pretended for the Clergy, to be a very difficult thing to know
the dues demandable of their several Parishes, that it makes them too much
given unto worldly things, As in the Kentish Petition, and other projects of
that kind.
by looking after the inning and threshing out of their Corn; and does occasion
many scandalous and vexatious Suits betwixt them and their Neighbors: all
which they think will be avoided, in case the Ministers were reduced to some
annual stipend. And to this end it is propounded by the Army in their late
Proposals, that the unequal, troublesome, and contentious way of Ministers
maintenance by Tithes, may be considered of, (in Parliament) and a remedy
applied unto it. But under favor of the Army, and of all those who have
contrived the late Petitions to that purpose, I cannot see but that the way of
maintenance by annual stipends will be as troublesome, unequal, and contentious
too, as that of Tithes by Law established; especially if those annual stipends
be raised according to the platform which is now in hand. For, as far as I am
able to judge by that which I have seen and heard from the chief Contrivers, the
design is this, A valuation to be made of every Benefice over all the Kingdom,
according to the worth thereof one year with another; a yearly sum according to
that valuation to be raised upon the lands of every Parish, which now stand
chargeable with Tithes; the money so assessed and levied, to be brought into
one common Treasury in each several County, and committed to the hands of
special Trustees hereunto appointed; and finally, that those Trustees do issue
out each half year such allowances to the Ministers of the several Parishes,
respect being had unto the deserts of the person and the charge of his family,
as they think fittest: yet so, that the Impropriators be first fully satisfied
according to the estimate of their Tithes and Glebe. This is the substance of
the project. And if the moneys be assessed in the way proposed, only upon the
landed men, whether Lords or Tenants, and not upon Artificers, Handicrafts, and
men of mysterious Trades, who receive equal benefit by the Ministers labors;
the way of maintenance by stipends will be as unequal altogether, as by that of
Tithes. And if it be but as unequal, I am sure it will be far more troublesome.
For now the Minister or Incumbent has no more to do, but to see his Corn
brought in and housed (being to be cut and cocked to his hand both by Law and
Custom) and being brought in, either to spend it in his House, or sell the
residue thereof to buy other provisions. Which if he think too great an
avocation from his studies, he may put over to his Wife, or some trusty
servant, as Gentlemen of greater fortunes do unto their Bailiffs. And I my self
know diverse Clergymen of good note and quality, to whom the taking up of
Tithes brings no greater trouble, than once a month to look over the accounts
of their servants: besides, that many of them, keeping no more in their hands,
than what will serve for the necessary expense of Household, let out the rest
unto some Neighbor at a yearly rent. But when the Tithes are turned to money,
and that the Minister has neither Corn nor Hay, nor any other provision for
expense of Household, but what he buyeth by the penny: what an unreasonable
trouble must it needs prove to him to trudge from one Market to another, for
every bit of bread he eats, and every handful of Malt which he is to spend? And
if Corn happen to be dear, (as it is at this present) one quarter of a years
provisions bought at the price of the Market, may eat out his whole years
allowance. Besides, I would fain learn, for I know not yet, whether the
valuation be to be made yearly, and to hold no longer than that year, or, being
once agreed on, to endure for ever. If it be made from year to year, either the
Minister must be at a certain trouble in driving a new bargain every year, with
each several and respective Occupant within the Parish; or at a greater trouble
in attending the Trustees of the County, till they have list and leisure to
conclude it for him. But if the valuation once made be to hold for ever, which
is I think the true intent of the design; I would fain know, in case the price
of all Commodities should rise as much by the end of the next hundred years, as
it has done in the last, and so the next hundreds after that; how scant a
pittance the poor Minister will have in time, for the subsistence of himself
and his Family-charge. For since the 26. of King Henry VIII. when a survey was
taken of all the spiritual promotions in this Kingdom, and the clear yearly
value of each returned into the Court of the Exchequer, the prices of
Commodities have been so inhanced, that had not Benefices been improved
proportionably, but held unto the valuation which is there recorded, the
Ministry in general had been so poor, so utterly unable to have gone to the
price of the Markets, that many must have dug or begged for an hungry
livelihood.

And yet we do not see an end of the mischief neither; for when the Tithes are
changed to a sum of money, and the money brought into a common bank or
Treasury, the Minister will be sure to undergo a certain loss, and be vexed
with more uncertain troubles. For when this Clergy-office is once erected and
settled in a constant course or method, as all Offices be; there must be
Treasurers, Receivers, Tellers, Auditors, besides Under-offices, in each
several County; every of which will look to have some benefit by his place and
office, if not his whole subsistence by it. And I would fain know of these
grand Projectors, by that time every one of these Cooks has licked his
fingers, and each Cerberus has had his mouth full; how pitifully short the
Commons must needs prove to the hungry Clergy, who are to live on the
remainder. Now as the loss is more than certain, so will the trouble be as
great as the loss, and no less certain too, though it be uncertain. For when
the poor Clergyman hackneyeth to receive his Stipend, how many put-offs shall
he find e're he speed of his business. For either Mr. Treasurer is not at
leisure, or the money is not yet come in, or better men than he must be sped
before him: And having danced a fortnight in this attendance, may possibly be
forced to a Composition, and take eggs for his money, or else pay very dearly
for his expedition. Such courses have been formerly complained of in the Kings
Exchequer; Committees in the Country are not free from the like complaints:
And much I fear, lest this new Office prove as full of delays and trouble (for
the best of us are but men, and subject to corrupt affections) as either of the
others have been found to be. But then, if Mr. Treasurer have a further power
either of augmentation or of diminution, according as he judges of the
Ministers diligence, or looks upon him in respect of his Charge and Family:
What a base Vassallage and Thraldom must the poor Clergyman be brought to, in
having such a Super-Intendent to judge of his parts and diligence, or to assign
him an allowance for his Wife and Children? How punctually must Mr. Treasurer
be attended and crouched unto, gifted, and bribed from time to time, either in
hope to have the yearly Stipend mended, or else for fear to have it lessened?
The Chancellors were thought to Lord it with too high an insolency, when the
poor Country-Minister did appear before them. But these who are to bear the
Bag, and upon whom the Clergy must depend for a poor subsistence, will be sure
to Lord it over them with contempt enough, more than the Chancellor or Bishop
in the worst times of their Government; in case at last they do not think all
wast which is given to Christ, under pretense of keeping it for more pious
uses. And what a trouble and vexation to ingenuous minds this must needs be
thought, let the Reader judge.

So then, the way of Ministers maintenance by yearly Stipends being as unequal,
and more troublesome than that of Tithes; let us next see whether it may not
prove as contentious also. It Is true indeed, there have been many suits in the
Courts of Westminster, between some Incumbents and their Neighbors about
matter of Tithes; but if it be examined where the fault lies most, I doubt it
will be rather found to proceed out of Covetousness in some Parishioners, than
any difficulty in discovering the demandable dues, or any contentiousness in
the Ministers. For many Country people reckoning all good gains of which they
can defraud the Parson, are apt enough on all occasions to subduct their
Tithes, and either to pretend Customs, or plead Prescriptions to decline the
payment. And though they commonly attempt it first in such trifling matters, as
are not considerable in themselves, and would bring a scandal on the Minister,
should he be too strict, and trouble them for matters of so slight a nature;
yet when he looks upon the consequent, and that the withholding or subducting
of those petit Tithes, is but to make a way for the rest to follow; he finds
more reason to insist on a punctual payment, than otherwise the nature of the
thing would bear. And if a suit ensue upon it, I see not why it should be
charged upon the Minister, who is accomptable to God, the Church, and his whole
succession, for any diminution of the Churches rights, by his remisness or
connivence. But wheresoever the fault lies, contentious suits do sometimes
happen, there is no question of it. And can we think Contentions will not also
rise about the payment of the Stipends? Some men conceive themselves to be
over-rated, others are apt enough to think that the Tradesman who gets more by
his Shop, than they do by the Plough, should be as liable as themselves to this
common burden; and some believing that no Tithes are due at all, will neither
pay in kind or money. Some course must then be taken to enforce a payment,
where payment is denied upon these pretentions; and there is no compulsive
course without some contention. And then supposing that some course must be
taken to enforce a payment, (as I can see no hope how it will be avoided) I
would next know by whom this course must be pursued. If by the Trustees for the
County, they will be like to prove but ill Solicitors in another man's business,
as being to get nothing but their pains for their labor; besides that,
spending, as they must, on the common stock (and men we know, are very apt to
cut large thongs out of another man's leather) the bill of charges for one suit,
may possibly devour the fruits of the whole Benefice. If by the Minister
himself, as it is most likely, we are but where we were before, and by avoiding
one Contention for Tithes in kind, the Minister must be engaged in another for
Tithes in money, which comes all to one. For that such suits will follow on
this alteration, I look on as a matter unavoidable; considering especially how
infinitely the Countryman, who aims at nothing in the change but his gain or
profit, will find himself deceived of his expectation, and consequently will be
more stubborn and untractable when he sees his error.

For that the change of Tithes into annual Stipends will not be so much unto
his profit as he does expect, and has been intimated to him by some leading
men, who have the hammering of the plot, will be no hard matter to demonstrate.
I know that nothing is pretended openly in the alteration, but that the
Occupant may have his Tithes at a certain rent; and not be troubled to expect
till the Parson comes to set out his dues. But I know too, that generally they
have been fed with a secret hope, that if the Parliament prevailed in the
present War, they then should pay no Tithes at all, but every man of what
estate or trade soever, should be contributory to the charge of the Ministers
maintenance. Just so the Prince of Orange dealt with the Boors of Holland;
assuring them, that if they prospered in the War against the King of Spain
(which was then in hand) they should pay no Tithes unto their Ministers; and in
the mean time that the Tithes should be taken up toward the maintenance of the
War for the common liberty. But when the War was brought to so fair an issue,
that the Boor thought to be exempted from the payment of Tithes: Answer was
made, that they should pay none to the Minister as they had done formerly,
whereby their Ministers in effect were become their Masters; but that the
Tithes were so considerable a Revenue, that the State could not possibly
subsist without them; that therefore they must be content to pay them to the
States Commissioners, as they had done hitherto, and that the State would take
due care to maintain a Ministry. By means whereof they do not only pay their
Tithes, as in former times; but seeing how short the public allowance made
their Ministers, does come of that which some are pleased to call a Competency,
they are constrained (as it were) out of common charity, if not compelled
thereto by order, to contribute over and above, with the rest of the people,
for the improvement and increase of the Ministers pension. And so it was in
Scotland also, after the Lords of new erection had engrossed the Tithes. I
cannot say that there is any such design as to annex the Tithes to the Crown,
(though if they be taken from the Clergy, they ought of common right to return
again unto the Crown, from whence they came.) But I dare say, the Landholder
will conceive himself as much defrauded of his expectation, as if there was:
And when he finds that instead of paying no Tithes at all, he is to pay a
valuable consideration in money for them, will think himself so far from being
beholden to the Undertakers of this project, that he will think the old way
better and more easy to him. His money he accounts his own, and parts as sadly
from it as from so much of his blood. The Tithes he looks upon as another man's,
which never were in his possession, or to be reckoned of as a part of himself,
and therefore lets them go without grief or trouble. And I have marked it
commonly amongst my Neighbors (who I believe are of the some temper with other
Oceupants) that the same men who took no thought for parting with their Tithes
in kinds, having compounded for them at a rate in money, invented more delays,
and made more excuses, to put the payment off for a week or two, and so from
one day to another, than for the payment of their Tithes in all their life
time. So dear a thing is money to us Country people, that he who shall
persuade us to redeem a supposed inconvenience with a real and a constant
expense of treasure, will be counted but an evil Counselor. A visible evidence
whereof we have now amongst us. For though the quartering of Soldiers be the
heaviest bondage that ever a freeborn people did languish under, and such as
men of means and quality would buy out upon any terms: Yet generally the
Countryman had rather make himself a Slave, and his Wife a Drudge, and let
them spend upon his Victuals, than part with money to remove them to some other
place. My inference hereupon is this; either the valuation of each several
Benefice will be true and real to the worth, or not. If not, it may redound
indeed to the Ploughmans profit, but then it comes accompanied with a public
fraud, which I believe no Christian State will be guilty of. And on the other
side, if the rates be made according to the full worth of the Benefice, it will
be little to the profit of the Husbandman, who might have farmed his Tithes as
cheap of the Parson or Vicar; besides the hearts-grief it will be unto many of
them to part with ready money for a thing of convenience, without which they
might live as happily as their Fathers did.

And if it be not to the profit of the Ploughman this way, I am sure that in
another way it will not be to his content, or his profit either. For taking it
for granted, as I think I may, that I have hit on the design which is now on
foot, that is to say, that the yearly profits of each Benefice in every County
be brought into one common bank or treasury within the County, and then
disposed of by Trustees, according as they judge of the deserts of the person,
and take into consideration his Family-charge: It may so happen, (and will
doubtless) that in a Parish where the Tax or Sessement comes to 400 l. per
annum, the Minister may not be allowed above an hundred. The residue will be
wholly in Mr. Treasurers power, either to feast with his Friends, or lay up for
his Children; or at the best to setle it on such who relate unto him, or can
make means and friends to enlarge their Pensions, though such perhaps as were
never seen nor heard of by the Parish, whence the money comes. And if men think
it as it is, an ill piece of Husbandry, to have the Soil carried off their own
Land, and laid on another, to the impoverishing of their own, and enriching of
his: I cannot see but that it will be thought a worse piece of Husbandry, and
prove of very ill digestion to most Country stomachs; to have the fat of their
livings carried to another place, and given unto a man whom they never saw, and
who is never like to feed their souls with the bread of life, or their bodies
with the life of bread; their own poor Minister mean while, from whom they have
reason to expect it, being so discouraged and impoverished that he can do
neither. For whereas those who were possessed of the richer benefices, did use
to keep good Hospitality to entertain their Neighbors and relieve their Poor,
and do many other good offices amongst them as occasion served, both to the
benefit and comfort of all sorts of Parishioners: It may so happen, and it will
(as before I said) that the Minister may be so ill befriended by Mr. Treasurer,
and the rest of the Trustees for the County, that instead of being either a
benefit or a comfort to them, in the way proposed, he may prove a burden and a
charge. And though I doubt not but as great care will be taken as can be
desired in the choice of those who are to have the disposing of the public
moneys; yet to suppose that men once settled in an office of such trust and
power, may not be subject unto partialities and corrupt affections, were an
imagination fitter for the Lord Chancelour Verulams new Atlantis, or Sir Thomas
Moore his Predecessors old Vtopia, or a Platonic Commonwealth, than the best
tempered government in the Christian world. For my part looking into the design
with the best eyes I have, and judging of it by the clearest light of
understanding which God has given me, I am not able to discern but that the
change of Tithes into Stipends (in the way propounded) will bring greater
trouble to the Clergy than is yet considered, and far less profit to the
Country than is now pretended; which is the third and last of my Propositions,
and is, I hope, sufficiently and fully proved, or at the least made probable,
if not demonstrative.

I have said nothing in this Tract of the right of Tithes, or on what motive or
considerations of preceding claim, the Kings of England did confer them upon
the Clergy: Contenting my self at this time with the matter of fact, as namely,
that they were settled on the Church by the Kings of this Realm, before they
granted out Estates to the Lords and Gentry, and that the Land thus charged
with the payment of Tithes, they passed from one man to another, Ante Concilium
Lateranense, been toterant Laici decimas sibi in feudum retinere, vel aliis
quibuscunque Ecclesiis dare. Lindw. in Provinc. cap. de decimis.
until it came unto the hands of the present Occupant, which cuts off all that
claim or title which the mispersuaded subject can pretend unto them. I know it
cannot be denied, but that notwithstanding the said Grants and Charters of
those ancient Kings, many of the great men of the Realm, and some also of the
inferior Gentry possessed of Manours, before the Lateran Council, did either
keep their Tithes in their own hands, or make Infeodations of them to Religious
houses, or give them to such Priests or Parishes as they best affected. But
after the decree of Pope Innocent the third (which you may find at large in Sir
Edw. Cokes Comment upon Magna Charta, and other old Statutes of this Realm, in
the Chapter of Tithes) had been confirmed in that Council, ( Anno 1215) and
incorporated into the Canons and conclusions of it, the payment of them to the
Minister or Parochial Priest, came to be settled universally over all the
Kingdom; save that the Templars, the Hospitalers, and Monks of Cisteaux held
their ancient privileges of being excepted for those Lands which they held in
Occupancy from this general rule. Nor have I said any thing of Impropriations,
partly, because I am persuaded that the Lords and Gentry who have their Votes
or Friends in Parliament, will look well enough to the saving of their own
stakes; but principally, because coming from the same original grant from the
King to the Subjects, and by them settled upon Monasteries and Religious houses,
they fell in the ruin of those houses to the Crown again, (as of due right the
Tithes should do, if they be taken from the Clergy,) and by the Crown were
alienated in due form of Law, and came by many mean conveyances to the present
Owners. Only I shall desire that the Lords and Commons would take a special
care of the Churches Patrimony, for fear lest that the prevalency of this evil
humor which gapes so greedily after the Clergies Tithes, do in the end devour
theirs also. And it concerns them also in relation to their right of Patronage,
which if this plot go on, will be utterly lost; and Churches will no longer be
presentative at the choice of the Patron; but either made Elective at the will
of the People, or else Collated by the Trustees of the several Counties
(succeeding as they do in the power of Bishops) as now Committee Men dispose of
the preferments of the Sequestered Clergy. If either by their power and wisdom,
or by the Arguments and Reasons which are here produced, the peoples eyes are
opened to discern the truth, and that they be deceived no longer by this
popular error, it is all I aim at; who have no other ends herein, but only to
undeceive them in this point of Tithes, which has been represented to them as
a public grievance conducing manifestly to the diminution of the^^ gain and
profit. If notwithstanding all this care for their information, they will run
headlong in the ways of spoil and sacrilege, and shut their eyes against the
light of the truth, shine it never so brightly; let them take heed they fall
not into that ^^^^tuation which the Scripture denounces, that seeing they
shall see, but shall not perceive; and that the stealing of this Coal from the
Altars of God, burn not down their Houses. And so I shut up this discourse with
the words of our Savior, saying, that no man tastes new wine, but presently
he says that the old is better.

ECCLESIA VINDICATA: OR, THE Church of England VINDICATED.

PART II.

Containing the Defense thereof V. In retaining the Episcopal Government. AND
VI. The Canonical Ordination of Priests and Deacons.


Framed and Exhibited in an HISTORY of EPISCOPACY.

By PETER HEYLYN, D. D.

HEB. XIII. 17. Obedite Praepositis vestris and subjacete eis. Ipsi enim
pervigilant quasi rationem pro Animabus vestris reddituri, ut cum gaudio hoc
faciant, and non gementes.

CYPRIAN. Epist. LXV. Apostolos, id est, EPISCOPOS and Praepositos Dominus
elegit; Diaconos autem post Ascensum Domini in coelos Apostoli sibi
constituerunt, Episcopatus sui and Ecclesiae Ministros.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, to be sold by C. Harper. 1681.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Quarrels and Disputes about Episcopacy had reposed a while, when they
broke out more dangerously than in former times. In order whereunto the people
must be put in fear of some dark design to bring in Popery; the Bishops
generally defamed as the principal Agents, the regular and established Clergy
traduced as the subservient Instruments do drive on the Plot: Their actings in
Gods public Worship charged for Innovations; their persons made the Common
subjects of reproach and calumny. The News from Ipswich, Bastwicks Let any, and
the Seditious Pamphlets from Friday-street (with other the like products of
those times) what were they but Tentamenta Bellorum Civilium, preparatory
Velitations to that grand encounter, in which they were resolved to assault the
Calling? The Calling could not be attempted with more hopes of Victory than
when it had received such wide wounds through the sides of those persons who
principally were concerned in the safety or defense thereof.

The way thus opened, and the Scots entering with an Army to make good the pass;
the Smectymnuans come upon the Stage, addressing their discourse in Answer to a
Book called An Humble Remonstrance to the Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, Anno 1640. amongst whom they were sure beforehand of a powerful
party to advance the Cause, which made them far more confident of their good
suocess, than otherwise they had reason to expect in a time less favorable.
And in this Confidence they quarrelled not the Rocket or the Officers Fees, the
Oath ex officio, the Vote in Parliament, or the exorbitant jurisdiction of the
High Commission, at which old Martin and his followers clamoured in Queen
Elizabeth's time: Non gaudet tenui sanguine tanta sitis. Their stomach was too
great to be satisfied with so small a sacrifice as the excrescences and
adjuncts of Episcopacy, which seemed most offensive to their Predecessors. They
are all now for Root and Branch, for the very Calling, that having grubbed up
those goodly Cedars of the Church, the Bishops, they might plant a stinking
Elder (as a noble person well observed) in the place thereof. Never was
Learning so employed, to cry down the encouragements and rewards of Learning.
The Branches needs must wither when the Root decays, and what could else befall
Cathedras (as we see it too evidently) but the inevitable exposing of them to a
present ruin, by making them Oblations unto Spoil and Rapine?

And now or never was the time for those that had a care of the Churches
safety, to put themselves into a posture of defense, and be provided for the
Battle. In which if few appeared at the first on the Churches side, it was not
that they durst not give the onset, but that they were reserved for succors.
For whilst the Humbly reverend Remonstrant was pleased to vindicate as well his
own as the Churches honor, there was small cause, or rather none, that other
men should interpose themselves at all, or rob him of the glory of a sole
encounter. Parque novum fortuna videt concurrere Bellum atque virum, as in a
case not much unlike was observed by Lucan. But when that Reverend pen grew
wearied, not with the strength or number of his Adversaries, but their
importunity, who were resolved to have the last words, as himself observes;
and that he has been pleased to give way to others to show their duty and
affection in so just a cause; it was then no hard matter to persuade me to such
further courses as might be thought on and pursued for the Churches peace. And
I the rather was resolved to do somewhat in it, because the Smectymnuans in a
manner had engaged me in the undertaking, It seems they have forgotten what
their own Darling HEILTN, etc. Smectym. page 16, 17.
by giving me the Title of the Bishops Darling; a Title (which though given in
scorn) had been ill bestowed, should I be wanting unto those of that Sacred
Order, which were supposed to let me hold so principal a place in their
affections.

Doubly engaged by duty and this provocation (which I could not take but for a
challenge) I took their Book into my hand, in which I found the whole dispute,
as it relates to the Episcopal Government reduced to these Propositions, viz.

1. That the Impropriation of name, and Imparity of place (between Bishops and
Presbyters) was not of divine right and Apostolical institution, but of humane
invention and occasionally only, and that a Diabolical occasion also, and no
more than so. 2. That the eminent Superiority and Power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction which our Bishops claim, was both unknown to the Scripture and the
Primitive times. 3. That anciently in some places of the World the Episcopal
Government was never known for many years together, the people in those places
being instructed in the faith without help of Bishops.
Hereupon they infer in the close of all, That Bishops or Episcopacy being at
the best a mere humane Ordinance, may by the same Authority be abrogated, by
which it was first established.

This last I must confess delivered in the way of Quere, but so delivered as to
carry a Position in it more pertinent to their aim and purpose than the other
three.

In prosecuting of which points, as they have showed the greatest of their wit
and cunning, to give the fairest colors to a rotten Cause; so have they
brought no new Objections against the Episcopal Order and Jurisdiction, but
what are either answered or prevented in the Learned works of B. Bilson, B.
Downham, and other Worthies of this Church now in bliss with God. Nihil dictum,
quod non dictum fuit prius; had been an Answer new enough for an old Objection.

But seeing that these Men, though they could bring no new supply of Arguments
is make good their Cause, would not rest satisfied with those old Answers which
had been given in former times to their Predecessors: I was resolved to deal
with them in another way than what has formerly been traveled. Not in the way
of Argumentation or a Polemical discourse, there being no likelihood of any end
in such Disputations, as long as men had so much Sophistry as either to evade
the Argument, or find some slight to weaken and shift off the Answer. I rather
chose (having found good success in that kind before) to manage the whole
Controversy as it lay between us, in the way of an Historical Narration, as in
point of fact, which I conceive to be the readiest means to convince
gainsayers, and silence the dispute for the times to come. For if History be
Testis temporum, the surest and most faithful witness of men's actions in the
carriage of all public businesses, as no doubt it is; it cannot but be also
Magistra vitae (both which the Orator affirms of it) the best Instructress we
can have in all Affairs of like nature as they come before us. The History of
Episcopacy, collected from the Writings of the Ancient Fathers, cannot but be
of special use and efficacy in setting forth the Government of the Church in
the purest times; especially when those Fathers are produced on no other
occasion but either as writing on those Texts of Scripture, in which the
Institution and Authority of Bishops is most clearly evidenced; or speaking of
the condition of the Church in their several times, in the Administration and
Government whereof, they had most of them some especial interess. Out of whose
testimonies so digested and compared together, I doubt not but it will appear
most evidently to an indifferent and impartial Reader; first, That our Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST laid the foundation of his Church in an imparity of
Ministers, and that according unto his example the Apostles did the like,
ordaining the three several Orders and Degrees of Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons in the holy Ministry. Next, that the Government of Bishops being
founded thus, was propagated over all the World with the faith it self, there
being no Nation which received the one without the other. And finally that in
matter of Authority and Jurisdiction, the Bishops of the primitive and purest
Ages had full as much as ours of England in these latter times. And if I have
done this, as I hope I have, it may more rationally be inferred, though perhaps
not so safely as the times now are, that Bishops or Episcopacy being of Divine
and Apostolical institution, no humane invention, cannot with piety be
abrogated by a less Authority than that by which it was ordained at the first
appointment.

This is the sum, and this is the end of my design. In prosecution of the
which, I had drawn down my story to the times of Constantine, by whose power
and favor the Church began to settle in all parts of the Empire, where it had
formerly been persecuted with all kind of Extremities, which either the wit of
Tyranny could invent, or an unconquered patience suffer. And if it does appear
by this Disquisition, that the Episcopal Government continued from the Apostles
times till the time of Constantine, not interrupted by the fury of those
Persecutions which made such havoc amongst men of that Sacred Order; there
will be little question made of it for the time succeeding, in which both the
Order and the Men were raised unto the highest pitch of Estimation. But finding
one objection of a later date, not to be satisfied in and by the practice of
those elder times, I think it not amiss to make answer to it here before we
part. The matter to be proved, and in the proof whereof they do so much glory,
is, That there is one Congregation at the least in the Christian World, in
which the Government of Bishops has met with Contradiction, contrary unto that
which had been positively affirmed in the Humble Remonstrance. And this they
prove from the Bishops own Darling HEYLYN, who told them in his Geography, page
55. That the people of Biscay in Spain, admit no Bishops to come amongst them;
and that when Ferdinand the Catholic came in progress accompanied among others
with the Bishop of Pampelone, the people rose up in Arms, drove back the
Bishop, and gathering up all the dust which they thought he had trod on, flung
it into the Sea. All this the Darling writes indeed, they say true in that. But
can any rational Man infer from hence, that the People of Biscay do abominate
the Episcopal Government; or that it is not there received without
contradiction? They may conclude as strongly (I am sure more logically) that
the Dean and Prebends of Westminster are enemies to Episcopal Government, or at
the least receive it not without contradiction, because they suffer neither
Archbishop nor Bishop to exercise any jurisdiction within that City and the
Liberties of it; nor to hold any Convocation within that Church, but upon
special leave obtained, and under a solemn protestation not to infringe thereby
their ancient privileges. For the truth is, that the Biscains being a poor and
indigent Nation, and finding the Episcopal Visitations very chargeable to them,
procured a privilege in times past, that their Bishops should not come in
person to visit their Churches; for which consult the general History of Spain,
fol. 919. And being withal a rugged and untractable people, tenaciously
addicted to their ancient customs, and kept continually in mind of some wrongs
and injuries, which had been offered by their Prelates in the times foregoing;
they might be easily excited to that act of outrage against the Bishop of
Pampelone, and yet without any the least contradiction receive there (as indeed
they do) the Episcopal Government.

But to proceed, I could not but perceive by this scornful attribute, under
what prejudice I lay amongst those of that Party, and therefore that any thing
of mine in Answer to them would not be looked upon with equal and impartial
eyes. The door of Truth is never so close barred, as when Prejudice and
Prepossession have blockt up the entrance. In which respect having finished the
discourse which I had in hand, I thought not fit to let it pass under my own
name, but published it under that of Theophilus Churchman (not without many
honest Precedents in that kind before.) A name which might both serve to
conceal my Person and express my Relations, and whereunto I hoped to create no
reproach or obloquy by my slack performances.

But contrary to what I hoped, the Author of the Pamphlet called The Observator
observed (finding perhaps who walked under that Disguise) must needs take him
to task, setting upon him first with a petulant scorn, (after his usual way of
throwing dirt on all he meets with) as not knowing by what name to call him,
whether Goodman, Worshipful, Right Worshipful, Honorable, Right Honorable, or
Right Reverend Churchman. Which said he charge it upon him, that there is
nothing in his Book but what is stolen from Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop Bilson,
Bishop Hall, and others, fol. 37. and reckoning up some others who have written
in defense of Episcopacy, he acknowledges them all but Churchman to be good men
and true, and consequently Churchman neither true nor good. Therefore that no
man else may suffer by my imperfections, I have thought good to lay aside my
former Vizor, to show my self in my own likeness, and to cry out with him in
Virgil, Me, me, adsum qui feci, in me convertite ferrum. Let him and all the
Enemies of Episcopacy make their blows at me, and if I cannot stand my ground
against all their Batteries, and justify my self from the crime of falsehood in
all the particulars of that History, I shall with gladness follow their
Triumphant Chariot like a conquered Captive: It will add something to the
Pageant that the bold Champion of the Bishops (as he elsewhere scoffs it) has
his place therein.

At this time passing over his reproachful taunts, I am to clear my self of the
Felony which is charged upon me, for stealing all things in that Book from
Archbishop Whitgift, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Hall, and others; this is Novum
crimen and ante haec tempora inauditum, a Felony not heard of in the Common
Law, to which the Gentleman pretends such a special knowledge. The citing of
the Authors for every passage absolves me clearly from that crime. And I would
fain know of him being so perfect an Historian, how a man writing the Affairs
of the former times (which come not within the compass of Autopsie or ocular
inspection, as we know who says) can possibly attain to the knowledge of them,
but by canvassing all sorts of Authors, which either lived in or near those
times, or otherwise held Correspondence and Intelligence with them. It is not
for all men (though it be for some) to challenge such a sovereign or praetorian
power of coining as well the matter as the words of their Histories, that
whatsoever they let fall, their negligences and ignorances, their mistakes and
passions shall forthwith be received for Oracular truths. We poor men who
pretend unto no such privilege, and write of things done long ago in the dark
ages, and obscure twilights of the Church, must help our selves by the light of
Letters, and thankfully make use of all hands which hold forth that Candle,
without fear of holding up our own. If this be stealing, neither the
Magdeburgians, nor Baronius, nor Torniellus, Salianus, Parker, Harpsfield, Fox,
nor any of our late Compilers of Ecclesiastical or Civil History can be
acquitted from the Crime. Let us all be discharged or condemned together;
guilty or not guilty, all or none, there is no question of it.

But I have gone too far on this Gentleman's Errant. And therefore for the
credit of those Witnesses which I have produced, what is desired of the Reader
in relation to them, with other things preparatory to the following History, I
must refer the Reader to the General Preface; that being informed in all
particulars which concern the Evidence, he may the better be enabled to give up
his Verdict. I close up this Address with these words in the Book of Judges,
cap. 19. v. 30. Consider of it, take advice, and then speak your minds.

THE HISTORY OF EPISCOPACY.
The First PART.
From the first Institution of it by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, until
the death of St. John the Apostle.
CHAP. I. The Christian Church first founded by our Lord and Savior, in an
Imparity of Ministers.
1. The several Offices of Christ our Savior in the Administration of his
Church. 2. The aggregation of Disciples to him. 3. The calling of the Apostles,
and why twelve in number. 4. Of the Name and Office of an Apostle. 5. What
things were specially required unto the making of an Apostle. 6. All the
Apostles equal amongst themselves. 7. The calling and appointing of the Seventy
Disciples. 8. A reconciliation of some different opinions about the number. 9.
The twelve Apostles superior to the Seventy by our Saviors Ordinance. 10.
What kind of superiority it was that Christ prohibited his Apostles. 11. The
several Powers and preheminences given to the Apostles by our Savior Christ.
12. That the Apostles were made Bishops by our Lord and Savior, averred by the
ancient Fathers. 13. And by the Text of holy Scripture.


OF all the Types in holy Scripture, David, Moses, and Melchizedech. David a
Shepherd, Psalm. 78.71, 72. Genesis 14.18.
and a King, Moses a Legislator, and a Prince; Melchisedech both King of Salem,
and a Priest also of the living God, as that Text has styled him. Each of
these was a type of our Savior Christ, according to his Regal Office; he being
like Melchisedech, Heb. 7.2. Exodus
a King of Peace and Righteousness; leading his people, as did Moses, out of
the darkness and Idolatries of Egypt, to the land of Canaan: 2 Samuel
and conquering like David all those Enemies which before held them in
subjection. This Office, as it is supreme, so it is perpetual. That God who
tells us in the Psalms, that he had set his King on Zion, on his holy mountain:
Psalm 2. Luke 1.33.
has also told us by his Angel, that he should reign over the House of Jacob
for ever, and of his Kingdom there should be no end. But if we look upon him in
his Sacerdotal and Pastoral Offices: if we behold him as a Lawgiver to his
Church and people: we find him not fore-signified in any one of these, but in
all together. Heb. 5.6, 10.
A Priest he was after the order of Melchisedech; Heb. 3.2.
faithful to him that did appoint him, as also Moses was faithful in all his
house; ordering, and disposing of the same, according to his will and pleasure.
And as for the discharge of his Pastoral or Prophetical Office, God likeneth
him to David, Ezekiel. 34.23.
by his holy Prophet saying, I will set up one Shepherd over them, and he
shall feed them, even my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be
their shepherd. Which Offices, although subordinate to the Regal power, are
perpetual also. He was not made a Priest for a time or season, but for ever. Tu
es Sacerdos in aeternum: Heb. 5.6.
Thou art a Priest for ever, said the Lord unto him. A Priest, who as he once
appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; Heb. 9.26.
so by that one offering has he perfected for ever all them that are
sanctified; Heb. 10.14.
and sitting down at the right hand of God, Heb. 7.25.
he ever lives, and makes intercession for them. Of the same perpetuity also
are those other Offices of Christ our Savior, before remembered. He had not
been sidelis sicut Moses, Estius in Heb. 3. v. 2.
faithful as Moses was in all his house: i. e. as Estius well expounds it, in
administratione populi sibi credita, in the well-ordering of the charge
committed to him, had he not constituted a set Form of Government, and given
the same unto his Church, as a Rule for ever. Nor had he faithfully discharged
the part of David, had he looked only to his flock, whiles himself was present;
and took no care for the continual feeding of the same, after he was returned
to his heavenly glories. And therefore, Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12, 13.
when he ascended up on high he gave gifts to men, and gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of faith, and of the knowledge of
the son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.

He gave them then indeed, Ascension, when he ascended up on high, because he
then did furnish them with those gifts and graces, wherewith they were endued
by the Holy Ghost, and thereby fitted for the execution of the trust committed
to them by their Lord. For otherwise many of them had been given already; not
only in the way of choice, and designation, but of commission and employment.
Ite, Matthew. 28.19.
and docete omnes Gentes, had been said before. It was not long after our
Saviors baptism by John in Jordan, that some Disciples came unto him. That
testimony which came down from God the Father, when the Heavens were opened,
and the Spirit of God descended on him like a Dove, Matthew. 3.16.
was of it self sufficient to procure many followers. The evidence which was
given by John the Baptist, added naught to this. And yet that evidence
prevailed so far, John 1.37.
that two of his Disciples, when they heard him speak, forsook their old
Master, and went after Jesus. Nor did it satisfy them, that they had found the
Christ, and had talked with him, but they impart the same unto others also.
Thus Andrew brings in his own Brother Simon; Philip invites his friend
Nathancel. John 1.42, 46.
One tells another the glad tidings, that they had found him of whom Moses in
the Law, and all the Prophets did write: and all of them desire to be his
Disciples. John 1.45.
Afterward as his fame increased, so his followers multiplied; and every
Miracle that he wrought to confirm his Doctrine, did add unto the number of his
Proselytes. So great his fame was, and so great the conflux of all sorts of
people, that John's Disciples presently complained, I know not whether with more
truth or envy, John 3.26.
Omnes ad eum veniunt, that all men came unto him, both to hear his preaching,
and receive his baptism. And certainly it was no wonder that it should be so;
that all men should resort to him, who was the way; or seek for him, who was
the truth; John 6.86.
or follow after him, who was the life. Lord (says Saint Peter, to whom shall
we go? thou have the words of life eternal.

The number of his followers being thus increased, Gospel. Two years he trained
them up in the School of Piety, where he himself was both the Teacher and the
Lesson, before he ventured them abroad upon that employment; And when he
ventured them abroad, he neither sent them all together, Luke 6.13.
nor with like authority. Twelve he selected from the rest, whom he named
Apostles. Mark 3.14.
And he ordained them says Saint Mark, that they should be with him, and that
he might send them forth to preach: first to be with him, as the constant
witnesses of his words and works, and afterward to preach and publish what
they saw and heard. De Praescript. advers. haeret.
In which regard, Tertullian calls them not unfitly, Legatos a latere, sent
from Christ to teach the Nations. Ex quibus (out of his Disciples) duodecem
praecipuos lateri suo adlegerat, destinatos nationibus Magistros: as his own
words are. The same Tertullian gives a reason, why Christ made choice of twelve
Apostles, neither more nor less: Contra Marcian. l. 4.
viz. because there were twelve Fountains in Elim; twelve gems or precious
Stones in the Breast Plate of Aaron; and twelve stones taken out of Jordan by
the hand of Joshua, and by him put into the Ark of the Testament. And then he
adds, totidem enim Apostoli praetendebantur, that the like number of Apostles
was prefigured. Other conceits there are of the Ancient Fathers about this
number: Bid, and Sedulius, resemble them to the twelve signs of the Zodiac:
Justin Martyr to the twelve Bells in the high Priests garment: Tertullian
before named, In John 6. Sedulius. Dialog. cum Tryphone. Loco supra citato.
to the twelve Oxen that did uphold the molten Sea in the Temple of Solomon.
Others have other fancies to the same effect; but whether Christ related unto
any of them in this designation, as it is no where to be found, so is it not
material to the present purpose. More near unto the point in my opinion, is
that of Calvin, who thinks our Savior in the choice of his twelve Disciples
related to the twelve Patriarchs of the Tribes of Israel: to show that as the
Patriarchs were the root and seminary of the Tribes of Israel, so the Apostles
were to be the Parents, or if you will, Calvin in Harm. Evang.
the Patriarchs of the Church of Christ, Non ergo frustra Dominus duodecim
veluti Patriarchas constituens, Ecclesiae renunciationem testatus est. Which
guess of his, though it come nearer to the matter than the other did; yet it
falls short also of the true intention of our Lord and Savior. For Christ, who
was best able to assign the reason of his mind herein, has told us, that he
fitted his Apostles according to the number of the Tribes of Israel; that his
Apostles in due time might become their Judges. For so himself declares it in
his holy Gospel; Verily (says he) I say unto you, Matthew. 19.28.
that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall
sit in the throne of his glory, ye shall also sit upon twelve thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Israel, Hieron. in locum.
i. e. as Hierom does expound it, Quia credentibus vobis, illi credere
noluerunt; by reason of their obstinacy and unbelief, not giving credit to that
Gospel the Apostles preached. Twelve then our Savior pleased to choose, whom he
named Apostles, and they themselves conceived this number not to want its
weight: and therefore made it their first care to fill up their number, and
surrogate some other in the place of Judas. Saint Peter very well declared the
necessity of it, when he came in with his Oportet; Acts 1.21, 22.
Oportet ergo ex his viris, etc. Wherefore of these men that have companied
with us all the time, that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us, must one
be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection. So excellently true is
that of Austin, Adeo numerus ille sacratus est, August. in Psalm. 103.
ut in locum unius qui exciderat, non posset nisi alter nominari.

As for the name, quos and Apostolos nominavit, as Saint Luke informs us:
Baronius thinks it was not of our Saviors own divising, Luke 6.13.
but by him borrowed of the high Priests of the Jewish Nation, who had a
special kind of Ministers, whom they called Apostles, employed by them for the
instruction of the Priests, Quos etiam ipse legare consueverat ad componendos
optimos Sacerdotum mores, ipsas Synagogas inspiciendas, pravos mores
corrigendos, etc. Annal. A. 32. ss. 5. Epiphan. haeres. 30. n. 5. Quos haec
appellatio missos interpretatur. Tert. de proscript. In Epist. ad Gal. c. 2.
the visiting of the several Synagogues, the rectifying of ill manners, and the
reforming of those public Ministers, who did not live according to the
prescript of the Law. Whether that it were so or not, or that the Cardinal be
not mistaken in the meaning of the Author whom he cites; I will not meddle for
the present: though I conceive by looking on the place in Epiphanius, that the
succeeding Patriarchs of the Jewish Nation, did rather take this name from
Christ's Apostles, than he from theirs. But for the word as now we use it, it is
merely Greek, signifying in its natural and original sense a Messenger, a
Legate, an Ambassador; from whom, to whomsoever sent: after appropriated and
applied by the Evangelists to signify those twelve, whom our Savior chose,
and called his Apostles, as by way of excellence: yet so that many of those men
who saw our Savior in the flesh, and did preach the Gospel, are sometimes
honored with that name. Quod autem exceptis duodecim quidam vocantur Apostoli,
illud in causa est, omnes qui Dominum viderunt, and eum postea praedicarunt,
fuisse Apostolos nominatos: as Saint Hierom notes it. By which we see, that
those two things did principally concur unto the making of an Apostle, viz. to
have been conversant with our Savior Christ, and to preach his Word: which
being most exactly verified in those twelve Disciples, whom he selected for
that purpose; it was most fit that they should chiefly have the honor of so
high a Title. But these, although they were two special marks of an Apostle;
yet they were not all. Others had seen our Savior in the flesh, and preached
his Gospe, which notwithstanding never durst assume that Title: Ignatius, who
affirms it of himself, Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrnem.
that he had seen the Lord Jesus, does yet disclaim the power and privilege of
an Apostle, (...), says he in his Epistle to the Romans. So that besides their
seeing of our Savior in the flesh, and preaching of those things which
themselves had seen; the Twelve had a pre-eminence above the rest of the
Disciples, in those three particulars: first, in their nearness of access unto
him when he was alive: Secondly, in the latitude of their commission, when he
was to leave them: And thirdly, in the height of their authority after his
departure.

For first, twelve Apostles, and no others were the continual, constant, and
domestical Auditors of all his Sermons; the diligent beholders and observers of
all his Miracles. With them did he discourse familiarly, propounding questions,
answering their demands, and satifying all their scruples. The Twelve, and none
but they, were present with him, when he did institute his holy Supper: and
they alone participated of those Prayers and Promises which he made to them
from himself, or for them to his heavenly Father. Many there were of his
retinue, of his Court not few: the Twelve were only of his Council; and of
those too, some more especially admitted to his privacies, and of his
Cabinet-council; (as it were) than others; whereof see Matthew. 17.1. Mark 14.33.
Luke 8.51. And on this ground does Clemens tell us, Clemens Alex. ap. Eusebius. l.
2. c. 1.
that Christ imparted many things unto these three after his Ascension, which
they communicated (...), unto the rest of the Apostles: the rest of the
Apostles to the 70. As they were nearer in access, so were they furnished with
a more liberal Commission, Mark 16.
when he was to leave them. Ite in universum mundum. He said unto them, Go into
all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. No such commission
granted to any others, who had their several precincts and bounds, a limited
Commission when it was at best. To the Eleven (for unto them alone did he give
that charge) the whole World went but for a Diocese. Chrysostom. Tom. 8. p. 110.
edit. Savill.
For this cause Chrysostom does honor them with the style of Princes, and
Princes of a great command over all the Universe. (...), etc. The Apostles were
ordained Princes by the hand of God: Princes which have not only under them
some Towns, and Nations, (...), but such unto whose care the whole World was
trusted. So far that Father. And if we doubt that their authority fell short in
any thing of their Commission: the same good Father in the same place, will
inform us otherwise. For making a comparison between Spiritual and Civil
Dignities, Chrysostom. ibid.
he calls the Office of an Apostle, (...), a spiritual Consulship, (...), the
most spiritual of all Powers or Governments; and finally, (...): the head, the
root, nay the foundation of all spiritual Dignities of what sort soever.
Doubtless the Father had good reason for so high an Eulogie. When Christ
affirmed, Sicut misit me Pater, John 20.21.
that as his Father sent him, so sent he them: He said enough to intimate that
supreme authority which he had given them in the Church, whether it were in
preaching of the Gospel, in founding Churches, constituting, and ordaining
Pastors, or whatsoever else was necessary for the advancement of his Kingdom.
For by these words, as Cyril has right well observed, (...), he did ordain
them for to be Guides and Teachers unto all the World, Chrysostom. in Joh. Evang. l.
12.
and the dispensers of his holy Mysteries, commanding them not only to
enlighten the land of Jewrie, but all the people of the Universe: as also
giving them to understand that it was their duty, (...), to call the sinners to
repentance, to heal all those that were afflicted, either in body or in soul,
in the dispensing of Gods blessings; not to follow their own will, but his that
sent them: and in a word, as much as in them was, (...), to save the World by
wholesome dictrines, for to that purpose was he sent by his Heavenly Father. And
so we are to understand Saint Chrysostom, when he tells us this, (...) Hom in
Joh. c. 20.21. Calv. in Job.
that Christ invested his Apostles with the like authority as he received from
his Father. Calvin affirms as much or more upon those words of our Redeemer.
Quare non abs re Christus cum Apostolis suis communicate, quam a Patre
autoritatem acoeperat, etc. But this authority of theirs will be seen more
clearly, when we behold it in the practice, and execution.

Five things then of necessity were to concur in the making or constituting of
an Apostle, Autopsie, or Eye-witnessing of those things which they were
afterward to preach or publish of him: thirdly, their nearness of access:
fourthly, the latitude of their Commission: fifthly, and finally, the eminence
of their authority: Of these the first were common with them unto the rest of
the Disciples; save that the calling of the Apostles to that charge, and
function does seem to be more solemn, and immediate. But in the rest, which are
indeed the special or specifical differences, they had no copartners. This
made them every way superior unto the rest of the Disciples, although all
equal in themselves. Though in the calling of those blessed Spirits to that
great employment, there was a prius and posterius; yet in regard of power and
authority, there was neither Summum, nor Subalternum: And howsoever Peter be
first named in that sacred Catalogue; yet this entitleth him to no more
authority, above the rest of the Apostles, than Stephen might challenge in that
regard above the residue of the Seven. Saint Cyprian did resolve this cause
many hundreds since; assigning unto all the twelve a parity of power and
honor. Cyprian lib. de unitate Eccles.
Hoc erant utique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio
praediti, and honoris and potestatis; sed exordium ab unitate proficiscitur.
Where clearly there is nothing given to Peter, but a priority of Order; a
primacy if you will, but no supremacy. Neither does Barlaam give him more,
though he inscribe his book, de Papae Principatu. (...), etc. The Apostles, all
of them says he, Barlaam de Papae principatu.
in matter which concerned the Church, were of equal honor. If Peter had
pre-eminence in any thing, it was that in their sacred meetings he first brake
the business, (...) and peradventure also had the upper place in the assemblies
of that goodly fellowship. But what need Cyprian, or Barlaam come in for
evidence, when as we find this parity so clearly evidenced in holy Scripture?
In the immediateness of their Calling, and their access unto our Lord and
Savior, they were all alike. He that called Peter from his Nets, called also
Matthew from the receipt of custom. If only Peter, and the sons of Zebedee were
taken with him to Mount Tabor, Matthew. 17.1.
there to behold the glory of his Transfiguration; Mark 14.33.
or chosen from amongst the rest to attend his person when he went out into the
Garden of Gethsemane: this makes as much for the supremacy of the sons of
Zebedee, as the son of Jona. Their mission, and commission were alike to all.
He that said Ite and docete, Go into all the world and preach the Gospel to
every creature, spoke it indefinitely to every one; not unto Peter only, as the
supreme Pastor; from whom the rest were to receive a delegated and confined
authority. Neither had he so often been molested with that needless question,
which of them should be greatest in their Masters Kingdom: had he before
determined of it, and settled the supremacy in Saint Peter's person. And as for
those prerogatives, of Tibi dabo claves, Pasce oves meas: which being spoken
unto Peter, may seem peculiarly to belong to him: the Fathers say, that nothing
did hereby accrue to Peter, but what was common to the rest. Ecclesiae enim
claves regni coelorum datae sunt. Et cum ei dicitur, ad omnes dicitur, Amas me?
August. lib. de Agon. Christian. c. 30.
Pasce oves meas: as Saint Austin states it. But what need more be said to
affirm this point, than that of our most blessed Savior, when he encouraged
them to perseverance with this heavenly Cordial, that they should sit upon
twelve Thrones, Matthew. 19.28.
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel? In which most gracious words of his, as
the sitting of the Apostles shows authority; their sitting upon Thrones, an
eminence of power; their sitting to judge, a power and exercise of jurisdiction;
and their sitting thus to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, the universality
and extent of their jurisdiction: Jansen. harm. Evang. in locum.
so does their sitting on twelve Thrones, singuli in sua sede, as Jansenius
has it, intimate an equality of jurisdiction, a parity in point of power.

But to proceed, Our Savior finding that the harvest was great, appointed
other seventy also, Luke 10.1.
and sent them two, and two before his face, into every City and place, whither
he himself would come. the Kingdom of God was come nigh unto them: giving them
also power to heal the sick, and to cast out Devils, as he had formerly to his
Apostles. So that there is no question to be made, but that they were entrusted
with a part of this sacred Ministry, but whether in an equal rank we shall see
anon. In the mean time if any question should be asked who these Seventy were
and by what names called; we answer, nondum constat, that we cannot tell.
Eusebius as great a searcher into the monuments of Antiquity, Hist. Eccles.
lib. 1. c. 12. (...).
as the Church ever bred, professes plainly, (...), that he could never meet
with any list or catalogue of them. Some he had taken up on hearsay, Ap.
Eusebius. hist. l. 1. c. 33. (...). In Panar. l. 1. haeres. 20. n. 4.
as Barnabas, Sosthenes, Cephas, Matthias, after chose into the place of Judas,
and Thaddeus. Papias mentions Aristion, as another of that number also. And
Epiphanius adds to these, Stephen, and the residue of the Seven, Mark and Luke,
two of the Evangelists, Justus, who stood in competition with Matthias,
together with Apelles, Rufas, and Niger, whose names occur in holy Scripture.
These are the most that there is any ground for, in antiquity. As for the
Catalogue of their names and actions fathered on Dorotheus Bishop of Tire:
there is not any thing more false and fabulous: that Rhapsodist thrusting into
that Catalogue, many who were converted by the Apostles, after Christ's
Ascension. Insomuch as Estius worthily complains, Estius in Romans c. 16.
eos fere omnes qui a Paulo in hoc capite nominantur, aut salutantes, aut
salutandi, that all the men whose names occur in the 16. Chapter to the Romans,
are by him thrust into the Catalogue of the Seventy Disciples: not to say any
thing of those many other absurdities, which he has noted in that Bedrol.

As for the number of Seventy, Tertullian, who had fitted (as before we saw)
the number of the Apostles, Tertul. contr. Marcion. l. 4.
to the twelve fountains in Elim; does also proportion the number of these
Disciples, ad arbusta Palmarum, unto the number of the Palm Trees, that grew
thereby. But this being only in the way of Allegory, we shall pass it over:
only reserving the Application made by Hierom for a little longer. That which
comes nearest the matter, and is agreed upon almost by all sorts of Writers,
is that our Savior in this choice, related to the Seventy Elders interessed in
the government of the Tribes of Israel: Calv. in harmon. Evan.
mention of whom is made, Number. 11.16. Ezekiel. 8.11. Calvin amongst the rest gives
this reason of it, In numero septuaginta videtur eum ordinem secutus esse, cui
jam olim assueverat populus: and adds withal another note, which may well serve
to reconcile the difference about this number, which is between the Greek and
the Latin Copies. For the Greek Copies have it generally, (...), that he
appointed other seventy also, as our English reads it. The Latin no less
generally: Designavit and alios septuaginta duos, that he sent out other
seventy two: which reading does occur in Hierom, Hieron. in canone Lucae. In
Evan. l. 2. cap. 14. Beza in Annot. in Luc. 10.
Austin, and some others. I know indeed, Beza does put an handsome slur on the
Latin Copies, and thinks that some poor ignorant Scribes ( Librarii indocti, as
he calls them) abbreviating the word discipulos into dlos: others as ignorant
as they out of dlos read duos, and so found seventy two Disciples instead of
seventy. But surely those renowned Fathers Hierom, and Austin, were no such
Babies: not to say any thing of Beda, and the rest that followed. And therefore
since it is agreed on, that these Disciples were proportioned to the number of
the Elders of the Tribes of Israel: we must first find what was the number of
those Elders, before we can agree upon the other. Now for the number of those
Elders, the Scripture says expressly, they were seventy two, as may appear by
comparing the 25. verse of the 11. of Numbers, with the 26. in which we find
that there were seventy Elders gathered about the Tabernacle, besides Eldad,
and Medad in the Camp. For making up this number, as afterward in the
translation of the Bible, there were six chosen out of every Tribe, (...),
Joseph. Ant. Judaic. l. 12.
as Josephus has it, which comes to seventy two in all. But both the seventy
two Elders, are generally called the Seventy; as the Translators of the Bible
are called the Septuagint; both of them ad rotundationem numeri: even as the
Magistrates in Rome were called Centumviri, though being three for every Tribe,
they came unto an hundred and five in all. Calvin. in harm. Evang. ut supra.
And this is that which Calvin has observed in the present business: viz. that
the Consistory of the Jewish Judges, to which the number of the Disciples is by
him proportioned, consisted of no less than 72, though for the most part, ut
fieri solet in talibus numeris, they are called the Seventy. So then to
reconcile the Latin with the Greek Original, there were in all 72 Disciples,
according to the truth of the calculation: and yet but seventy in account,
according to the estimation which was then in use. And therefore possibly the
Church of England, the better to comply with both computations; though it have
seventy in the new Translations, yet still retains the number of seventy two,
in the Gospel appointed for Saint Lukes day in the book of Common Prayer
confirmed by Parliament.

This being the number of the Disciples, Elders, for every Tribes so here will
be six Presbyters or Elders, for every one of the Apostles. For those which
have compared the Church of Christ which was first planted by the Apostles,
with that which was first founded by the Lord himself: resemble the Bishops in
the Church to the twelve Apostles; the Presbyters, or Priests, unto the
Seventy. Which parallel how well it holds, and whether it will hold, or not,
we shall see hereafter. Mean while it cannot be denied, but that the Apostles
were superior to these Seventy, both in place and power. The Fathers have so
generally affirmed the same, that he must needs run cross unto all antiquity
that makes question of it. The Council of Neocaesarea, which was convened some
years before that of Nice, Leo Ep. 88.
declares that the Chorepiscopi, which were but Presbyters in fact, (though in
Title Bishops) (...), Council. Neocasar. 1. Can. 13.
were instituted according to the pattern of the Seventy. Saint Hierom, in his
Tractate ad Fabiolam, speaking of the twelve fountains of Elim, and the seventy
Psalms that grew thereby, does resolve it thus, Nec dubium quin de duodeeim
Apostolis sermo sit, etc. It is not to be doubted, but that the Scripture
speaks here of the twelve Apostles, the waters issuing from whose fountains
have moistened the barren dryness of the whole World; and that the seventy
Psalms that grew thereby, are the Teachers of the second rank or order: Luca
testante duodecim fuisse Apostolos, and septuaginta Discipulos minoris gradus:
Saint Luke affirming that there were twelve Apostles, and seventy Disciples of
a lower order, whom the Lord sent two and two before him. In this conceit,
Saint Ambrose led the way before him, likening unto those Psalms the Seventy,
qui secundo ab Apostolis gradu, who in a second rank from the Apostles, were by
the Lord sent forth for the salvation of mankind. Sermon. 24. Damasus their
co-temporary does affirm as much, viz. non amplius quam duos ordines, Epist. 5.
that there were but two Orders amongst the Disciples of Christ, viz. that of
the twelve Apostles, and the Seventy. Theophylact concurrs with Hierom in his
conceit about the twelve Fountains, and the seventy Palm Trees: and then
concludes, Theoph. in Luc. 10.
that howsoever they were chosen by Christ, (...), yet were they inferior to
the twelve, and afterward their followers and Scholars. Add hereunto the
testimony and consent of Calvin, who giving the pre-eminence unto the Apostles,
Calvin. in Institut. l. 4. c. 3. 4.
as the chief builders of the Church; adds in the next place the Evangelists,
such as were Timothy and Titus, and fortassis etiam septuaginta Discipuli, quos
secundo ab Apostolis loco Dominus designavit: and peradventure also the seventy
Disciples, whom Christ appointed in the second place after his Apostles.
Besides, S. Hierom gives it for a Maxim, Qui provehitur, Ep. ad Oceanum.
de minore ad majus provehitur, that he which is promoted, is promoted from a
lower rank unto an higher. Matthias therefore, having been formerly of the
Seventy, and afterward advanced into the rank and number of the Twelve, in the
place of Judas: it must needs follow that the twelve Apostles shined in an
higher sphere than these lesser luminaries. Now that Matthias had before been
one of the seventy, appears by the concurrent testimonies of Eusebius. l. 1.
Eccles. Hist. c. 12. and l. 2. cap. 1. and of Epiphanius contr. haeres. 20. n.
4. to whom, for brevity sake, I refer the Reader. And this the rather, because
the Scripture is so full and pregnant in it; it being a condition, or
qualification, if you will, required by S. Peter, in those that were the
Candidates for so high a Dignity, Acts 1. v. 21.
that they accompanied the Apostles all the time that the Lord Jesus went in
and out amongst them. And that we know none did, but the Seventy only. So then
it is most clear, and manifest, both by authority of Scripture, and consent of
Fathers, that our Savior instituted in his Church two ranks of Ministers, the
one subordinate unto the other: and consequently, laid the first foundations of
it, in such a Fatherly, and moderate imparity, as bound all following times and
ages, that would not willingly oppose so Divine an Ordinance, to observe the
like.

And yet it is not to be thought, that this superiority thus by him
established, Jews in general, and all the followers of Christ particularly,
expected that the promised Messiah should come with power, restore again the
luster of the Jewish Kingdom, and free them from that yoke and bondage, which
by the Romans had been laid upon them. We thought, said Cleophas, that this had
been he that should have delivered Israel. Acts 24.21.
And what he thought, was solemnly expected by all the rest. Acts 1.6.
Domine, si in tempore hoc restitues regnum Israel, Lord, say they, even in the
very moment of his Ascension, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom
unto Israel? Upon which fancy and imagination, no marvail if they harbored
some ambitious thought; every one hoping for the nearest places, both of power
and trust about his person. This was the greatness which they aimed at: and
this our Savior labored to divery them from: by interdicting all such power
and Empire, as Princes, and the favorites of Princes have upon their Vassals.
Ye know (says he) that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over
them, and they that are great exercise auhtority upon them: Vobis autem non
sic, Matthew. 20.25. Luke 22.25.
But so it shall not be amongst you. Where plainly it appears, both by the Text
and context: first, that this strife and contestation was only amongst the
twelve Apostles; and therefore howsoever it may prove that there was to be a
parity or equality amongst themselves, yet it will never prove, but that they
were, and might be still superior unto the Seventy. And secondly, that Christ
our Savior does not prohibit them the use and exercise of all authority, on
those who were inferior and subordinate to them; but only such authority as
the Princes of the Gentiles, and the great Lords and Ministers about them did
exercise upon their Subjects. The power and government of the Apostles in the
Church of Christ was merely (...), such as a Father bears unto his children:
but not (...), a Lordly, and imperious Rule, such as a Master exercises on his
slaves and servants: 1 Pet. 5.3 2 Cor. 2.24. Chrysostom. in oper. imper. in Mat.
hom. 35.
Not as Lords over Gods inheritance, but as the helpers of their joy, say the
two Apostles, and herein stands the difference, according unto that of
Chrysostom, Principes mundi ideo fiunt, ut dominentur minoribus suis, The
Princes of the Earth were made to this end and purpose, that they might Lord it
over their inferiors, and make them slaves, and spoil them, and devour them,
abasing them unto the death, for their own profit and glory: Principes autem
Ecclesiae fiunt, etc. But the Governors or Princes of the Church were
instituted to another end, viz. To serve their inferiors, and to minister unto
them all such things, as they have received from the Lord.

This eminence and superiority over all the Church, preaching of his holy Word,
administering his blessed Sacraments, retaining and forgiving sins, ruling and
ordering of his flock: giving them also further power of instituting, and
ordaining such, by whom these several Offices were to be performed till his
second coming. None but the Twelve were present with him, when he ordained the
blessed Sacrament of his body and blood: Luke 22.19.
and unto them alone was said Hoc facite, do this: i. e. take bread, and break,
and bless it, and distribute it, in remembrance of me. To the eleven alone it
was that he gave commission to go into all the World and preach the Gospel to
all creatures, Matthew. 28.19.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. They only had
that powerful and immediate mission, John 20.21. John 20.22, 23.
Sicut misit me Pater, As my Father sent me, so send I you; and upon them alone
he breathed, saying, Receive the Holy Ghost: whose sins ye do remit, they are
remitted unto them; and whose sins you do retain, they are retained. Finally,
they, and none but they were trusted with the feeding, and the governance of
the Flock of Christ, (the word (...) in the Greek does imply them both) for
howsoever Pasce oves meas, John 21.15, 16.
was in particular spoken to Saint Peter; yet was that charge incumbent on them
all, as before we noted from Saint Austin. By all which passages and Texts of
Scripture, it is clear and manifest, that the Apostles were by Christ ordained
to be the sole and ordinary Teachers, Bishops, and Pastors of the Church, next
and immediately under his most blessed self, Heb. 13.20. 1 Pet. 2.25.
who still continues (...), the great Shepherd of the Sheep, as Paul; the
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, as Saint Peter calls him. The Seventy had no
part in this new Commission, the dispensation of the Word, and Sacraments, but
at second hand; as they were afterward entrusted with it, by the holy
Apostles, either as Prophets, Presbyters, or Evangelists, according to the
measure of the Grace which was given unto them: or specially designed to some
part therein, after the Ascension of our Lord and Savior, by the immediate
designation of the Holy Ghost. And when they were entrusted with a part
thereof, yet were they still secundi Ordinis, Ministers of a second rank,
inferior unto the Apostles, both in place and power, to whom all latitude of
power was given. Nay, the Apostles took an hint from this different mission, to
institute two several sorts of Ministers in the Church of Christ: the one
subordinate unto the other, as were the Seventy unto them. And this by virtue
of these words in their Commission, Ita mitto vos; i. e. as the Archbishop of
Spalato very well applies it, De Repab. Eccl. l. 2. c. 3. n. 7.
Sicut ego a Patre habui potestatem eligendi Ministros, etiam diversi ordinis,
ita and vos pariter habeatis. As I received power from my heavenly Father, of
instituting Ministers, even of diverse Orders, so I give it you. And therefore
whatsoever the Apostles did therein, they did it after Christ's example, and by
his authority: and consequently, the imparity of Ministers by them ordained,
was founded on the Law of God, and the original institution of our Savior
Christ, by whom the power of Ordination was to them committed, and by them unto
their Successors in the Church for ever.

To bring this Chapter to an end, Luke 24.50.
did in a very solemn manner bestow his benediction on them. Elevatis manibus
suis benedixit eis, he lifted up his hands, and blessed them, as Saint Luke
has it. Which benediction Saint Austin takes to be a consecrating of those
holy men unto the power and dignity of Bishops. Aug. quaest. N. Test. qu. 14.
Ipse enim priusquam in caelos ascenderet, imponens manum Apostolis, ordinavit
cos Episcopos: as the Father has it. Which whether it were so or not, I mean
so done with such an outward Form and Ceremony, and in that very point of time,
is perhaps uncertain: But sure I am, that for the thing it self, which is here
delivered, the Fathers, many of them do agree with Austin; affirming, passim,
in their writings, that the Apostles were made Bishops by our blessed Lord.
Saint Cyprian voucheth it expressly. The Deacons ought to understand, Cyp. lib.
3. Ep. 9.
quoniam Apostolos, i. e. Episcopos, and Praepositos Dominus elegit, that the
Lord Christ himself did choose the Apostles, that is, the Bishops and Rulers of
the Church, and that the Apostles after his ascension did ordain the Deacons to
be the Ministers of their Episcopal function, and the necessities of the
Church. Saint Ambrose does affirm the same, Ambros. in 1. ad Cor. c. 12.
Caput it aque in Ecclesia Apostolos posuit, etc. Christ, says he, made the
Apostles the head (or supreme Governors) of his Church, they being the Legates
or Ambassadors of Christ, according unto that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.20. And
then he adds, Ipsi sunt Episcopi, that they were Bishops. More plainly in his
Comment on the Ephesians, Apostoli Episcopi sunt, Prophetae, explanatores
Scripturarum, The Apostles, says he, In Comment. in Ephesians. 4.
are Bishops, and Prophets, the Expositors of Scripture. But because question
has been made, whether indeed those Commentaries are the works of Ambrose, or
of some other ancient Writer; he tells us in his Notes on the 43. Psalm, that
in those words of Christ, Pasce oves meas, Peter was made a Bishop by our Lord
and Savior. De Repub. Eccles. l. 2. c. 2. n. 4.
Significat Ambrosius Petrum Sacerdotem, hoc est, Episcopum electum, illis
verbis, Pasce oves meas: as the place is cited by the Archbishop of Spalato.
And thus Saint Chrysostom speaking of the election of the Seven, says plainly,
(...), that then there were no Bishops in the Church, Chrysostom. hom. 14. in Act 6.
but only the Apostles.

But what need more be said in the present business, Judas: wherein the place
or function of an Apostle is plainly called Episcopatus; Acts 1.20.
Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter, let another take his Bishopric, as the
English reads it. His Bishopric, i. e. says Chrysostom, (...), his
Principality, his Priesthood, Chrysostom. hom. 3. in Act. 1.
the place of government that belonged unto him, had he kept his station. A
Text most plain and pregnant as the Fathers thought, to prove that the
Episcopal dignity was vested in the persons of the Lords Apostles. The Comment
under the name of Ambrose, which before we spoke of, having said, Ipsi sunt
Episcopi, Ambros. in 1. ad Cor. c. 12
that the Apostles were Bishops, adds for the proof thereof these words of
Peter, Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter. And the true Ambrose saying of Judas,
Id. Sermon. 50.
that he was a Bishop [Episcopus enim and Judas fuit] adds for the proof
thereof the same very Text. Finally, to conclude this matter, Saint Cyprian,
showing that Ordinations were not made without the privity of the people, in
the Jewish Church, Nisi sub populi assistentis conscientia. lib. 1. ep. 4.
adds that the same was afterward observed by the holy Apostles, Quando de
ordinando in locum Judae Episcopo; when Peter spoke unto the people, about the
ordering of a Bishop in the place of Judas. But for a further proof of this,
that the Apostles were ordained Bishops by our Lord and Savior, we shall see
more hereafter in convenient place, Vide chap. 6. n. 12.
when we are come to show, that in the government of the Church, the Bishops
were the proper Successors of the Apostles; and so esteemed to be by those, who
otherwise were no great friends unto Episcopacy. In the mean time, we may take
notice of that impudent assertion of Jobannes de Turrecremata: viz. Quod solus
Petrus a Christo Episcopus est ordinatus: Lib. 2. Summae de Eccl. c. 32. ap.
Bell. de Rom Pont.
that Peter, only Peter was made Bishop by our Savior Christ, and that the
rest of the Apostles received from Peter their Episcopal consecration: wherein
I find him seconded by Dominicus Jacobatius, lib. 10. de Council. Art. 7. A
Paradox so monstrous and absurd, that howsoever Bellarmine does reckon it
amongst other the Prerogatives of that Apostle, in his first Book de Romano
Pontifice, cap. 23. yet upon better thoughts, he rejects it utterly in his 4th
Book upon that argument, Cap. 22. and so I leave it.

Thus having shown in what estate the Church was founded by our Savior, and in
what terms he left it unto his Apostles: we must next see what course was taken
by them to promote the same, what use they made of that authority which was
trusted to them.

CHAP. II. The foundation of the Church of Jerusalem under the Government of
Saint James the Apostle, and Simeon, one of the Disciples, the two first
Bishops of the same.
1. Matthias chosen into the place of Judas. 2. The coming of the Holy Ghost,
and on whom it fell. 3. The greatest measure of the Spirit fell on the
Apostles, and so by consequence the greatest power. 4. The several
Ministrations in the Church then given; and that in ranking of the same, the
Bishops are intended in the name of Pastors. 5. The sudden growth of the Church
of Jerusalem, and the making of Saint James the first Bishop there. 6. The
former point deduced from Scripture. 7. And proved by the general consent of
Fathers. 8. Of the Episcopal Chair or Throne of Saint James, and his Successors
in Jerusalem. 9. Simeon elected by the Apostles to succeed S. James. 10. The
meaning of the word Episcopus, and from whence borrowed by the Church. 11. The
institution of the Presbyters. 12. What interest they had in the common
business of the Church, whilst S. James was Bishop. 13. The Council of
Jerusalem, and what the Presbyters had to do therein. 14. The Institution of
the Seven, and to what Office they were called. 15. The names of Ecclesiastical
functions, promiscuously used in holy Scripture.


OUR Savior Christ having thus Authorized his Apostles to Preach the Gospel
over all the World, Luke 24.49.
only commanding them to tarry in the City of Jerusalem until they were endued
with further power from on high, whereby they might be fitted for so great a
work. Act. 1.9.
And when he had spoken those things, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a
Cloud received him out of their sight. No sooner was he gone to the Heavenly
glories, but the Apostles with the rest, withdrew themselves unto Jerusalem,
as he had appointed; where the first care they took was, to fill up their
number, to surrogate some one or other of the Disciples in the place of Judas,
that so the Word of God might be fulfilled, Psalm. 69.26.
which he had spoken by the Psalmist, Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter. A
business of no small importance, and therefore fit to be imparted unto all the
Brethren; not so much that their suffrage and consent herein was necessary, as
that they might together join in prayer to Almighty God, Act. 1.21.
to direct the action, whose business indeed it was, and unto whom alone the
whole election properly pertained. All that they did was to propose two men
unto the Lord their God ( Et statuerunt duos, Act. 1.23.
says the Text) such as they thought most fit for so great a charge, and so to
leave it to his providence, to show and manifest which of the two he pleased to
choose. In the appointment of which two, whether that statuerunt being a Verb
of the Plural number, be to be referred to all the multitude, as Chrysostom is
of opinion, or only unto the Apostles, and the Seventy, as some others think,
it comes all to one. For the whole number being but an hundred and twenty, Act.
1.15.
and being that the Apostles with the Seventy (out of which rank the nomination
of the two was made) made up the number of fourscore; it must needs be that the
appointment in effect was in them alone. And though I rather do incline to
Chrysostom, in this particular, that the appointment of these two was done by
all the multitude in general; Chrysostom. in hom. 3. in Act.
yet I can yield by no means to the next that follows. For showing some
politic and worldly reasons, why Peter did permit the people to have an
interest in the business, he first asked this question, [(...) (...); whether
it were not lawful for Saint Peter to have chose the man. And then he answers
positively, (...), that it was most lawful, but that he did forbear to do it,
lest he might seem to do it out of partiality. In this I must crave leave to
dissent from Chrysostom. The power of making an Apostle was too high a
privilege to be entrusted unto any of the Sons of Adam. 1 Cor. 15. Galat. 1.1.
Paul was not made Apostle, though an Abortive one, as he calls himself, either
of men, or by men, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father. What privilege or
power soever Peter had as an Apostle of the Lord in making Bishops, or as a
Bishop of the Church in ordaining Presbyters; he had no power to make Apostles.
The Pope might sing Placebo, if it had been otherwise; and we should have
Apostles more than ten times twelve, if nothing were required unto it, but
Saint Peter's Fiat.

But to proceed: This weighty business being thus dispatched, Epiphan. haeres.
20. n. 4.
and Matthias who before was of the Seventy, being numbered with the eleven
Apostles, it pleased God to make good his promise of pouring on them in a
plentiful and signal manner the gifts and graces of his holy Spirit. Not on the
Twelve alone, or the Seventy only, but on the whole body of the Disciples, even
on the whole 120. which before we spoke of. I know that Beza and some others,
would limit this effusion of the Holy Ghost to the Twelve alone. Why, and to
what intent he does so resolve it, though I may guess perhaps, yet I will not
judge; but sure it is, he so resolves it. Beza in Act. 2.
Solis Apostolis propria est haec Spiritus sancti missio, sicut proprius fuit
Apostolatus, as his own words are in his Annotations on the Text. The same he
also does affirm in his Book de Ministrorum Evangelii gradibus, cap. 5. But
herein Beza leaves the Fathers and the Text to boot. Saint Austin tells us,
that the Holy Ghost came from Heaven, Tract. 2. in ep. Johannis. Hom. 4. in
Act. c. 2.
and implevit uno loco sedentes centum viginti, and filled one hundred and
twenty sitting in one place. Saint Chrysostom affirms the same, (...), etc.
what (says he) did it come on the twelve alone, not upon the rest? And then he
answers, (...), not so by no means, it fell on all the 120 which were there
Assembled. Nor does he only say it, but he proves it also, alleging in defense
of his assertion that very plea and argument which was used by Peter, to clear
himself and his associates from the imputation of being drunken with new wine,
Act. 2.16.
viz. Hoc est quod dictum fuit per Prophetam Joel, This is that which was
spoken by the Prophet Joel, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh, etc.
Besides, the text and context make it plain enough, that this effusion of the
Holy Ghost was upon them all. Act. 1.14.
In the first Chapter of the Acts we find them all together (the whole 120.)
with one accord: And in the first verse of the second Chapter, we find them all
together with the same accord: And then it follows that there appeared cloven
tongues, like as of fire, seditque supra singulos eorum, Act. 2.3, 4.
and sat upon each of them; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost. If
they were all together (as we found before) and all were filled with the Holy
Ghost: No question but there were more filled with it than the twelve Apostles.
And when as Peter with the eleven stood up, making an Apology for the rest, and
saying, These men are not drunken, Act. 2.14, 15.
as ye suppose; it must needs be that others, besides the twelve, and indeed
all the company were suspected of it. Add, as by way of surplusage, and ex
abundanti, that the Seven chosen by the multitude to serve the Tables, who
questionless were of the number of the Seventy, are said to have been full of
the Holy Ghost, Epiphan. haeres. 20. n. 4. Act. 6.3.
before that the Apostles had laid hands on them.

So then it is most evident, as I conceive it, For unto one was given by the
spirit the word of Wisdom, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
to another the word of Knowledge, and to another the gift of healing by the
same spirit; to another the working of Miracles, to another Prophecy, to
another discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of Tongues, to another
the interpretation of Tongues. Every one of them had their several gifts; the
Apostles all (...), Hom. 32. in 1. ad Cor. c. 12.
as we read in Chrysostom. Whatever was divided amongst the residue for the
advancement of Gods glory, and the improvement of his Church, that was united
in the persons of the holy Apostles, whom God had ranked as much above them in
their gifts and graces, as they were in place. By means whereof it came to
pass, that howsoever the Lord out of these 120 made choice of some to be
Evangelists, some to be Prophets, and others to be Pastors, Presbyters, and
Teachers; yet the Apostles still retained their superiority, ordering and
directing them in their several Ministeries to the best edifying of the Church.
For thus we read how Paul disposed of Timothy and Titus, who were both
Evangelists; sending them, as the occasions of the Church required, from Asia
to Greece, and then back to Asia, and thence to Italy. How he sent Crescens to
Galatia, 2 Timothy 4.
Titus to Dalmatia, Tychicus to Ephesus; commanding Erastus to abide at
Corinth, and using the Ministry of Luke at Rome. 1 Cor. 14.
So find we how he ordered those that had the spirit of Prophecy, and such as
had the gift of tongues, that every one might use his talent unto edification;
how he ordained Bishops in one place, Elders or Presbyters in another, as we
shall se^ hereafter in this following story. The like we may affirm of Saint
Peter also, and of the rest of the Apostles, though there be less left upon
record of their Acts and Writings, than are remaining of Saint Paul; whose
mouths and pens being guided by the Holy Ghost, have been the Canon ever since
of all saving truth. For howsoever Mark and Luke, two of the Evangelists, have
left behind them no small part of the Book of God, of their own enditing; yet
were not either of their writings reckoned as Canonical in respect of the
Authors, but as they had been taken from the Apostles mouths, and ratified by
their Authority, as both Saint Luke himself, Luke 1. Hieron. in Marc. Clemens
apud Eusebius. l. 2. c. 15. Act. 8.12. v. 14, 15, 17.
and the Fathers testify. And for a further mark of difference between the
Apostles and the rest of the Disciples, we may take this also; that though the
rest of the Disciples had all received the Holy Ghost, yet none could give the
same but the Apostles only. Insomuch that when Philip the Evangelist had
preached the Gospel in Samaria, and converted many, and Baptized them in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ; yet none of them received the Holy Ghost till
Peter. and John came down unto them, and prayed for them, and laid their hands
on them, as the Scriptures witness. That was a privilege reserved to the
Apostles, and to none but them. (...), Hom. 18. in Act. 8.
as it is in Chrysostom, And when the two Apostles did it, they did it without
Philips help or cooperation, who joined not in it, nor contributed at all to
so great a work, for ought we find in holy Scripture.

In this regard it is no marvel, 1 Cor. 12.28.
Apostles: Secondarily, Prophets: Thirdly, Teachers, etc. as Saint Paul has
ranked them. Nor did he rank them so by chance, but gave to every one his
proper place, Hom. 32. in 1. ad Cor. c. 12.
(...), says Saint Chrysostom, first placing that which was most excellent,
and afterward descending unto those of a lower rank. Which plainly shows, that
in the composition of the Church there was a prius and posterius in regard of
order, a (...), or more honorable, as the Father calls it, in regard of power;
as in the constitution of the body natural, to which the Church is there
resembled, some of the members do direct, and some obey, some of them being
honorable, 1 Cor. 12.22, 23.
some feeble, but all necessary. The like may also be observed out of the 4.
chap. of the same Apostle unto the Ephesians, where the Apostles are first
placed and ranked above the rest of the ministrations, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Teachers, of which some were to be but temporary in the Church of
God, the others to remain for ever. Hom. 11. in Ephesians. 4.
For as Saint Chrysostom does exceeding well expound that Scripture, (...),
First, he does name Apostles, as they in whom all powers and graces were
united: Secondly, Prophets, such as was Agabus in the Acts: Thirdly,
Evangelists, (...), such as had made no progress into many Countries, but
preached the Gospel in some certain Regions, as Aquila and Priscilla; and then
Pastors and Teachers, who had the government of a Country or Nation, (...),
such as were settled and employed in a certain place or City, as Timothy and
Titus. If then a question should be made, whom S. Paul means here by Pastors
and Teachers; I answer, it is meant of Bishops, (...), as the Father has it,
such as were placed over some certain Cities; and that the Bishops were
accounted in the ancient times the only ordinary Pastors of the Church, in the
room and stead of the Apostles, we shall show hereafter. Chap. 6. n.
And this I am the rather induced to think, because that in the first Epistle
to those of Corinth, written when as there were but few Bishops of particular
Cities, S. Paul does speak of Teachers only; but here in this to the Ephesians,
writ at such time as Timothy and Titus, and many others had formerly been
ordained Bishops, he adds Pastors also. Theoph. Oecum. in Ephesians. 4.4.11.
Certain I am that both Theophylact and Oecumenius do expound the words by
Bishops only, (...), such Bishops as both Timothy and Titus were by them
accounted. Nay, even Saint Hierome seems to incline this way, Hieron. in
Ephesians. 4.
making the Prelates of the Church, or the Praesides Ecclesiae, as he calls
them there, to be the Pastors and Teachers mentioned by Saint Paul, i.e.
Pastores ovium, magistros hominum; Pastors in reference to their Flocks,
Teachers in reference to their Disciples.

But to go on unto our story. Act. 2.41.47.
The first day added to the Church 3000 souls. And after that, God added daily
to it such as should be saved. The miracle wrought by the hands of the two
Apostles at the Beautiful gate, Act. 3.2.
opened a large door to the further increase thereof. For presently upon the
same, and Peter's Sermon made upon that occasion, we find that the number of the
men which heard the word and believed, Act. 4.4.
was about five thousand. Not that there were so many added to the former
number, as to make up five thousand in the total; but that there were five
thousand added to the Church more than had been formerly; S. Chrysostom and
Oecumenius, Chrysostom. hom. 10. in Act. 4. and hom. 25. in Act. 11.
both affirming that there were more converted by this second Sermon of Saint
Peter's, than by the first. So that the Church increasing daily more and more,
multitudes both of men and women being continually added to the Lord, and their
numbers growing dreadful to the Jewish Magistrates; Act. 5.14.
it seemed good to the Apostles, James the Son of Alpheus, Gal. 1.19.
who in regard of consanguinity is sometimes called in Scripture the Lords
Brother; and in regard of his exceeding piety and uprightness, was surnamed the
Just. Which action I have placed here, even in the cradle of the Church upon
good Authority. For first, Eusebius tells us out of Clemens, that this was done
(...), Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 1.
after the Ascension of our Savior; Hierome more plainly, statim post
passionem Domini, immediately upon his passion. In Scrip. Eccles.
We may with good security conclude from both, that it was done not long after
Christ's Ascension, as soon almost as the Believers were increased to a
considerable number. And lastly, Ignat. in ep. ad Trall.
that Ignatius has made S. Stephen to be the Deacon, or subservient Minister
to this James the Bishop of Jerusalem; and then we must needs place it in some
middle time, between the Feast of Pentecost, and the 26. of December, when
Saint Stephen was Martyred. So early did the Lord take care to provide Bishops
for his Church, and set apart a special Pastor for his holy City.

It Is true, there is no manifest record hereof in holy Scripture, Gal. 1.18, 19.
Saint Paul some three years after his Conversion, went up unto Jerusalem to
see Peter, but found no other of the Apostles there, save only James the Lords
Brother. Ask Hierome, who this James was, whom S. Paul then saw, and he will
tell you that it was James the Bishop of Jerusalem, Hier. in Gal. 1.
Hic autem Jacobus Episcopus Hierosolymorum primus fuit, cognomento Justus. And
then withal, we have the reason why Paul should find him at Jerusalem, more
than the rest of the Apostles, viz. because the rest of the Apostles were
dispersed abroad, according to the exigence of their occasions; and James was
there residing on his Pastoral or Episcopal charge. Fourteen years after his
Conversion, Gal. 21.1.
being the eleventh year after the former interview, he went up into Jerusalem
again, with Barnabas and Titus, and was together present with them at the first
general Council, held by the Apostles. In which, upon the agitation of the
business there proposed, the Canon and determination is drawn up positively and
expressly in the words of James. Act. 15.20.
Do you desire the reason of it, Peter and others being there? Chrysostom on
those words of Scripture, Act. 15.13. Hom. 33. in Act. c. 15. v. 23.
James answered saying, does express it thus, (...), this James was Bishop of
Jerusalem. And this no question was the reason, why Paul reciting the names of
those with whom especially he had conference at his being there, puts James in
the first place before Peter and John, viz. Galat. 2.9.
because that he was Bishop there, as Estius has noted on that Text. The
Council being ended, Paul returns to Antioch, and there by reason of some men
that came from James, Peter withdrew, eating no longer with the Gentiles. Why
takes the Apostle such especial notice that they came from James, but because
they were sent from him, as from their Bishop, about some business of the
Church; this James being then Bishop of Jerusalem, Theoph. and Oecum. in Gal.
2.
[(...)] as both Theophylact and Oecumenius note upon the place. Finally, nine
years after this, being the 58. of Christ's Nativity, Paul makes his last
journey to Jerusalem; still he finds James there. Act. 21.18.
And the day following Paul went in with us unto James, etc. as the Text
informs us. Chrysostom. hom. 46. in Act.
Chrysostom notes upon the place, that James there spoken of was the Lords
Brother, (...), and Bishop of Jerusalem. So that for 20 years together, we
have apparent evidence in Scripture of James residing at Jerusalem, and that
as Bishop there, as the Fathers say.

For that Saint James was Bishop of Jerusalem, Ignatius, who was made Bishop
of Antiochia, Ignat. ep. ad Trallian.
within eight years after the Death and Martyrdom of this James in their
account, who place it latest, makes Stephen to be the Deacon of this James, as
Clemens and Anacletus were to Peter; which is an implication that James was
Bishop of Jerusalem, out of which City we do not find that Stephen ever
traveled. Egesippus, who lived near the Apostles times, Hieron. in loc. Eusebius.
l. 4. c. 21. Apud Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 1. Ibid. and l. 7. c. 14.
makes this James Bishop of Jerusalem, as both Saint Hierom and Eusebius have
told us from him. Clemens of Alexandria not long after him, does confirm the
same. And out of him and other monuments of antiquity, Eusebius does assure us
of him, (...), that he was the first that held the Episcopal throne or chair in
the Church of Jerusalem. Saint Cyril, Catech. 4. cap. de cibis. Catech. 14.
Bishop of Jerusalem, speaks of him as of his Predecessor, [(...)] in that
Church, (...), as the first Bishop of that Diocese. And Epiphanius for his
greater credit, makes him not only the first Bishop that ever was, Haeres. 29.
n. 3. but Bishop of the Lords own Throne, (...), Epiph. adv. haeres. 78. n. 7.
and that too by the Lords appointment. S. Ambrose does assign this reason, why
Paul going unto Jerusalem to see Peter, Ambros. in Gal. 1. De Scriptor. Eccles.
should find James there, quia illic constitutus erat Episcopus ab Apostolis,
because that by the rest of the Apostles he was made Bishop of that place.
Saint Hierom does not only affirm as much, as for his being Bishop of
Jerusalem, but also does lay down the time of his Creation to be not long
after our Redeemers passion, as we saw before. Saint Chrysostom, Hom. ult. in
Ioh.
besides what was alleged from him in the former Section, tells in his
Homilies on S. John's Gospel, (...), that Saint James had the Bishopric of
Jerusalem. Where by the way I cannot but take notice of a lewd forgery, or at
the best a gross mistake of Baronius, who to advance the Sovereignty of the
Church of Rome, An. 34. n. 291.
will have this James to take the Bishopric of Jerusalem from Saint Peter's
hands, and cites this place of Chrysostom for proof thereof. But surely
Chrysostom says no such matter; for putting the question, how James was made
the Bishop of Jerusalem, since Pasce oves meas was said to Peter; returns this
answer, (...), that Christ made Peter not the Pastor of a particular place, but
of all the universe. That James received his Bishopric from Peter, not one
word says Chrysostom: It Is true, the Latin reads it as the Cardinal does; but
such an undertaker as he was, should have sought the fountains. As for Saint
Austin, Cap. 37.
he agrees herein with the other Fathers, in his second book against
Cresconius; where speaking of the Church of Jerusalem, he describes it thus,
quam primus Apostolus Jacobus Episcopatu suo rexit, whereof S. James the
Apostle was the first Bishop. Add here the joint consent and suffrage of 289
Prelates in the sixth General Council of Constantinople, Council. Constant. in
Can. 32.
affirming James the Lords Brother to be the first Bishop of Jerusalem; not to
say any thing of Oecumenius and Theophylact, whom before we cited. Never was
point in issue tried by a fuller evidence.

And yet one other circumstance occurs to confirm the point, Eusebius time,
Eccl. hist. l. 7. c. 14.
the Chair, or Cathedra Episcopalis, wherein S. James was said to be inthroned,
was very carefully preserved by his Successors, as a sacred Monument, and
gladly showed to all that desired to see it; (...), as the Author has it. An
evidence of no mean consideration, as being vouched by an Author that lived
before the superstitious reverence and esteem of Relics had been introduced
into the world, or any Impostures of that kind put upon the people. Unto which
testimony of Eusebius, Beda Martyrol. December. 28.
we may add that of Beda also, who in his Martyrologie does place the memorial
or commemoration of the Apostles inthronizing in that Chair or Throne upon the
27 of December; wherein I dare not join with him as unto the day, though I
approve his observation of the fact or ceremony, as being every way conform to
the ancient custom of the Church. One only thing I have to add and rectify,
Hieron. de Script. Eccles.
which concerns S. James, and is briefly thus. S. Hierome tells us out of
Egesippus, huic soli licitum esse ingredi Sancta Sanctorum; that it was only
lawful to S. James to enter into the Holy of Holies; whereas in truth it should
not be huic soli licitum, but huic solitum. And this appears to be the true and
ancient reading, by comparing the translation of Sophronius with S. Hieroms
Text, wherein we have it, (...), etc. that it was his custom so to do; the Jews
permitting him to enjoy that privilege in the declining times of their State
and Temple, by reason of the holiness of his conversation. Id. ibid.
Finally, to conclude with Hierom, this blessed Man of God was Martyred in the
7 year of Nero ( An. Chr. 63.) postquam triginta annos Hierosolymis rexerat
Ecclesiam; after he had been Bishop of Jerusalem 30 year; that is to say 29
years complete, and the 30 current. By which account it must needs follow, that
the making of this James Bishop of Jerusalem, was one of the first actions of
the Apostles, after they were endued with the Holy Ghost.

James being dead, Simeon another of the Lords Disciples was made the Bishop of
that Church, Peter, and Paul, and John, and many other of the Apostles, being
then alive, and all concurring in this choice, and consenting to it. Eusebius,
Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 10.
as he tells the story, makes it a very solemn business, scarce such another
Precedent to be found in all antiquity. And he relates it thus, as follows,
(...) etc. After the Martyrdom of James, and the taking of Jerusalem (by the
Romans) it is affirmed that the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord and Savior
which were yet alive, together with those of the Lords kindred after the flesh,
many of whom continued living till that time, resorted thither. Their business
was to enter into consultation, (...), whom they should find most worthy to
succeed in the place of James; and having well considered of it, they all with
one accord, (...), says the Author, agreed on Simeon the Son of Cleophas, one
of our Saviors kindred also, as fit and worthy to possess the Episcopal
Throne, (...). Id. Ibid.
and look unto the government of that Church or Diocese. So that in this
election there did not only meet together the Lords kindred, who might perhaps
desire to keep that holy honor in their own family; not the Disciples only of
the lower rank, who might perhaps be easily induced to consent thereto, to
gratify the kindred of their Lord and Master: But there met also the Apostles,
men guided and directed by the Spirit of God; and all of these coming from
several parts and countries did, (...), with one accord, with one unanimous
assent, agree upon the choice of this worthy man, to be the Bishop or chief
Pastor of the mother City, which place he held until the time of Trajan, during
whose Empire he received the Crown of Martyrdom, Anno 109.

Here then we have two Bishops of Jerusalem, Episcopus, in the primitive and
proper notion does signify a Supervisor or Overseer, as it is rendered in our
last Translation, Act. 20.4. Suidas in Episcopo.
Such were the Officers of the Athenians whom Suidas speaks of, sent by that
State to look into the Government of the Cities under their dominion, (...).
And these, says he, were called Bishops and Guardians. In this last sense the
word is often used by Plutarch, Plutarch. in Numa.
as where he calls Numa, (...), The Bishop or Guardian of the Vestal Virgins;
and their God Terminus, (...), the Overseer and preserver of peace and amity.
Thus do we read in Sophocles of certain Officers called (...), such as took
care about the dead; of others in the civil Laws, qui pani, LL. Munerum.
and caeteris rebus venalibus praesunt, which had the oversight of the markets,
and those called Episcopi. And thus does Tully tell us of himself, Cicero ad
Atticum. l. 7.
Vult me Pompeius episcopum esse, etc. that Pompey had made him the Overseer or
the Guardian of Campania, and the whole Seacoast. This being the meaning of
the word in its native sense, it pleased the Holy Ghost to make choice thereof,
to signify the Pastor or Superior Minister, to whom the governance of the
Church was trusted; one who was vested with a constant and fixed pre-eminence,
as well over the Clergy as the Laity, committed to his charge; such as both
Timothy and Titus are described to be in S. Paul's Epistles, V. Chap. 5. De civ.
Dei. l. 19. c. 19.
of whom we shall say more hereafter. S. Austin rightly understood the word,
and the original of it, when he told us this, Graecum est enim, atque inde
ductum vocabulum, quod ille qui praeficitur, eis quibus praeficitur
superintendit, etc. The word, says he, is Greek originally, and from thence
derived, showing that he which is preferred, or set over others, is bound to
take the oversight and care of those whom he is set over. And so proceeding
unto the Etymology, or Grammar of the word, he concludes it thus, ut intelligat
se non esse Episcopum, qui praeesse dilexerit, non prodesse, that he deserves
not to be called a Bishop, which seeks rather to prefer himself, than to
profit others. Saint Austin being himself a Bishop, knew well the meaning of
the word, according to the Ecclesiastical notion and sense thereof. And in that
notion, the Scriptures generally, and all the Fathers universally have used the
same; out of which word Episcopus (whether Greek or Latin) the Germans had
their Bischop, and we thence our Bishop. If sometimes in the holy Scripture,
the word be used to signify an ordinary Presbyter, it is at such times, and
such places only, when as the Presbyters had the chief governance of the
Flocks, next and immediately under the Apostles, and where there was no Bishop,
properly so called, established over them, as we shall see hereafter in the
Churches of S. Paul's plantation.

Having thus seen the sudden, Jerusalem; and seen the same confirmed and
settled in Episcopal government: our next enquiry must be made into the Clergy,
which were to be subordinate to him, and to participate of the charge to him
entrusted, according to his directions. And in this search, we first encounter
with the Presbyters, the first, as well in time, as they are in dignity. The
Deacon, though exceeding ancient, yet comes short in both. We showed you in the
former Chapter, how our Redeemer having chosen the Twelve Apostles, appointed
other Seventy also, and sent them two and two before him, 1 Cor. 12. and Ephesians.
4.8.
to prepare his way. Of these the Lord made choice of some to be Evangelists,
and others to be Prophets, some to be Pastors, and Teachers, and others to be
helps in Government, according to the measure, and the purpose of his grace
bestowed upon them, in the effusion of his Spirit. And out of these thus fitted
and prepared for the work of God, I doubt not but there were some chosen to
assist S. James, in the discharge of the great trust committed to him, by the
common Counsel, and consent of the Apostles. Such as were after added unto
them, according to the exigences of that Church. I take it to be all of Saint
James ordaining: who being a Bishop, and Apostle, is not to be denied the
privilege of ordaining Presbyters, it being a thing which both the Apostle Paul
did do in all the Churches which he planted, and all succeeding Bishops since
have done in their several Dioceses. Certain it is, that there were Presbyters
in the Church of Jerusalem, before the election of the Seven: Ignat. ep. ad
Hieron.
Ignatius telling us that Stephen did minister, (...), etc. to James, and to
the Presbyters, which were in Jerusalem. And certain also it is, that the
Apostles first, and Bishops afterward ordained Presbyters, to be assistant
with them, and subservient to them, in their several charges: and this they
did, according as the Fathers say, in imitation of our Lord and Savior; who
having chose his twelve Apostles, Hier. ad Fabiolam.
appointed Seventy others of a lower rank, Seciendos Christi Discipulos, as S.
Hierom calls them. Not that the Presbyters of the Church do succeed the
Seventy, who were not founded in a perpetuity by our Savior Christ, De Rep.
Eccles. l. 2. c. 2. n. 6. Council. Neo-Caesar. Can. 13.
as the Archbishop of Spalato has well observed: but only that they had a
resemblance to them, and were ordained (...), as the Council of Neo-Caesarea
affirmed before, as secondary and subservient Ministers in the Church of God,
And this is that which Beda tells us in his Comment on the Gospel of Saint
Luke, Beda in Luc. 10.
that as the Twelve Apostles did premonstrate the Form of Bishops, so the
Presbyters did bear the figure of the Seventy.

Another resemblance between the Presbyters and the Seventy may perhaps be
this, Jewry: so the Apostles thought it fit to give unto the Ministers thus by
them ordained (though they regarded not the number) the name of Elders,
according to the custom of that State before. Presbyters, they are called in
the Greek originals, which being often rendered Seniores in the vulgar Latin,
occasioned that our first Translators (who perhaps looked no farther than the
Latin) turned it into Elders: though I could heartily have wished they had
retained the name of Presbyters, as the more proper, and specifical word of the
two, by far. But for these Presbyters of the Church of Jerusalem (from
whencesoever they may borrow or derive their name) we find thrice mention of
them in the Book of the Acts, during the time Saint James was Bishop, viz. in
the 11.15.21. In the first place we read, that when the Disciples which dwelt
at Antioch, Acts 11. ult. Cap. 18. in Act. Apostol.
had made a contribution for the brethren of Judaea, they sent it to the Elders
there by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. Ask Oecumenius who these Elders were,
and he will tell you (...), that they were the Apostles. And like enough it is,
that the Apostles may be comprehended in that general name; In Act. 11.
they being indeed the elder brethren. Ask Calvin why this contribution was
sent unto the Presbyters or Elders, being there were particular Officers
appointed to attend the poor, as is set down in the 6. Chapter of the Acts; and
he will tell you, that the Deacons were so appointed over that business, that
notwithstanding they were still inferior unto the Presbyters; nec quicquam
sine eorum auctoritate agerent, v. 18.19, etc.
and were not to do any thing therein without their authority. So for that
passage in the 21. S. Luke relates how Paul, at his last going to Jerusalem,
went in unto James, and that all the Elders were present; and adds withal, what
counsel and advice they gave him, for his ingratiating with the Jews. Here find
we James the Bishop attended by his Presbyters, at the reception of Saint Paul:
Chrysostom. in Act. 21.
and they together joining with him in the consultation then in hand, the
business being great and weighty. And therefore Chrysostom observes, (...) that
James determined nothing in it, as a Bishop, of his sole authority: but took
Paul into counsel with him: and that the Presbyters on the other side, carried
themselves with great respect and reverence toward him, [(...)] giving him an
account, or reason of their following counsel. The Bishop never fist in a
firmer Chair, than when his Chapter does support it.

But that which is indeed the matter of the greatest moment, Acts, touching the
Council of Jerusalem: wherein the Presbyters are so often mentioned, as if
without their presence and assistance, the Apostles had been able to determine
nothing. Some would fain have it so perhaps, but it will not be, Saint Paul was
so assured of the Doctrine by him delivered, as not to put it to the trial of a
mortal man: and the Apostles of a spirit so infallible in the things of God, as
not to need the counsel and assistance of inferior persons. How many points of
Doctrine did Saint Paul determine without repairing to the Apostles? How many
did the Apostles preach and publish without consulting with the Presbyters?
Somewhat there must be in it more than ordinary, which did occasion this
conjuncture; and is briefly this. Some of the Jews which had but newly been
initiated in the faith of Christ, and were yet very zealous of their ancient
Ceremonies, came from Jerusalem to Antiochia; Acts 15.1.
and there delivered Doctrines contrary unto those which Paul taught before. It
seems there were some Presbyters amongst them, for it is said, they taught the
people: and they pretended too, that they did teach no other Doctrine, than
that which had been authorized by the Apostles. The Doctrine was, that except
men would be circumcised after the manner of Moses, they could not be saved.
Paul might have overruled this case, by his own authority. But partly for the
satisfaction of the Antiochians, and partly for the full conviction of these
false Teachers, he was content, by Revelation of the Spirit, Gal. 2.2.
to put the matter over to the resolution of such of the Apostles as were then
abiding in Jerusalem: that by their general attestation, they might confirm
his doctrine to be sound, and true. As for the Presbyters it concerned them to
be present also, as well to clear themselves from authorizing any such false
brethren to disturb the Church, as to prevent the like disorders in the time to
come. This is the sum of the proceedings in this business. And this does no way
interest the Presbyters in the determination of points of faith, further than
as they are concerned either in having been a means to pervert the same; or for
the clearing of themselves from the like suspicions. And yet I cannot but
affirm withal, that pure and primitive antiquity did derive from hence the
Form, and manner of their Councils: in which the Presbyters did oftentimes
concur, both for voice and hand, I mean as well in giving of their suffrages,
as the subscription of their names. Council. Tarracon. Can. 13.
Certain I am that in the Council held in Arragon, Anno 490. or thereabouts, it
was provided among other things, ut non solum a Cathedralibus, verum etiam de
Diocesanis: that certain Presbyters should be chosen, as well out of the
Diocesan, as the Cathedral Churches, to attend that service; and that the
Metropolitan should send out his Letters unto that effect: according as is
still observed in holding of the Convocation of the Church of England.

Next to the constituting of the Presbyters in time and order, Apostles did put
over to the people only: not intermedling in the same at all, further than in
commending them to the grace of God, that they might faithfully discharge the
trust committed to them. The Church was then in that condition, that the
Disciples lived in one place together, and had all things common: some of them
selling their Estates, Acts 4.32.34, 35.
and laying down the price thereof at the Apostles feet, that by them it might
be distributed as occasion was. But being it fell out, that some did think
themselves neglected in the distribution, the Apostles, both to free themselves
of so great a trouble, Acts 6.1.
as also to avoid suspicion of being partial in the business, required them to
make choice of such trusty men, as they conceived most fit to be the Stewards
of their goods, Acts 6.3.
and the dispensers of the common stock. This was the charge the Seven were
called to by the people: which being no Ecclesiastical function, but a Civil
trust; no dispensation of the Word and Sacraments, but a dispository power of
the common Treasure: it was most consonant to the Rules of Reason, that the
election of them should be left to the people only. I know these Seven are
commonly both called, and accounted Deacons: but I find no such thing in the
Texts, or story. Neither in that Chapter, nor in all the Acts, is the word
Deacon to be found: nor find I either Stephen or Philip (of whom the Scripture
is most copious) to be so entitled. Acts 21.8.
Philip indeed is called unus de septem, but no more, one of the Seven, but no
such style as Deacon added: which makes me think their Office was not such as
it is conceived. And this I am the rather induced to think, because I find
Saint Chrysostom, Hom. 14. in Act. 6.
and others of the same opinion. Saint Chrysostom putting it unto the question,
what dignity or Office these men had, what Ordination they received, and
namely, whether that of Deacons; makes answer first, that in his time the use
was otherwise, the Presbyters being there entrusted with the distribution of
the Churches Treasure, and then concludes, (...), that it appeared not in his
opinion, that they were either Presbyters, or Deacons. The Fathers of the sixth
Council in Constantinople building upon those words of Chrysostom, Council. in
Trullo, Can. 16.
do affirm the same; determining expressly that those Seven mentioned in the
Acts, were not ordained to any ministration at the Lords Table, (...), but only
to the service and attendance of the Common Tables. Hieron. in epist. ad Euagr.
In which regard Saint Hierom looking back unto the Primitive institution, does
call the Deacons of his time, mensarum and viduarum Ministros, in his Epistle
to Euagrius. For howsoever I believe not, on my former ground, that the Seven
spoken of in the Acts, had either the Office or the name of Deacons, as it was
used afterward in the Church of God: yet I deny not but the Church took some
hint from hence, even in the times of the Apostles, to institute that holy
Order, and to appoint it to some special ministry in Gods public service: as
does appear both by the Epistles of Saint Paul, and the Records of Primitive
and pure antiquity. That Philip did both preach the Gospel, and baptize the
Converts, or that Stephen did both preach the Gospel, and convince the
adversary: related not to any power or faculty which they received by the
addition or access of this new Office. For being they, and all the residue were
of the Seventy, Epiph. adv. haeres. 20. n. 4. Acts 6.3.
as the Fathers say: and that they had received the Holy Ghost before, as the
Scriptures tell us: their preaching and baptizing, must relate to their former
Calling. And it had been a degradation from their former dignity, being
Presbyters at the least before, to be made Deacons now.

Thus have we seen the instituting of the several Orders of Bishops,
Hierarchy: according to those several names, which were in tract of time
appropriated to their several functions in the Church of God. And certainly it
did require some space of time, to estrange words from their natural to a
borrowed sense, to bring them to an Ecclesiastical, from a Civil notion. So
that it is no wonder, if at first the names and appellations of these several
functions were used promiscuously, before that time had limited and restrained
them to that express and settled signification which they still retain. That
glorious name of an Apostle, which of it self did signify a Messenger, (
Graece Apostoli, Tract. 54. in Evang. Johannis.
Latin Missi appellantur, as Saint Austin has it) was given by Christ as a
peculiar name to his twelve Disciples. And yet we find it sometimes given to
inferior persons, Romans 16.7.
as to Andronicus and Junias, in the 16. Chap. to the Romans: sometimes
reverting to its primitive and ancient use, as where the Messengers of the
Churches are called Apostles, Cap. 8.23.
as in the 2. to those of Corinth, Apostoli Ecclesiarum gloria Christi, the
Messengers of the Churches are the glory of Christ. So was it also with that
reverend and venerable Title of Episcopus, borrowed and restrained from its
general use, to signify an Overseer in the Church of God: one who was trusted
with the Government, and superintendency of the flock of Christ committed to
him: according to the acceptance of the word in the most ancient Authors of
the Christian Church. Cap. 1. v. 1.
And yet sometimes we find it given unto the Presbyters, as in the first of the
Philippians in which Paul writing to the Bishops and Deacons, is thought by
Bishops to mean Presbyters; partly because the Presbyters had then the
government of that Church under the Apostle, and partly because it was against
the ancient Apostolical constitution, that there should be many Bishops
(properly so called) in one City. Thus also, for the Title Presbyter, which by
the Church was used to signify, not as before, an ancient Man, which is the
native sense, Beza Annot. in 1 Pet. 5.1. Ambros. in 1. ad Tim. c. 3.
and construction of it; but one in holy Orders, such as in after times were
called by the name of Priests: it grew so general for a while, as to include
both Bishops and Apostles also; as Beza notes upon the first Epistle of Saint
Peter, Chap. 5. And that perhaps upon the reason given by Ambrose, Omnis
Episcopus Presbyter, non tamen omnis Presbyter Episcopus, because that every
Bishop was Presbyter, although not every Presbyter a Bishop. And yet sometimes
we find in Scripture, that it returned unto its primitive, and original use: as
in the first to Tim. Cap. 5. v. 1. in which (...), is used to signify an
ancient Man. (...), an ancient Woman, as by the Text and context does at full
appear. The like occurreth sometimes also in the ancient Writers. Last of all,
for the word Diaconus, which in it self does signify any common Minister, or
domestic servant, the Church made use thereof to denote such Men, as served in
the inferior ministeries of the Congregation; such as according to the
Ecclesiastical notion of the word we now call Deacons, as in the first of the
Philippians, and in the ancient Writers passim. Phil. 1.1.
Yet did it not so easily put off its original nature, but that it did
sometimes revert to it again: as in the 13. of the Romans, in which the
Magistrate is called Diaconus, Romans 13.4.
being the public Minister of Justice under God Almighty; Phoebe in the 16. of
the same Epistle, is called (...), a servant of the Church of Cenchrea. Indeed
the marvel is not much that it should be so long before the Church could fasten
and appropriate these particular names to the particular Officers of, and in
the same; considering how long it was before she got a name unto her self. The
word (...), which is used in Scripture to denote the Church, does signify
amongst the ancient learned Writers, a meeting or assembly of the people for
their common business: as (...). Not to omit the Thracians to the common
Council. In Acharn. Act. 1. scen. 4. Histor. l. 1.
So in Aristophanes. The like we find also in Thucydides, (...), that having
constituted the Assembly, they fell upon their altercations. The first time
that we find it used to denote the Church, is Matthew. 16.18. and after
frequently in holy Scripture: yet so, that it returned sometimes to its native
sense, as in the 19. of the Acts, wherein we read, (...), that the assembly (of
the Ephesians) was confused, ver. 32. and (...), he dismissed the assembly,
ver. 41. And therefore they which from identity of names in holy Scripture,
conclude identity of Offices in the Church of Christ; and will have Presbyter,
and Episcopus to be both one Calling, because the names are sometimes used
promiscuously in the first beginnings: may with like equity conclude that every
Deacon is a Magistrate, and every Presbyter an Apostle, or that the Church of
Ephesus was nothing else than an assembly of the Citizens in the Town Hall
there, for the dispatch of business which concerned the Corporation.

CHAP. III. The Churches planted by Saint Peter, and his Disciples, originally
founded in Episcopacy.
1. The founding of the Church of Antioch by Saint Peter; the first Bishop
there. 2. A reconciliation of the difference about his successors in the same.
3. A list of Bishops planted by him in the Churches of the Circumcision. 4.
Proof thereof from Saint Peter's general Epistle to the Jews dispersed. 5. And
from Saint Paul's unto the Hebrews. 6. Saint Paul's Praepositus, no other than a
Bishop, in the opinion of the Fathers. 7. Saint Peter the first Bishop of the
Church of Rome. 8. The difference about his next successors there, reconciled
also. 9. An answer unto such Objections as have been made against S. Peter's
being Bishop of Rome. 10. Saint Mark the first Bishop of Alexandria, and of his
successors. 11. Notes on the observations of Epiphanius, and Saint Hierom,
about the Church of Alexandria. 12. An observation of Saint Ambrose applied
unto the former business. 13. Of Churches founded by Saint Peter, in Italy,
France, Germany, and the Isle of Britain, and of the Bishops in them
instituted.


OY (...), Chrysostom, that the Church never thriveth better than in
persecutions. Hom. in Act. cap. 11.
And this he speaks, on the dispersion of the Disciples after the martyrdom of
Stephen: than which there could not any thing fall out more fortunately, for
the advancement of the Gospel. Act. 11.19.
They which were scattered abroad (says the holy Text) upon the persecution
which arose about Stephen, traveled as far as Phoenice, and Cyprus, and
Antioch, preaching the Word to none but the Jews only. At first indeed to none
but the Jews alone. The Vision had not yet appeared to Peter, to Authorize his
going in unto the Gentiles; nor had Cornelius and his Household as yet been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost. The Jews were they to whom the promises of God had
first been made, who as they were dispersed into many places; so did Gods Word
go after them, and found them out, either converting them unto the Faith, or
else convincing them of their incredulity. But in no City of the East, were
they so thick set, as in Antiochia, the regal seat and City of the Kings of
Syria; Joseph. Antiqu. Jud. l. 12. c. 3.
in which by ancient privilege first granted by Seleucus Nicanor, they were
all free Denizens, and enjoyed all immunities whatsoever with the Greeks and
Macedons. Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 24.
This made them plant here in great multitudes, together with their Wives and
Children, and so by consequence the greater opportunity was offered for the
enlargement of the Church. News hereof being brought unto Jerusalem, and Peace
by that time being settled throughout the Churches, S. Peter, Act. 9.31, 32.
as he passed throughout all quarters, is said to have come down unto Antioch
also, and to have undertaken the charge thereof, as being the most famous City
of the Eastern parts. It Is true, the Scriptures tell us nothing of this, but
the Fathers do, and negative proofs from Scripture, Homil. 6. in Lucam.
in a point of History, are of no Authority. Origin calls Ignatius, Episcopum
Antiochiae post Petrum secundum, the second that was Bishop of Antioch after
Peter; and therefore Peter must of necessary consequence be first Bishop there.
Eusebius. eccl. hist. l. 3. c. 35.
Eusebius says the same with Origin, as to S. Peter's being Bishop there, and
so does Felix Pope of Rome, in the fifth Council of Constantinople, Action
prima. But not to trust to consequences only, Id. in Chron.
though those clear enough; Eusebius in his Chronicon says expressly, Petrus
Apostolus Ecclesiam Antiochenam fundavit, ibique Cathedram adeptus sedit, that
Peter the Apostle founded the Church of Antioch, and sat Bishop there. S.
Hierom does affirm the same, Hieron. in. c. 2. ad Galat.
Primum Episcopum Antiochenae Ecclesiae Petrum fuisse, and makes it one of
those things which S. Luke omitted. Luke being an attendant of S. Paul in his
peregrinations, took not such special and particular notice of S. Peter's
actions; Ipse firmavit sedem in qua septem annis quamvis discessurus sedit.
Greg.
and therefore his omission of it is no argument that it was not so. More of S.
Peter's being Bishop of the Church of Antioch, see in the same S. Hierom in his
Book de Ecclesiast. Scriptoribus: And in S. Gregory's Epistles, lib. 6. ep. 37.
Where he is said to have continued Bishop there seven years; as indeed most
Authors do agree.

This founding of the Church of Antioch by S. Peter, Eusebius. in Chron.
is by Eusebius placed in the fourth year of the 203 Olympiad, which falls by
computation into that 38 year of Christ's Nativity, being the fourth year after
his Ascension. But then withal, we must restrain S. Peter's Bishopric in
Antioch, and his foundation of that Church, only unto the Jewish Congregations
there. Preaching unto the Gentiles, was not yet thought lawful. And when it
was, it pleased God to make choice of others to promote that work. Whereof when
tidings came unto Jerusalem, Act. 11.22. Ibid. 25.
they sent forth Barnabas that he should go as far as Antioch: And when he
found the task too great for himself alone, he went to Tarsus, says the Text,
to seek for Saul, whom he brought with him to that City. By these the gaining
of the Gentiles in that famous City was begun and finished. In this regard S.
Paul is to be reckoned a co-founder at the least of the Church of Antioch; and
so Ignatius does account them in his Epistle to the Magnesians, Ignat. ep. ad
Magnes.
where he relates that the Disciples were first called Christians at
Antiochia, (...), the Church whereof was founded by Paul and Peter. And this
may serve to reconcile the difference which does occur amongst the ancient
Writers about S. Peter's next Successor in the Sea of Antioch. Homil. de transt.
Ignatii. Dialog. 1.
Origin, Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Felix, whom before we spoke of, do make
Ignatius to be S. Peter's next Successor; where by the way we have S. Peter's
being Bishop there, avowed by Chrysostom and Theodoret into the bargain. Hist.
l. 3. c. 16. descript. eccles. in Ignatio. Epist. ad. Antioch.
And on the other side, Eusebius and S. Hierom place Euodius first, and after
his decease, Ignatius; wherein Ignatius does himself concur with them,
counselling or exhorting the Antiochians, to call to mind Euodius that most
holy Bishop, (...), who first received the government of that Church from the
holy Apostles. Now for the reconciliation of this difference, taking it first
for granted, as I think we may, that at first there were in Antiochia two
several Congregations of converted Christians, the one of Jews, Constitat.
Apostol. l. 7. c. 48.
the other of the Gentiles, whereof S. Peter and S. Paul were the several
heads; the Author of the Constitutions ascribed to Clemens (who in a matter of
this nature may well be credited) will give us an handsome hint, informing us
that (the Apostles being to betake themselves to their other business, or the
business rather of the Lord) S. Peter did ordain Euodius, and S. Paul,
Ignatius, to be the Bishops there in their several charges. Upon which ground
Baronius does infer, and not improbably, that the wall of separation being
beaten down, and both the Congregations of Antiochia, made into one Church,
Baron. Annal. Eccle. An. 45. n. 14.
Ignatius did willingly resign his present interest unto Euodius, whom he
succeeded also after his decease. But be this how it will, certain I am that
the preferment of Euodius to the Sea of Antioch, is placed by Eusebius in the
45. year of Christ's Nativity; who having sat there six and twenty years, did
leave the same unto Ignatius, Anno 71. S. John, and perhaps other of the
Apostles being then alive. More than so, Chrysostom affirms expressly, Sermon. de
Ignat. Tom. 5. p. 499. edit. Savil.
not only that some of the Apostles were then alive, but that he was made
Bishop by them, (...), and that the hands of the Apostles touched his holy
head. And so much for the Bishops of Antioohia, which lived and were
co-temporary with the Apostles.

But to go forwards with S. Peter, Antioch, and by this Preaching to Cornelius
opened a door unto the Gospel in Caesarea, and amongst the Gentiles; he
followed on the course of his Apostleship, Preaching unto the Jews dispersed in
the Eastern parts, as namely throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia, as himself intimates in his first Epistle. 1 Pet. 1.1.
And when he was to leave those parts, and make for Italy, he left them not
without a Ministry; nor did he leave that Ministry without some Bishops to
govern and direct the Flock. The Roman Martyrology does reckon in these
Churches of S. Peter's founding, Cornelius, the first fruits of the Gentiles,
Februar. 2.
Quem B. Petrus Episcopali honor sublimavit, made by him Bishop of Caesarea.
Metaphrastes, if he may be credited, Citat ap. Baron. An. 44. n. 10.
as in most things, which do not tend to miracles, I think he may, relates
that S. Peter in his peregrination did ordain Bishops in the Churches of Sydon,
Berytus, and Laodicea; that he made Marson Bishop of Tripolis, and Prochorus of
Nicomedia; and finally, that in the Provinces of Pontus, Cappadocia, and
Bithynia, he did not only plant Churches, but he founded Bishoprics. But
waving these things as I find them, and the report of Agapetus in the fifth
Council of Constantinople, that the first Bishop of Bizantium was of Peter's
founding, though of unquestionable credit: Let us repair unto the Scriptures.
Conc. Constant. 5. Act. 2.
There find we the Apostles stirring up the Pastors to have a care unto the
Flock. The Elders which are amongst you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a
witness of the sufferings of Christ, Feed the Flock of God which is among you.
1 Pet. 5.1. Oecumen. in 1 Pet. cap. 5.
Ask Oecumenius who these Presbyters or Elders were, and he will tell you they
were Bishops. And then he gives this reason of it, (...), that Bishops are
called Presbyters in the book of Acts. But Oecumenius being of a later
standing, may possibly be undervalued when he speaks alone; and therefore we
will stare super vias antiquas, enquire amongst the ancients, and ask their
judgments in the case. And here we meet with Gregory Nazianzen, Nazian. in
Ap^^get.
who pencelling and describing a perfect Prelate, makes amongst others, this to
be a special quality belonging to him, (...), not to constrain their people to
the works of piety by force and violence, but to allure them by persuasions.
For proof whereof, he instanceth in this present Text, Feed the Flock of Christ
which is among you, not by constraint, but willingly, of a ready mind.

But this construction may be verified from the Text it self, Peter calling
himself their Fellow Presbyter, (...) in the Greek, shows plainly that they
were not simple Presbyters, which he thus exhorts, but Presbyters invested
with some higher dignity, such as had some resemblance of the Apostolical
function. In which regard S. John the Apostle in his two last Epistles, calls
himself a Presbyter, the Elder, as our English reads it. Which word he used, as
Oecumenius has observed, Oecum. in 2. Joh. ep. 1. v. 1.
either because he was grown aged when he wrote the same, (...), or intimating
that he was a Bishop, according as the word Presbyter would bear in those
former times. And why not thus, since Beza does affirm on those words of Saint
Peter, Generale esse nomen Presbyteri, Beza Annot. in 1 Pet. c. 5.
that the name of Presbyter was very general; so general as it seems by him, ut
etiam ipsi Apostoli hoc nomine comprehendantur, that even the holy Apostles are
comprised therein. And therefore Beza being Judge, S. Peter may mean Bishops
here, though he calls them Presbyters. And that he means Bishops, may be also
gathered from the word (...), Feed ye the Flock which is among you. (...), in
the Greek not signifying to feed only, and no more than so; but such a feeding
as implies a rule or governance annexed unto it, which is the proper act of
Bishops. Inferior Presbyters may (...), feed the particular Flock committed to
them by the word of Doctrine: The Bishop only may (...) so feed them with the
word of Doctrine, as that he also rule them with the rod of Discipline. In this
respect as the Apostle joins the Shepherd and the Bishop in a line together: 1
Pet. 2.25.
So primitive Antiquity did arm the Bishop with a Crozier or Pastoral staff, to
show the union of those Offices in the self-same person. But hereof we shall
speak more fully in another place: And indeed need not speak more of it upon
this occasion, considering that there is another word behind in S. Peter's Text,
which puts the matter out of question. Feed ye the Flock of God which is
among you, says the Apostle, (...), says the Text, taking the oversight
thereof, as our English reads it, doing the Office of a Bishop, as the word
does signify. Phil. 3.17. cap. 9. v. 9.
The ordinary Presbyters may be called (...), or Seers if you will, according
to the notion of that word, in the first of Samuel; the Bishops are (...), such
as do over-see the Seers. So then the Presbyters whom S. Peter speaks of, being
such as might (...), and (...), both feed and oversee, and govern; it is
apparent they were Bishops, and not simple Presbyters.

But in this point Saint Peter shall not go alone; Paul will put in for a
share, and keep him company; who writing to the Hebrews, even to the very
hebrews of Saint Peter's Province, Heb. 13.17.
does advise them thus, (...) etc. Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
account, Chrysostom. in 13. ad Heb.
etc. If you would know of Chrysostom who these Rulers are, he will tell you
that they are the Pastors of the Church, whom if you take away from the Flock
of Christ, (...), you utterly destroy and lay waste the whole. Theophy. in 13.
ad Heb.
Next ask Theophylact, than whom none ever better scanned that Fathers
writings, what he means by Pastors, and he will tell you, (...), that he speaks
of Bishops. Oecumen. in locum.
The very same says Oecumenius, noting withal that (...), which we read
submit, does signify (...), a very punctual and exact obedience. But to go
higher yet than so, Ignatius the Apostles Scholar, one that both knew S. Paul,
and conversed with him, will tell us that the Rulers. or (...), which Saint
Paul here speaks of, were no other than Bishops. For laying down this
exhortation to the Trallenses, (...) be subject to your Bishop, as unto the
Lord; he gives the self-same reason of it, which S. Paul here does, viz.
Because he watches for your souls, as one that is to render an account to
Almighty God. The like we also find in the Canons commonly ascribed to the
Apostles, which questionless are very ancient; in which, the obedience and
conformity which is there required of the Presbyters and Deacons, to the
directions of their Bishop, is grounded on that very reason alleged before.
And for the word, (...) of Saint Paul, it is not such a stranger in the
writings of the elder times, but that they use it for a Bishop; as may appear
by that of the Historian, where he calls Polycarpus Bishop of the Church of
Smyrna, E^^eb hist. l. 3. cap. 30. (...).
the (...) of that Church; Ignatius writing, as he says, not only to the
Church of Smyrna, (...) but also unto Polycarpus Bishop of the same.

Where lest it may be thought that the preposition does add unto the nature of
the word, Id. l. 14. c. 14. (...).
we find the same Historian speaking of the same Polycarpus in another place;
where he gives notice of an Epistle written in the name of the Church of
Smyrna; (...), of which this Polycarpus had the Government, and a Bishop
doubtless. In the which place (...), is conform most fully to the (...) of
Saint Paul, differing no otherwise than the verb and participle.

Now those which in the Greek are called (...), Praepositi; Obedite Praepositis
vestris, as the Latins read it; and amongst them Praepositi are taken
generally for the same with Bishops. Oprian l. 1. ep. 3.
S. Cyprian thus, Ob hoc Ecclesiae praepositum prosequitur; for this cause does
the enemy pursue him that is set over the Church, that the Governor thereof
being once removed, he may with greater violence destroy the same. Id. lib. 3.
ep. 14.
More clearly in another place, What danger is not to be feared, says he, by
offending the Lord, when some of the Priests not remembering their place,
neither thinking that they have a Bishop set over them, challenge the whole
government unto themselves, Cum contumelia and contemptu Praepositi, even with
the reproach and contempt of the Prelate, Id. lib. 3. ep. 9.
or him that is set over them? Most clearly yet, where speaking of the
insolency of a Deacon toward his Bishop, he makes Episcopus and Praepositus to
be one same thing; willing the Deacon, Episcopo, Praeposito suo plena
humilitate satisfacere, with all humility to satisfy his Bishop, or
Praepositus. Saint Austin speaks as fully to this purpose, as Saint Cyprian
did, Ad hoc enim speculatores, De civitat. Dei l. 1. c. 9.
i.e. populorum Praepositi in Ecclesiis constituti sunt, etc. For this end are
Bishops ( for speculatores and Episcopi, are the same Office, though in diverse
words) I mean the Prelates or Praepositi, ordained in the Churches, that they
should not spare to rebuke sin. In the same work De civitate, he speaks plainer
yet. For speaking of these words of the Divine, I saw seats, Id. l. 20. c. 9.
and some sitting on them, and judgment was given, he expounds it thus. This is
not to be understood, says he, of the last Judgment: Sed seeds praepositorum,
and ipsi Praepositi intelligendi sunt, per quos Ecclesia nunc gubernatur, but
the seats of the Praepositi, and the Praepositi themselves, by whom the Church
is now governed ( and they were Bishops doubtless in Saint Augustines time)
must be understood. More of this word who list to see, may find it in that
learned Tract of Bishop Bilson, entitled, Chap. 9.
The perpetual Government of Christ's Church; who is copious in it. Beza indeed,
the better to bear off this blow, has turned Praepositos into Ductores; and
instead of Governors, has given us Leaders. Where if he mean such Leaders, as
the word imports, Leaders of Armies, such as Command in chief, Lieutenants
General, he will get little by the bargain. But if he mean by Leaders, only
guides and conducts, Paraeus, Paraeus comment. in Heb. 13.
though he follow him in his Translation, will leave him to himself in his
Exposition: who by Ductores understands Ecclesiae Pastores and gubernatores,
the Pastors and Governors of the Church. Neither can Beza possibly deny, but
that those here are called Ductores, Beza Annot. in Heb. 13.17.
qui alibi Episcopi vocantur, which elsewhere are entitled Bishops. But where
he does observe, that because the Apostle speaks of Praepositi in the plural
number, Ex eo quod loquitur Paulus in plurali mumero. Ibid.
therefore Episcopal jurisdiction was not then in use; it being indeed against
the ancient course and Canons, to have two Bishops in one Church: there could
not any thing be spoken, (to pretermit the incivility of his expression) more
silly and unworthy of so great a Clerk. For who knows not that the Jews being
dispersed into many Provinces and Cities, must have several Churches; and
therefore several Bishops, or Praepositos, to bear Rule over them?

This business being thus passed over, Peter's planting in the Eastern parts,
being thus left unto the care and charge of several Bishops: we will next
follow him into the West. And there we find him taking on himself the care of
the Church of Rome, or rather, of the Church of God in Rome, consisting for the
most part then of converted Jews. The current of antiquity runs so clear this
way, that he must needs corrupt the Fountains, who undertakes to trouble or
disturb the stream. His being there, and founding of that Church, his being
Bishop there, and suffering there an ignominious, yet a glorious death, for the
sake of Christ; are such noted Truths, that it were labor lost to insist upon
them. Only I shall direct the Reader to such pregnant places in the most
ancient and incorrupted Writers, as may give satisfaction in those points to
any one that will take pains to look upon them. And first to look upon the
Greeks, he may find Papias and Clemens, ancient Writers both, alleged to this
purpose by Eusebius Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 14. Caius, and Dionysius Bishops of
Corinth, both of good antiquity, alleged in the same book, cap. (...).
Eusebius speaking for himself, not only in the 13. Chap. of the same book also,
but also in his Chronicon, in which he notes the year of his first coming to
that City, to be the 44. after Christ's Nativity. See to this purpose also,
Saint Chrysostom in his Homily De Petro and Paulo, Saint Cyril of Alexandria,
in his Epistle to Pope Celestine: Theodoret, Sozomen, and others. Next for the
Latins, there is hardly any but says somewhat in it: whereof see Irenaeus l.
3. c. 3. Tertullian in his book de praescript. adv. haeret. Lactant. lib. 4.
cap. 21. Optatus, lib. 2. contr. Parmen. Hierom in his Tract. De Eccl.
Scriptoribus, Saint Austin in Epist. 165. and other places, not to descend to
later Writers of the Latin Churches, whose interest it may seem to be. To close
this point, Saint Austin, Aug. ep. 169.
whom I named last, shall speak once for all, who reckoning up the Bishops in
the Church of Rome, thus begins his Catalogue: Si enim, etc. If the succession
of the Bishops there be a thing considerable, quanto certius, and vere
salubriter ab ipso Petro numeramus? how much more certainly, and assuredly do
we begin the same with Peter, who bare the figure of the whole Church? And then
goes on, Petro successit Linus, Linus succeeded Peter, Clemens him, and so to
Anastasius, who then held the Sea.

Nor can it be replied that Peter took the Church of Rome into his Apostolical
care, and had not the Episcopal charge thereof, as some now suppose. of
succession make that clear enough. Saint Peter the Apostle could have no
successors, but the Bishop might. Linus, or whosoever else succeeded, nor did,
nor could pretend succession to the preheminences, and miraculous privileges,
which were required necessarily unto the making of an Apostle, challenge an
interest by succession, in his Pastoral Office they both might and did. The
Writers of all ages since do afford them that. Only the difference is amongst
them, who was the first that did succeed him in his Pastoral charge. St. Austin
gives it unto Linus, as before we saw: next Clemens, Adv. haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
Haeres. 26. Lib. 2. contr. Parmen. Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in Clement. Id.
ibid. in Petro.
and then Anacletus. Irenaeus does agree with Austin, placing Linus first, but
placing Anacletus second, and then Clemens third: and so does Epiphanius also.
Optatus reckons them, as before in Austin. Saint Hierom sometimes ranketh
them, as Irenaeus, and Epiphanius did, Linus, Cletus, Clemens; and sometimes
places Clemens first, as Tertullian, and plerique Latinorum, most of the
ancient Latin Writers had done before. I know there is much pains taken to
compose this difference amongst our Antiquaries, those most especially of the
Papal party. But in my mind there cannot be a better course taken to effect the
same, than that which was observed before in the case of Antioch. And to effect
this composition, Ignatius, and some other Fathers give a ground as probable,
as that which was laid down before in the former business. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
For first it is affirmed by Irenaeus, that S. Paul had as great an interest in
the foundation of the Church of Rome, as Saint Peter had, A duobus Apostolis
Petro and Paulo Romae fundatae and constitutae Ecclesiae: as his own words are.
The like says Epiphanius in another language, Ado. haeres. 27. number. 6. Ep. ad
Tral.
making both of them Bishops of that Church. Next it is said expressly by
Ignatins, who might well speak on certain knowledge living in those times, that
Anacletus (for I conceive that Cletus, and Anacletus were the same) was Deacon
to S. Peter, and Linus, Deacon to S. Paul, who does indeed make mention of him
in his second Epistle unto Timothy. This ground thus laid, why may we not
conceive, as before in Antioch, that in the first planting of the Church of
Rome, there were two several Churches, or congregations; that of the
Circumcision being collected by Saint Peter, that of the Gentiles first drawn
together by Saint Paul; each of them being Bishop, or chief Pastor of their
Congregations? Secondly, that when the two Apostles perceived the time of their
sufferings to draw near. Peter ordained Anacletus Bishop of the Churches of the
Circumcision, and that Paul did commit to Linus the government of the Churches
of the Gentiles: both whom they had employed before as Deputies and Substitutes
to attend these charges, whilst they themselves did travel to and fro, as
occasion was, and the necessities of the Church required. Thirdly and lastly,
that Linus being dead, Clemens (who had before been specially designed by Saint
Peter to possess his place) succeeded Bishop of the Churches of the Gentiles
there, who finally surviving Cletus, or Anacletus, call him which you will, and
the division between Jew and Gentile being worn away, united the two Churches
in his person, as the sole Bishop of the whole. And this I am the rather
induced to think, because that Epiphanius making up a Catalogue of the Popes of
Rome, (...), etc. Epiph. haer. 27.
first joins together Peter and Paul, next coupleth with the like conjunction
Linus and Cletus: and after brings in Clemens, Euaristus, Alexander, etc. in a
line successively. And yet the Tables of succession may well stand as they have
done hitherto; first Linus, after Cletus, and thirdly Clemens: because that
Linus dying first, left Cletus in possession of the Pastoral charge, and Cletus
dying before Clemens, left him the sole surviver of the three, which possibly
may be the reason why many of the Latins reckon Clemens for the first Bishop
after Peter: whom they conceive to be sole Bishop of that Church: as indeed it
was, before there was a Church of Gentiles founded in that famous City. For
being formerly designed by Saint Peter to be his Successor, and afterward
enjoying the whole charge alone, as Peter for a season did: it might not seem
improper to report him for the second Bishop; that is, the second of the whole.
And then again, Clemens is placed by some next and immediately after Linus,
whose successor he was in the direct line, as Bishop of the more famous Church,
viz. of the Gentiles; and by some also after Cletus, whom he succeeded at the
last, in the line collateral. However, be this so, or not, we have three
Bishops sitting in the Church of Rome between the martyrdom of Peter, and the
death of John: first, Linus, who held the same twelve years: Cletus or
Anacletus, who survived, and held twelve years more: and Clemens, finally, who
suffered martyrdom at Rome, the next year after the decease of Saint John at
Ephesus.

I take it then for a most manifest and undoubted truth, Peter was at Rome, but
that he also took upon him the Episcopal charge, and was the Bishop of that
City. The Arguments devised in this later Age to evince the contrary, do
nothing less in my opinion, than prove the point for which they were first
devised. For first it is objected, that the Episcopal charge requiring
residence, could not consist with that of an Apostle, who was to be perpetually
in motion. Which argument, if it be of any force, will militate as well against
Saint James his being Bishop of Herusalem, as against Saint Peter's being Bishop
of the Church of Rome. And then will Calvin come very opportunely in to help
us, Comment. in Act. c. 21.
who speaking of S. James his constant residence in Jerusalem, does resolve it
thus. Quanquam commune illi cum reliquis collegis mandatum erat, etc. Although,
says he, the Lords Commandment of preaching to all Nations, was common unto
him with the residue of the Lords Apostles, yet I conceive, that they did so
divide the charge amongst them, as to leave him always at Jerusalem, whither
such store of strangers did use continually to resort. Id enim perinde erat ac
si Evangelium long lateque promulgasset in locis remotis; for that, says he,
was as sufficient, as if he had promulgated, or preached the Gospel in the
parts remote. This if it may be used for James, will serve for Peter. Assuredly
there was a greater confluence of all sorts of strangers to the City of Rome,
than used to be unto Jerusalem: and therefore Peter being there, might spread
abroad the Gospel with the greater speed; and with no less success than those
others did, who did not fix themselves in a certain station. But whereas Calvin
does object in another place, Institut. l 4. c. 6. n. 14.15.
that Saint Paul writing to the Romans, and saluting many of the Saints there,
makes no speech of Peter; and that writing many of his Epistles from the City
of Rome, he makes no mention of him neither: this may infer indeed, that Saint
Peter was then absent, when those things were done, as one that had not so
immured himself in the walls of Rome, but that he traveled up and down in
several quarters of the world: doing sometimes the Office of an Apostle,
discharging otherwhiles the place and function of a Bishop. All the Epistles of
Saint Paul which bear date from Rome, were written in the first two years of
his being there: and therefore any argument derived from thence must be very
weak, either to prove that Peter never was at Rome, or never Bishop of that
place: being so many ancient Writers do affirm them both. And yet I would not
have the Papists think that this makes any more for the Popes supremacy,
because he sits in Peter's seat: than it did make for Vibius Rufus to attain
Tullies eloquence, Dion. in Tiber. hist. l. 57.
or Caesar's power, because he married Tullies Widow, and bought Caesar's Chair;
though the poor Gentleman, as the story tells us, (...) did presume on both.

But to go on, the Church of Christ being thus settled by Saint Peter, Rome, and
Antioch: his next great care is for Alexandria, the great and most renowned
City in the parts of Africa: that so there might be no prime City in all the
habitable World, to which the Gospel was not preached. In the discharge of this
great business, was Saint Mark employed; a principal and constant follower of
Saint Peter's, who mentions him in his Epistle by the name of Son. 1 Pet. 5.13.
The Church which is at Babylon saluteth you, and so does Marcus my son. The
planting of this Church is thus remembered by Eusebius, (...), etc. Eusebius. hist.
l. 2. c. 15.
It is affirmed, says he, that Mark did first (of all Christ's followers) pass
into Egypt, and there promulge and preach the Gospel, which before he writ; and
that he first did plant the Church of Alexandria: in which his undertakings had
so good success, that on his very first endeavors, (...), as the Author has
it, great multitudes both of Men and Women did believe in Christ; his holiness,
and strict behavior gaining much upon them. This Church as he first founded in
the faith of Christ, so did he take upon himself the charge thereof, and became
Bishop of the same. This witnesses S. Hierom of him, Marcus interpres Petri
Apostoli, and Alexandrinae Ecclesiae primus Episeopus: Hieron. in Proem. super
Matt.
that Mark the interpreter of Saint Peter, was the first Bishop of the Church
of Alexandria. The same he also does affirm in his Epistle to Euagrius; whereof
more anon. And when Eusebius does inform us, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 23.
(...).
that in the eighth year of the Emperor Nero, Anianus a right godly Man,
(...), as the story calls him, succeeded Mark the Evangelist in Alexandria: he
does infer ex consequenti, that Mark was Bishop there before him. So that is
seems he sat there 19. years by this account. For he came hither Anno 45.
being the third of Claudins Caesar; and finished his course in the eighth of
Nero, which was the 64. of our Redeemer. Finally, Anianus having continued
Bishop here 23 years, died in the 4th. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 12. (...).
year of Domitianus, being Anno Chr. 87. and had Abilius to succeed him: after
whom Cerdo did succeed, in the year 100. what time Abilius left this World, S.
John the Apostle being yet alive. So that there were four Bishops of Alexandria
succeeding one another in that weighty charge, during the lives of the
Apostles: a pregnant evidence that they both instituted and approved the
calling.

Now for the Church of Alexandria, Epiphanius, Haeres. 66. n. 6. Smectymn. p.
53.
that Alexandria never had two Bishops, (...), as had other Cities: which words
not rightly understood have made some conceive, that anciently Bishops were the
same with Presbyters, it being against the usual custom to have two Bishops in
one Church or City. But if we look considerately upon Epiphanius, there is no
such matter: all that he drives at being this, that whereas in most other
Churches, for the preventing of schisms and factions amongst the people, in the
electing of their Bishops, it had been ordinary for the Bishop yet in place, to
consecrate some one or other that should assist him whilst he lived, and
succeed after his decease: only the Church of Alexandria never had that custom.
And they that had that custom, Aug. ep. 110.
as it seems, did not like it well: for whereas Valerius Bishop of Hippo, out
of a vehement desire to have S. Austin his successor, did consecrate or ordain
him Bishop, whilst as himself was yet alive. Saint Austin was resolved for his
part not to do the like: it being a thing prohibited by the Nicene Council.
Quod ergo reprehensum est in me, noli reprehendi in filio meo, as he there
resolves. So that the place in Epiphanius tends unto this alone, viz. to
show the reason why Athanasius could not succeed Alexander in that See, though
by him designed: which was, that he being yet alive, Ep. ad Euag.
it was against the custom of that Church to ordain another. Saint Hierom,
secondly, observes, that the Presbyters of Alexandria, unum ex se electum in
excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant, did use to choose one from
amongst themselves, whom being placed in a more eminent degree, than any of the
rest, they called a Bishop. And this says he, continued in that Church, a
Marco Evangelista, ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos: from the time of Mark
the Evangelist until the Bishoprics of Heraclas and Dionysius. Smectymn. p. 31.
Some hereupon infer, that the persons who brought in the imparity of Ministers
into the Church, were not the Apostles, but the Presbyters. An inference as
faulty, as was that before. All that Saint Hierom means is this, that from the
time of Mark, till the days of Heraclas and Dionysius, the Presbyters of
Alexandria had no other Bishop than one whom they had chosen out of their own
body: just as a man may say, on the like occasion, that from the first
foundation till the time of Sir H, Savil, the College of Eaton never had a
Provost but one, Eusebius. hist. l. 6. c. 12.^^.
whom they had chosen out of their own society. Now Heraclas before he was
ordained Bishop was not a Presbyter of that Church, although a Reader in the
Schools of that famous City; and belike Dionysius also was. And therefore it is
well observed by the Cardinal; that Hierom writing to Euagrius relates, quid
in ea Ecclesia usque ad haec Dionysii tempora in electione Episcoporum agi
consueverit: Annal. An. 1248. n. 5.
what was the usage of the Church of Alexandria in the election of their
Bishops, until the times of Dionysus. However we have gained thus much by
Hierom, that from Mark downward till those times, and a long time after, there
wanted not a Bishop, properly so called, Hier. Comment. in ep. ad Titum.
in that famous Church: and therefore sure they came not first into the Church,
Diaboli instinctu, by the Devils instinct. as he elsewhere says.

There is another observation in the Commentaries ascribed to Ambrose, Comment.
in Ephesians. c. 4.
The Author of those Commentaries affirms, that Timothy whom Paul created
Presbyter, was by him called a Bishop, because the first Presbyters were called
Bishops: it being the custom of the Church (for so I think the sense must be
made up) ut recedente eo sequens ei succederet; that he [the first] departing,
the next in order should succeed. But being it was found that the following
Presbyters were utterly unworthy of so high preferment, that course was
altered; and it was provided by a Council, ut non ordo, sed meritum crearet
Episcopum, etc. that merit, and not seniority should raise a man, he being
appointed by the suffrages of many Priests, to be a Bishop, lest an unfit
person rashly should usurp the place, and so become a public scandal. These
are the Authors words, Resp. ad tract. de diverse. minist. gradibus c. 23.
be he who he will. And from hence Beza does collect that Bishops differed not
from Presbyters in the Apostles times; that there was only in every place a
President of the Presbytery, who called them together, and porposed things
needful for their consideration; that this priority went round by course, every
one holding it in his turn for a week, or more, according as the Priests in the
Jewish Temple had their weekly courses; and finally, that this Apostolical and
primitive order was after changed, upon the motives and inducements before
remembered. Smectymn. p. 31.
Some of our modern Writers against Episcopacy have gone more warily to work
than so, affirming from those words of Ambrose (or whosoever was the Author)
that this Rectorship, or priority was devolved at first from one Elder to
another by succession; when he who was in the place was removed, the next in
order amongst the Elders succeeded; and that this course was after changed the
better to keep out unworthy men, it being made a matter of election, and not a
matter of succession. These men come near the point in their Exposition, though
they keep far enough in the Application, inferring hence that the imparity of
Ministers came in otherwise than by divine Authority. For by comparing this of
Ambrose, with that before mentioned out of Hierom, the meaning of the Author
will be only this, that as in some places the Presbyters elected one of their
own Presbytery to be their Bishop; so for preventing of Ambition, and avoiding
Faction, they did agree amongst themselves, ut uno recedente, that as the place
did vaike by death or deprivation, by resignation, cession, banishment, or any
other means whatever, the Senior of the whole Presbytery should succeed
therein; as the Lord Mayor is chosen for his year in London. But after upon
sight of those inconveniences, which did thence arise, it was thought fit in
their election of the person, rather to look upon his Merit than his Seniority.
So that for all this place of Ambrose (were those Comments his) the Bishop may
enjoy a fixed pre-eminence, and hold it by divine Authority, not by humane
Ordinances.

But to return unto Saint Peter, and to the Churches by him planted, Episcopacy
in these Western parts; I shall in part rely on the Authority of the
Martyrologie of the Church of Rome; though so fat only, and no further, as it
is backed by venerable Bede, and Vsuardus, ancient Writers both, the latest
living in the year 800. and besides them, in some particulars by other Authors
of far more Antiquity. Bellarm. de Scriptor.
And these, for better methods sake, we will behold according to the several
Countries, into which S. Peter either went himself, or sent forth his Disciples
to them, to preach the Gospel. And first for Italy, besides the Church of Rome
before remembered. We find Epaphroditus, (not he that is commemorated by S.
Paul, In Annal. Eccles. A. 60. Romans Martyr. Mart. 22. April. 3. Jun. 4. Julii.
12. Julii. 12. Julii. 23. Chrysostom. sermon. 128.
in his Epistle to the Philippians, as Baronius witnesses against himself) a
beato Petro Apostolo Episcopus illius Civitatis ordinatus, made Bishop by S.
Peter of Tarracina, of old called Anxur: Pancratius made by S. Peter, Bishop of
Tauromenium, in the Isle of Sicily, as the Greeks also do affirm in their
Menologia: Marcianus Bishop of Syracusa, to whom the said Menologies do bear
record also: Hermagoras a Disciple of S. Mark, the first Bishop of Aquileia,
now in the Signeurie of Venice: Panlinus the first Bishop of Luques in
Tuscanie: Apollinaris, created by S. Peter the first Bishop of Ravenna, in
praise of whom Chrysologus, one of his Successors, and an holy Father, has
composed a Panegyric: Marcus ordained Bishop of Atina, at S. Peter's first
coming into Italy: Romans Martyr. Apr. 28. November. 7. Sept. 1. October. 25. Jan.
27. Acts. Martyrol. Romans December. 29.
And last of all, Prosdocimus the first Bishop of Padua a Beato Petro
ordinatus, made Bishop thereof by S. Peter. Next to pass over into France, we
find there Xystus the first Bishop of Rhemes, and Fronto Bishop of Perigort
[Petragorricis;] ordained both by this Apostle: As also Julianus the first
Bishop of ( Main Cononiensium in the Latin) of his Ordination. And besides
these, we read that Trophimus, once one of S. Paul's Disciples, was by S. Peter
made the first Bishop of Arles. And this besides the Martyrologies, and other
Authors cited by Baronius in his Annotations, appears by that memorable
controversy in the time of Pope Leo, before the Bishop of Vienna, the chief
City of Daulphine, and him of Arles, for the place and dignity of Metropolitan.
In prosecution of the which, it is affirmed by the Suffragans, Epist. contr.
Provinc. ad S. Leonem. in fine. lib.
or Com-provincial Bishops of the Province of Arles: Quod prima inter Gallias
Arelatensis Civitas missum a Beatissimo Petro Apostolo, Sauctum Trophimum,
habere meruit Sacerdotem, that first of all the Cities of Gaul, that of Arles
did obtain the happiness to have Saint Trophimus for their Bishop, (for so
Sacerdos must be read in that whole Epistle) sent to them from the most blessed
Apostle S. Peter, to preach the Gospel. For Spain, we find this testimony once
for all, that Ctesiphon, Torquatus, Secundus, Caecilius, Judaletius, Hesychius,
Romans Martyr. Maij 15.
and Euphrasius; Romae a Sanctis Apostolis Episcopi ordinati; and ad
praedicandum verbum Dei in Hispanias directi: Having been ordained Bishops at
Rome by the Apostles, ( viz. S. Peter and S. Paul) were sent unto Spain to
preach the Gospel; and in most likelihood were Bishops of those Cities, in
which they suffered, the names whereof occur in the Martyrologie. If we pass
further into Germany, we may there see Eucherius, one of S. Peter's Disciples
also, by him employed to preach the Gospel to that Nation; which having done
with good effect in the City of Triers, Primus ejusdem Civitatis Episcopus,
December. 8.
he was made the first Bishop of that City. And unto this Methodius also does
attest, Ap. Mar. Scotum in An. 72.74.
as he is cited by Marianus Scotus, who tells us, that after he had held the
Bishopric 23 years, Valerio Trevericae Ecclesiae culmen dereliquit, he left
the government of that Church unto Valerius, who together with Maternus, (both
being Disciples of Saint Peper) did attend him thither; and that Maternus after
fifteen years did succeed Valerius, continuing Bishop there 40 years together.
I should much wrong our part of Britain, should I leave out that, as if
neglected by the Apostle, concerning which we are informed by Metaphrastes
(whose credit has been elsewhere vindicated) that this Apostle coming into
Britain, Commem. Petri and Pauli ad diem 29 Junii.
and tarrying there a certain time, and enlightening many with the word of
grace, (...), did constitute Churches, and ordain Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons in the same. Which action as he places in the twelfth year of Nero,
being the 67. of our Redeemer; so he professes, that he had his information
out of some writings of Eusebius, which have not come unto our hands, but with
a great deal more of that Authors works, have perished in the ruins and wrack
of time. Nor is it strange that the Apostle should make so many of his
Disciples Bishops, before or shortly after they were sent abroad to gain the
nations to the Faith, Beda hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 27.
that being the usual course in the like employments, as may appear by Austins
being consecrated Bishop, immediately after his first coming into England. The
reason was, as I conceive it, that if God prospered their endeavors with
desired success, they might be furnished with a power of ordaining Presbyters
for their assistance in that service. And so much for the Churches planted by
Saint Peter, and by his Disciples.

CHAP. IV. The Bishoping of Timothy and Titus, and others of Saint Paul's
Disciples.
1. The Conversion of Paul, and his ordaining to the place of an Apostle. 2.
The Presbyters created by Saint Paul, Act. 14. of what sort they were. 3.
Whether the Presbyters or Presbytery did lay on hands with Paul, in any of his
Ordinations. 4. The people had no voice in the Election of their Presbyters in
these early times. 5. Bishops not founded by S. Paul at first, in the
particular Churches by him planted, and upon what reasons. 6. The short time of
the Churches of S. Paul's plantation, continued without Bishops over them. 7.
Timothy made Bishop of Ephesus, by S. Paul, according to the general consent of
Fathers. 8. The time when Timothy was first made Bishop, according to the Holy
Scripture. 9. Titus made Bishop of the Cretans, and the truth verified herein
by the ancient Writers. 10. An Answer unto such Objections as have been made
against the Subscription of the Epistle unto Titus. 11. The Bishopping of
Dionysius the Areopagite, Aristarchus, Gaius, Epaphroditus, Epaphras, and
Archippus. 12. As also of Silus, Sosthenes, Sosipater, Crescens, and
Aristobulus. 13. The Office of a Bishop, not incompatible with that of an
Evangelist.


WE are now come unto S. Paul, David only, but also of the Son of David, to be
persecuted by the hands of Saul. Rhemist. Testam. Act. 15.
But as the Rhemists well observe, that the contention between Paul and
Barnabas, fell out unto the great increase of Christianity: So did this
persecution raised by Saul, fall out unto the great improvement of the Gospel.
For by this means, the Disciples being scattered and dispersed abroad, the
Gospel was by them disseminated in all the parts and Countries where they came;
and Saul himself being taken off, even in the middle of his fury, became the
greatest instrument of Gods power and glory in the converting of the Gentiles.
For presently upon his own Conversion, we find him Preaching in the Synagogues
of Damascus, Act. 9.20.22. Gal. 1.17, 18. Act. 9 30. Act. 11.26.
thence taking a long journey into Arabia, from thence returning to Jerusalem,
afterward traveling toward Tarsus his own native soil, and thence brought
back to Antio^h, by the means of Barnabas. And all this while I look upon him
as an Evangelist only, a constant and a zealous Preacher of the Gospel of
Christ, in every Region where he travelled^. His calling unto the Apostleship,
was not until the Holy Ghost had said unto the Prophets Lucius, Act. 13.1, 2.
Simeon, and Manahen, ministering then in Antiochia, Separate mihi Barnabam and
Saulum; separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called
them. An extraordinary call, and therefore done by extraordinary means, and
Ministers. For being the persons here employed in this Ordination, neither were
Apostles, nor yet advanced for ought we find, unto the estate and honor of
Episcopacy, it most be reckoned amongst those Extraordinaries which God pleased
to work, in, and about the calling of this blessed Apostle. Of which we may
affirm with Chrysostom, (...), Chrysostom. hom. 20. in Act.
that of the things which did befall S. Paul in his whole vocation, there was
nothing ordinary, but every part was acted by the hand of God. God in his
extraordinary works ties not himself to ordinary means and courses, but takes
such ways, and does employ such instruments as himself best pleases, for the
more evident demonstration of his power and glory. So that however Simeon,
Manahen, and Lucius did lay hands upon him; yet being the call and designation
was so miraculous, he might well say that he was made an Apostle neither of
men, nor by men. but of Jesus Christ and God the Father. Chrysostom so expounds
the place, Not of Men, (...), Gal. 1. v. 1. Hom. 27. in. Act
so to make it manifest, that he received not his call from them; not by men;
because he was not sent by them, but by the Spirit. As for the work, to which
he was thus separated by the Lord, ask the said Father what it was, and he will
tell you (...), that it was the office of an Apostle; and that he was ordained
an Apostle here, (...), that he might Preach the Gospel with the greater power.
Ask who it was that did ordain him, and he will tell you, that howsoever
Manahen, Lucius and Simeon, did lay hands upon him, (...), yet he received his
Ordination by the Holy Ghost. And certainly, that he had not the Apostleship
before, may be made manifest by that which followed after. For we do not find
in all the story of his Acts, that either he ordained Presbyters, or gave the
Holy Ghost, or wrought any miracles, which were the signs of his Apostleship,
before this solemn Ordination, 2 Cor. 12.11.
or imposition of the hands of the said three Prophets; as afterward we find
he did in several places of that book, and shall now show (as it relates unto
our present business) in that which follows.

Paul being thus advanced by God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, Cyprus,
Act. 13.11. etc.
from thence proceeding to Pamphylia and other Provinces of the lesser Asia,
every where gaining Souls to Almighty God. Having spent three years in those
parts of Asia, and planted Churches in a great part thereof, he had a mind to
go again to Antioch, Act. 14.26.
from whence be had been recommended to the grace of God, for the work which he
had fulsilled. But fearing lest the Doctrine he had Preached amongst them,
might either be forgotten, or produce no profit, if there were none left to
attend that service: Before he went, he thought it fitting to found a Ministry
amongst them, in their several Churches. To this end, They (i.e. He and
Barnabas) ordained them Presbyters in every Church, with prayer and fasting;
Act. 14.23.
and that being done, they recommended him unto the Lord, in whom they
believed. This is the first Ordination which we find of Presbyters in holy
Scripture; though doubtless there were many before this time. The Church could
neither be instructed, nor consist at all, without an ordinary Minister left
amongst the people, for the Administration of the Word and Sacraments. However,
this being as I said, the first record thereof in holy Scripture; we will
consider hereupon, first to what Office they were called, which are here called
Presbyters: Secondly, by whom they were Ordained: And thirdly, by what means
they were called unto it. First, for the Office what it was, I find some
difference amongst Expositors, as well new as old. Beza conceives the word in a
general sense, and to include at once, Pastors and Deacons, and whoever else
were set apart for the rule and government of the Churches to them committed.
Annot. in Act. 14. v. 23.
Presbyteros, i.e. Pastores, Diaconos, and alios Ecclesiae gubernationi
praefectos, as his own words are. Here we have pastors, Deacons, Governors,
included in this one word Presbyters. Ask Lyra who those Governors were, Lyra
in Act. 14.
which Beza calls praefecti in a general name, and he will tell you they were
Bishops. Nomine Presbyterorum hic intelliguntur etiam alii Ecclesiae Ministri;
ut Episcopi and Diaconi: Under the name of Presbyters, says he, are
comprehended also other Ecclesiastical Ministers, as Bishops and Deacons.
Gloss. Ordinar. in Act. 14.
The ordinary gloss agrees herewith, as to that of Bishops; and gives this
reason for the same, Illo autem tempore ejusdem erant nominis Episcopi and
Presbyteri, that in that time Bishops and Presbyters were called by the same
name. Oecum. in Act. 14.
And Oecumenius holds together with them, as to that of Deacons; nothing that
Paul and Barnabas had Epifcopal Authority, (...), in that they did not only
ordain Deacons, but also Presbyters. So that it seems Saint Paul provided
here against all occasions, fetling the Churches by him planted in so sure a
way, that there was nothing left at random, which either did relate to
government, or point of Doctrine. And yet if any shall contend, that those who
here are called Presbyters, were but simply such, according to the notion of
that word, as it is now used; I shall not much insist upon it. I only show what
other Authors have affirmed herein; and so leave it off.

The next thing here to be considered, Cum constituissent illis, when they had
Ordained; and they, is there a relative, and points to Paul and Barnabas,
mentioned v. 20. They preached the Gospel, they returned to Lystra, and finally
they here Ordained. Of any one that laid hands with them on these Presbyters
heads, which was the ceremony by them used in this Ordination (as the word
(...), does plainly manifest) ne My Lucilianum, not a word in Scripture. Indeed
it cannot be conceived that in those places wherein there were no men in Sacred
Orders, any should join with the Apostles in that sacred action. So that the
Presbyters, which were here ordained, could have no other hands laid on them
than those of Paul and Barnabas, if they joined together; and did not rather
severally and apart perform that ceremony. And if that the Apostles by the
imposition of their own hands only, could perform it now; how came they to be
shortened after? how came they so divested of that sacred privilege, as to want
others to be joined with them, and not to make a Presbyter without the
co-assistancy of the Presbytery? The Holy Ghost was no less powerful in them
after this, than it had been formerly; neither did Paul or want, or crave the
help of any, in giving of the Holy Ghost on the like occasions, in the times
that followed. Certain I am, Act. 19. v. 6.
when Paul was at Ephesus, though Timothy and others were then present with
him, yet none but he laid hands upon the twelve Disciples: And yet upon the
laying on of his hands, The Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with
tongues and prophesied. Which if it were an Act of Ordination, Beza Annot. in
Act. 19. v. 1.
as Beza thinks, and it is likely so to be, because the Text says that they
spoke with tongues and prophesied; then have we here more Presbyters created by
laying on of Paul's hands only, without help of others. As for that passage in
the first Epistle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.
wherein the Presbytery may be thought to lay hands upon him; let it be
balanced with another in the second Epistle, where the Apostle does assume the
whole performance to himself, as his proper act; and then the difference which
appears will be quickly ended. If Timothy received those gifts which did enable
him for the Holy Ministry, by laying on of Paul's hands only, as it seems he
did; what interest could the Presbytery challenge in that sacred action? If he
received it jointly from the Presbytery, what influence had Saint Paul's hands
on him more than all the rest? Assuredly Saint Paul's hands were not grown so
impotent, that they needed help; or that he could not give the graces of the
Holy Ghost, by laying on his own hands only, as he had done formerly. And
therefore if the Presbytery did concur herein, it was not that the business
could not be performed without them, but either to declare the good affections
which they did bear unto the person, or to express their joyful approbation of
his calling to that sacred function, 1 Timothy 1.16. and 1 Timothy 4.14.
of whom so many Prophesies had gone out before; or finally to contribute their
prayers and blessings to the solemnity of so grave and great a work, And so, I
think, the business will be best made up, if Paul be suffered to enjoy the
honor of giving unto Timothy, by the imposition of his hands, the gifts and
graces of the Spirit; and the Presbytery be permitted not to want their share
in the performance of the outward ceremony. Certainly that the power of
Ordination was in one alone, that is to say, in the Apostle, is affirmed by
Calvin. Calvin in 2. ad Tim. 1. v. 6.
Who having canvassed the point, does resolve at last, Vnum tantum fuisse qui
manus imponeret: Which is indeed the safest tenet, and most agreeable unto
Antiquity. Estius in 1. ad Tim. c. 4. v. 14.
And therefore Estius, in my mind, did resolve it well, when he did thus divide
the business: Ceremoniam impositionis manuum, a pluribus fuisse adhibitam; sed
solum Paulum ea peregisse, quae [Sacramento] erant substantialia. Unless
perhaps we may conceive, as perhaps we may, that Timothy received two
Ordinations; the one unto the Office of a Presbyter, in which the Presbytery
might concur as to the outward pomp or ceremony; the other to the function of a
Bishop, in which, because the Presbyters might not concur, no not so much as to
the outward act or ceremony, he was Ordained by laying on of Paul's hands only.

The last thing offered to consideration, Luke here uses, does signify a
popular manner of election, used by the holding up of hands. Ortum est hoc
verbum ex Groecorum consuetudine, Beza Annot. in Act. 14.23.
qui porrectis manibus suffragia ferebant, as Beza notes it on the place; who
hereupon translates the word, Cum per suffragia creassent, wherein he has been
followed by some Translators of our Bibles, who express it thus, When they had
created Elders by Election. But whatsoever use the word might have in the old
Greek Writers, assuredly, it either had no such use now; or if it had, it quite
excludes the people of those Churches from having any hand in this Election.
(...), however used amongst the Grecians, to signify the approbation of the
people, testified by the holding up of their hands; yet in the
Church-construction it signifies Ordination, done by the laying on of hands.
And this, to save the labor of a further search, is very thoroughly avouched by
Calvin, Calvin in Act. c. 14. v. 23.
where he acknowledges, that amongst Ecclesiastical Writers, the word (...),
was used pro solenni ordinationis ritu, for the solemn ceremony of Ordination,
which is in holy Scripture called Imposition of hands. Particular instances
hereof, he that lists to see, may find them gathered to his hand in the learned
work of Bishop Bilson, The perpet. governm. of Chapter Chapter c. 7. Calvin us supra.
before remembered. But whereas Calvin hence collecteth, that Paul and Barnabus
permitted the Election of these Presbyters to the common suffrage of the
people, and that themselves did only preside therein, Quasi moderatores, ne
quid rumultuose fieret, only as Moderators of the business, to see that it was
fairly carried: What other ground soever he might have for his conjecture,
assuredly he could collect none from the word here used. For if that (...) did
signify election by holding up of hands, Id. ibid.
qualiter in Comitiis populi fieri solet, as in Assemblies of the people it did
use to be; as he himself affirms it does: Then certainly none but Paul and
Barnabas holding up their hands, (for none but they were (...), in the present
business) the whole election of these Presbyters must be given to them. But
indeed it was neither so, nor so. Neither the Apostle nor the People had any
hand in the elections of those times, but the Spirit of God, which evidently
did design and mark out those men whom God intended to employ in his holy
Ministry. The words of Paul to Timothy make this clear enough, where it is
said, Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy,
1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy 1.18.
etc. and that there went some Prophesies before concerning Timothy, the same
Saint Paul has told us in the first Chapter of that first Epistle. Hom. 5. in
1. ad Tim. c. 1.
Chrysostom notes upon these words, that in those times (...), the Priests and
Ministers of God were made by Prophecy, that is, says he, (...), by the Holy
Ghost. And this he proves by the selection of Paul and Barnabas to the work of
God, which was done by Prophecy and by the Spirit. And finally glossing on
those words, Noli negligere gratiam, etc. he does thus express it, (...), God,
says he, did elect thee to this weighty charge, he has committed no small
part of his Church unto thee, (...), no mortal man had any hand in that
designation: and therefore take thou beed that thou disgrace not, nor dishonor
so Divine a calling. More might be said, both from Theodoret and Oecumenius, to
confirm this Truth; Theodor. and Oecum. in locum.
but that I think it is sufficiently confirmed already.

So then, the Presbyters of these times, being of Gods special choice, Deans,
although but simply Presbyters, are with us in England. And of this rank I take
it were the Presbyters in the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20.28.
whom the Apostle calls by the name of Bishops; that is to say, Presbyters by
their Order and Degree, but Bishops in regard of their jurisdiction. Such also
those ordained by Saint Paul in the Church of Philippos, Phil. 1.1.
whom the Apostle mentions in the very entrance of his Epistle to that
people. Which as it may be some occasion, why Bishops properly so called, were
not ordained by the Apostles, in the first planting of some Churches: so there
are other reasons alleged for it, and are briefly these. For first, although
the Presbyters in those times were by the Holy Ghost endued with many excellent
gifts and graces, requisite to the Preaching of the Word, yet the Apostles
might not think fit to trust them with the chief government, till they had
fully seen, and perfectly made trial of their abilities and parts that way.
Epiphan. adv. haeres. 75. n. 5.
And this is that which Epiphanius means in his dispute against Aerius,
saying, (...), etc. that where there were no fit men to discharge that Office,
the place remained without a Bishop; but where necessity required, and that
there wanted not fit men to supply the place, there Bishops forthwith were
appointed. But that which I conceive to be the principal reason, was this, that
the Apostle did reserve unto himself the chief Authority in all the Churches of
his planting, so long as he continued in, or about those places: And this he
exercised either by personal Visitations, mention whereof is made in the 14.21.
and 15.36. of the Book of Acts; or else by his rescripts and mandates, as in
his sentencing of the incestuous Corinthian, although absent thence. But when
he was resolved to take a journey to Jerusalem, Act. 19.21.
and from thence to Rome, not knowing when he should return to those Eastern
parts, and knowing well that multitude of governors do often breed confusions,
and that equality of Ministers did often end in factions: he then resolved to
give them Bishops, to place a Chief in and above each several Presbytery, over
every City; committing unto them that power as well of Ordinations, as
inflicting censures, which he had formerly reserved to himself alone. This
great Apostle, as for some space of time he taught the Church, without help of
Presbyters; so for another while he did rule the same without help of Bishops.
A time there was wherein there were no Bishops, but the Apostles only to direct
the Church; and so there was a time wherein there were no Presbyters, but they,
to instruct the same.

However it must be confessed that there was a time in which some Churches had
no Bishops. Hieron. in Tit. c. 1.
if any, was the time that Saint Hierom speaks of, Cum communi Presbyterorum
consilio ecclesiae gubernabantur, when as the Churches were governed by the
common counsel of the Presbyters. But sure it was so short a time, that had not
the good Father taken a distaste against Episcopacy, by reason of some
differences which he had with John the Bishop of Jerusalem; he could not
easily have observed it. For whether Bishops were ordained, Id. ad Evagrium.
In Schismatis remedium, as he says elsewhere, for the preventing of those
Schisms and factions which were then risen in the Church; or that they were
appointed by the Apostles to supply their absence, when they withdrew
themselves unto further Countries: This government of the Church in common by
the Presbyters, will prove of very short continuance. For from the first
planting of the Church in Corinth, Baronius so computes it. Annal. Hieron. in
Tit^m. c. 1.
which was in Anno 53. unto the writing of his first Epistle to that Church and
people, in which he does complain of the Schisms amongst them, was but four
whole years. And yet it does appear by that place in Hierom, for ought can see,
that the divisions of the people in Religion, some saying I am of Paul, and I
of Apollo, and I of Cephas, every one cleaving unto him by whom he had received
Baptism, were the occasion that it was decreed throughout the world, as that
Father says, Vt unus de Presbyteris electus, superponeretur caeteris, that one
of the Presbyters should be set over the rest, to whom the care of all the
Church should appertain, that so the seeds of schism might be rooted up. And
from the time when Paul ordained those Presbyters in Lystra and Iconium, and
those other Churches, which was in Anno 48. according as Baronius calculates
it, unto Saint Paul's return unto Jerusalem, which was in Anno 58. are but ten
whole years. Before which time, immediately upon his resolution to undertake
that journey, and from thence to Rome, he had appointed Bishops in the Churches
of his own plantation; so that the government of the Presbyters in the largest
and most liberal allowance that can be given them, will be too short a time to
plead prescription. Now that Saint Paul ordained Bishops in many of the Asian
Cities, or in the Churches of those Cities which himself had planted, before
his last going thence into Greece and Macedon; may well be gathered out of
Irenaeus, who lived both near those times, and in those parts, and possibly
might have seen and known some of the Bishops of this first foundation. Item.
l. 3. c. 14.
Now Irenaeus his words are these. In Mileto enim convocatis Episcopis and
Presbyteris, qui erant ab Epheso and reliquis proximis civitatibus, etc. Paul,
says he, calling together in Miletum, the Bishops and Presbyters, which were
of Ephesus, and other the adjoining Cities, told them what things were like to
happen to him in Jerusalem, whither he meant to go before the Feast. Out of
which words of Irenaeus I collect thus much. First, that those Presbyters whom
Paul called to Miletum, to meet him there, were not all of Ephesus, though all
called from Ephesus: Ephesus being first appointed for the Randevouz, or place
of meeting: and secondly, that amongst those Presbyters there were some whom
Paul had dignified with the style and place of Bishops: In which regard the
Assembly being of a mixed condition, they are entitled by both names;
especially those Presbyters which had as yet no Bishops over them, having the
charge and jurisdiction of their Churches under the Apostles, as before was
said. And this perhaps may be one reason, why the Apostle in his speech to that
Assembly, makes no words of Timothy; who being present with the rest, received
his charge together with them: as also why he gave the Presbyters of Ephesus no
particular charge, how to behave themselves before their Bishop; there being
many Bishops there, which were not under the command of Timothy. However we may
gather thus much out of Irenaeus, that though we find not in the Scripture the
particular names of such as had Episcopal Authority committed to them, but
Timothy and Titus: yet that there were some other Bishops at that time of S.
Paul's Ordination, who doubtless took as great a care for Thessalonica and
Philippos, for Lystra and Iconium, as for Crete and Ephesus. And that these two
were by Saint Paul made Bishops of those places, will appear most fully by the
concurrent testimony of ancient Writers.

And first for Timothy, that he was Bishop of the Church of Ephesus,
Polycrates, who was himself not only Bishop of this Church of Ephesus, but born
also within six or seven and thirty years after the writing of the Revelation
by Saint John. Which treatise of Polycrates entitled, De martyrio Timothei, is
extant amongst the lives of Saints, printed at Lovaine, An. 1585. and cited by
the Learned Primate of Armagh in his brief Discourse touching the original of
Episcopacy. Sigebertus de Eccl. Script.
Certain I am that Sigebertus does report Polycrates to be the Author of a Book
entitled, De passione Sancti Timothei Apostoli; but whether that it ever came
unto the hands of those of Lovain, I am not able to determine. More like it is,
the book is perished, and the fragments of the Treatise which remain in
Photius, Photius in Biblioth. n. 254.
touching the death and martyrdom of Timothy, is all which have escaped that
shipwreck. And yet in those poor fragments there is proof enough that Timothy
was Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, in which it is expressly said, (...), that
Timothy was both Ordained and Inthroned Bishop of the Metropolis of Ephesus by
the great Apostle. Secondly, this appears by the testimony of Eusebius, who
reckning up Saint Paul's assistants, his (...), and coadjutors, as it were,
brings in Timothy for one; and this adds thus of him, Eccles. hist. l. 3. c.
4.
(...), that as Histories recorded of him, he was the first Bishop of the
Diocese of Ephesus. Thirdly, by Epiphanius, Epiph. har. 75. n. 5.
who in a glance gives him the power and style of Bishop, where he relates,
(...), that the Apostle speaking unto Timothy, being then a Bishop, does advise
him thus, Rebuke not an Elder, etc. Fourthly, by Ambrose, if the work be his,
Ambr. Praef. in Epist. 1. ad Timoth.
who in the preface to his Commentaries on the Epistles unto Timothy, thus
resolves the point, Hunc ergo jam creatum Episcopum, instruit per Epistolam;
that being now ordained a Bishop, he was instructed by Saint Paul's Epistle, how
to dispose and order the Church of God. Fifthly by Hierom, who in his Tract De
Eccles. Scriptoribus, does affirm of Timothy, Hieron. de Script. Eccles.
Ephesiorum Episcopum ordinatum a Beato Paulo, that he was ordained Bishop of
the Ephesians by Saint Paul. Sixthly, by Chrysostom, as in many places, so most
significantly and expressly in his Comment on the Epistle to the Philippians,
saying, Chrysostom. Hom. in 1. ad Tim. and in Praef. ad eand.
Paul says in his Epistle unto Timothy, Fulfill thy Ministry, (...), being then
a Bishop: (...), for that he was a Bishop appears by Paul's writing thus unto
him, Lay hands hastily on no man. Seventhly, by Leontius, Bishop of Magnesia,
Council. Chal. Act. 11.
one of the Fathers in the great Council of Chalcedon, affirming publicly,
(...), that from blessed Timothy unto his times, there had been 26 Bishops of
the Church of Ephesus. Eighthly, by Gregory the Great, De cura Pastorali pars
2. c. 11.
where he says that Paul admonishes his Scholar Timothy, Praelatum gregi,
being now made the Prelate of a Flock, to attend to reading. Com. in 1. ad Tim.
c. 1.
Ninthly, by Sedulius an ancient writer of the Scottish Nation, who lived about
the middle of the first Century, affirming on the credit of old History,
Timotheum istum fuisse Episcopum in Epheso; that Timothy to whom Paul wrote,
had been Bishop of Ephesus. Primas. in Tim. 1. Ep. 1. c. 4.
Tenthly, by Primasius, a writer of the first 600 years, who in the Preface to
his Commentaries on the first to Timothy, gives us this short note, Timotheus
Episcopus fuit, and Discipulus Pauli; that Timothy was a Bishop, and Paul's
Disciple: and in his Comment on the Text, says, that he had the grace or the
gift of Prophecy, cum ordinatione Episcopatus, Subscript. ep. 2. ad Tim.
with his ordination to a Bishopric. 11. By the subscription of the second
Epistle, where he is called positively, (...), the first that was ordained
Bishop of the Ephesians. In Praesat. in 1. ad Tim.
12. By Theophylact, who gives this reason of Saint Paul's writing unto
Timothy, because that in a Church new constitute, (...), etc. it was not easy
to inform a Bishop of all things incident unto his place by word of mouth; and
further in his Comment on the fourth Chapter of the first Epistle, In cap. 4.
v. 14, 15. Oecum. in 1. ad Tim. c. 1.
does twice or thrice give Timothy the name of Bishop. 13. By Oecumonius, whom
on these words of the Epistle, I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, gives
this gloss or descant; (...), for there, (or of that place) he ordained him
Bishop. An evidence so clear and full, that Beza, Beza Annot. in 1. ad Tim. c.
5. v. 19.
though he would not call him Bishop, confesses him to be President, or (...),
of the Ephesme Presbytery, and that he had authority to receive accusations and
complaints against a Presbyter, and to judge accordingly. Which what it is else
than to be a Bishop, is beyond my fancy to imagine.

Now for the time in which he was appointed Bishop of the Church of Ephesus
(for on the right stating of that point, 1 Timothy 1.3.
the clearing of many difficulties does depend) it may be best gathered from
those words in the first Epistle, where Paul relates, that he besought him to
abide still at Ephesus, when he himself went into Macedonia. Now S. Paul's
journey into Macedonia, which is here intended, is not that mentioned, Act. 16.
for then there was no Church of Ephesus to be Bishop of. Act. 18, 19. and 19.1,
2, 3. etc.
Paul had not then seen Ephesus at all, nor planted any Church there till a
good while after. Nor could it be when he left Ephesus, to go the second time
into Macedonia, mention whereof is made in the 20 Chapter, Act. 19.22. Act.
20.3.
for he had sent Timotheus, and Erastus before him thither. But it was after he
had stayed three months in Greece, when hearing that the Jews laid wait for him
as he went about to sail into Syria, he changed his course, and purposed to
return through Macedonia. Then was it, as he went that time into Macedonia,
that he brake the business unto Timothy, requiring or besseeching him to go to
Ephesus, to set up his abode in that populous City, and undertake the
government of the Church thereof. To which when Timothy had condescended, Act.
20.5.
he was sent before with Aristarchus and the rest, tarrying at Troas in
expectation of the Apostles coming. And there he was most like to be, when the
Apostles first Epistle came unto his hands, being written not from Laodicea,
Athan. in Synop. Sacrae Script. 1 Timothy 3.14.
as the subscription does pretend, but (...), out of Macedonia, as Athanasius
does expressly say in his Synopsis. For howsoever the Apostle hoped to come to
him shortly, and to instruct him more at large for that weighty business; yet
well considering how many lets and hindrances might intervene, he thought it
not amiss to prevent the worst, and send that letter of instructions in the
mean time to him, that he might know how to behave himself in the house of God.
1 Timothy 1.15.
After this time, I find not that the Apostle did employ Timothy in any other
general service which concerned the Church; or that he called him from Ephesus,
being once got thither, save that he sent for him to make have to Rome
immediately on his first coming to that City, 2 Timothy 4.21.
to be assistant to him there in that dangerous exigency. A thing that both the
one might crave, and the other do, without detracting any thing at all from the
Episcopal place and power which Timothy had taken on him: All the Epistles
wherein the name of Timothy is joined with Paul's, being written within the
compass of two years, which was so short an absence from his Pastoral charge,
as might be very easily dispensed withal, especially when the public service
of the Church was concerned so highly. I know that some of eminent note, B.
Downham, in the Sermon at Lambeth. p. 76, 77, 78. and others.
the better to avoid some appearing difficulties that concern this business,
will not have Timothy made Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, till after the
Apostles coming unto Rome. But the second of the two Epistles does very
thoroughly refute that fancy, in which Saint Paul acquaints him how he had
disposed of his retinue; Tim. 4. Taking it, as it seems, in his way to Crete.
Titus being gone into Dalmatia, Crescens to Galatia, Erastus taking up his
abode at Corinth, and Trophimus left at Miletum sick; taking great care to have
the Cloak and Parchments which were left at Troas, where Timothy stayed for
him, Act. 20. to be sent speedily unto him. Where by the way, Miletum, where
Paul left Trophimus sick, was not that Town of lesser Asia, unto the which the
Elders were called from Ephesus, for after that we find him at Jerusalem, Act.
21.29. Annal. Eccl. An. 59. n. 1. Conditorem ex Mileto, quae in Creta est,
Sarpedonem accipientes, Geogr. l. 2.
nor was it at the Island called Mileta, as Baronius thinks, on which Saint
Paul was cast by Shipwreck, Act. 28. such alterations or corrections not being
easily allowable in holy Scripture. For being that there is in the Isle of
Crete a Town called Miletus, as Strabo testifies; and that Saint Paul in his
Voyage from Jerusalem to Rome, sailed under Crete, and hovered for a while
about that coast, Act. 27.7, 8. etc. that is most like to be the place, and
there I leave him.

For being thus fallen on the Coast of Crete, Titus: whom the Apostle much
about the time that Timothy undertook the charge of Ephesus, had made the
Bishop of this Island. Baronius thinks, An. 57. n. 209. Act. 20.2.
and not improbably, that at Saint Paul's last going out of Asia into Macedonia,
when he had gone over those parts, and given them much exhortation, and having
so done, went into Greece; that this his going into Greece was by and through
the Aegean sea; that in his passage thither he put in at Crete: And finally,
that he left Titus here, ad curandam Ecclesiam, whom he made Bishop for that
purpose. This is most like to be the time, the circumstances of the Text and
story so well agreeing thereunto; for till this time, Titus was either
attendant on S. Paul in person, or sent from place to place on his occasions
and dispatches; as may appear by looking on the concordances of holy Scripture.
Now that Titus was ordained the first Bishop of Crete, has been affirmed by
several Authors of good both credit and antiquity. For first, Eccles. hist. l.
3. c. 4.
Eusebius making a Catalogue of Saint Paul's assistants, or fellow laborers,
and reckoning Timothy amongst them, whom he records for the first Bishop of
the Church of Ephesus, adds presently, (...), and so was Titus also, the first
Bishop of Crete. Ambr. praef. in ep. ad Titum.
Saint Ambrose in the Preface to his Commentaries, on the Epistle unto Titus,
does affirm as much, Titum Apostolus consecravit Episcopum, the Apostle
consecrated Titus a Bishop, and therefore does admonish him to be solicitous
for the well ordering of the Church committed to him. Saint Hierom, writing on
these words in that Epistle, Hieron. in Tit. c. 1. v. 5.
For this cause left I thee in Crete, etc. does apply them thus, Audiant
Episcopi qui habent constituendi Presbyteres per singulas urbes potestatem, Let
Bishops mark this well who have authority to ordain Presbyters in every City,
on what conditions, to what persons (for that I take to be his meaning)
Ecclesiastical orders are to be conferred. Which is a strong insinuation, that
Titus having that authority, must be needs a Bishop. More evidently in his
Catalogue of Writers, or in Sophronius at the least, Id. de Scrip. Eccles. in
Tit.
if those few names were by him added to that Catalogue. Titus Episcopus
Cretae, Titus the Bishop of Crete did preach the Gospel both in that and the
adjacent Islands. Apud Oecumen. Praef. ad Tim.
Theodoret proposing first this question, why Paul should rather write to
Timothy and Titus, than to Luke and Silas; returns this answer to the same,
that Luke and Silas were still with him, (...), but those had entrusted with
the government of Churches. But more particularly Titus, a famous Disciple of
Saint Paul, Ap. eund. in Praef. ad Tit.
(...), was by him ordained Bishop of Crete, being a place of great extent;
with a Commission also to ordain Bishops under him. Theoph. in praef. ad Tit.
Oecum. in Tit. c. 1. v. 5.
Theophylact in his preface unto this Epistle, does affirm the same; using
almost his very words. And Oecumenius on the Text does declare as much, saying,
that Paul gave Titus authority of ordaining Bishops, Crete being of too large a
quantity to be committed unto one alone, (...), having first consecrate or made
him Bishop. Finally, the subscription of this Epistle calls Titus the first
Bishop of the Church of the Cretians; which evidence, though questioned now of
late, is of good Authority.

For some of late, who are not willing that Antiquity should afford such
grounds, Titus being Bishop of the Church of Crete, have amongst other
arguments devised against it, found an irreparable flaw, as they conceive, in
this Subscription. Beza, Annot at. in Ep. ad Tit. in fine.
who herein led the way, disproves the whole Subscription as supposititious,
because it is there said, that it was written from Nieopolis of Macedonia. A
thing, says he, which cannot be, for the Apostle does not say, (...), I will
winter here, but (...), illic, I will winter there; and therefore he was
somewhere else when he wrote this Epistle. But Athanasius, who lived nearer the
Apostles times, In Synopsi sacr. script. Ad Paulum and Eustochium. Comment. in
Ep. ad Tit.
affirms it to be written from Nicopolis; and so does Hierome in his Preface
unto that Epistle. The Syriack translation dates it also thence, as is
confessed by them that adhere to Beza. Theophylact and Oecumenius agree herein
with Athanasius, and the ancient Copies. As for the criticism it is neither
here nor there; for Saint Paul being still in motion, might appoint Titus to
repair unto Nicopolis, letting him understand that howsoever he disposed of
himself in the mean time, yet he intended there to Winter; and so he might well
say, though he was at Nicopolis when he writ the same. That Titus is there
called the first Bishop of Crete, Smectym. p. 54.
or of the Church of the Cretians, is another hint, that some have taken to
vilify the credit of the said Subscription; asking if ever there were such a
second Bishop? Assuredly, the Realm of England is as fair and large a circuit,
as the Isle of Crete. And yet I do not find it used as argument, that Austin
the Monk had neither any hand in the converting of the English, or was not the
first Archbishop of the Sea of Canterbury; Beda hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 27.
because it is affirmed in Beda's History, Archiepiscopus genti Anglorum
ordinatus est, that he was ordained the Archbishop of the English Nation. Hist.
Eccl. l. 4. c. 20. (...).
And for an answer to the question, we need but look into Eusebius, where we
shall find Pinytus a right godly man, called in plain terms Bishop of Crete;
Cretae Episcopus, says the Latin, (...), as the Greek Original: the self-same
style, which is excepted at in Titus. Now, whereas it is said, that Titus was
left no otherwise in Crete, than as Paul's Vicar General, Commissary, or
Substitute, to order those things in such sort as he had appointed, which he
could not dispatch himself, when he was there present; this can by no means be
admitted: the Rules prescribed unto him, and Timothy, being for the most part
of that nature, as do agree with the condition of perpetual Governors, and not
of temporary and removable Substitutes. As for the anticipation of the time,
which I see some use, relating that Saint Paul with Titus, having passed
through Syria, and Cilicia, to confirm the Churches, did from Cilicia, pass
over into Crete; where the Apostle having preached the Gospel, left Titus for a
while to set things in Order: although I cannot easily tell on what Authority
the report is built, yet I can easily discern that it can hardly stand with
Scripture. We read indeed in the 15. Chapter of the Acts, that he went through
Syria and Cilicia confirming the Churches; ver. ult. and in the first words of
the following Chapter, Acts 14.6. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 20. (...).
we find him at Derbe and Lystra Cities of Lycaonia, the very next Province to
Cilicia Northward, from which it is divided by a branch of the Mountain Taurus.
Now whether of the two it be more probable, that Paul should pass immediately
from Cilicia unto Lycaonia, upon the usual common Road; or fetch a voyage into
Crete, Smectymn. p. 50.
as these men suppose, and be transported back again into Lycaonia, being an
inland Country far from any Sea, (which could not be without some Miracle, or
great hiatus in the story) I leave to any man to be imagined.

Timothy and Titus being thus settled in their Episcopal Sees, Paul's Disciples,
or his assistants if you will, that were entrusted with the like Authority. And
first we meet with Dionysius, the Areopagite, ordained by Saint Paul, (as is
most likely) the first Bishop of Athens; but howsoever, questionless ordained
the first Bishop there. Another Dionysius, Bishop of Corinth, Ap. Eusebius. Eccl.
hist. l. 4. c. 22. (...). as also, l. 3. c. 4.
who in all probability was born whilst Saint John was living, does expressly
say it: viz. that Dionysius the Areopagite being converted to the Faith by the
Apostle Paul, (...), was first ordained Bishop of the Church of Athens. The
foresaid Dionysius the Corinthian does also tell us, Ap. Eusebius. l. c. 22. (...).
that Publius succeeded the Areopagite, after him Quadratus; both which were
Disciples of the Apostles: the former of the two, being conceived to be the
same, Acts 28.8.
whose Father, Paul cured so miraculously, in the Isle of Malta. Next for the
Church of Thessalonica, August. 4.
the Martyrologies inform us that Aristarchus, one of Paul's Companions, ab
eodem Apostolo Thessalonicensium Episcopus ordinatus, was by him ordained
Bishop of the Thessalonians. And after him succeeded Caius, whom Saint Paul
mentioned in his Epistle to the Romans, Romans 16.23. Comment. in Epi. ad Romans c.
16.
by the name of Gaius, the Host, as he calls him, of the whole Church. Certain
I am, that Origin reports him to be Bishop here, and that upon the known
tradition of his Elders. Fertur sane ex traditione majorum, quod hic Gaius
Episcopus fuerit Thessalonicensis Ecclesiae, as his own words are. So for the
Church of the Philippians. Saint Paul has told us of Epaphroditus, one whom he
mentions oftentimes, Phil. 2.29.
in his Epistle to that people, that he was not only his Brother, and Companion
in labor, and his Fellow-souldier; Vestrum autem Apostolum, but he was also
their Apostle. Theodor. in 1. ad Tim. c. 3.
Ask of Theodoret what Saint Paul there means, and he will tell you that he
was their Bishop. For in his Comment on the first to Timothy, he gives this
note, Eos qui nunc vocantur Episcopi, nominabant Apostolos, that in those times
in which Saint Paul writ that Epistle, those who are now called Bishops, were
called Apostles. And this he proves out of this passage of Saint Paul, that so,
in this respect, [ita Philippensium Apostolus erat Epaphroditus] Epaphroditus
is called the Apostle of the Philippians. Which clearly shows, that in his
opinion, Epaphroditus was Bishop of the Philippians, as Titus of the Cretans,
and Timothy of the Ephesians, in whom he afterward does instance. Beza indeed
does render the Greek word (...), by the Latin, Legatus; in which he has been
followed by the latter English, who read it Messenger. But Calvin does not only
keep himself to the old Translation, Calvin in (...). lip. c. 2.
though he take notice of the other; but he prefers the old before it; Sed
prior sensus melius convenit, as more agreeable unto the meaning of the place.
For the Colossians next; we find the names of Epaphras, and Archippus, their
two first Bishops, in the Epistle to that Church. And first for Epaphras, it is
conceived that he first preached the Faith of Christ to the Colossians: And
this Saint Paul does seem to intimate in the first Chapter of the same Epistle,
saying, Ver. 7.
As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servant. Certain it is, that in
the Martyrologies, he is affirmed to be the Bishop of this Church, ab eodem
Apostolo ordinatus, Julii 19.
and that he was ordained Bishop by the hands of Paul. But being after Prisoner
with Saint Paul at Rome, Archippus undertook the Episcopal charge, Colos. 4.17.
whom Paul exhorts to take heed unto the Ministry which he had received of
the Lord, and to fulfill it. Most sure I am, that Ambrose writing on those
words, does make Archippus Bishop of Colossi, by the name of their Praepositus,
Ambros. in Colos. 4. V. cap. 3. n. 5.
or Governor, of which see before: adding withal that after Epaphras had
seasoned them in the Truth of God, hic accepit regendam eorum Ecclesiam,
Archippus took the Government of that Church upon him.

For other of Saint Paul's Disciples, we find in Dorotheus, if he may be
credited, Silas, Paul's most individual Companion, Dorotheas in Synopsi.
was Bishop of the Church of Corinth. the truth whereof shall be examined more
at large, in the second Century: and that Sosipater, mention of whom is made,
Acts 20, was ordained Bishop of Iconium, wherein Hippolitus concurring with
him, does make the matter the more probable. Of Sosthenes, (of whom see Acts
18. 1 Cor. 1.) the same two Authors do report, that he was Bishop of Colophon,
one of the Cities of the lesser Asia. But leaving these more Eastern Countries,
let us look homeward toward the West. And there we find that Crescens, whom
Saint Paul, at his first coming unto Rome, 2 Timothy 4.
had sent into Galatia to confirm the Churches; was after by him sent on the
like occasion into Gaul, or Gallia, there to preach the Gospel: for so I
rather choose to atone the business, than correct the Text, and read it Crescens
in Galliam with Epiphanius. Epiphan. haeres. 51. n. 11.
For having with so good success been employed formerly in Galatia; he might
with better comfort undertake the service of Preaching Christ unto the Gauls,
whereof the Galatians were a branch or Colony. Now that he did indeed Preach
Christ's Gospel there, is affirmed positively both by Epiphanius and Theodoret,
two very eminent and ancient Writers: Epiphan. haeres. 51. Theodor. in Epl. 2.
ad Tim. Ado in Chron.
and Ado Viennensis, a Writer though of lesser standing, yet of good repute,
affirms that he was put upon this employment, quo tempore Paulus in Hispanias
pervenisse creditur, at such time as it is conceived that the Apostle Paul went
into Spain, which was in Anno 61. as Baronius thinks, there being left, and
having planted a Church of Christ, in the City of Vienna, (now in that Province
which is called Daulphine) he became the first Bishop of the same; Primus
ejusdem Civitatis Episcopus, says the Martyrologie. December. 29. In Chronico.
And to this, Ado, one of his successors, also does agree; adding withal, that
after he had sat there some few years, he returned back again into Galatia,
leaving one Zacharias to succeed him. Finally, not to leave out Britain, it is
recorded in the Greek Menologies, that Aristobulus (whom Saint Paul speaks of
Romans 16.) being one of the Seventy, and afterward a follower of Saint Paul,
Menolog. Craec. in Martii. 14.
was by him ordained Bishop of Britain ((...), as the words there are) a region
full of fierce and savage people; and that having there settled the Church, and
ordained Presbyters and Deacons in the same, he did there also end his life.
The Reverend Primate of Armagh, out of a fragment attributed to Heleca, De
Britannic. Eccl. prim. c. 1.
sometimes Bishop of Saragossa in Spain, does recite a passage, wherein it is
affirmed of this Aristobulus, missum in Angliam Episcopum, that he was sent
Bishop into England, for so the Author calls this Country according to the
name it had when he writ the same. But these things which relate to the British
Churches, I rather shall refer to our learned Antiquaries, to be considered of
more fully; than affirm any thing my self.

But to look back on Timothy and Titus, Bishops: Smectymn. p. 48.
Bishops being tied to the particular care of that flock or Church, over which
God had made them Overseers; but the Evangelists being Planetary, sent up and
down from place to place, by the Apostles, as the necessities of the Church
required. Besides that moving in an higher sphere than that of Bishops, and
being Copartners with Saint Paul in his Apostleship or Apostolical function,
Unbishopping of Tim. and Tit. p. 36.
it had been a devesting of themselves of their Apostolical jurisdiction, and
pre-eminence, to become Bishops at the last, and so descend from a superior to
an inferior Office. For answer whereunto we need say but this, that the gift
of being an Evangelist, might, and did fall on any rank of ordinary Ministers,
as might that also of the Prophet. Philip one of the seven, a Deacon, as it is
generally conceived, but howsoever Ministering unto the Church, in an inferior
place or Office, was notwithstanding an Evangelist: and Agabus, though perhaps
but a simple Presbyter, one of the Seventy past all question, was a Prophet
too. Philip, as he was one of the Seven, was tied to a particular employment,
and of necessity, sometimes, Acts 6.12.
must leave the Word of God to serve Tables. Yet the same Philip, as he was
furnished by the Lord with gifts and graces for gaining Souls to God Almighty,
and doing the work of an Evangelist, must leave the serving of those Tables to
preach the Word. And Agabus, Acts 11.27, 28. and 21.10.
if he were a Presbyter, whether of Jerusalem, from whence he is twice said to
come, or of some other Church, that I will not say, might notwithstanding his
employment in a particular Church, repair to Antioch, or Caesarea, as the
Spirit willed him, there to discharge the Office of a Prophet. So then both
Timothy and Titus might be Bishops, as to their ordinary place and calling;
though in relation unto their extraordinary gifts, they were both Evangelists.
As for their falling from a higher, to a lower function, from an Evangelist
unto a Bishop; I cannot possibly perceive where the fall should be. They that
object this, will not say, but Timothy, at the least, was made a Presbyter, for
wherefore else did the Presbytery (which they so much stand on) lay hands upon
him. And certainly, if it were no diminution from an Evangelist to become a I
resbyter; it was a preferment unto the Evangelist, from being but a Presbyter
to become a Bishop. But for the Bishopping of Timothy and Titus, as to the quod
sit of it, that so they were, in the opinion of all ancient Writers, we have
said enough. We will next look on the authority committed to them, to see what
further proof hereof may be brought for that.

CHAP. V. Of the Authority and Jurisdiction given by the Word of God, to
Timothy and Titus, and in them, to all other Bishops.
1. The Authority committed to Timothy and Titus, was to be perpetual, and not
personal only. 2. The power of Ordination entrusted only unto Bishops by the
Word of God, according to the judgments of the Fathers. 3. Bishops alone both
might, and did Ordain, without their Presbyters. 4. That Presbyters might not
Ordain without a Bishop, proved by the memorable case of Coluthus and Ischyras.
5. As by those also of Maximus, and a Spanish Bishop. 6. In what respects, the
joint assistance of the Presbyters was required herein. 7. The case of the
Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, declared, and qualified. 8. The care of
ordering Gods Divine Service, a work peouliar to the Bishop. 9. To whom the
Ministration also of the Saoraments does in chief belong. 10. Bishops to have a
care that Gods Word be preached: and to encourage those that take pains that
way. 11. Bishops to silence, and correct such Presbyters, as preach other
doctrines. 12. As also to reprove and reject the Heretic. 13. The censure and
correction of inferior Presbyters, does belong to Bishops. 14. And of
Lay People also, if they walk unworthy of their Christian calling. 15.
Conjectural proofs that the description of a Bishop, in the first to Timothy,
is of a Bishop truly and properly so called.


THEY who object that Timothy and Titus were Evangelists; Unbishopping of Tim.
and Tit. p. 60, 61, etc.
have also said, and left in writing, that the authority committed to them by
Saint Paul, did not belong to them at all, as Bishops, but Evangelists only.
But this, if pondered as it ought, has no ground to stand on. The calling of
Evangelists, as it was Extraordinary, so it was but temporary, to last no
longer, than the first planting of the Church, for which so many signal gifts
and graces of the Holy Spirit, were at first poured on the Disciples. I know
not any Orthodox Writer, who does not in this point agree with Calvin: Com. in
4. ad Ephesians. v. 11.
who in his Comment on the Epistle to the Ephesians, gives us this instruction,
Deum Apostolis, Evangelistis and Prophetis, Ecclesiam suam non nisi ad tempus
ornasse, that God adorned his Church with Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles,
for a season only: having before observed, that of all those holy ministrations
there recited, Postrema tantum duo perpetua esse, the two last, ( viz. Pastors
and Teachers, which he takes for two) were to be perpetual. But on the other
side, power to ordain fit Ministers, of what sort soever, as also to reprove
and censure those that behaved themselves unworthily; authority to convent and
reject an Heretic, to punish by the censures of the Church, all such as give
offense and scandal to the Congregation by their exhorbitant and unruly living:
this ought to be perpetual in the Church of Christ. This the Apostle seems to
intimate, when he said to Timothy, I charge thee in the sight of God, 1 Timothy
6.14.
and before Jesus Christ, that thou keep this Commandment without spot, and
unreprovable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now Timothy was not
like to live till Christ's second coming; the Apostle, past all question, never
meant it so: therefore the power, and charge here given to exercise the same,
according to the Apostles Rules and Precepts was not personal only: but such as
was to appertain to him, and to his successors for ever, even till the
appearing of our Lord and Savior. The like expression do we find in Saint
Matthew, when our Redeemer said unto his Apostles, Matthew. 28. ult.
Behold I am with you always even unto the end of the world, Not always
certainly with his Apostles, not to the end of the World with those very men,
to whom he did address himself when he spoke these words; for they being mortal
men have been dead long since. Non solis hoc Apostolis dictum esse, this was no
personal promise then, says Calvin truly. Harmon. Evangel. In Matthew. 28.
With them and their successors he might always be, and to the end of the
world give them his assistance. Cum vobis and successorlbus vestris, as Denis
the Carthusian very well observes. Saint Paul then gives this charge to
Timothy, and in him unto all his successors in the Episcopal function; which
should continue in the Church till Christ's second coming. And therefore I
conceive the annotation of the ordinary gloss to be sound and good, in Timotheo
omnibus successoribus loquitur Apostolus, Glossa Ordinar. in 1 Timothy 6.
that this was spoke in Timothy unto all his successors. And so the
Commentaries under the name of Ambrose do inform us also, saying, that Paul was
not so solicitous for Timothy, as for his successors, ut exemplo Timothei
Ecclesiae ordinationem custodirent: In 1 Timothy 6.
that they might learn by his Example ( i.e. by practicing those directions
which were given to him) to look unto the ordering of the Church.

This ground thus laid, Timothy and Titus, and in them to all other Bishops.
And the best way to look upon it is, to divide the same as the Schoolmen do,
into potestas ordinis, and potestas jurisdictionis; the power of Order, and the
power of jurisdiction: in each of which there occur diverse things to be
considered. First, for the power of Order, besides what every Bishop does, and
may lawfully perform, by virtue of the Orders he received as Presbyter; there
is a power of Order conferred upon him as a Bishop: and that is indeed the power
of Ordination, or giving Orders, which seems so proper and peculiar to the
Bishops Office, as not to be communicable to any else. Paul gives it as a
special charge to Timothy, to lay hands hastily on no man: Tim. 5.22.
which caution doubtless had been given in vain, in case the Presbyters of
Ephesus might have done it, as well as he. And Titus seems to have been left in
Crete for this purpose chiefly, Tit. 1. v. 5.
that he might ordain Presbyters in every City: which questionless had been
unnecessary, in case an ordinary Presbyter might have done the same. The
Fathers have observed from these Texts of Scripture, that none but Bishops
strictly and properly so called (according as the word was used when they lived
that said it) have any power of Ordination. Epiphanius in his dispute against
Aerius, Haeres. 75. n. 4.
observes this difference betwixt Bishops and Presbyters, (whom the Heretic
would fain have had to be the same) that the Presbyter by administering the
Sacrament of Baptism, did beget children to the Church: but that the Bishop by
the power of Ordination, (...), did beget Fathers to the same. A power from
which he utterly excludes the Presbyter; and gives good reason for it too: for
how, says he, can he ordain, or constitute a Presbyter, (...), which in his
Ordination did receive no power to impose hands upon another: Hom. 11. in 1 Timothy c. 3.
Chrysostom speaking of the difference between a Bishop, and a Presbyter, makes
it consist in nothing else, but in this power of Ordination. (...), etc. only
in laying on of hands, says he, or in Ordination, a Bishop is before, or above
a Presbyter; and have that power only inherent in them, Epistola ad Euagr.
which the others have not. Hierom although a great advancer of the place and
Office of the Presbyter, excludes him from the power of Ordination, or any
interest therein. Quid enim facit excepta ordinatione Episcopus, quod Presbyter
non faciat? What, says he, does a Bishop, saving Ordination, more than a
Presbyter may do? Neither does Hierom speak de facto, and not de jure, quid
facit, not quid debet facere: Smectymn. p. 37.
as I observe the place to be both cited and applied in some late Discourses.
Hierom's non faciat, is as good as non debet facere: and they that look upon
him well, will find he pleads not of the possession only, but the right and
Title. And we may see his meaning by the passage formerly alleged upon the
words of Paul to Titus, cap. 1. v. 5. Audiant Episcopi qui habent constituendi
Presbyteros per singulas urbes potestatem. By which it seems that Bishops only
had the power of ordaining Presbyters; and that they did both claim, and enjoy
the same from this grant to Titus.

For further clearing of this point, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 7. n.
appears by the ordination of Origin unto the Office of a Presbyter by
Theoctistus Bishop of Caesarea, and Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, who laid
hands upon him; (...), as my Author has it. Which act of theirs when it was
quarrelled by Demetrius, he did not plead in bar, that there were no Presbyters
assistant in it; but that the party had done somewhat (and we know what 'twas)
by which he was conceived to be incapable of holy Orders. Id. l. 6. c. 25.
(...).
So when the Bishop, whosoever he was, out of an affectation which he bare unto
Novatus (not being yet a Separatist from the Church of God) desired, (...), the
Clergy being all against it, to ordain him Presbyter: the matter stood upon, as
the story testifies, was not the Bishops being the sole agent in it, but
because it was forbidden by the ancient Canons, that any one who had been
formerly baptized being sick in bed, (and that had been Novatus case) should be
assumed into the Clergy. But not to make a further search into particulars,
which are vast and infinite: we have two notable cases that reflect this way,
and in them two such general Maxims as will make all sure. In the third Council
of Carthage holden in or about the year 390. it was proposed by Aurelius then
Metropolitan of Carthage, Council. Carthag. 3. Ca. 45.
that it might be lawful for him to choose or take Presbyters out of the
Churches of his Suffragans, and to ordain them Bishops of such Cities as were
unprovided: and that the Bishops of those Churches, whose Clerks, or Presbyters
they were, might not be suffered to oppose. To which when all the Fathers had
agreed. Posthumianus one of the Prelates there assembled, puts this case, that
if a Bishop had but one Presbyter only, Numquid debet illi ipse unus Presbyter
auferri, whether that one Presbyter should be taken from him. Aurelius
thereunto replyeth, Episcopum unum esse posse, per quem dignatione divina
Presbyteri multi constitui possunt, that a Bishop by Gods grace might make many
Presbyters, and therefore that on such occasions, his one and only Presbyter
must be yielded up upon demand. By which it is most clear and evident, that a
Bishop may alone perform the Act or Ceremony of Ordination, not having any
Presbyter at all to join with him in it. The like occurreth in the second
Council of Sevil (held in the year 617, or thereabouts) concerning Erangitanus
a Presbyter of the Church of Corduba, who by the Bishop of that See, Council.
Hispalens. 2. c. 5. Cap. 6.
(a ruffling Prelate, as appears by the following Chapter) had been deposed
from his Ministry: the cause being brought before the Council, and the whole
process openly declared unto them, the man was presently restored to his
Orders, and the sentence passed against him declared to be irrregular, and
contrary to the ancient Canons, whereby it was enacted that no Clergyman
should be deposed without the judgment of a Synod. And then it follows,
Episcopus sacerdotibus and ministris solus dare honorem potest, auferre solus
non potest; that Bishops solely of themselves may confer holy Orders on Priests
and Deacons, but solely of their own authority, they could not depose them.

So then it is most clear and evident, Certainly nothing less than so: or if
they did attempt it at any time, the whole act was not only censured and
condemned as uncanonical, but adjudged void and null, from the first beginning.
For besides that which has been said before, from Hierom, Chrysostom, and
Epiphanius, touching the limitation of this power to the Bishops only; there
are three Book-cases in the point, which put the matter out of question:
Coluthus, once a Presbyter of Alexandria, Athanas. in Apol. 2. Edit. Gr. Lat.
p. 784.
falling at difference with his Bishop, usurps upon the Bishops Office, and
ordains certain Presbyters, himself being one. This business being canvassed in
the Council of Alexandria, before that famous Confessor Hosius, and other
Bishops there assembled: Coluthus was commanded to carry himself for a
Presbyter only, as indeed he was: and all the Presbyters of his ordaining
reduced to the same condition, (...), in which they were before the said
Ordination. Where by the way instead of Coluthus the last edition of this
Author in Greek and Latin, does read Catholicus: Lutet. 1627.
which must be mended as before, in the relation of this story; P. 732.792.
where we have Coluthus, and not Catholicus. But to proceed. It happened
afterward that Ischyras one of the Pseudo-Presbyters ordained by Coluthus, Id.
ibid. p. 757.
accused Macarius (one of the Presbyters of Athanasius) for a pretended
violence to be offered to him, Id. ibid. p. 732.
then ministering at the holy Table. So that the business being brought at last
unto the judgment of a Council; and the point in issue being this, whether this
Ischyras were a Presbyter, or not; and so by consequence a dispenser of those
sacred Mysteries: he was returned no Presbyter, by the full consent of all the
Prelates then assembled. The reason was, because he was ordained by Coluthus,
(...), who died a Presbyter; and that his Ordinations had been all made void,
and those that had received them at his hands, (...), became lay again, and in
that state received the blessed Sacrament as the Laymen did. And this says
Athanasius was a thing so public, (...), that no man ever doubted of the
truth thereof.

The second case was that of Maximus, Gregory Nazianzens, at such time as he
was Bishop of Constantinople; and by him, Greg. Presb. in vita Nazian.
having taken a good liking to him, admitted into the Clergy of that Church.
But Maximus being an ungrateful wretch, complots with others like himself, to
be made Bishop of that City: and thereupon negotiates with Peter, then
Patriarch of Alexandria, to ordain him Bishop of the same; which being done
accordingly, (for Maximus was by birth of Egypt, and possibly might have good
friends there, besides his money) and the whole City in a great distemper about
the business: the whole cause came at last to be debated in the first general
Council of Constantinople, Conc. Constable. 1. cap. 4.
where on full hearing of the matter it was thus Decreed, viz. that Maximus
neither was to be taken for a Bishop, (...), nor any of those he had ordained
to be accounted of the Clergy, or remain in any order or degree thereof. Where
note, that howsoever Maximus came unlawfully unto the bishopric of
Constantinople, by means whereof all the Acts done by him as a Bishop, were
made void and frustrate: yet if as Presbyter, to which degree he had been
lawfully ordained by Nazianzen, he might have given the imposition of hands,
the Presbyters by him ordained, would have held good still. But the third case
comes nearest to the business, yet as it is thus reported in the Council of
Sevil before remembered. A Bishop of the Church of Spain, Council. Hisp. 11. cap.
5.
being troubled with sore eyes, and having some presented to him to be ordained
Presbyters and Deacons, did only lay his hands upon them, suffering a Presbyter
that stood by, to read the words of Ordination. This coming to be scanned in
the aforesaid Council, upon mature deliberation it is thus determined. First,
for the Presbyter, which assisted, that for his boldness and presumption, he
had been subject to the Councils censure, but that he was before deceased: next
for the Presbyter and Deacons, who were so ordained, that they should actually
be deposed from all sacred Orders, Concluding thus, Tales enim merito judicati
sunt removendi, quia prave inventi sunt constituti; that they were worthily
adjudged to lose those Orders, which they had wrongfully received. So little
influence had the Presbyters in the essential parts of Ordination, as that
their bare reading of the words (though required to it by the Bishop) was
adjudged enough, not only to make them liable to the Churches Censure, but also
for their sakes to make void the Action. Nay so severe and punctual was the
Church herein, that whereas certain Bishops of those times, whether consulting
their own case, or willing to decline so great a burden, had suffered their
Chorepiscopi, as well those which were simply Presbyters, as such as had
Episcopal Ordination (for two there were) to perform this Office: Council.
Gangrens. Can. 13. Council. Antioch. l. Can. 10.
it was forbidden absolutely in the one, limited and restrained in the other
sort, as by the Canons of the two ancient Synods of Gangra, and Antioch, does
at full appear.

It is true indeed, that anciently, as long, for ought I know, as there is any
Monument, or Record of true Antiquity, Cyprian, one of the ancientest of the
Fathers, which now are extant, Cyprian. Ep. 33. or l. 2. ep. 5.
affirms, that in the ordination of Aurelius unto the Office of a Reader in the
Church of Carthage, he used the hands of his Colleagues. Hunc igitur a me, and
a Collegis, qui praesentes aderant, ordinatum sciatis, as he reports the matter
in a Letter to his charge at Carthage. Where by Colleagues it is most likely
that he means his Presbyters; first, because that Epistle was written during
the time of his retreat, and privacy; what time it is not probable, that any of
his Suffragan Bishops did resort unto him: and secondly, because those words,
qui praesentes aderant, are so conform unto the practice of that Church in the
times succeeding. For in the fourth Council of Carthage held in the year 401.
Council. Car. 4. Can. 3.
it was Decreed, that when a Presbyter was ordained, the Bishop blessing him,
and holding his hand upon his head, etiam omnes Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt
manus suas juxta manum Episcopi super caput illius teneant; all the Presbyters
which are present shall likewise lay their hands upon his head, near the hands
of the Bishop. Id. Can. 12.
And in the same Council it was further ordered, that the Bishop should not
ordain a Clergyman, sine consilio clericorum suorum, without the counsel of
his Clergy: which also does appear to be Cyprians practice, in the first words
of the Epistle before remembered. But then it is as true withal, that this
conjunction of the Presbyters in the solemnities of this Act, was rather ad
honorem Sacerdotii, quam essentiam operis, more for the honor of the
Priesthood, than for the essence of the work. Nor did the laying on of the
Presbyters hands confer upon the party that was ordained any power or order:
but only testified their consent unto the business, and approbation of the man,
according to the purpose and intent of the last of the two Canons before
alleged. And for the first Canon, if you mark it well, it does not say, that
if there be no Presbyters in place, the Bishop should defer the Ordination till
they came: but Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt, if any Presbyters were present
at the doing of it, they should lay their hands upon his head, near the Bishops
hands. So that however anciently, in the purest times, the Presbyters which
were then present, both might and did impose hands with the Bishop, upon the
man to be ordained; and so concurred in the performance of the outward
Ceremony: yet the whole power of Ordination was vested in the person of the
Bishop only, as to the essence of the work. And this appears yet further, by
some passages in the Civil Laws, prescribed for the ordering of Ecclesiastical
Ministers; by which, upon neglect or contempt thereof, the Presbyters were not
obnoxious unto punishment that joined with the Bishop, because they had no
power to hinder what he meant to do. But the Bishop only, qui ordinat, or, qui
ordinationem imponit, he in whom rested the authority, by laying on, or by
withholding of his hands, either to frustrate or make good the action: he was
accomptable unto the Laws, if he should transgress them: for which consult
Novell. Constitut. 123. Cited by B. Bilson. c. 13. Sozomen, Hist. Eccl. l. 4.
c. 23. (...).
Ca. 16. and Novell. Constitut. 6. And so it also stood in the Churches
practice; as appears plainly by the degradations of Basilius, Eleusius, and
Elpidius, three ancient Bishops, because that (amongst other things) they had
advanced some men unto holy Orders, contrary to the Laws, and Ordinances of the
Church: of which Elpidius was deposed on no other reason, but on that alone.
Now had the Presbyters been agents in ordaining as well as the Bishop, and the
imposing of their hands so necessary, that the business could not be performed
without them: there had been neither equity, nor reason in it, to let them
escape Scot-free, and punish the poor Bishops only, for that in which the
Presbyters were as much in fault.

Against all this, Reformed Churches beyond the Seas: who finding an aversness
of the Bishops at the first, to give them Orders, unless they would desert the
work of Reformation, which they had in hand, were fain to have recourse to
Presbyters, for their Ordinations, in which estate they still continue. That
thus it was, August. Con. in fine.
appears by the Augustan Confession, the Authors and Abettors of the which
complain, that the Bishop would admit none unto sacred Orders, Nisi jurent se
puram Evangelii Doctrinam nolle docere, except they would be sworn not to
Preach the Gospel according to the grounds and Principles of their Reformation.
For their parts they professed, Non id agi ut dominatio excipiatur Episcopis,
that they had no intention to deprive the Bishops of their Authority in the
Church; but only that they might have liberty to Preach the Gospel, and be
eased of some few Rites and Ceremonies, which could not be observed without
grievous sin. This if it could not be obtained, and that a Schism did follow
thereupon, it did concern the Bishops to look unto it, how they would make up
their account to Almighty God. So that the Bishops thus refusing to admit them
into holy Orders, which was the public ordinary Door of entrance into the
Ministry of the Church; necessity compelled them at the last, to enter in by
private ways, and impose hands on one another. In which particular the case of
the Reformed Churches may not unfitly be resembled unto that of Scipio, as it
is thus related in the story. Valor. Maxim, l. 3. c. 7.
Upon some want of money for the furtherance of the necessary affairs of State,
he demanded a supply from the common Treasury. But when the Quaestor,
pretending that it was against the Laws, refused to open it; himself a private
person, seized upon the Keys: Et patefacto aerario, legem necessitati cedere
coegit, and made the Law give way to the necessities of the Commonwealth. So in
like manner, the better to reform Religion, many good men made suit to be
supplied out of the common Treasuries of the Church; to be admitted to the
Ministry, according to the common course of Ordination. Which when it was
denied them by the Bishops, the Churches Quaestors in this case, they rather
chose to seize upon the Keys; and receive Ordination from the hands of private
persons, than that the Church should be unfurnished. This I conceive to be the
Case, at the first beginning. But whether with the change of their condition,
the case be altered, or whether they continue in the state they were; I am not
able to say any thing. It is a good old saying, and to that I keep me; (...),
that where I am a stranger, I must be no medler.

Hitherto of the power of Ordination committed by Saint Paul to his two Bishops
of Ephesus and Crete, and in them to all other Bishops whatsoever.
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; so far forth as the same has been committed by
the Word of God, and by the practice of the Church, unto the managing and care
of Bishops. First for the ordering of Gods Service, and all things thereunto
pertaining, Saint Paul gave Timothy this Direction, that first of all, 1 Timothy
2.1.
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men: for Kings, and all that be in authority, that men may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. This, as it was a common Duty,
and appertaining unto every man in his several place: so the Apostle leaves it
unto Timothy, to see that men performed this Duty, and were not suffered to
neglect it. For that the Prayers here intended, were not the private Prayers of
particular persons, but the public of the Congregation, is agreed on all
sides. Calvin conceives it so for the Protestant Writers, Paulus simpliciter
jubet quoties orationes publicae habentur, Calvin in 1. ad Tim. c. 2.
that Paul does here appoint what he would have to be comprised in our public
Prayers. Estius, for the Pontificians, does resolve so also, Estius in 1 ad
Tim. c. 2.
that the place must be understood de publicis Ecclesiae precibus, of the
public Prayers, of and in the Congregation. And that the Western Churches may
not stand alone, Theophylact, and Oecumenius do expound the words, Theophyl.
and Occum. in locum.
(...), of the daily Service used in the Church of God, who also call it (...),
the first Christian Duty. Now ask of Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in 1 ad Tim. c. 2.
to whom it does belong to see this Duty carefully discharged as it ought to
be; and he will tell you it is the Priest, or (...), as he which is the common
Father of the Universe, and therefore to take care of all, as does the Lord,
whose Priest, or (...) he is. And ask of Oecumenius; Oecum. Ibid.
than whom none better understood that Fathers Writings, whom he does there
mean by the Priest, or (...), and he will tell you that it is the Bishop.
(...), etc. It does, says he, belong unto the Bishop, as the common Father, to
make Prayers for all men, faithful and infidels, friends and enemies,
persecuters and slanderers. Lyra speaks home and fully to this purpose also.
For this he makes to be secundus actus ad Episcopum pertinens, the second Act
belonging to the Bishops Office, that Prayers be offered unto God.

The Ministration of the Sacraments, Mat. 28.19. Luke 22.19.
To teach and to Baptize, was given in the charge to the Apostles; and unto
none but they did Christ say, hoc facite, that they should take the bread and
break, and bless it, and so deliver it to the Communicants. So also in the
blessing and distributing of the other element. This power they left in general
to their Successors, to the Bishops chiefly, and such as were found worthy of
so high a trust, Ep. ad Smyrnens.
by their permission. Ignatius, who lived nearest to our Saviors time, and had
been conversant with the Apostles, does expressly say it. (...), etc. It is not
lawful without the Bishop, either to Baptize, or make Oblations, or celebrate
the Eucharist, or finally to keep the Love Feasts, or (...), which were then in
use (for those I take it were the (...), which the Father speaks of. Tertul. de
Baptismo. c. 17.
) Tertullian for the second Century does affirm as much. The right, says he,
of giving Baptism, belongs to the chief Priest, that is, the Bishop; next to
the Presbyters or Deacons, non tamen sine authoritate Episcopi, yet not without
the Bishops License or Authority. Council. Laodic. Can. 57. (...).
In the third Century, the Council held in Laodicea is as plain and full, save
that indeed it is more general, in which the Presbyter is tied from doing any
thing ( i. e. such things as appertain to his ministration) (...). without the
knowledge of his Bishop. Hieron. adv. Luciferian.
Saint Hierom finally, no great advancer of the Episcopal authority and
jurisdiction, having considered of it better, does conclude at last, that if
the Bishop had not a pre-eminence in the Church of God, there would be
presently almost as many Schisms as Priests. And hence it is, says he, Vt sine
Episcopi missione neque Presbyter, neque Diaconus jus habeat baptizandi, that
without lawful mission from the Bishop, neither the Presbyter nor Deacons might
Baptize. Not that I think there was required in Hieroms time, a special License
from the Bishop, for every ministerial act that men in either of those Orders
were to execute, but that they had no more interest therein, than what was
specially given them by, and from the Bishop, in their Ordination.

As for the Act of Preaching, Paul's exhortation to the Presbyters, 2 Timothy 4.5.
which he called from Ephesus unto Miletum. To this as Timothy had been used
before, doing the work of an Evangelist; so he was still required to ply it,
being called unto the Office of a Bishop. Saint Paul conjuring him before God
and Christ, that notwithstanding the diversions which might happen to him by
reason of his Episcopal place and jurisdiction, 2. Tim. 4.2.
he should Preach the Word, and not to Preach it only in his own particular, 2 Timothy 2.15.
showing himself a Workman that needed not to be ashamed, dividing the word of
truth aright: But seeing that others also did the like, according to the trust
reposed in them; whether they had been formerly ordained by the Apostles, or
might be by himself ordained in times succeeding. Those that discharge this
duty both with care and conscience, 1 Timothy 5.17.
guiding and governing that portion of the Church aright, wherewith they are
entrusted, and diligently laboring in the word and doctrine, by the Apostle
are accounted worthy of double honor. Which questionless S. Paul had never
represented unto Timothy, but that it did belong unto him, as a part of his
Episcopal power and Office to see that men so painful in their calling, and so
discreet in point of government, should be rewarded and encouraged accordingly.
By honor in this place, the Apostle does not only mean respect and reverence,
but support and maintenance, as appears plainly by that which is alleged from
holy Scripture, viz. Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn:
And, the Labourer is worthy of his hi^e. Chrysostom. hom. 15. in 1 Timothy 5.
Ambros. in locum. Calvin in 1 ad. Tim. c. 5.
Chrysostom so expounds the word, (...), By honor here is meant both reverence
and a supply of all things necessary; with whom agree the Commentaries which
pass under the name of Ambrose. Calvin affirms the like for our modern Writers.
Victum praecipue suppeditari jubet Pastoribus qui docendo sunt occupati; Paul
here commands that necessary maintenance be allowed the Pastor, who labors
in the Word and Doctrine: And hereto Beza agrees also in his Annotations on the
place. Now we know well that in those times wherein Paul wrote to Timothy, and
a long time after, the dispensation of the Churches Treasury was for the most
part in the Bishop, and at his appointment. For, as in the beginnings of the
Gospel, the Faithful sold their Lands and Goods, Act. 4. v. ult.
and laid the money at the Apostles feet, by them to be distributed as the
necessities of the Church required: So in succeeding times, all the Oblations
of the faithful were returned in unto the Bishop of the place, and by him
disposed of. We need not stand on many Authors in so clear a business. Zonaras
telling plainly, that at the first, the Bishop had the absolute and sole
disposing of the revenues of the Church; (...), Zonaras in Council. Chalced^n.
Ca. 26.
no man whoever, being privy to their doings in it. And that they did
accordingly dispose thereof, to every man according to his parts and industry,
does appear by Cyprian, where he informs us, that he having advanced
Celerinus, a Confessor of great renoun amongst that people, and no less eminent
indeed for his parts and piety, unto the office of a Reader, he had allotted
unto him, Cypr. Ep. 34. vel l. 4. ep. 5.
and to Aurelius (one of equal virtue) then a Reader also, Vt sportulis iisdem
cum Presbyteris honorentur, that they should have an equal share in the
distribution with the Priests or Presbyters.

But many times so fell out, that those to whom the Ministry of the word was
trusted, 1 Timothy 1.3. Tit. 1.10, 11.
Vain talkers and deceivers, which subverted whole houses, teaching things they
should not, and that for filthy lucres sake. What must the Bishop do to them?
He must first charge them not to Preach such doctrins, which rather minister
questions than godly edifying: 1 Timothy 1.4.
And if they will not hearken to, nor obey this charge, (...), Tit. 1.9.
he must stop their mouths, let them be silenced in plain English. The
silencing of such Ministers as deceive the People, and Preach such things they
should not, even for lucres sake, to the subverting of whole Families, is no
new matter, as we see in the Church of God. Saint Paul here gives it as in
charge to Titus, and to all Bishops in his person. Certain I am that Chrysostom
does so expound it. If thou prevailest not, says he, by admonitions, Chrysostom.
tom. 2. n. Tit. 1.
be not afraid, (...), silentium iis impone, the Translator reads it, but
silence them that others may the better be preserved by it. Hierom does so
translate it also, quibus oportet silentium indici, such men must be commanded
silence. Hieron. in Can. Tit.
And for the charge of Paul to Timothy, that he should charge those false
Apostles which he speaks of not to Preach strange doctrines; it carries with it
an Authority that must be exercised. For this cause I required thee to abide at
Ephesus, (...), not that thou should entreat, but command such men to Preach
no other doctrines than they had from me. Theophylact on those words, Theophyl.
in 1. ad Tim. c. 1.
puts the question thus, in the words of Chrysostom, (...) it may be asked,
says he, whether that Timothy were then Bishop when Paul wrote this to him. To
which he answers of himself, (...), that it is most probable; giving this
reason of the same, because he is to charge those men not to teach other
doctrines. Oecumen. in locum.
Oecumenius is more positive in the point, and affirms expressly on these words,
that Paul had made him Bishop there, before that time. And Lyra, if he may be
heard, Lyra in 1 Timothy c. 1.
make this general use of the Apostles exhortation, that the first Act here
recommended to a Bishop, is falsae doctrinae extirpatio, the extirpation of
false doctrine.

This part of jurisdiction, with those that follow, I shall declare only, teach
strange doctrins, and that their mouths be stopped, and they put to silence;
yet they will persevere however in their wicked courses, and obstinately
continue in the same, until at last their obstinacy ends in heresy. What
course is to be taken upon such occasions? The Apostle has resolved that also.
A man that is an Heretic, says he, after the first and second admonition,
Tit. 3.10.
is to be rejected. Rejected? but by whom? why by Titus surely. The words are
spoken unto him in the second person, and such as did possess the same place
and office. Hanc sive admonitionem, sive correptionem, intellige ab Episcopo
faciendam, Estius in Ep. ad Tit. c. 3.
etc. This (...), which Saint Paul here speaks of, whether that it be meant of
gentle admonition, or severe reproof, must be done only by the Bishop, and that
not as a private person, but as the governor of the Church, and that both with
authority and power, by which he also may denounce him excommunicate, if he
amend not on the same. So Estius, in his Comment on the place; and herewith
Calvin does accord, Tito scribens Paulus, Calvin. in Titum. c. 3.
non disserit de Officio magistratus, sed quid Episcopo conveniat. Paul, says
he, writing unto Titus, disputes not of the Office of the civil Magistrate, but
of the duty of a Bishop. And this in answer unto some, who had collected from
these words of the Apostle, that Heretics were to be encountered with no
sharper weapon than that of Excommunication, nec esse ultra in eos saeviendum,
and that there was no other course to be taken with them. In which these
Moderns say no more, as to the exercise and discharge of the Episcopal function
in this case, Hieron. ad Riparium, adv. Vigilant. a.
than what the Ancients said before. I marvail, says Saint Hierom, speaking of
Vigilantius, a broacher of strange (or other) Doctrins in the Church of Christ,
that the Bishop in whose Diocese he is said to be a Presbyter, has so long
given way to his impiety: Et non virga Apostolica, virgaque ferrea confringere
vas inutile; and that he has not rather broke in pieces with the Apostolic
rod, a rod of iron, this so unprofitable a Vessel. In which as the good Father
manifests his own zeal and fervor; so he declares therewithal, what was the
Bishops power and office in the present business.

The last part of Episcopal jurisdiction which we have to speak of, Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.19, 20.
and command to use it. First, for the Presbyters, Against an Elder receive not
an accusation but before two or three Witnesses; but if they be convicted, them
that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear. In the declaring of
which power, I take for granted that the Apostle here by Elder, does mean a
Presbyter, according to the Ecclesiastical notion of that word; Hom. 15. in 1 Timothy in locum.
though I know that Chrysostom, and after him Theophylact and Oecumenius, do
take it only for a man well grown in years. And then the meaning of Saint Paul
will be briefly this, that partly in regard of the Devils malice, apt to
calumniate men of that holy function; and partly to avoid the scandal which may
thence arise, Timothy, and in him all other Bishops should be very cautious in
their proceedings against men of that profession. But if they find them guilty,
on examination, then not to smother or conceal the matter, but censure and
rebuke them openly, that others may take heed of the like offenses. The
Commentaries under the name of Ambrose, Amb. in 1. ad Tim. c. 5.
do expound it so, Quoniam non facile credi debet de Presbytero crimen, etc.
Because a crime or accusation is not rashly to be credited against a Presbyter;
yet if the same prove manifest and undeniable, Saint Paul commands that in
regard of his irregular conversation, he be rebuked and censured publicly,
that others may be thereby terrified: And this, says he, non solum ordinatis
sed and plebi proficit, will not be only profitable unto men in Orders, but to
Lay people also. Herewith agrees, as to the making of these Elders to be men
in Orders, the Comment upon this Epistle, Hier. in Ep. 1. ad Tim.
ascribed to Hierom: Presbyters then are subject unto censure; but to whose
censure are they subject? Not unto one another surely, that would breed
confusion; but to the censure of their Bishop, (...), says Epiphanius; Epipha.
haer. 75. n. 5. Theoph. in 1. ad Tim. c. 5.
he speaks to Timothy, being a Bishop, not to receive an accusation against a
Presbyter: Theophylact also says the same. For having told us, that if a
Presbyter upon examination of the business be found delinquent, he must be
sharply and severely censured, that others may be terrified thereby; he adds,
(...), that it becomes a Bishop (in such cases) to be stern and awful. Lyra in
eund. locum.
Lyra observes the like in his Gloss or Postils, viz. that the proceedings
against inferior Clergymen, in foro exteriori, in a judiciary way, is a
peculiar of the Bishops. But what need more be said than that of Beza, Beza
Annot. in 1. ad Tim. 5.
who notes on these very words, that Timothy, to whom this power or charge was
given, was President or (...), at that time of the Ephesian Clergy: Which is a
plain acknowledgment, in my opinion, that the correction of the Clergy by the
law of God, does appertain unto the Bishop, the (...), or President of the
Presbytery, call him what you will. For what need we contend for words, when we
have the matter? And this appears by the several Councils of Nice and
Antioch, Sardica, Turin, Africa and Sevil; in all and every of the which, the
censure and proceedings against a Presbyter, are left to their own Bishops
severally; but a course taken therewithal for their ease and remedy, in case
their own Bishops should proceed against them out of heat or passion.

For the Lay People next, Paul gave Timothy a power of correcting them, appears
by the instructions which he gives him for the discharge of this authority
toward all sorts of People, whether that they be old or young, of what sex
soever. Old men, if they offend, must be handled gently, respect being had unto
their years. Rebuke not an Elder, 1 Timothy 5. Hom. 13. in 1 ad Tim.
but entreat him as a Father: i. e. says Chryfostom, take him not up with
harshness and severity, but do it with such temperance and meekness as thou
would do unto thy Father, if he gave offense. His reason is, because it is
an irksome thing unto good persons to be reprehended, (...) especially by one
younger than themselves, as then Timothy was. The like regard was to be had to
old Women also, for the self-same reason. As for the younger men, they were to
be rebuked as Brethren, with greater freedom than before, but still with
lenity. (...), the sauce of reprehension must be sweet, though the meat be
sour. Nor was this power committed only unto Timothy, but in him to all other
Bishops, of all times and places, (...), so says Oecumenius. Oecumen. in 1. ad
Tim. c. 5. Beza de triplic^ Episcop.
The function of a Bishop was not instituted in the Church of God, quasi Clero
impositus inspector, as Beza has it; that he might oversee the Clergy only,
but for the well ordering and governance of all Gods People. Episcopi Graece,
speculatores Latin dicuntur, populi respectu, He that is called a Bishop in
the Greek, Is^dor. Etymol. l. 7. c. 12.
says Isidore, is called an Overseer in the Latin, and that in reference to
the People. And then he gives this reason of it, quod speculetur and prospiciat
populorum infra se positorum mores and vitam, because he overseeth the lives
and conversation of the People which are under him. The like says Austin, as
to the reason of the name, Aug. de Civ. Deil. l. 19. c. 19. Pater. in Psalm. 106.
and the intent of their preheminency; the like Paterius on the Psalms, and
thither I refer the Reader. As for the execution of this power, how, and by
whom the same was exercised, being a matter merely practical, we shall
encounter it hereafter, as occasion is, in the success and prosecution of this
story. Only take this of Austin for a taste or relish, where saying that there
is no greater punishment in the Church than that condemnation, Aug. de Correp.
and Great. c. 16.
quam Episcopale judicium facit, which is pronounced by the Bishop: He adds,
that notwithstanding this, necessitas pastoralis habet separare ab ovibus sanis
morbidam, the Pastor must needs separate the scabby and infected Sheep from the
sound and healthy, lest the whole Flock be made obnoxious to so great a danger.
What interest or concurrent jurisdiction the Presbyters did either challenge or
enjoy in these public censures, we shall see hereafter. But sure, for ought
appears to me, S. Paul addresseth his discourse to the Bishop only; who if, in
the succeeding Ages he used the Counsel and assistance of his Presbyters, in
the affairs and weightier matters of the Church; he did but as a wary and wise
man would on the like occasions.

I would here offer, if I might, some conjectural proofs, Timothy, is of a
Bishop truly and properly so called, according as the word was used and
appropriated by the Ancient Writers. I know the general current of Interpreters
is against me in it, by whom the word Episcopus is said to signify in that
place, as well the Presbyter as the Bishop. Which I conceive they do upon this
reason chiefly, because Saint Paul having prescribed the qualities which are
required in a Bishop, passes directly on to the description of a Deacon. But
if we look upon it well, I doubt not but we shall perceive some reasons which
may incline unto the contrary. For first, Saint Paul speaks of a Bishop in the
singular number, 1 Timothy 3.2.
but of inferior Ministers in the plural. One Church, or City, though it had
many Presbyters, had one Bishop only: And therefore we may reasonably conceive,
that the Apostle speaking of a Bishop in the singular number, speaks of him in
his proper and true capacity, as one distinguished from, and above the
Presbyters. Secondly, the Apostle seems to require in him an Act of
Government, as being a man, that is, 1 Timothy 3.5.
to take a care of the Church of God; and thereupon gives order for an
Inquisition to be had upon him, whether he has ruled his own house well.
Chrysostom hereupon observes that the Church is likened to an House or Family,
wherein there is a Wife and Children, Menservants and Maidservants, (...),
all which are subject to the government of the Husband, who is the Father of
the Family. So is it in the Church, says he, the (...) or Governor whereof is
to take care for Widows, Virgins. all Gods Sons and Servants. A care of too
transcendent and sublime a nature, to be entrusted unto every common Presbyter,
or discharged by him; who as our Hooker well observes, though he be somewhat
better able to speak, In the Preface.
is as little to judge, as another man; and if not fit to judge, no fit man to
govern. Thirdly, 1 Timothy 3.2.
Saint Paul requires in a Bishop, that he be given to Hospitality, i. e. that
he receive the Stranger, entertain the Native, and in a word, admit all comers.
Hier. in Tit. c. 1.
Hierom does so expound it, saying, that if a Layman entertain but two or
three, hospitalitatis officium implebit, he has exceeding well complied with
all the rules of hospitality: Episcopus nisi omnes receperit, inhumanus est;
but that the Bishop is accounted a Churl or Niggard, if his House be not open
unto all. Which howsoever it might possibly agree in those ancient times, to
the condition of a Bishop, who had the keeping and disposing of the Churches
treasures: yet I can see no possibility how it could be expected from the
Presbyter, that out of his poor pittance from the Sportula, he should be able
to perform it. For I believe not that the Lord intended to work miracles daily,
as in the lengthning and increasing the poor woman's oil. Fourthly and lastly,
it is required by Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 3.6. Chrysostom. and Theophyl. in loc.
that his Bishop must not be (...), a Novice as our English reads it, and
exceeding rightly; that is, as Chrysostom, and out of him Theophylact expound
the word, (...), one newly Catechized as it were, lately instructed in the
faith. Now who knows not, but that in the beginnings of the Church, some of
these new plants, these (...), must of necessity be taken into holy Orders, for
the increase and propagation of the Gospel. The Presbyters were many, but the
Bishops few. And therefore however there might be found sufficient Standards,
upon the which to graft a Bishop; yet I can hardly find a possibility of
furnishing the Garden of the Church with a fit number of Presbyters, unless we
take them from the Nursery. Hence I collect, that this description of a Bishop
in S. Paul to Timothy, is of a Bishop truly and properly so called, and that it
does not also include the Presbyter. If then it be demanded whether S. Paul
has utterly omitted to speak of Presbyters, I answer, no; but that we have
them in the next Paragraph, Diaconos similiter; which word howsoever in our
last translation, it be rendered Deacons: Yet in our old translation, and in
that of Coverdale, we read it Ministers, according to the general and native
meaning of the word: Calv. in 1. ad Tim. c. 3. v. 8.
An Exposition neither new, nor forced. Not new, for Calvin does acknowledge,
alios ad Presbyteros refer Episcopo inferiores, that some referred those
words to Presbyters, subordinate or inferior to the Bishop. Not forced, for if
we search the Scripture, we shall there perceive that generally Diaconus is
rendered Minister; and that not only in the Gospels, before that Deacons had
been instituted in the Church of God, but also in S. Paul's Epistles, after the
planting of the Church, when all the Officers therein had their bounds and
limits. Thus the Apostle speaking of himself, and of Apollos, 1 Cor. 3.5.
faith that they were (...), the Ministers by whom that People did believe;
himself he calls, (...), a Minister of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. (...),
a Minister of God, 2 Cor. 6.4. (...), a Minister of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.7.
Coloss. 1.23. Thus Tychicus is called, (...), a faithful Minister, Ephesians. 6.26.
and again, Coloss. 4.7. and so is Epaphras entitled, Coloss. 1.7. Thus Timothy
is called (...), 1 These. 3.2. (...), a good Minister, in this very Epistle; and
finally is required in the next to this, 2 Timothy 4.5.
not only to do the work of an Evangelist, but (...), to fulfill his Ministry.
Hence I infer, that since Diaconus is a word of so large extent, as to include
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, I see no inconvenience that can follow on
it, if it include the office of the Presbyter or Elder also: And let the Bishop
have the former Character to himself alone, to whom of right it does belong.
But this I only offer to consideration, as my private thoughts; not being so
far wedded to mine own opinions, but that on better reasons I may be divorced,
when ever they are laid before me.

CHAP. VI. Of the Estate of holy Church, particularly of the Asian Churches,
toward the latter days of S. John the Apoistle.
1. The time of S. John's coming into Asia. 2. All the Seven Churches, except
Ephesus, of his Plantation. 3. That the Angels of those Churches were the
Bishops of them, in the opinion of the Fathers. 4. And of some Protestant
Divines of name and eminence. 5. Conclusive reasons for the same. 6. Who most
like to be the Angel of the Church of Ephesus. 7. That Polycarpus was the Angel
of the Church of Smyrna. 8. Touching the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, and
of Thyatira. 9. As also of the Churches of Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea.
10. What Successors these several Angels had in the several Churches. 11. Of
other Churches founded in Episcopacy, by S. John the Apostle. 12. S. John
deceasing, left the government of the Church to Bishops, as to the Successors
of the Apostles. 13. The ordinary Pastors of the Church. 14. And the Vicars of
Christ. 15. A brief view of the estate of holy Church in this first Century.


WE now proceed unto Saint John, and to the Churches of his time, those most
especially which he did either plant or water: who living till the end of this
present Century, and being the last Surviver of that Glorious company of the
Apostles, could not but see the Church of Christ in her fullest growth, in her
perfection, both for strength and beauty. Of this Apostle we find not any thing
in Scripture, from his descent unto Samaria, when he accompanied Saint Peter
thither, Acts 8.14.
by the appointment of the residue of that goodly fellowship, until the writing
of the Revelation. The intervening passages of his life and preaching, we must
make up out of such fragments of Antiquity, and records of Story, as are come
safe unto our hands. Where first I must needs disallow the conceit of those,
who carry him I know not how to Ephesus, making him an inhabitant there, and
taking with him to that place, the Mother of our Lord and Savior: which must
needs be, if ever it had been at all, about the 44. year after Christ's
Nativity, that being the time wherein the Apostles and Disciples were dispersed
abroad, upon the persecution raised by Herod. Acts 12.1, etc.
But that it was not then, nor a long time after, will appear by this, that
when Paul came to preach and reside at Ephesus, which was in Anno 55. above ten
years after, there was so little knowledge of the faith of Christ, that they had
not so much as heard there was any Holy Ghost; being baptized only, as
themselves confessed, unto John's baptism. Acts 19.2, 3.
A thing which could not possibly be supposed, without a great deal of reproach
and ignominy to this blessed Apostle, had he been here a resiant, as by some
reported. And after this, though we are well assured of his being here, yet
then he could not have in household with him the blessed Mother of our Lord; who
died, in their account that put it off until the latest, Anno 48. seven years
before the coming of Saint Paul to Ephesus. And therefore I agree rather unto
Epiphanius, as to the main and matter of his Negative, though not as to the
reason of it. For where he tells us, that when JOHN went down to Asia, (...),
Epiphan. haeres. 78. n. 11.
he took not the blessed Virgin with him; I hold it to be absolutely true, past
contradiction. But where he builds his negation upon an (...) the silence of
the Scripture in it; I hold that reason to be insufficient: there being many
things of undoubted verity, whereof there is no mention in the Holy Scripture.
And I agree too unto Epiphanius, where he tells us this, Epiph. ibid. n. 2.
that Saint John's coming into Asia was (...) when he began to be in years; the
Holy Ghost then calling of him thither, as well to propagate the Gospel where
it was not preached; as to confirm it where it had been shaken by the force of
Heresy. Into what parts the Spirit did before command him, it is hard to say.
Some likelihood there is. Acts 2.9. Possidius in Judic. operum August.
that he did preach the Gospel amongst the Parthians, (some of which Nation had
been present at Jerusalem at the first giving of the Holy Ghost) his first
Epistle being inscribed, ad Parthos, as some Ancients say.

But that he came at last to Asia, and there preached the Gospel, is a thing
past question. Eusebius, out of Origin, does expressly say it. August. qu.
Evang. l. 2. chap. 39. Eccl. Histor. l. 3. cap. 1.
And though that piece of Origin be lost out of which Eusebius took the same;
yet we may take it on his word without more authority. Nor did he only preach
the Gospel in those parts of Asia, strictly and properly so called; but he also
planted many Churches, and founded in them many Bishoprics. All the seven
Churches, except that of Ephesus, to which he writ his Revelation, were partly,
if not totally his foundation: and in all them he constituted Bishops, as we
shall manifest and declare anon. And as for Ephesus, although he came too late
to plant it, yet he came time enough to water it; to settle and confirm the
same: being much weakened and endangered by the sorceries and devices of
Apollonius Tyanaeus, who for some time did therein dwell; as also by the
Heresies of Ebion and Cerinthus, who at that time lived, and therefore rightly
does Ignatius, who then lived also, join him with Paul and Timothy, as a
Co-founder of that Church. Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians. p. 22^. Edit. Vedelian.
But being in the middle of his course, he was sent prisoner unto Rome, Anno
92. thence confined to Patmos, where he continued till the death of the
Emperor Domitian, which was in Anno 99. during which time he writ the
Revelation. And of those Churches I conceive it was that Tertullian speaks,
where pleading in defense of the Catholic Faith, delivered by the Apostles, to
the Churches by them severally planted, and by the Bishops of those Churches
taught, and in their successions: he thus brings them in, " Habemus and
Johannis alumnas Ecclesias, etc. We have, says he, Tertul. lib. 4. contra
Marci. cap. 5.
the Churches founded by Saint John. For howsoever Marcion does reject his
Revelation, Ordo tamen Episcoporum, yet the succession of their Bishops
reckoned up unto their original, will stand for John to be their founder. And
probable at their request it was, that he writ his Gospel. Hier. descrip Fcc.
in Johan. and prooem. in Evang. 8. Matthew.
For that he writ it at the entreaty of the Asian Bishops, Rogatus ab Asiae
Episcopis, is positively affirmed by Hierom: though like enough it is, that
other Bishops besides those of his own foundation, might contribute their
requests, and importunities to so good a purpose, being all equally afflicted
with the pest of Heresies.

The quality and condition of these Asian Churches, John does punctually
describe in his Revelation, written in Anno 97. when as he had been four or
five years confined to Patmos. It seems those Churches, most of them at the
least, on the calamity which befell the Apostle in his deportation, being
deprived of the benefit of so Divine and excellent a Spirit, and pressed by the
importunity of these active Heretics, willing to make the best advantage of
the present time, began to stagger in the faith, wax cold in their affection to
the Gospel, and to give way to such false Teachers as were crept in amongst
them, to rectify what was amiss amongst them, and to inform them of their
errors did he direct unto them his Apocalypse, Apoc. 1.4.
To the seven Churches in Asia; so it does begin. But when he comes unto
particulars, to give them every one their particular charge, from him who
walked in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks; then he addresseth his
discourse to the Angels only, Apoc. 2.1. Cap. 8.12.
the Angels of those several Churches. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus;
and to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna; and to the Angel of the Church of
Pergamus; and sic de caeteris. Now ask the Fathers what those Angels were, and
they will tell you that they were the Bishops of those several Churches. Saint
Austin writing on these words, Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, etc.
makes this observation, August. Ep. 162. in fine.
Divina voce sub Angeli nomine laudatur praepositus Ecclesiae, that the Bishop
or Governor of the Church, (remember what was said before of the word
Praepositus) is praised by the voice of Christ, Vid. chap. 3. n. 5.
under the name of an Angel: But first he gives a reason of his resolution,
showing that this Expostulation could not be applied to those Ministering
spirits in the Heavens, because they still retained their first Love to God;
and therefore must be understood, de praepositis Ecclesiae, of the Rulers or
Governors of the Church, who had given way to false Apostles. The like
occurreth in his Comment on the Revelation, wherein he makes the Angels of
these Churches, to be Episcopi aut praepositi Ecclesiarum, the Bishops or
Rulers of the same. The Commentaries under the name of Ambrose, pointing unto
this place of the Apocalypse, Amb. in 1 Cor. cap. 11.
give us this short note, Angelos Episcopos dicit, that by Angels there he
means Bishops. And these ascribed to Hierom, writing on those words, Because
of the Angels, Hier. ib.
1 Cor. 11. observes the same, Angelos ecclesiis presidentes dicit, that there
by Angels Saint Paul intends the Presidents or Rulers of the Churches. Finally,
Oecumenius says the same, Oecumen. ca. 1. in Apoca.
who speaking of the seven Churches in Asia, to whom Saint John addresseth his
Discourses, observe, that John ascribes to them, (...), an equal or
proportionable number of governing Angels. And on those words, Id. cap. 2. in
Apocal.
the seven stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, makes this gloss or
Comment, (...), that he calls these Angels, governors of Churches by the
name of stars, because they borrow all their light from the Sun of
Righteousness.

For Protestant Writers which affirm the same, Citat. apud Marlorat. in cap. ^.
Apoca. v. 20. Bullin. con. 6. in Apocal. Id. in con. 9.
where first we have Sebastian Meyer; Ecclesiarum Praefecti, and stellae and
Angeli, in sacris literis dicuntur; the Governors of Churches are called,
says he, in holy Scripture, by the name of Stars, and Angels. Bullenger to the
same effect, Angeli sunt legati Dei, Pastores Ecclesiarum, the Angels are the
Messengers of God, the Pastors of the Churches; in which, lest possibly we
might mistake his meaning, in the word Pastor, he tells us not long after, that
he means the Bishop, for speaking of the Angel, or the Pastor of the Church of
Smyrna, he tells us that he was that Polycarpus, as it was indeed, Ordinatus ab
Apostolis, ab ipso inquam Johanne Episcopus, who was ordained Bishop of that
Church by the Apostles, nay by John himself. Paraeus is as general as the other
two, but far more express. Episcopos vocat stellas, etc. Paraeus in Apocal.
cap. 1. v. 20.
The Bishops are called Stars, says he, because they ought to outshine
others, as well in purity of Doctrine, as sincerity of Conversation in the
Church of God: eosdem Angelos vocat, quia sunt Legati Dei ad Ecclesiam, and
they are also called Angels, because they are the Legates or Ambassadors of God
to his holy Church. And lest we should mistake our selves, and him, in the word
Episcopus, he labors to find out the Bishop of each several Church, as we
shall see hereafter in that inquisition: for those who speak to the particular,
Beza Annot. Apoc. c. 2.1.
we begin with Beza, who on those words, unto the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, gives this Annotation. Angelo, i. e. (...), quem nimirum oportuit
imprimis de his rebus admoneri, etc. To the Angel, that is, says he, to the
chief President, whom it behoved to have the notice of the charge there given,
and by him to the rest of his Colleagues, and the whole Congregation: but
fearing lest this Exposition might give some advantage, for the upholding of
the Hierarchy, which he so labored to pull down, he adds, de proprio, that
notwithstanding this acknowledgment, Episcopal authority, being a thing of man's
invention, hinc statui, nec potest, nec debet, nor may, nor ought to have any
ground from hence. Finally, Marlorat himself on those very words, Marlorat.
Eccl. Exp^sit. in Apocal. c. 2. v. 1.
shows that however there were many things in the Church of Ephesus, which
required Reformation, both in the Clergy and the people; Non tamen populum
aggreditur, sed Clerum, yet the Apostle does not apply himself unto the people,
but the Clergy. Nor does he fashion his discourse to the Clergy generally, Sed
ad Principem Cleri, Episcopum utique, but to the chief or principal of the
Clergy, which was the Bishop.

Nay, Marlorat goes further yet, and he as he lays down his interpretation,
Idem. Ibid.
His reason is, Nam Pastor non modo pro propriis, etc. Because the Pastor is
not only to render an account to the supreme Judge, for his own sins alone, but
for the sins of all his flock, if any of them by his sloth or negligence do
chance to perish. And certainly this reason is of special use and efficacy to
the point in hand. For if the Lord do look for an account at the Pastors hand,
for every sheep that shall be lost by his sloth or negligence: it must needs
follow thereupon, that those of whom so strict a reckoning is expected must not
have power only to persuade and counsel, but also to correct and censure, and
by their own proper and innate authority, to rectify such things as are amiss
in their several charges. The Son of God is neither so unjust, as that the
Pastor should be charged with those enormities, which he has no authority to
amend or rectify: nor so forgetful as to threaten and rebuke the Pastor, not
only for the peoples faults, but the Errata of the Presbyters, in case he were
not trusted with a greater power than any of the rest, for that end and
purpose. Which being so, and that our Savior by Saint John does send out his
summons neither unto the Church in general, nor to the Presbyters in common,
but to the Angel of each Church in the singular number: it is most plain and
evident, as I conceive, that in the time of writing the Apocalypse, as long
time before it, the Church of Christ had certain Pastors, of more eminent note,
when they (as we) entitled Bishops, which governed as well the Presbyters, as
the rest of the Flock; and those the Son of God acknowledges for stars and
Angels. And howsoever the inferior Pastors both are, and may be called Angels,
in a general sense, as Messengers and Ministers of God Almighty: yet if it be
the Angel in the singular number, the Angel in the way of eminence and (...),
it is peculiar only to the Bishop.

Now that each Church of those remembered in that Book, had his proper Angel,
Angel being to be taken collectively, and not individually, as some men
suppose, is in the next place to be showed. And first for proof, Smectymn. p.
52.
there is a pregnant evidence in a Discourse or Treatise touching the Martyrdom
of Timothy: the Author of the which relates, that after Saint John the Apostle
was revoked from his exile, by the sentence of Nerva, Apud Phot. in Biblioth.
n. 254.
he betook himself to the Metropolis of Ephesus: (...), and being assisted with
the presence of the seven Bishops, he took upon himself the government of the
Metropolis of the Ephesians, and there continued preaching the Doctrine of
salvation till the time of Trajan. Which as it is an evident and convincing
proof, that the seven Churches had their several Bishops, to each Church one
Bishop: so is it no such difficult matter, to find out most of them by name,
and what Church each of them did govern. And first for Ephesus, Paraeum in
Apocal. cap. 2.
some have conceived that Timothy was still alive, and Bishop at that time when
the Apocalypse was written: which hotly is defended by Alcasar, against Ribera,
Lyra, and Pererius, who opine the contrary. But surely Timothy it could not be,
as does appear in part by that which was alleged out of the Treatise of his
Martyrdom, which if it were not written by Polycrates, is yet very ancient, and
authentic: wherein he is conceived to be dead before: but principally by the
quality and condition of that blessed Evangelist, so plentifully endued with
the Holy Ghost, so eminent in piety, and all heavenly graces, that no man can
conceive him liable to the accusation, with which the Angel of that Church is
charged. And therefore it must either be that John, when (on the death of
Timothy, as I conceive) Saint John ordained Bishop of this Church, as is
reported in the Constitutions, Constitut. Apost. l. 7. c. 48.
ascribed to Clemens: or else Onesimus, another of the Successors of Timothy in
the Sea of Ephesus, who is entitled Bishop of it in the Epistle of Ignatius,
written to that Church; within twelve years after the writing of the
Revelation. In which Epistle Ignatius blessing God for so good a Bishop, Igna.
in Epist. ad Ephesians.
admonishes the people of their duty, (...), in submitting themselves unto his
judgment, or concurring with it, as their whole Presbytery did: which harmony
of the Bishop and his Presbyters, he does compare (...) unto the concord of the
Strings and Harp. In which he speaks if you observe, as of a Bishop that had
been long confirmed, and settled in his place of Government; and knew the temper
of his people: one that was vested with a constant, and fixed pre-eminence above
his Presbyters, not with a temporary Presidency, and no more than so.

But whatsoever doubt or scruple may be made, Onesimus, his being Bishop, or
Angel at this time, of the Church of Ephesus; certain I am, there can be none
pretended against Polycarpus, as if he were not then the Angel of the Church of
Smyrna: he being made Bishop of that See 13 years before, Pullenger in Apocal.
Conc. 9.
as Bullinger computes the time, and holding it a long while after, no less
than 74 years, as the Annals reckon it, without vicissitude or alteration. Now
that this Polycarpus was Bishop of this Church of Smyrna, appears by such a
cloud of Witnesses, as he that questioneth it, may with equal reason, Ignat.
Vpist. ad Polycarp.
make doubt of yesterday. And first we have Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, one of
his Co-temporaries, who taking him in transitu, as he was led from Syria
toward Rome to suffer Martyrdom, did after write to him an Epistle, in which
he styles him, in the superscription, (...), the Bishop of the Church of
Smyrna. Irenaeus apud Euse. l. 4. c. 10. and con. haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus, one of his Disciples, and who had often heard the good man discourse
of his conversation with Saint John, reports that he was not only taught by
the Apostles, and had conversed with many of those who had seen Christ in the
flesh, (...); but also was by them appointed Bishop of the Church in Smyrna.
Next comes in the whole Church of Smyrna, Apud Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 15.
in their Encyclical Epistle of his death, and Martyrdom, where he is called an
Apostolical and Prophetical Doctor, (...), and Bishop of the Catholic Church
of Smyrna. After them speaks Polycrates, Ap. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24.
Bishop of Ephesus, one of the Successors of Onesimus, and so by consequence
his Neighbor, who being 38 years of age at the time of the death of
Polycarpus, attesteth to him, saying amongst other things, (...), that he had
been both Bishop and Martyr in Smyrna. Tertal. lib. de praescript.
Tertullian who lived about the same time with Polycrates, though in another
Clime or Region, is more particular in the point: not only making him Bishop of
Smyrna, as the others do; but a Johanne collocatum refert, making him to be
placed or established there by Saint John the Apostle. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 3.
c. 30.
From these hands, and no doubt from many others, it came at last to Eusebius,
Bish. of Caesarea, by whom it is affirmed that he was made Bishop of the Church
of Smyrna, (...), by those which had beheld the Lord, and were his Ministers.
Saint Hierom finally does inform us, De Scryptor. Eccl. in Polycar.
that he was a Disciple of Saint John's, and ab eo Smyrnae Episcopus ordinatus,
and by him ordained Bishop of Smyrna. By which it is most clear and evident
that he was the Angel or Bishop of this Church, and thereto constituted by
Saint John, other of the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord and Savior,
concurring in the Ordination, No titular or nominal Bishop only, but such a one
as had a body of Presbyters assistant and subservient to him, as does most
evidently appear out of Ignatius his Epistle unto those of Smyrna; Ignat.
Epist. ad Smyrnen.
wherein he tells them, (...), etc. that they ought not to do any thing, no
not so much as to administer the Sacrament, without the consent and approbation
of their Bishop.

The Angel of the Church of Pergamus is next in order; Paraeus out of Aretas
Caesariensis, Paraeus Com. in Apocal. c. 2.
who makes Antipas (whom we find mentioned Apocal. 2.13.) to be the Pastor of
this Church under the Empire of Domitian, who being cruelly put to death by the
Pergamenians, successor ejus haud dubie fuit iste, ad quem scribit, his
successor, as there Paraeus does observe, must out of question be the man, to
whom as to the Angel of that Church, these things are written. And he informs
us this withal, that similis supplicii metu, for fear of the like punishment
which Antipas suffered, though he continued constant in the faith of Christ, he
might grow more remiss and negligent in looking to his Pastoral Office. So then
the Angel of this Church was Pergamensis Episcopus, the Bishop of Pergamus, as
he plainly calls him; Id. in v. 14.
and possibly may be that Gaius whom Clemens makes to be ordained Bishop of
this Church by the hands of some of the Apostles. Or if not he, yet
questionless some one particular person, as Paraeus says: this we may rely
upon, though his name we know not. Next is the Angel of the Church of Thyatira,
Antistes Thyatirensis, that is, Id. in v. 18.
the Bishop of Thyatira, says Paraeus. That Thyatira had a Bishop, as other
the seven Churches had, was affirmed before. And probably the Bishop of it at
this time, might be that Carpus, who by the name of Carpus Bishop of Thyatira
did suffer Martyrdom, during the persecution raised by Antoninus; whereof
consult the Martyrologies, Apr. 13. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 14.
compared with Eusebius, lib. 4. However we may take what Paraeus gives us,
that the Angel of this Church was the Bishop of it, one singular and individual
Person, to whom our Savior does direct his charge; though there be somewhat in
the Text which is alleged to the contrary. For whereas in the two former
Epistles, and the beginning of the present, the style is singular, I know thy
works, Apoc. 2.2, 4, 9, 13, 14, 19, 20.
and I have somewhat against thee, here on a sudden, as it were, the style is
altered, and it is Vobis autem dico, but I say to you, and unto the rest in
Thyatira. Apoc. 2.24. Smectym. p. 53.
Hence some infer, that by the word Angel in that place, is meant not any one
singular person, but the whole company of Presbyters; and by the rest, the
residue of that People there: the people governed, and the governors in the
plural number. But this as I conceive, will avail but little; these alterations
or enallages of number being no rare matters in the Scripture, as does appear
by that so memorable place in the first of Timothy, Salvabitur autem si
permanserint, 1 Timothy 2.15.
where the Apostle does begin in she, and end in they. Besides it is observed,
that the antienter and better Copies read it without the copulative, (...),
Apoc. 2.24.
I say to you the rest in Thyatira; the spirit there addressing his discourse
to those godly men that had not known the depths of Satan. And so, besides the
ancient Copy sent hither by the Patriarch of Constantinople, and cited by my L.
B. of Exeter, Def. of the humble Remonstr. p. 105. Primasius in Apoc. l. 1. c.
2.
does Primasius read it. Vobis autem dico, reliqui qui estis Thyatirae. Paraeus
also does observe, Veterem sine copula, that the old Latin has not the
conjunction; and that Andreas and Montanus do adhere to that. So that for all
this observation, the Angel of this Church was a singular person. And this does
further yet appear (since we are fallen upon these Criticisms) by some ancient
readings of the 20. verse. For whereas now we read in our usual Copies, (...),
the woman Jesebel, Cited in the Def. of the Remonstr. p. 105.
the old Greek Copy from Constantinople, writ above 1300 years ago, does read
it (...), thy Wife Jesebel, and so does that also of Aretas Caesariensis. And
this does seem to be the ancienter and the truer reading, as being followed by
S. Cyprian and Primasius also; In Can. Apoc. Epistola 52. In Can. Apoc.
Vindication etc. p. 140. in marg.
(the first of which lived 1400 years agone) in whom we read uxorem tuam. And
though I grant that the Original standing thus may be translated thy woman
Jesebel, or that woman of thine Jesebel, as I perceive some men would have it;
yet then it must be granted therewithal, that the Angel of this Church was one
singular individual person, not a body collective. It could not otherwise be
thine, but yours.

The fifth in order of these Angels, is he of Sardis, Ecclesiae Antistes,
Paraeus notes; and he observes withal, veteres quosdam, Paraeus in Apocal. c.
3. v. 1.
that some ancient writers conceive that Melito, of whom Eusebius speaks,
lib. 4. cap. 26. was then the Bishop of this Church, and probably it might be
so. For howsoever he excepteth against this opinion, because that Melito was
Bishop of this place under Antoninus, tamdiu vero Melitonem Sardibus praefuisse
non est verisimile, and therefore that it is not likely that he should so long
hold this Bishopric; yet granting it in Polycarpus, tamdiu Smyrnensibus
praefuisse, that he was Bishop of Smyrna for as long a time: I see no reason
why the like may not be granted of the other also: As for his other reason,
that Melito is commended for his sanctimony, and the Angel here accused for his
Hypocrisy; it may well be, that though this Angel were accused of Hypocrisy,
at the present time, yet having many good things in him, he might be brought
unto a sense thereof, upon this admonition from our Lord and Savior, and so
become a careful and a painful Pastor. So that the ancient Writers, as Paraeus
says, reporting that this Angel was that Melito, may be believed, for ought I
see unto the contrary, in that affirmation, and this I am the rather inclined
to think, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 25.
because I find a tract of Melito's inscribed Onesimo Fratri, unto Onesimus his
Brother, who was the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, as before was said, which
shows they lived together in one age or time. The Angel of the Church of
Philadelphia, must be looked on next, whom some conceive to be Quadratus, a
Scholar or Disciple of the Apostles, of whom Eusebius speaks, lib. 3. cap. 37.
Paraeus in Apocal. c. 3.
But surely if Eusebius speaks of him at all, it is as Bishop of Athens, not of
Philadelphia, unless perhaps we may conceive that being first Bishop of
Philadelphia, he was translated afterward to Athens, ( Publius the Bishop
being dead, whom he there succeeded) which I somewhat doubt. But whatsoever was
his name, or whether he were that Demetrius, who as Clemens says, was by S.
Paul made Bishop of this place; I take him for the very man whom Ignatius
speaks of in his Epistle to this People: where speaking of their Bishop, he
tells them this, that at the very first sight of him he did plainly see, (...),
Ignat. ad Philadelphens.
that neither of his own desire, nor by choice of man was he preferred unto
that place, but by the love of Jesus Christ, and God the Father; commending him
for modesty, and for a careful walking in Gods Commandments, being like
Zachary, without reproof; and finally, not only free from passion, but
perfectly adorned with all kind of virtue. A commendation very well agreeing
with that bestowed upon this Angel by the Holy Ghost; as did the Character of
the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, agree unto the quality of Polycarpus, the
then Bishop of it; it being generally observed, as it is most true, that only
these two Angels are presented to us without fault or blemish. Last of all, for
the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, Paraeus in Apocal. cap. 3.
Paraeus, as before conceives, that he was the Bishop; quis vero fuerit, nos
latet; but who this Bishop was, that he cannot tell. Only he notes him for a
man, qui Episcopi titulum perfunctorie sustineret, that only had the name of
Bishop, but not one lively spark of Piety, being wholly taken up with luxury
and the love of money. But whether he were Lucius mentioned by S. Paul, Romans
16. whom Dorotheus makes to be Bishop here; or one Archippus, said by Clemens
to be the Bishop of this Church; or Sagaris, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 23.
who by Polycrates is affirmed to be the Bishop of this place, I am not able to
say positively: Though I incline rather unto Sagaris, whose Martyrdom being
touched upon by Melito, Id. l. 4. c. 25.
in his books de Paschate, is a strong argument that he departed some good time
before him, and so most like to be the man. Nor is it any obstacle unto this
conjecture, Apocal. 3.16.
that Christ did threaten to spew this Angel out of his mouth, being he called
him to repentance, V. 19, 20, 21.
and promised him a throne, if he overcame.

To bring this business to an end, Laodicea, which was in most apparent danger
to lose its Candlestick, retained a continual and constant successions of
Bishops there, from the death of Sagaris to the Nicene Council, and a long time
after. Where, by the way, I must needs rectify Paraeus in this one particular,
who showing that this Church of Laodicea, Paraeus in Apocal. c. 3. v.
did afterward recover and get strength again, instanceth in Anatotius and
Stephanus, both eminent and learned men, and both Bishops there; whereas indeed
they were not Bishops of this Laodicea, but of Laodicea in Syria, (called
anciently Seleucia Tetrapolis) as he might easily have seen by a more careful
looking on those places of Eusebius, which himself has cited. Now in the
Nicene Council, if we like of that, we find the Successors of those several
Angels, subscribing severally to the Acts thereof, Act. Conc. Nic. in subser.
amongst other Prelates of that time; as viz. Menophanes of Ephesus, Eutychius,
B. of Smyrna, for the province of Asia; Artemidorus B. of Sardis, Soron or
Serras B. of Thyatira, Ethymasius B. of Philadelphia, for the Province of
Lydia; and finally Nunechlus B. of this Laodicea, Perpet. gover. cap. 13. p.
269.
for the Province of Phrygia, for Theodotus, who by Bilson is affirmed to have
subscribed as Bishop of this Laodicea, was Bishop of Laodicea in the Province
of Syria, amongst the Bishops of which Province his subscription is; which I
marvel that most learned and industrious Prelate did not see. And though we
find not him of Pergamus amongst them there, yet after in the Council of
Chalcedon, does his name occur. In fine, by the person that speaks to the
Pastors, and those seven Churches, and the name he gives them, it is plain and
evident that their vocation was not only confirmed by the Lord himself, but
their Commission expressed. He speaks that has best right to appoint what
Pastors he would have to guide his Flock, till himself come to judgment: The
name he gives them, shows their power and charge to be delivered them from
God; and consequently, each of them in his several charge and City, must have
Commission to reform the errors and abuses in their several Churches, at whose
hands it shall be required, by him that shall sit judge to take account of
their doings. And so much for the Angels of the seven Churches in Asia,
remembered in the book of the Revelation.

But to go forwards to S. John, Patmos, he sets himself unto the reformation of
these Churches, calling together the Bishops of the same, as before we showed;
and governing both those and the adjoining Churches of Asia minor, by his
Apostolical Authority and pre-eminence. Which having done on the entreaty and
request of some godly men, he went unto the neighbor Nations, (...), Clemens
Alex. ap. Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 17.
in some places instituting or ordaining Bishops, in others rectifying and
reforming the whole Churches; and in a word, by the direction of the spirit,
founding a Clergy in the same. It seems the journey was not far, the places
which he visited being said to be (...), the neighboring Nations; and indeed
the Apostle was now grown too old to endure much travel, being near an hundred
at this time. And therefore I conceive that the Episcopal Sees of Traellis and
Magnesia, were of his foundation: Council. Chal. in subscript.
being Cities not far off, and after reckoned as the Suffragans of the Archb.
or Metropolitan of Ephesus. Certain I am, that they were both of them Sees of
Bishops, as does appear by the Epistles of Ignatius; in which he names
Polybius Bishop of Trallis, Ignat. Epist. ad Magnesi.
and Damas Bishop of Magnesia; and those not titular Bishops only, but such as
were to be obeyed, (...), without gainsaying; and without whose allowance
there was (...) laid upon the Presbyters, who were not to do any thing in
their ministrations, but by his authority. One other Bishop there is said to be
of S. John's ordaining, viz. the young man which Clemens speaks of, Clem. Alex.
ap. Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 17.
whose aspect being liked by the Apostle, he left him to the care and tutorage
of an ancient Bishop of those parts. And when the Young man afterward for want
of careful looking to, became debauched, and made himself the Captain of a crew
of Outlaws, the blessed Saint with much ado reclaimed him from that wretched
course, and afterward having new molded him, and prepared him for it, (...),
made him a Bishop in the Church. But whether that the word will bear that
sense, as to the making him a Bishop, or that it only does imply that S. John
placed him in some function of the holy Ministry, Ecclesiae ministeri^
praefecit, as Christophorson reads it, I will not contend. Only I cannot but
observe, that where the Bishop to whose care he was committed, is in the
prosecution of the story, called (...); some have collected from the same,
Unbishopping of Tim. and Tit. p. 126.
that Bishops in those times were no more than Presbyters. But this will prove,
if better looked on, but a plain mistake: the word (...) in that place, noting
the Bishops age, and not his office, as does appear by that which follows in
the story, where he is called (...), which certainly does signify an ancient
man, but not a Presbyter.

The Asian Churches being thus settled and confirmed in the faith of Christ,
Beda de sex aetatibus. In Annal. Ecc
he went unto the Lord his God in a good old age, being then 98 years old, as
Beda reckons in the beginning of the second century, Anno 101. according to
the computation of Baronius: The Church at his departure he left firmly
grounded in all the points of faith and doctrine, taught by Christ our Savior,
as well settled in the outward government, the polity and administration of the
same, which had been framed by the Apostles, according to the pattern and
example of their Lord and Master. For being that the Church was born of Seed
immortal, and they themselves though excellent and divine, yet still mortal
men; it did concern the Church in an high degree to be provided of a
perpetuity, or if you will, an immortality of Overseers, both for the sowing of
this Seed, and for the ordering of the Church, or the field it self. This since
they could not do in person, they were to do it by their Successors, who by
their Office were to be the ordinary Pastors of the Church, and the Vicars of
Christ. Now if you ask the Fathers who they were that were accounted in their
times and ages, the Successors of the Apostles; they will with one accord make
answer that the Bishops were. To take them as they lived in order, it is
affirmed expressly by Irenaeus, Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
one who conversed familiatly with Polycarpus, S. John's Disciple. He speaking
of those Bishops which were ordained by the Apostles, and showing what
perfections were in them required, then adds, Quos and Successores relinquebant
sunm ipsorum locum magisterii tradentes, whom they did leave to be their
Successors, delivering unto them their own place of government. Cypr. Epist.
42. vel. l. 2. ep. 10.
S. Cyprian next writing to Cornelius, then Bishop of Rome, exhorts him to
endeavor to preserve that unity, Per Apostolos nobis Successoribus traditam,
which was commended by the Apostles unto them their Successors. So in another
place, speaking of the commission which our Savior gave to his Apostles, he
adds that it was also given to those Praepositi, Id. Epist. 69. vel. l 4. ep.
10.
rulers and governors of the Church, Qui Apostolis Vicaria ordinatione
succedunt, which by their ordination have been substituted as Successors to
them. And lest we should mistake his meaning in the word Prupositi,
Firmilianut, anothe ^i shop of those times, Firmil. ep. Cy. Epist. 79.
in an Epistle unto Cyprian, uses instead thereof the word Episcopi, not
varying in the rest from those very words which Cyprian had used before.
Hieron. ad Marcell. adv. Mont.
Hierom, although conceived by some to be an adversary of the Bishops, does
affirm as much. Where speaking of Montanus and his faction, he shows this
difference betwixt them and the Church of God, viz. that they had cast the
Bishop downwards, made him to be the third in order, Apud nos Apostolorum locum
Episcopi tenent, but in the Catholick-Church of Christ, the Bishops held the
place or room of the Apostles. The like he says in his Epistle to Euagrius,
Id. ad Euagr.
where speaking of the parity of Bishops amongst themselves, that the eminency
of their Churches did make no difference in their authority; he gives this
reason of the same, Omnes Apostolorum successores sunt, because they were all
Successors to the Apostles. So also in his Comments on the Book of Psalms,
writing upon those words, Id. in Psalm. 44.
Instead of thy Fathers thou shall have Children, he tells us that at first,
the Apostles were the Fathers of the Church; but they being gone, Habes pro his
Episcopos filios, the Church had Bishops in their stead: which though they were
her Children, as begotten by her, Sunt tamen and patres tui, yet they were also
Fathers to her, in that she was directed and guided by them. August. in Psalm.
44.
S. Austin on the same words has the like conceit, the Fathers of the Church,
says he, were the Lords Apostles, Pro Apostolis filii nati sunt tibi,
constituti sunt Episcopi, instead of those Fathers, the Church has Children,
Bishops that be ordained in her, such whom she calls Fathers, though her self
begat them, and constituit in Sedibus patrum, and placed them in the seats or
thrones of those holy Fathers. August. Epist. 42.
The like the same Saint Austin in another place, to the same effect. The root,
says he, of Christian Religion, is by the seats of the Apostles, and
Successiones Episcoporum, and the succession of the Bishops, dispersed and
propagated over all the world. Grego. Magn. hom. 26.
And so S. Gregory discoursing of the power of binding and loosing, committed
by the Lord unto his Apostles, applies it thus: Horum nunc in Ecclesia locum
Episcopi tenent, that now the Bishops hold their places in the Church of
Christ. Not that the Bishops do succeed them in their personal graces, their
mighty power of working Miracles, speaking with tongues, giving the Holy Ghost,
and others, such as these, which were merely temporary; but in their Pastoral
charge and government, as the chief Rulers of the Church, the ordinary Pastors
of the Flock of Christ.

Now that the Bishops are the ordinary Pastors of the Church, Ignatius, Ignat.
Epist. ad Antioch.
who conversed with most of the Apostles, writing unto the Antiochians,
requires them to call to mind Euodius (who was his Predecessor in the Sea of
Antioch) (...), Tertull. de fuga in persecut.
their most blessed Pastor. Tertullian discoursing on those words of Christ,
The hireling sees the Woolf coming and flees; but that the good Shepherd
lays down his life for the Sheep, Joh. 10. infers thereupon, Praepositos
Ecclesiae in persecutione fugere non oportere, that the Prelates or Governors
of the Church are not to fly in persecution. By which it is most clear, (not to
dispute the truth of his assertion) that Pastor and Praepositus Ecclesiae do
come both to one. Cypr. de Aleatore.
S. Cyprian in his tract de Aleatore, is more plain and positive, Nam ut
constaret nos, i. e. Episcopos, Pastores esse ovium Spiritualium, etc. that it
might evidently appear, says he, that we the Bishops are the Pastors of the
Flock of Christ: He said to Peter, feed my Sheep. And in another place, (for
fear the former Book may prove none of his) expostulating with Pupianus, Id.
Epist. 69.
who charged him, as it seems, for some defect in his administration, he thus
drives the point. Behold, says he, for these six years, Nec fraternitas
babuerit Episcopum, neither the Brotherhood has had a Bishop, nor the People
a Praepositus, or Ruler, nor the Flock a Pastor, nor the Church a Governor,
nor Christ a Prelate, nor God a Priest. Where plainly, Pastor and Episcopus,
and so all the rest are made to be the same one function. More clearly in
another place of the same Epistle, where he defines a Church to be Plebs
sacerdoti adunata, and Pastori suo grex adhaerens; that is to say, a People
joined or united rather to their Priest, a Flock adhering to their Pastor.
Where by Sacerdos, as before, (and in other Authors of the first times) he
means no other than a Bishop, as does appear by that which follows. Vnde
scire debes Episcopum in Ecclesia, etc. From whom thou ought to understand,
says he, the Bishop to be in the Church, and the Church to be also in the
Bishop; and that whoever is not with the Bishop, is not in the Church. Optatus
says the same in brief, Opta. de schismate. lib. 1.
by whom Pastor sine grege, and Episcopus sine populo, a Bishop without a
Church or People, and a Pastor without a Flock are joined together as Synonyma.
S. Austin speaking of two sorts of Overseers in the fold of Christ, some of
them being Children, and the others hirelings: then adds, Praepositi autem qui
filii sunt, Pastores sunt, Aug^st. Tra^^. 46. in Job.
the Rulers which are Children (of the Church) they are the Pastors. And in
another place not long since cited, speaking of Episcopale judicium, the
condemnation that attends the Bishops sentence; he presently subjoyns,
Pastoralis tamen necessitas, Id de corr^pt and great. c. 15.
that yet the necessity incumbent on the Pastoral Office, does many times
inflict such sentences for the public safety of the Flock. I might be infinite
in this search, but that I have spoke somewhat to the point already: and am
moreover saved all further labor in it, by our learned Andrews, affirming
positively and expressly, Resp. ad Epis. Petri Motinaei.
Apud veteres Pastorum nomen vix adhiberi, nisi cum de Episcopis loquuntur, the
name of Pastor is scarce used among the Ancients, but when they have occasion
to speak of Bishops. And Binius in his Notes upon the Councils, excepts against
a fragment of the Synod of Rhemes, said to be held Anno 630. as not of that
antiquity which is there pretended: and that he does upon this reason only, Eo
quod titulum ^astoris tribuat Parocho, because the style of Pastor is there
given to the common Presbyter, Tom. 3. part. 2. p. 978.
contrary to the usage of those elder times.

And certainly it is no wonder that it should be so, Episcopus and Pastor
animarum, the Bishop and Pastor of our Souls, as Saint Peter calls him, 1 Petri
2.2^.
should confer on them both his Titles: since he has substituted and appointed
them to be his Vicars here on Earth. The Pope may challenge, if he will, this
Title to himself alone: but since antiquity has given it to all Bishops
equally, to every one as much as to him of Rome. Saint Ambrose has resolved it
generally, Ambros. in 1. ad cor. cap. 11.
Episcopus personam habet Christi, the Bishop, says he, susteineth the person
of Christ, and therefore every Woman ought to behave her self before the
Bishop, as before her Judge: giving this reason therewithal, Quia Vicarius
domini est, because he is the Vicar of the Lord. The Commentaries on Saint
Matthew, ascribed to Chrysostom, does affirm the same: Opus imperfect. in
Matthew. hom. 17.
where showing that such men as persecuted or molested those of the holy
Sacerdotal Order, were either Gentiles, or at least sordid and senseless
Christians: he gives his reason for the same: Quia nec intelligunt, nec
considerant, sacerdotes Christi Vicarios esse, because they neither understand
nor do consider, that the Bishops, (whom he there means by Sacerdotes) are
the Vicars of Christ. Saint Austin to the same effect, Lib. qu. vet. and N.
test. qu. 127.
as before, Saint Ambrose. The Bishop is to be more pure and pious than another
man, for he seems to sustein the person of God: Est enim Vicarius ejus, for
he is his Vicar. The Fathers in the Council of Compeigne, Anno 833. thus, Scire
omnes convenit, Council. Com.
it behooves all men to understand what is the nature of the Government or
Ministry of Bishops, Quos constat esse Christi Vicarios, who, as it evidently
appears, are the Vicars of Christ. Nay even Blesensis, Petr. Blesens. Sermon. 47.
though he lived and writ when the Papacy was at the height, makes this
description of a Bishop. Ordinatur Christi Vicarius, Ecclesiae Praelatus, etc.
He is ordained a Vicar of Christ, a Prelate of the Church, a Father of men, and
a Pastor of Souls: So far the Ancients have attested to the present business,
and yet there is one Testimony more, which as it is more ancient, so it is as
pertinent as any hitherto produced, viz. The Declaration of the Fathers in the
Council of Carthage, Anno 258. or rather the attestation of the Fathers to that
which was affirmed by Clarus of Muscala, one of the Bishops there assembled,
who being to give his Vote upon the business then in agitation, first thus laid
his grounds. Conc. Carth. sub. Cypr.
Manifesta est sententia Domini nostri, etc. The judgment of our Lord and
Savior JESUS Christ is plain and evident, bequeathing that authority unto his
Apostles, which had been given him by his Father, to which Apostles we are now
the successors, eadem potestate Ecclesiam Domini gubernantes, governing the
Church by that authority, which they had before. In which we see a clear and
manifest derivation of this power, this Vicarship, from God the Father unto
Christ, from Christ to his Apostles, and by them also to the Bishops, and their
successors in the Church for ever. Not that each Bishop in particular has
some particular Apostle whom he does succeed; I conceive not so: but that the
Bishops generally do succeed the Apostles, and are in general Vicars unto
Christ our Savior, as to the general Government of the Church of God.
Apostolis datos esse Episcopos successores, non siagulis Apostolis, sed in
solidum universis; De rep. Eccles. l. 2. c. 5. n. 3.
as the unfortunate Arch-Bish. of Spalato has right well observed, conform
unto the Tenet of the Fathers, in this very point. The sum of these three
Sections then, in brief is this. Christ by the mission which he had from his
heavenly Father, devolves all power on his Apostles, for teaching, governing
and directing his little flock: and they being sensible of their own mortality,
ordain by like authority a line of Bishops to succeed them, ad consummationem
seculi, by whom that care might be perpetuated. In whom, as there is plenitudo
potestatis, a fullness of authority for that end and purpose; Amb. in Ep 4.
the Bishop, as is said by Ambrose, being made up of all the Orders in the
Church ( nam in Episcopo omnes ordines sunt, as his words there are:) so he
both does and may assume such and so many associates, assistants, and
subservient Ministers in partem oneris, for the discharge of this great trusi;
as were assumed by the Apostles, or ordained by them rather, for the public
service of the Church.

Thus have we seen the Gospel of our Lord and Savior, Episcopal form of
Government. A pregnant evidence, that as the Lords Apostles were by the Holy
Ghost instructed in that Faith, which they were to preach; so by the same
eternal Spirit they were directed to that form of Government, which they were
to plant. They could not else have fallen so unanimously on the self same
project: nor had God blessed it with so flourishing and fair increase, a growth
so sudden and miraculous; had it not been a graft of his own heavenly
planting. Which graft, what root it took in this present Age, in little more
than half an hundred years after Christ's Ascension; we shall best see by
looking on this brief Chronology, which I have drawn to that intent.

The state of Holy Church in this first CENTURY.
Anno Chr. 34. OUR Savior Christ suffered and rose again, and ascended into
glory. S. James made Bishop of Jerusalem. 35. The conversion of Paul. 39. S.
Peter takes upon him the Bishopric (or government of the Church) of Antioch.
41. S. Peter baptizeth Cornelius and his family, opening the door of life unto
the Gentiles. 43. The Disciples first called Christians at Antiochia. 44.
Bishops ordained by Saint Peter, in the Churches of sidon, Berytus, and
Laodicea of Syria, and other Cities of the East. Saint Peter comes to Rome,
and undertaketh the government of the Churches of the Circumcision founded in
that City. Paul and Barnabas called forth by the holy Ghost, to the Apostleship
of the Gentiles. 45. Euodius made Bishop of Antioch. S. Mark ordained Bishop of
Alexandria. 46. Saint Peter ordains many of his Disciples Bishops, and
sends them abroad into France, Italy and Spain. 49. Saint Paul ordains
Presbyters in Churches of his Plantation. 50. Eucherius one of St. Peter's
Disciples, made Bishop of the Church of Triers in Germany. 51. The Jews
banished from Rome by Claudius Caesar: in which regard, Saint Peter leaving
Rome, commits the government of his Church to Cletus, by birth a Roman. The
Apostolical Council in Jerusalem. Saint Paul makes his first Journey into
Macedonia. 52. Saint Paul first Preaches at Athens, Corinth, etc. 55. Saint
Paul takes up his abode at Ephesus, and from thence writes to those of
Corinth. 57. Timothy ordained by Saint Paul the first Bishop of Ephesus. Titus
ordained Bishop of Crete by the same Apostle. Other of Paul's Disciples ordained
Bishops for the Eastern Churches. 58. Saint Paul calls the Elders from
Ephesus to Miletum. 59. Saint Paul brought Prisoner unto Rome, takes on himself
the Government of the Churches of the Gentiles there. 60. Archippus Bishop of
the Colossians. Epaphroditus ordained Bishep of the Philippians. 61. Crescens
made Bishop of Vienna in Daulphine. Paul passes into Spain, leaving the Church
of Rome to the care of Linus. 63. Simeon elected Bishop of Jerusalem in the
place of James, by the joint consent of the Apostles and Disciples. 64. Anianus
succeeds Mark in the Bishopric of Alexandria. 67. Saint Peter planteth
Churches, and ordains Bishops, in the Isle of Britain. 68. Peter and Paul
return to Rome. 69. The Martyrdom of Peter and Paul at Rome, by command of
Nero. 70. Linus and Cletus (or Anacletus) succeed the two Apostles in the
government of their Churches there. 71. Ignatius succeeds Euodius in the Sea
of Antioch. 74. Valerius succeeds Eucherius in the Church of Triers. 80. Saint
John takes up his abode in Asia, planting and confirming the Churches there,
and ordaining Bishops in the same. 81. Linus being dead, Clemens succeeds him
in the government of the Church of the Gentiles, in Rome. 84. Polycarpus made
Bishop of Smyrna by Saint John. 87. Abilius succeeds Anianus in the
Bishopric of Alexandria. 92. Saint John confined unto Patmos, by Domitianus.
93. Cletus (or Anacletus) being dead, the Churches of the Circumcision in the
City of Rome and parts adjoining, became united with the Gentiles, under the
Government of Clemens. 97. Saint John writes the Apocalypse to the Seven
Churches in Asia. 98. Saint John restored to Ephesus, foundeth the Churches of
Trallis and Magnesia, ordaining Bishops in them both, as in other places. 99.
At the entreaty of the Asian Bishops, St. John writes his Gospel. 100. Cerdo
succeeds Abilius in the Bishopric of Alexandria. 101. Saint John dies at
Ephesus in a good old age; leaving the government of the Church in the hands of
Bishops, as Successors to the Apostles, and the Vicars of Christ.
The End of the first Part.
THE HISTORY OF EPISCOPACY:

The Second Part.

From the Death of Saint JOHN the APOSTLE, To the beginning of the Empire of
CONSTANTINE.

By PETER HEYLYN, D. D.

IREN. Lib. III. Cap. III. Habemus annumerare eos, qui ab Apostolis instituti
sunt EPISCOPI in Ecclesiis, and Successores eorum, usque ad nos.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, to be sold by C. Harper. 1681.

THE HISTORY OF EPISCOPACY.
PART II.
CHAP. I. What does occur concerning Bishops, and the Government of the Church
by them, during the first half of the second Century.
1. Of the Condition of the Church of Corinth, when Clemens wrote unto them his
Epistle. 2. What that Epistle does contain in reference to this point in hand.
3. That by Episcopi, he means Bishops truly and properly so called, proved by
the scope of the Epistle. 4. And by a Text of Scripture therein cited. 5. Of
the Episcopal succession in the Church of Corinth. 6. The Canons of the
Apostles ascribed to Clemens, what they say of Bishops. 7. A Bishop not to be
ordained under three or two at least of the same order. 8. Bishops not barred
by these Canons from any secular affairs, as concern their families. 9. How far
by them restrained from the employments of the Commonwealth. 10. The
jurisdiction over Presbyters, given to the Bishops by those Canons. 11. Rome
first divided into Parishes, or Tituli, by Pope Euaristus. 12. The reasons why
Presbyteries or Colleges of Presbyters were planted at the first in Cities. 13.
Touching the superiority over all the flock given to the Bishop by Ignatius.
14. As also of the Jurisdiction by him allowed them, 15. The same exemplified
in the works of Justin Martyr.


FROM the Apostles we proceed unto their Disciples, Clemens, once one of Paul's
Disciples, and by him remembered; afterward Deacon to Saint Peter, Philip. 4.3.
Epist. ad Trallianos.
as Ignatius tells us, and finally successor to them both in the administration
of the Church of Rome, as before was showed. Chap. 3. n. 8.
Amongst the several Monuments of Piety which he left behind him, the most
renowned is his Epistle to the Church of Corinth; of which Eusebius gives this
testimony, Eusebius. Hist. Ecc. 1.3. c. 12.16.
that it was (...) famous and very much admired: adding withal that as well
anciently, as in his times, it used to be read publicly in the Congregation.
Tht occasion which induced him to write the same, was a sedition, or a faction
rather, raised in the Church, which from the first Preaching of the Gospel
there, had been too much addicted to Divisions, But what this faction was
about, 1 Cor. 3.
or what occasion was then taken for the production of new broyls, or the
reviving of the old; we shall best see by looking on this piece of Clemens;
recovered from the ruins of Antiquity by the care and industry of Patr. Young,
Library Keeper to his Majesty. Clemen. Epist. ad Corinth. p. 62.
There find we the good man complaining that the Church of Corinth, so ancient
and well grounded in the faith of Christ, (...), should for the sake of one or
two contentious persons tumultuate against their Presbyters: and that the
scandal of their functions should come unto the ears of Infidels, to the
dishonor of the Lord. Nor did the faction rest in the people only, Ibid. p. 58.
though it proceeded to that height as the ejecting of those Presbyters whom
they had distasted: but it had taken too deep sooting amongst the Presbyters
themselves, encroaching with too high an hand on the Bishops Office, or
wilfully neglecting his authority. Part. 1. chapter 5.
For whereas in those times, as before was shown, the blessed Eucharist,
regularly and according to the Churches Orders, could not be celebrated but by
the Bishop, by his leave at least, and that it did pertain to him to appoint
the Presbyters what turns and courses they should have in that ministration;
these men perverting all good order, neither observed the time and place
appointed for that sacred Action, nor kept themselves unto those turns and
courses, in the performance of the same, which were assigned them by their
Bishop. Certain I am that the discourse of Clemens in the said Epistle does
militate as well against the one, as against the other: blaming as well the
Presbyters for their irregular proceeding in their ministration; as censuring
the People for their insolency, in the ejecting of their Presbyters. So that we
have two factions, at this time in the Church of Corinth: one of some
inconformable Presbyters, so far averse from being regulated by their Bishop,
as they ought to be, Clem. p. 57.
that they opposed the very Calling, raising contentions and disputes about the
Name and Office of Episcopacy: another of the people against the Presbyters,
and that pursued with no less acrimony and despite, than the former was.

For the repressing of these factions at this present time, Presbyters, Id. p.
48.
he first presents unto them the obedience that Soldiers yield to their
Commanders, showing them (...), how orderly, how readily and with what
subjection they execute the several Commands imposed upon them by their
Leaders: that since all of them are not Generals, Colonels, Captains, or in
other Office every one (...) in his rank or station is to obey the charge
imposed upon him, by the King or Emperor, and his Commanders in the Field.
Then represents he to them the condition of the natural Body, Id. 49.
in which the Head can do but little without the ministry of the Feet, the
Feet as little (out of question) without direction from the Head; that even the
least parts of the body are not only profitable, but also necessary, concurring
all of them together to the preservation of the whole. Which ground so laid, he
thus proceeds in his Discourse: (...), etc. Id. p. 52, etc.
These things being thus declared and manifested, looking into the depth of
heavenly knowledge, we ought to do those things in their proper order, the
People in the tendering of their Oblations, the Presbyters in the celebrating of
the Liturgy, according to the times and seasons by the Lord appointed, who
would not have these sacred Matters done either rashly or disorderly, but at
appointed times and hours, and by such Persons as he has thereunto designed by
his supreme Will, that being done devoutly and Religiously they might be the
more grateful to him. They therefore who upon the times presixed make their
Oblations to the Lord, are blessed, and very welcome unto him from whose
commands they do not vary. (...), etc. For to the High Priest was assigned his
particular function, the Priest had his peculiar ministry prescribed unto him,
and the Levites theirs: the Laymen being left unto Lay-imployments. Therefore
let every one of you my brethren, in his Rank and Station, offer to God the
blessed Eucharist, with a good Conscience; (...) p. 53.
keeping within the bounds of his ministration, appointed to him by the Canon.
(For so I take it is his meaning) For not in every place was it permitted to
the Jews to offer up the daily and perpetual Sacrifices; whether they were
Sin Offerings, or Eucharistical Oblations, but at Jerusalem alone, nor there
in any place indifferently, but only in the Court of the Temple, at the Altar:
the Sacrifice being first viewed and approved of, both by the High Priest, and
the foresaid Ministers. They that did any thing herein, otherwise than
agreeable to his will and pleasure, were to die the Death: you see, my
brethren, that as we are endued with a greater knowledge, so are we made
obnoxious to the greater danger. The Apostles have Preached the Gospel unto us
from Christ; JESUS Christ from God: Christ being sent by God, as the Apostles
were by Christ; and both proceeding orderly therein, according to his holy
Will. For having received his Commands, and being strengthened by the
Resurrection of our Lord JESUS Christ, and confirmed by the Word of God, they
spread themselves abroad, in full assurance of the Holy Ghost, publishing the
coming of the Kingdom of God: and having Preached the Word throughout many
Regions, and several Cities, they constituted and ordained the first fruits of
their labors, such whom in spirit they approved of, to be Bishops and Deacons,
unto those that afterward were to believe. (...), etc. p. 54.55. (...). p. 55.
Nor was this any new device, it being written many ages since in the book of
God; Esaias 60. (...), i.e. I will appoint them Bishops in Righteousness, and
Deacons in Faith. Afterward laying down the History of Aarons Rod budding, and
thereby the miraculous confirmation of his Election, he adds, that the Apostles
knowing by our Lord JESUS Christ the contention that would arise (...), about
the name or function of Episcopacy, Id. p. 57.
(take it which you will) and being for this very cause endued with a perfect
foresight of that which afterward should happen; ordained the aforesaid
Ministers, and left to every one their appointed Offices; that whenever they
should die, other approved men should succeed in their several places, and
execute their several parts in the Ministration. Those therefore which were
either ordained by them, or by those famous and renowned men that followed
after them, with the consent and approbation of the Church, and have
accordingly served unblameably in the fold of Christ, with all humility and
meekness, and kept themselves from baseness and corruption, and have a long
time carried a good testimony from all men: those we conceive cannot without
much injury be deprived of their place and service: it being no small sin to
reject those men, who holily and without reproof have undergone the Office of
Episcopacy, or done the duty of a Bishop.

So far the Father has proceeded, as to the Vindication of Episcopacy, page
58. beginning with Beati sunt Presbyteri, etc. following the same till page 70.
where he persuades the Presbyters that were so distasted, by several Examples
both profane and sacred, rather to quit the place for the Churches peace, than
by their tarrying there to increase the Rupture. Now that by Bishops, or
Episcopi, in the words before, he means Bishops truly and properly so called;
and does not use the word in so large a sense, as also to include the
Presbyters, as some men conceive; Vindication of the Answ. pa. 136, 137. Clem.
p. 53.
does seem most evident to me, by these reasons following. First, from the
Parallel here made between the several degrees and Offices in the Jewish
Church, and those established in the Christian: which had been very imperfect
and inconsequent, if there had not been those several and distinct degrees of
Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons in the one, as of the High Priests, Priests,
and Levites in the other Church. And that the Bishops in the Christian Church
are called many times' (...), or High Priests, in the ancient Writers, is no
new Learning unto those that have read the Fathers. And unto this
interpretation of the word Episcopi in that place of Clemens, I am the more
inclined to stand, as to the true and proper meaning of the Father; because I
find the self-same Parallel produced by Hierom, none of the greatest Patrons of
Episcopacy. Who tells us first, that many of the Apostostolical Traditions did
take their ground or hint from the old Testament, and gives us next this
instance of it; or if you will, this resolution in the case: Quod Aaron, and
filii ejus atque Levitae in Templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi, Presbyteri atque
Diaconi vendicant in Ecclesia; that such as Aaron, and his Sons, Hierom. ad
Euagrium.
and the Tribe of Levi, were in the Temple: the same were Bishops, Presbyters
and Deacons in the Church of GOD. Where plainly that pre-eminence which Aaron
had over and above the Priests and Levites; the same is given by Hierom to the
Bishops, over their Presbyters and Deacons respectively. And this is that which
is affirmed in the words of Clemens, if we mark it well, the Parallel being
brought in both, for the self-same end. And this to me appears yet further to
be clear and evident, by the contentions raised by these Corinthian Presbyters
(...), Clem. p. 57.
about the Name or Dignity of Episcopacy; the power and privileges
appertaining to that sacred Calling; and the discourse thereon occasioned,
touching the limiting and restraining of these busy Presbyters. unto their
proper Rank and Station. For had the heat been only raised upon the deposition
of their godly Presbyters, as by some is said: that had not any way concerned
either the Name or Dignity of Episcopacy, Vindic. p. 137.
(taking Episcopacy in that sense as themselves would have it:) that quarrel
not being taken up (as they make the case) against the Dignity or Calling, but
the persons only of those Presbyters, whom they had deposed.

But I am most of all confirmed herein by the citation of that Text of the
Prophet Esaias, though of a very different reading from those now in use: Clem.
p. 55.
the application of it being so conform to that of other ancient Writers. Saint
Hierom following the Translation of the Septuagint, Hierom. Comment. in Esa.
6.60.
does thus read the Text, Dabo Principes tuos in pace, and Episcopos tuos in
justitia: observes that in the Hebrew it is written thus, Ponam visitationem
tuam pacem, and Praepositos tuos in justitiam. And thence infers the admirable
Majesty of holy Scripture, quod principes futuros Ecclesiis, Episcopos
nominavit, in that the future Governors (or Princes) of the Church are there,
beforehand, called Bishops; whose Visitation is in peace, and the name or
Appellation of their Office, does denote their justice. Cyril Alexan. in Esai.
l. 5. c. 60.
Saint Cyril also, although he differ from our Author in the Translation of the
Text, following therein the Septuagint, as Saint Hierom did; yet he agrees
with him in his application. For making a comparison between the Religion of
the Jews and Christians; likening the one to Gold and Silver, the other unto
Brass and Iron, according to the tenor of the words foregoing: he adds that
the Jewish Ministers, the Scribes and Pharisees, whom before he spoke of, being
once removed, (...), Christ the Redeemer of all people did raise up other
Governors and Bishops for them, such as did every way excel in Peace and
Righteousness. Id. in Esaiam. Tom. 5. c. 60.
And then he makes this use thereof, for our instruction, That since the
Princes or Rulers of the Church do excel in Peace, and the Bishops of the same
in Righteousness; it ought so far to work upon the people, (...), as that they
should endeavor to lead their lives in Christian Piety and Godliness. Here
then we have two of the learned of the Ancients writing upon the Text
alleged by Clemens; and both expounding it of Bishops truly and properly so
called, according to the nature of that word in the times they lived: and
therefore questionless Clemens must needs be understood of such Bishops also:
And herewith you shall have the reason, why Bishops and Deacons are here joined
together, and that there is no mention made of Presbyters; not that the
Presbyters were not ordained by the Apostles, as well as either of the other;
but because the Deacons in this common broyl did constantly adhere unto their
Bishop, when as so many of the Presbyters were in opposition: Epiphan. adv.
haeres. 75.
or else as Epiphanius tells us, because that Bishops at the first had more use
of Deacons, than they had of Presbyters: for where the Congregation was but
small, Basil de Sp. san. c. 29.
(as that of Gregory Thaumaturgus is said to be, consisting of no more than 17
persons) a Bishop only was sufficient: (...), but being a Bishop could not be,
or at the least not do his Office, without help of Deacons; that Bishops and
Deacons are remembered only. And yet perhaps the meaning of the Author may be
best conceived, certain I am, the doubt or difficulty would be best removed,
did we translate (...), by the English Minister, as in that place I think we
may, according to the general meaning of that word in its native sense; the
Presbyters and Deacons, both being but subservient Ministers unto the Bishop,
who did allot them out their turns and stations in the officiating of Gods
divine Service; the Presbyters not having yet assigned them their particular
bounds, wherewith to execute the same, as in the time succeeding it is plain
they had. Of which more hereafter.

In the mean time we must examine whether the Church of Corinth, Clemens writ,
had not been settled by the Apostle in that Form of Government, which had been
every where established in the neighbor Cities. And certainly I can see no
reason, why Corinth should not have a Bishop, as well as Athens, or Philippi, or
the Thessalonians, Hierom. in Titum cap. 1. and in Epist. ad Euagr.
or any other Church of Greece or Macedon. I see much reason why it should. For
if that Bishops were first instituted in Schismatis remedium, for remedy of
Schism, as Saint Hierom says: assuredly the Church of Corinth being first
pestered with that foul Disease, should first of all, in all congruity, be
fitted with the remedy so proper and peculiar to it. A Bishop then they were to
have by Saint Hieroms Rule, and that as soon as any other Church what ever: but
who this Bishop was, is not yet so evident. By Dorotheus in Synopsi, Silas,
Saint Paul's most individual Companion, is said to be the Bishop of this Church,
Corinthiorum constitutus est Episcopus, as his words there are: Baron. in Romans
Martyrol. Julii. 13.
wherein Hippolitus, concurring with him, does make the matter the more
probable. And though I will not take upon me to justify the reports of
Dorotheus, where there is any reason to desert him, as there is too often: yet
when the point by him delivered does neither cross the holy Scripture, nor any
of the ancient Writers, as in this he does not; I know not why his word may not
pass for current. Nay, if we please to search the Scripture, we may find some
hint, for the defense of Dorotheus in this one particular. For whereas we find
often mentioned that Silus did accompany Saint Paul in many of his
peregrinations: the last time that we find him spoke of, is in the 18. of the
Acts; which time he came unto Saint Paul. Corinth. After, there is no mention
of him in the book of God: And possibly the reason of it may be this, in brief,
that he was left there by Saint Paul to look unto the government of that mighty
City. Which when he could not do by the Word and Doctrine, Saint Paul reserving
for a time the jurisdiction to himself, V. Chap. 4. n. 5.
as before was said; and that the Factions there did increase and multiply, for
want of ordinary power to suppress the same: Saint Paul might then invest him
with authority, making him Bishop of the place, both in Power and Title. This
if it may be counted probable, I desire no more. And then as we have found the
first Bishop in the Church of Corinth, we shall with greater ease and certainty
find out a second, though his name were Primus: for proof of whose being Bishop
here, Ap. Easeb. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 21. x 6. Ibid. c. 24. x 5. Id. lib. 5. c.
21. x 6.
we have the testimony of Egisippus, who took him, in his Journey toward Rome
and abode long with him; giving him special commendation both for his Orthodoxy
and Humanity. After succeeded Dionysius, next to him Bachyllus; of both which
we shall speak hereafter in convenient place.

From the Epistle of this Clemens unto those of Corinth, which is his
undoubtedly, Canons commonly called the Apostles Canons, Bellarm. Baron. alii.
Tertul. adver. Praxeam.
supposed to be collected by him: but so supposed, that still there is a
question of it, whether his or not. That they are very ancient is
unquestinable, as being mentioned by Tertullian, and cited in some of the
ancientest Councils, whereof the acts and monuments are now remaining on
Record. But being it is confessed on all hands, Binius in natis ad Can. Apo.
quosdam ab haereticis corruptos, that some of them have been corrupted by the
Heretics of old, the better to advance their cause by so great a Patronage: we
must be very wary how we build upon them. And howsoever Bellarmine be exceeding
confident, Lib. De Seriptor. Eccl. in Clemente. Annal. An. 102. n. 17.
that the first 50 are most true and genuine; and probably it may so be: yet I
conceive it safe to admit them on those sober cautions, which are commended to
us by Baronius: who on a full debate of the point in question, does resolve it
thus: Illi tantum nobis ex Apostolieis fontibus, etc. Those Canons only seem to
us, says he, to be derived from the Apostolical fountains, which have either
been admitted and incorporated by the Fathers into the Canons of succeeding
Councils, or confirmed by the authority of the Bishops of Rome, aut in communem
usum Ecclesiasticae disciplinae, or otherwise have been continually practiced
in the Churches Discipline. The first and last these three cautions, I conceive
to be exceeding sound, and should not stumble at the second, had the Decrees
and Ordinances of the ancient Popes come incorrupted to our hands. Which ground
thus laid, we will now see what the Apostles Canons have delivered in the
present business: and that we shall distribute as it does relate to Bishops,
either in point of their Admission, how and by whom they are to be Ordained; or
of their carriage and behavior being once admitted, how far to disoblige
themselves from the employments of the World; or of their Jurisdiction over the
inferior Clergy, whom they are to govern. These are the points which are most
clearly offered us to be considered of, in the aforesaid Canons, and these we
shall present, and then consider of them accordingly.

And first in way of their Admission to that sacred Function, viz. That a
Bishop is not to be ordained, but by three Bishops, or by two at the least.
(...), as the Canon has it. Canon. Apost. 1.
A Canon which has all the Rules and cautions required by Baronius, for proof
of its antiquity, and Apostolical institution, as being confirmed by many of
the Decretals, in case they were of any credit; incorporated first into the
Canons of the Council of Arles, Council. Arelat. Can. 21. Nicen. Can. 4.
as afterward in those of Nice; and generally continued in the constant
practice and perpetual usage of the Church. Only the difference is, that the
old Canon does admit of Ordinations made by two Bishops, if a third may not
conveniently be had; whereas the later Councils stand on three precisely:
whereof prehaps this was the reason, because in later times there was a greater
number of Bishops in the Church of God, than had been before; and so the number
of three Bishops to concur together, not so hard to meet with. Now they that
search into the first occasion of the present Canon fetch it from a Tradition
on Record in Clemens: viz. that James the Proto-Bishop, Philodox. ap. Masonum
de Minist. Anglic. l. 1. c. 5. (...) Clem. Alex. ap. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 1.
the first that ever had a fixed Episcopal See, was ordained Bishop of
Jerusalem, by Peter, James and John the sons of Zebedee. Peter, says he, and
James and John being by our Redeemer most esteemed of, contended not amongst
themselves after his ascension, for the highest place, (...), but rather made
choice of James the Just, to be the Bishop of Jerusalem. But this, if looked
on well, was no Ordination, for James being one of the Apostles needed no such
Ceremony; but only an agreement made by that goodly fellowship amongst
themselves, that whilst the rest did Preach the Gospel in the world abroad,
Objected by Philodix. ap Masonum. l. 1. cap. 7.
Saint James should take the charge of the Mother-City. The Ordination of Saint
Paul and Barnabas unto the Apostleship by the hands of Lucius, Simeon, and
Manaen, is indeed more pertinent; but that being an extraordinary case, it can
make no precedent. But what need any further pedigree be sought to raise the
reputation of this Canon? It is antiquity enough that it stands in front, and
leads on all the residue of the Canons, ascribed of old to the Apostles. And
yet we must observe withal, that as there is no general rule but has some
exception, so the necessities of the Church have many times dispensed with
these ancient Canons; Anastas. in vita Pelagii. Synadol. Ep. Episcoporum Ponti,
ap. Binium. p. 173. Tom. 2. Theodo. Hist. lib. 5. c. 23.
the Ordination of Pelagius the first, once a Pope of Rome, and of Dioscorus,
Patriarch of Alexandria, being performed by two Bishops only, contrary to the
Councils of Nice and Arles; that of P. Evagrius Patriarch of Antiochia, but by
one alone, contrary to the old Apostolic Canon. But then we must observe
withal, that these exceptions being in extraordinary cases and occasions, are
rather a confirmation of the Canons, than any diminution to them, according to
the good old rule, Exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis.

The Bishop being thus admitted to his charge and function by a peculiar
Ordination, Canon. 5.
it is ordered thus, (...), that he do not put away his Wife on pain of
Excommunication, on any shadow or pretense of Piety whatever. I know my
Masters in the Church of Rome would fain shift this off, Binius in Annot. in
Can. 5.
by saying that there is nothing else required by the present Canon, but that
they ought to have a care of them, ipsisque de omnibus quae ad vitam honest
degendem requiruntur, provideant, and to provide them all things necessary for
this present life. But surely Zonaras gives a fairer and more likely gloss;
Zonar. Com. in can. Apo.
by whom it is affirmed, that if a Bishop, or any other person in holy orders,
(for the Canon does extend to all particularly) should under color of Religion
put away his Wife: He was to be excluded from the Church by this present Canon,
till he admitted her again: Admitted her again? to what? Assuredly unto his
bed, to cohabitation: Should he do otherwise (says he) it would redound to the
reproach of Marriage, (...), as if that conjugal society did beget uncleanness,
whereas the Scripture says, that Marriage is honorable, and the Bed
undefiled; adding withal, (...), etc. that lawful Wedlock in those times was
left free to Bishops, and that it was restrained first by the Synod in Trullo,
many hundreds after, An. 692. Which being so, the following Canon must admit of
some qualification, Can. Apost. 6.
by which it is decreed, (...), that he do not take upon him any worldly cares,
or secular affairs, be it which it will. For if he was allowed to have Wife and
Children, and consequently was necessitated to maintain a family; it could not
be, but he must needs be subject to some worldly cares, 1 Timothy 5.8.
in making fit provision for them: Saint Paul determining that, If any man
provide not for his own, especially for those of his own House, he has denied
the faith, and is worse than an Infidel. So that these being not the worldly
cares which are intended, as they relate to his domestic carriage in his
private family; we must next see how far it does extend to those worldly cares,
or rather secular affairs, if any shall so choose to read it, which do concern
him in the public.

And here we must first know, qua tales for themselves; or as they were an
avocation from the work of the holy Ministry. Not of themselves, qua tales,
there is no doubt of that; for then their private and domestic cares must also
undergo the same prohibition. Zon. Comment. in Apost. Can.
It seems then only as an avocation, as they diverted Bishops and the rest in
Orders from doing the work of their vocation. Zonaras does conceive it so.
(...), the purpose of the Canon is, that they should attend the holy Ministry,
keeping themselves from all disturbances and the tumultuousness of business.
But then withal, we must observe that Zonaras allows them to take care of
Orphans, and to administer their estate to the best advantage, which is one
secular employment, and no mean one neither. In this the Council of Chalcedon,
Can. 3. does agree with Zonaras, allowing Clergymen to be Guardians (as we call
it) unto those in Wardship. Can. 3. Though the providing for the Fatherless be
a work of mercy, (...) the administration of their estates (...), as it is
there called, is a work of business. And this allowance is affirmed by Zonaras
to be consistent with the Canon, which is one thing more; and such a one as
will make way for many others. The arbitrating of emergent differences between
man and man, for the advancement both of peace and justice, is a worldly work,
a secular employment, past all question. May not the Canon be persuaded to
admit of this, and not to have it laid in bar against the Bishop, that he has
left his holy calling, and made himself a Judge amongst his Neighbors? Out of
doubt it will: And which is somewhat more, out of doubt it must. Those Canons
which are only fathered on the Apostles, will else run cross with those which
are theirs indeed. When Saint Paul lessoned those of Corinth, 1 Cor. 6.
that rather than they should profane the Gospel with contentious suits, they
should refer their differences to their Brethren: Think you it was his purpose
either to exclude the Clergy then, or their Bishop after, when they had one? No
says Saint Ambrose, Ambros. Com. in 1 ad Cor. c. 6.
(if the work be his) Melius dicit apud dei ministros causam agere, no better
way than to refer the business to Gods Ministers, who being guided by the fear
of God, will determine rightly in the same. Or is the Bishop only to be barred
this Office? Not so, says he. For if Saint Paul advises them to submit
themselves unto the judgment of their Brethren, it was upon this reason
principally, quia adhuc Rector in eorum Ecclesia non esset ordinatus, because,
as then, there was no Bishop in that Church. Saint Austin gives it more
exactly, makes it a charge imposed upon the Bishop by Saint Paul's command. For
speaking of the pains he took in the determining of such causes as were brought
before him, August. de Opere Monarch. c. 29.
he tells us that he underwent the same in obedience only to Saint Paul's
injunction, quibus nos molestiis idem affixit Apostolus, as his words there
are; and that Saint Paul imposed it not by his own authority, sed ejus qui in
eo loquebatur, but by the authority of the Holy Ghost which did dictate to him;
adding withal, that howsoever it was irksome and laborious to him, yet he did
patiently discharge his duty in it pro spe aeternae vitae, only upon the hope
of life eternal. And it is worth the observation, that venerable Beda, making a
Comment upon Saint Paul's Epistle, collected out of several passages of Saint
Austins writings; he puts down this place at large, as the most full and
proper exposition of the Apostles words, Secularia judicia si habueritis, etc.
1 Cor. 6.4. If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, etc.
Here then we have the Bishop interessed in the determining of suits and
differences, a secular employment surely; and yet no violence offered to the
sacred Canon. May he not go a little further, and intermeddle, if occasion be,
in matters of the Commonwealth? (...). Synesius in Ep. 57.
I do not blame those Bishops, says Synesius, that are so employed; such as
are fitted with abilities for the undertaking, being by him (a strict and
rigorous man) permitted to employ the same. And more than so, (...), it makes
for Gods praise and glory that it should be so; that men, on whom he has
bestowed abilities to perform both Offices, should do accordingly. But these I
put down here as opinions only; the practice of them we shall see in a place
more proper. If then it be demanded what those (...), those worldly cares, and
secular employments are which the Canon speaks off: Zonar. Comment. in Conc.
Chalced. Can. 3.
Zonaras will inform us in another place, that the Canon aims at the mingling
of the Roman Magistracies (...), with the Episcopal or Priestly function, which
at that time were, questionless, incompatible. And then the meaning of the
Canon will in fine be this, that Bishops or inferior Clergymen, might not be
Consuls, Praetors, Generals, or undergo such public Offices in the State of
Rome, as were most sought for and esteemed by the Gentiles there.

As for their jurisdiction over the inferior Clergy, Can. Apost. 2.
The second Canon tells us so, (...), the Presbyter and Deacon, and all other
Clerks must be ordained by one Bishop. And if a Bishop be required, though but
one in all, the Presbyters have no authority at all of conferring Orders. But
of this before: Being ordained, they were accomptable in the next place to
their Bishop, in all things which concerned their Ministration; without whose
special leave and liking there were not only many things which they might not
do, but there was nothing in a manner to be done, (...), Can. 38. Ignat. ad
Smyrnens. Zonar. in Can. Apost.
let them do nothing, says the Canon, without the knowledge of the Bishops;
neither Baptize nor celebrate the Eucharist, as Ignatius has it, of whom more
anon; (...), not repel any man from the Communion, as it is in Zonaras. But
here the Canons speaking in another place, they will tell you more
particularly, that if a Presbyter neglecting or contemning his own Bishop, Can.
31.
shall gather the People into a Conventicle, (...), and erect another Altar for
divine worship, not being able to convict his Bishop of any impiety or
injustice; he is to be deposed, (...), as an ambitious person, seeking a
pre-eminence that belonged not to him. Finally, so obnoxious were the
Presbyters to the command and pleasure of their Bishop, that they could not be
admitted into any other City, Can. 12.
(...), without his letters testimonial; and this on pain of Excommunication as
well unto the Presbyter that should so depart, Can. 15.
as to the party that received him. If any Presbyter or Deacon, leaving the
charge appointed to him, shall go into another Diocese (for so I think (...),
must be read in this place and time) and there abide without the allowance of
his Bishop, (...), he is to be suspended ab officio, especially if he return
not presently on the Bishops summons. More of this kind there is in those
ancient Canons, touching the Presbyters dependence on, and plain subjection to
their Bishop. But I have instanced in such only as may be clearly justified by
succeeding practice: And so much of the Apostles Canons, ascribed to Clemens.

From Clemens, Evaristus, his next successor in the government of the Church of
Rome. I know the Antiquaries of that Church have interloped an Anacletus
between these two; Iren. l. 3. cap. 3.
and let them take him for their labor. But when I find in Irenaeus, who lived
so near the times we speak of, as to converse with those which were then alive,
when both these Bishops sat in the Church of Rome; and when I find it in
Eusebius, Eusebius. hist. Ec. l. 3. c. 28. (...).
who with such care and diligence collected the successions of the Prelates in
the greater Churches, that Evaristus did immediately succeed this Clemens: I
shall desire to be excused if I prefer their testimony in this case, before
that of Anastasius, or the Pontifical or Platina, or any whosoever of the later
days. Now of this Evaristus it is said by Damasus in the Pontifical, In vita
Evarist.
and from him by Platina, titulos in urbe Romae Presbyteris divisisse, that he
did first assign the Presbyters in Rome their particular charges, which also is
affirmed by Rob. Barnes, De vitis Pont. Romans in Evaristo. Hooker Eccles. Polit.
l. 5. n. 80.
one of the great Agents in our Reformation; which words of the Historians
being short and dark, we will expound in the expressions of judicious Hooker
thus, as follows. For more convenient discharge of Ecclesiastical duties, as
the body of People must needs be severed by diverse Precincts, so were the
Clergy likewise accordingly distributed. Whereas therefore Religion did first
take place in Cities, and in that respect was a cause why the name of Pagans,
which properly signifies Country People, came to be used in common speech for
the same that Infidels and Unbelievers were, it followed thereupon that all
such Cities had their Ecclesiastical Colleges consisting of Presbyters and
Deacons, whom first the Apostles or their Delegates the Evangelists did both
ordain and govern: Such were the Colleges of Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus,
Rome, Corinth, and the rest, where the Apostles are known to have planted our
Faith and Religion. Now because Religion and the Cure of souls was their
general charge in common over all that were near about them, neither had any
one Presbyter his several Cure apart, till Evaristus Bishop in the Sea of Rome,
about the year 112. began to assign Precincts unto every Church or Title which
the Christians held, and to appoint unto each Presbyter a certain compass,
whereof himself should take charge alone; the commodiousness of which invention
caused all parts of Christendom to follow it: So he. And he says well that
Evaristus first began it; but it was shortly after followed by Higinus also,
who added more divisions to the former number, if I do understand my Author
rightly. Platina in vit. Higini.
As for the following of this pattern by other Churches, it is most true indeed
that this invention of his was after followed in the Churches of Antioch and
Alexandria: whereof see Socrates, Hist. Eccles. l. 5.3. for that of Antioch,
and for the other Epiphanius, who reckons nomin^^im those several Churches,
which were before the time of Constantine in that famous City. And doubtless in
all other Cities as the number of Christians did increase, so were the like
divisions made, and several Presbyters appointed for those divisions, though we
have no such pregnant evidence thereof, as for those before. But then we must
observe withal, that such divisions were not in the Country till a long time
after, as we shall let you see in due place and time.

As for those Colleges of Presbyters and Deacons, Hooker speaks, founded by
the Apostles and Evangelists in all the Cities wherein they planted the Gospel
of Christ, and by them conjoined into one Church under and with the Bishop: It
was a very excellent and useful institution, Bilson. perpet. Covernm. ca. 14.
as the times then were. For first it did exceedingly promote the conversion of
the world to Christ our Savior; it being a work too great for one or two to
undertake in a populous City, and would require more time to effect the same,
than such a weighty business could afford. The Harvest being great, it was most
expedient that the Laborers should also be many; that so the truth of Christ
might disperse it self not only throughout their Cities, but even unto those
Country Towns and Villages which bordered near them. A second use was to
continue those whom they had converted, in the Faith of Christ, instructing and
encouraging the Faithful from house to house, and from man to man, to stand
fast to the Doctrine which they had received, and not to shrink under the
bloody storms of persecution, which were then so frequent. A work that of
necessity required many hands; the more, because the faithful in those
dangerous times had not their public places of Assembly; or if they had, durst
not frequent the same as in times of peace: and so the labor must be great,
and the persons many, in Preaching, teaching, and exhorting in their private
houses, or in those secret places where they met by stealth for the receiving
of the Sacrament. A third use was, that from these Presbyteries, or Colleges of
Presbyters and Deacons, as from a sacred spring or fountain, there might be a
continual supply of fit and able men, by whom as well the Cities themselves
might be continually furnished for their own occasions; and also that from
thence, the smaller Towns and Villages within the circuit of those Cities,
which for the slenderness of their estate, and paucity of believers could not
maintain a Presbyter at their proper charge, might be provided of industrious
teachers for their spiritual necessities. For in these times whereof we speak,
and a long time after, the Villages and Country Towns, as they were converted
to the Faith, and did desire a Minister of the Word and Sacraments to reside
amongst them; so they repaired unto the Bishop of the City, within whose (...)
or bounds they were, of him desiring a fit man for that business; which course
continued in the Church for a long time after, until Churches were endowed with
Tithes, and Glebe, and Mansion houses, which drew the Patronage or
Presentation, as we call it, into hands of such their Founders and liberal
Benefactors to the same. The last, but not the least, was the advising and
assisting of the Bishop of the Church or City in all doubts and dangers; as
well in making Rules and Ordinances for the better government of the place; as
for the censuring and correcting of such faulty persons, whether of the Clergy
or Laity, as were thought fit to be convented, for an example to the rest.
Ignatius in Ep. ad Trallian.
In which regard Ignatius calls the Presbytery, or College of Presbyters (and
not the Priesthood, Sacerdotium, as it is rendered by Vedelius) (...), an holy
Corporation, Counselors and Assessors to the Bishop. A perfect Image of the
which, we have remaining in our Deans and Chapters of Cathedral Churches,
though not so frequently consulted with in the Churches business, as I could
heartily desire they were, and as our Canons now in force in some sort require.

The mention which I made so lately of Ignatius, leads me on to him, Rome,
whilst Euaristus was there Bishop: And in him I shall only touch upon those
Epistles which I find mentioned in Eusebius; and which Vedelius does confess
and defend to boot, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. In Apolog. pro Ignatio.
to be truly his: But by the way I must first tell you that Vedelius in this
business deals for all the world like the naughty Cow that gives a good meals
milk and kicketh it down with her heel. For having showed some pains and
learning in his Apology for Ignatius, in vindicating these Epistles from all
those who except against them: Yet in the body of the Text, when ever he does
meet with any thing which runs cross unto his fancies; that he excepts
against himself, as supposititious and adulterate, or else destroys a good
Text with a faulty Comment. But let us take the Author as he gives him to us.
(...). Ignat. ad Tral.
Be subject to the Bishop (says the good Father) as unto the Lord, and to the
Presbyters as to Christ's Apostles. Vedelius hereupon observes that the
Presbyters are the proper successors of the Apostles, Vedel. Annotat. in Ep. ad
Trallian. c. 3.
contrary unto that of Bellarmine, who makes them (as he says) to succeed the
seventy. In which Vedelius does the Bishops a far greater courtesy than I
believe he did intend them; making the disproportion more considerable between
the Bishop and his Presbyters than any Champion of the Prelacy had done before
him. For if Vedelius may infer from our Authors words that the Presbyters are
successors unto the Apostles, we may as well infer from the self same grounds,
that Bishops are the successors of Christ our Savior. The like obedience to
the Bishop he presses in another place of the same Epistle. (...). Reverence
your Bishop as you would do Christ, as the Apostles have commanded. Ignat. ibid.
And then he gives this reason of it, (...); for what else is the Bishop, but
one superior unto all in place and Power? what else the Presbytery, but an
holy Company, the Counselors and Assessors of the Bishop? In which we have as
great a difference betwixt a Bishop and his Presbyters; as is between a Prince
and his Privy Council. In that to the Magnesians thus; Id. ad Magn.
(...), etc. It becomes you to obey your Bishop, not being refractory against
him in any thing: for a most terrible thing it is to contradict him and oppose
him, in that the contumely or reproach does redound to God. In his third
Epistle, Id. ad Philad.
that to the Philadelphians, he writes thus. (...) the Priests are good, and
so are the Deacons, as being Ministers of the Word; but better, or more
excellent is the Chief Priest, as being only trusted with the Holy of Holies,
and the secrets of God. Id. ad Smyrn.
The like occurs in that to those of Smyrna; (...), etc. Honor God as the
Author and Lord of all things, and your Bishop as the chief Priest, bearing the
Image of God; that is to say, of God as he is chief, and of Christ as Priest.
And though Vedelius brands this last as supposititious, Vedel. in marg. Ep. ad
Philad.
and in the former by chief Priest will have our Savior meant, and not the
Bishop: yet he that looks upon the place without prejudice, Id. in exercit. n.
Ep. ad Smyrnens. cap. 18.
will easily discern the contrary; the comparison which there Ignatius makes,
being between the Ministers of the Church with one another, and not between the
Ministers and the Master, betwixt them and Christ, with whom it were both
impious and absurd to make comparisons. It were an endless piece of work to
instance in all those several places, wherein the superiority of Bishops over
all the flock, is pleaded and declared by this blessed Martyr. I therefore shut
up all with this Conclusion, Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrnens.
(...), Let the Lay People be subject to the Deacons, the Deacons to the
Presbyters, the Presbyters unto the Bishop, and the Bishop unto Christ, as he
to his Father: An heavenly and Divine subordination. Not one of all the ancient
Fathers, that speaks more clearly and distinctly of the Degrees and Orders in
the Hierarchy, than this blessed Martyr; assigning unto every one his due place
and station. If in one place, he calls the Presbyters by the name of Bishops,
as writing unto Hero, one of the Deacons of the Church of Antioch it is plain
he does: it was at such time and on such occasion, when he himself being the
Bishop of that place was ravished from them; and the chief Government thereof
was to them committed, (as in the times of vacancy or absence it has since
been done) which gave them the authority of Bishops, though not the Order.

For point of Jurisdiction next, Id. ad Smyrn.
(...), nothing that appertains unto the Church, or concerns Religion. And this
he grounds on the obedience of our Savior Christ, Id. ad Magnes.
(...), who does not any thing without his Father: resolving finally, that they
who give unto their Governor the name of Bishop, Id. ibid.
(...), and yet do what they list without him; do in effect, as those did unto
Christ our Savior, who said unto him, Lord, Lord, and yet did nothing which he
said. As for particulars, he would have those which marry, or are given in
marriage, Id. in Epist. ad Polycar.
(...), to take the Bishop along with them; that so their marriage may be made
according unto Gods Commandment, and not for wantonness. The Eucharist he would
not have performed but by the Bishop; either by him in person, or by his
authority; nor Baptism to be administered without his license and permission.
This last expressly in his 4th Epistle, being that unto the Church of Smyrna.
Id. ad Smyrn.
It is not lawful without the Bishop, (...), either to baptize, or present
Oblations, or celebrate the sacrifice of the blessed Eucharist, or solemnize
the Love feasts; but all things to be done agreeably unto his direction,
according to the will and pleasure of Almighty God. In which as to the
Sacrament of Baptism, Tertul. lib. de Baptismo.
Tertullian also does concur; as we shall see hereafter in its proper place:
And for the celebrating of the Eucharist by himself in person, and the
assembling of the people upon his appointment, the same good Father gives it
thus. Ignat. Ep. ad Smyrnens.
(...). Let that administration of the Eucharist be held good and valid, which
is done by the Bishop, or such as he permits to do it. And where the Bishop
shall appear, there let the Congregation be assembled; as where Christ is,
there all the Hosts of Heaven do stand round about him. Those that assemble
otherwise than thus, and do not take the Bishop with them in these sacred
Actions, are by him said, Id. ibid. paulo post.
to break the concord of the Church, and destroy her Order; and consequently
are worthy of a greater punishment, than he (...), which does rebel against his
King. Never did Advocate for his see plead a cause more thoroughly. So
thoroughly, that I dare take up the Conclusion of that blessed Martyr: Id. ad
Tarsens.
(...). My Soul for theirs who carefully observe this Order, and keep
themselves unto the Rules which are here prescribed.

Now that which by Ignatius is laid down before us, observation or direction;
the same we find in Justin Martyr, who lived about the middle of this second
Century; exemplified and represented in the way of Practice. For showing how a
Convert was to be admitted in the Congregation, and that he was received with
Common Prayers both for himself, Justin Mart. in Apolog. 2.
and for the holy Catholic Church, he does thus proceed. (...), Prayers being
done, we salute one another with an holy kiss. Then do we offer Bread and Wine
mixed with Water, (...) to the President or Ruler of the brethren; which he
receiving, presents to the Father of all, by the name of the Son and holy
Ghost, the sacrifice of praise and glory, rendering immortal thanks unto him in
that he has vouchsafed those his gifts unto us: who having offered this
oblation of Prayer and Thanksgiving, the Congregation present say Amen. The
President or (...) having done his part, in celebrating of the Eucharist, and
the People crowning his performance with their best Devotions, (...), those who
by us are called Ministers or Deacons ( for both these words the Latin uses)
distribute unto every one there present, a portion of the blessed bread and
wine mixed with water, that he may communicate thereof; and also carry part
thereof unto such as are absent. Which aliment (being thus consecrated and
received) we call the Eucharist, and is delivered unto none, but such as do
believe our doctrine, and have been washed in the laver of Regeneration. And
not long after, making a description of their Assemblies on the Sunday, he
first relates that the Commentaries of the Apostles and writings of the
Prophets, as much as the time will suffer, are read before them. Then adds,
that the Reader having done, (...), etc. the President or (...) makes a Sermon,
wherein he does instruct the People in the performance of those excellent
things, which are contained in the same. Which done we all arise, and make our
Prayers unto the Lord, and then the Bread and Wine and Water, as before, is
offered: the (...) proceeding to the Eucharist, according to the manner
formerly described. Here then we have the celebration of the Eucharist, and the
Preaching of Gods holy Word, performed ordinarily by the (...) or President of
the Congregation: but what this (...) should be, is the point in question. For
resolution of which doubt, it is clear and evident, that by (...) anciently was
meant the Bishop, as may appear by that of Eusebius, calling Publius Bishop of
Athens by this name (...), as he styles him there; Eusebius. hist. Ec. l. 4. c.
22. (...).
and so in other places and in other Writers. Nor do I find that it was any way
applied to inferior Presbyters, till after the division of the Church into
several Parishes, not in some Cities only, but in all parts else; after which
times the Presbyters or Ministers of Parochial Churches having cure of Souls,
by and from the Bishop, and having got the name of Rectors; came to be called
in some Writers (...) also, as we shall see hereafter in its proper place. But
what need any of the Ancients come in for evidence; when as the matter is
confessed by those, who were the greatest adversaries of Episcopacy? For Beza
making Timothy, whom we have proved sufficiently to have been a Bishop, to be
the President or (...) of the Ephesine Presbytery; and such a President or
(...), ut Justinus vocat, Beza Annot. in Tim. 5.19.
as Justin Martyr speaks of in the present place: it must needs be, that Justin
Martyrs President or (...) was a Bishop also, as Timothy is proved to be. Which
if it be not clear enough, we have a second that speaks plainer, and he the
greatest Champion of the adverse Party, which had the honor to be bred in the
Church of England; Cartwright I mean, Cited by Bish. Downham in his defense, l.
4. c. 1. sect. 17.
who tells us, with great grief no question, that even in Justins time there
began to peep, out something, which went from the simplicity of the Gospel, as
that the name of (...), which was common to the Elders with the Ministers of
the Word, was it seems appropriated unto one. So that by the confession of
the Adversaries to Episcopal Government we have gained thus much, that the
administration of the Sacrament of the blessed Eucharist, did properly and in
chief belong unto the Bishop, as was affirmed by Ignatius, and proved in point
of practice out of Justin Martyr. And so much for the first half of the second
Century; what is presented to us in the other half, we are next to see.

CHAP. II. The settling of Episcopacy together with the Gospel, in the Isle of
Britain, by Pope Eleutherius.
1. What Bishops Egesippus met with in his Peregrination; and what he
testifies of them. 2. Of Dionysius Bishop of Corinth; and of the Bishops by
him mentioned. 3. How Bishops came to be ordained, where none were left by the
Apostles. 4. The settling of the Gospel in the Isle of Britain by Pope
Eleutherius. 5. Of the Condition of the Church of Britain from the first
preaching of the Gospel there, till the time of Lucius. 6. That Lucius was a
King in those parts of Britain which we now call England. 7. Of the Episcopal
Sees here founded by King Lucius at that time. 8. Touching the Flamines and
Arch-flamines, which those stories speak of. 9. What is most like to be the
reason of the number of the Archbishopricks and Bishoprics here, of old
established. 10. Of the Successors, which the Bishops of this Ordination are
found to have on true Record. 11. Which of the British Metropolitans was
anciently the Primate of that Nation.


AMongst those several Writers of the Primitive times, Eusebius collected his
materials, for the composing of the Ecclesiastical History, which we still
enjoy: one of the antientest was Egesippus, one that took great pains in the
self-same kind. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 4.21. (...).
Five books he writ, as both Eusebius and Saint Hierom tell us, touching the
Acts and Monuments of the Church of God: this last affirming of the work, that
it contained many things, ad utilitatem legentium pertinentia, exceeding
profitable to the Reader; De scriptor. Eccles.
though written in a plain and familiar style. Some fragments of his cited by
Eusebius, we have seen before; the body of his Works being eaten by the teeth
of Time: and one we are to look on now, being the remainder of a most accurate
and full confession of his Faith, Eusebius. ut supra.
which he left behind him. There he relates, (...), that in a Journey toward
Rome, he did confer with many Bishops; and that he found amongst them all the
same Form of Doctrine: there being no City where he came, no Episcopal
succession, wherein he found not all things so confirmed and settled, as they
were prescribed by the Word, taught by the Prophets, and Preached by our Lord
and Savior. Particularly he tells us of the Church of Corinth, (...), that it
continued constantly in the Orthodox Faith, till the time that Primus was there
Bishop: with whom he had much conference, as he sailed toward Rome, staying
with him many days at Corinth, and being much delighted with his Conversation.
Of Rome he only does inform us, that he abode there till the time of Anicetus,
whose Deacon Eleutherus at that time was; who not long after did succeed in his
Pastors Chair: Soter succeeding Anicetus; Eleutherus succeeding Soter. Where by
the way, De viris ill. in Egesip.
I wonder how Saint Hierom came to place the coming of Egesippus unto Rome, sub
Aniceto, when Anicetus was there Bishop; considering that Egesippus tells us he
was there before; and that he there continued (...), until the time of
Anicetus, as before was said. Discoursing of the Errors of the Jews his
Contrymen, he shows that after James the Just was martyred in defense of
Christ's Truth and Gospel; Simeon the son of Cleophas and Uncle to our Savior,
was erected Bishop: all the Disciples giving their voices unto him, as being of
their Masters kindred: He adds that Jerusalem (whereof he speaks) was
called for long time, the Virgin Church; as being undefiled with the filth of
Heresies: and that Thebulis was the first who broached strange Doctrine in the
same; the man being discontented, as it seemed, (...), because he was not made
a Bishop. So far the pieces of this Journal, or Itinerary direct us in this
present search, as to discern how strong a bulwark the Episcopal succession
has been, and been accounted also, of Gods sacred Truths; how strong a Pillar
for support of that blessed building.

At the same time with Egesippus lived Dionysius, Bishop of the Church of
Corinth, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 4. c. 22. (...). De scriptor. Ecc.
successor to that Primus whom before we spoke of. A man, as both Eusebius and
Saint Hierom say, of such both industry and Eloquence, ut non solum suae
Civitatis and Provinciae populos, that he instructed not alone by his Epistles
the people of his own City and Province, but also those of other Churches. One
writ he, says Eusebius, to the Lacedaemonians, at once confirming them in faith
and love: another unto the Athenians, about the time that Publius, their
Bishop, suffered Martyrdom; exhorting them to live according to the prescript
of Christ's holy Gospel. In that Epistle he makes mention of Quadratus also, who
succeeded Publius in that charge; declaring also, that Dionysius the Areopagite
being converted by Saint Paul, was made the first Bishop of that City. Of which
three Bishops of Athens, Quadratus is much celebrated by Eusebius for an
Apology by him written, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 3.
and tendered unto Adrian the Emperor, in the behalf of Christians; being the
first piece of that kind that was ever written in the World: and written, as it
seems, with such power and efficacy, Id. ibid. c. 9.
that shortly after Adrian desisted from his persecuting of the Church of God,
making a Law or Edict for their future safety. But to go on with Dionysius. A
third he writ unto the Nicomedians, opposing in the same the Heresies of
Marcion: a fourth unto the Gortynaeans, in which he much commended their Bishop
Philip, in that the Church committed to his care and governance (...), had been
made famous by so many trials both for faith and constancy. He writ unto the
Church of Amastris also, and the rest in Pontus; speaking by name of Palma, the
Bishop there: as also to the Church of Gnossus, in the Isle of Crete; in which
he did persuade Pintus, Bishop of the same, (...), not to impose that grievous
yoke of Chastity upon his brethren, as a matter necessary; but to consider
rather the infirmity and weakness of them. Finally, there was extant in
Eusebius's time another Epistle of this Dionysius, to the Church of Rome;
wherein he magnifieth their abundant charity toward all the Brethren which
were in want or persecution, not only of their own, but of other Cities: highly
commending Soter, who was then their Bishop, who did not only study to preserve
them in so good a way, (...), but also did encourage them to improve their
bounties. So much remains of Dionysius and his public Acts: by which we may
perceive, that though the Bishops of those times (as since) had their
particular Sees and Cities, yet did their care extend unto others also;
maintaining a continual intercourse betwixt one another, not only for their
mutual comfort in those dangerous times, but also for the better government of
the Church it self; the Unity whereof was then best preserved by that
correspondence which the Bishops, in the name of their several Churches, had
with one another. For other Bishops of those times, not to say any thing of
Melito or Polycarpus, whom before we spoke of; nor of the Bishops of the four
Patriarchal Sees, which we shall have occasion to remember shortly: those of
most fame were Papias and Apollinarius, Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c 23. (...).
Bishops successively of Hierapolis a City of Phrygia; Pothinus Bishop of Lions
in France; Id. l. 4. c. 25. (...). Id. l. 5. c. 6. (...). Id. c. 21. (...). Id.
c. 25. (...). Ibid. c. 18. (...).
Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea; Cassius Bishop of Tire; Clarius Bishop of
Ptolomais, all three in Palestine; Publius Julius Bishop of Debelto a Colony in
Thrace; with many others of great eminency; whereof consult Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. 5. c. 18. (...). and cap. 21. (...).

By this that has been said of Dionysius, and other Bishops of his time,
Bishops had been settled even in those early days) in many Cities, wherein we do
not find that any had been formerly ordained by the Apostles. But how they were
so settled, and by whose authority, has in these later days been made a
question. Our Masters in the Church of Rome, appropriate the power of
instituting and erecting new Episcopal Sees, to their Bishop only, as being the
only, universal and supreme Pastor of the Church. Bellarmine has resolved it
so, in terms express. Bellarm. de Romans pont. l. 2. c. 12.
Apostolorum proprium erat, It properly pertained (says he) to the Apostles to
constitute Churches, and propagate the Gospel in those Churches wherein it
never had been Preached. So far unquestionably true, but what follows after?
Et hoc ad Romanum Pontificem pertinere, and ratio and experientia ipsa nos
docet. And that this does belong to the Popes of Rome, both reason and
experience teach us. Belong it does indeed to the Popes of Rome, so far we dare
join issue with him: but that it does belong to the Pope alone, and not to any
other Bishops but by his sufferance and authority, which is the matter to be
proved, that there is neither reason nor example for. No reason certainly, for
if this did belong to all the Apostles, as Bellarmine affirms it did, then
other Bishops which derive their pedigree from Andrew, James, John, Paul, or
any other of the Apostles, have as much interest herein as the Popes of Rome,
who challenge their descent from Peter. And for Examples, if they go by that,
they have a very desperate cause to manage. It Is true indeed, that Clemens, one
of the first Bishops of the Church of Rome, Ino Carnotens. in Chron. M.S.
citat. a Patr. Junio.
did ordain several Bishops in his time, and placed them in the chief Cities of
those parts of Gallia which lay near unto him, as viz. Photinus at Lions, Paul
at Narbon, Gratian at Tours, others in other places also, as Ino Carnotensis
has reported of him. But then it is as true withal, that other Bishops did the
like in their times and places. Christianity and Episcopacy had not else in so
short a time been propagated over all the World; if those which dwelt far off
and remote from Rome, could not have settled and ordained Bishops in convenient
places, without running thither, or having a Commission thence. And though we
have no precedent hereof, in the present age, yet we may see by the continual
practice in the ages following, that Bishops were first propagated over all the
Churches, by the assistance of such neighbor Churches, in whom there had been
Bishops instituted either by the Apostles and Evangelists themselves, or by
their Successors. Frumentius being in some hope of gaining the Indians beyond
Ganges to the faith of Christ, was made a Bishop for that purpose, (...),
Socrat. Eccles. hist. lib. 1. c. 15.
as the story has it: not by the Pope of Rome, nor with his privity or consent
that we can hear of, but by Atbanasius the great and famous Patriarch of
Alexandria. Theodoret. hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 4.
And when Eusebius Samosatanus had a mind, for the suppressing of the growth of
Arianism, to erect Dolicha (...) as my Author calls it, a small City, but
greatly pestred with that Heresy, into an Episcopal See: we find not that he
sent to Rome for a Commission, but actually ordained Maris, Bishop of the
place; and went himself to see him inthronized in the same. So in like manner
Saint Basil ordained Gregory Nazianzen Bishop of Sasima, making that Town a
Bishops See, which before was none: Gregor. Presb. in vita Nazian.
and thereupon Gregorius Presbyter writing the life of Nazianzen, calls it very
properly (...), a Bishopric or Episcopal See of a new foundation. And thus
Saint Austin also in the age succeeding erected an Episcopal See in Fussata, a
City or walled Town in his own Diocese of Hippo, making one Antonius the first
Bishop there, August. Epist. Bellarm. de Ecc. lib. 4. c. 8.
the Primate of Numidia returning with him in the Ordination. Nor did they
this, as fain the Cardinal would have it, a sede Apostolica facultatem
habentes, by force of any faculty procured from Rome; which is gratis dictum:
but by their own proper and innate authority, as they were trusted with the
Government of the Church of Christ.

So then the Bishops only of the Church of Rome had not the sole authority of
instituting Bishops, Pontifician. Authority they had to do it, as had others
also; and hereof does occur a notable and signal evidence in this present Age:
viz. the settling of the Church of Britain, and planting Bishops in the same by
Pope Eleutherius. Damas. in vita Eleuther. apud Bin. in Council. Tom. 1.
Of him it is affirmed in the Pontifical, ascribed to Damasus, (who lived about
the year 370.) accepisse Epistolam a Lucio Britannico Rege, ut Christianus
efficeretur per ejus mandatum; that he received an Epistle from Lucius a
British King, desiring that by his authority he might be made a Christian: Our
venerable Bede, a right ancient Writer, thus reports the story. Anno ab
incarnatione Domini 156; Beda hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 4.
etc. In the 156 year after Christ's Nativity, Marcus Antonius Verus together
with Aurelius Commodus his brother, did in the fourteenth place from Augustus
Caesar, undertake the Government of the Empire. In whose times, when as
Eleutherius a godly man was Bishop of the Church of Rome, Lucius King of the
Britains sent unto him, obsecrans ut per ejus mandatum Christianus efficeretur,
entreating by his means to be made a Christian; whose virtuous desire herein
was granted; and the faith of Christ being thus received by the Britains, was
by them kept inviolate and undefiled until the times of Dioclesian. Wherein as
I submit to Beda, as to the substance of the story, so I crave leave to differ
from him as to the matter of Chronology. For by this reckoning Eleutherius
must attain the Popedom Anno 167. as Beda elsewhere does compute it; Beda in
histor. Epitom.
which is ten years at least before the time assigned him by most other
Writers. And therefore I shall rather choose to follow the commonly received
account, by which the said two Emperors are brought upon the Government of the
Roman Empire, Anno 161. and the attaining of the Popedom by this Eleutherius is
placed in the 17th year of Mareus, Anno 177. Lucius Aurelius Commodus being
dead before. But in this Controversy, as it belongs to Chronology, I shall
not meddle at the present. It is enough, that the planting of the Gospel
amongst the Britains, was, as the greatest, so the first action of this Pope,
done by him, as we read in Platina, Platina in vita Eleutheril.
inito pontificatu, at his first entrance on the place: wherein Philippus
Bergomensis in Supplemento Chronicorum, l. 8. and Cocc. Sabellicus, Ennead. 7.
l. 5. do either follow him, Harpsfield in Ec. hist. Angl. c. 3.
or concur with him. How Lucius came to be inflamed with this holy zeal, is
related diversely. Nicolas Harpsfield does conceive it to be on occasion of the
great Miracle then lately done by the Christian Legion, obtaining rain from
Heaven by their fervent prayers, on the Imperial Army much distressed with
drought; by means whereof the Emperors dealt very favorably with the
Christians, adjecta etiam accusatoribus damnatione, even to the condemnation of
their false Accusers. Tertull. Apol. cap. 5.
Others conceive, that being in himself of a sweet and gracious disposition, he
was much taken with the reports that had come unto him, de miraculis Christi,
Chron. Gisebur. cit. ap. Armacan. de Primordiis.
and praedicatione Apostolorum, touching the miracles of Christ, and the
preaching of his holy Apostles. And possibly it might be both, one adding help
and strength unto the other. But whichsoever it was, it seems he was not very
forward at the first to embrace the Gospel, being retarded from the same by the
obscure and poor condition of the Christians. But when he had been well
informed by Pertinax and Trebellius, Balaeus de scrip. Brit. cent. 1.
Lieutenants in this Island for the Roman Emperors, Romanorum illustres aliquot
illam admifisse, that many men of mark amongst the Romans had received the
faith; he then resolved to go through with his good intentions. And being so
resolved, Lib. de primo statu Landanen. eccl. citat. apud Armacan. c. 4.
he dispatched away Eluanus and Maduinus, Britans both, and both initiated in
the faith, to Pope Eleutherius; who giving thanks to God for so great a
blessing, did first of all Baptize the Legates or Ambassadors; and having
Consecrated Eluanus Bishop, and fitted Meduinus for a Doctor, or an instructor
of the people, or made him Presbyter, as I conceive the meaning of the place to
be, he sent them back again to Lucius. The issue of the business was, eorum
praedicatione Lucius, and totius Britanniae primates baptismum susceperunt,
that by their preaching, both Lucius and all the Noblemen of Britain received
the Sacrament of Baptism; and that according to the order of the said
Eleutherius, the State Ecclesiastical was established, Bishops ordained, and
the rules of godly living showed unto the people. Nor did he trust this work to
those two alone, but he sent with them others also, Faganus, Platina in vita
Eleuther. alii.
and Deruvianus (or Damianus, as some call him) to assist the work, and
contribute their best endeavors to so great a business, as most of our
Historians witness.

This though it were a notable and signal work, Rome it self. Gildas, Gildas de
excidio Brit. initio.
one of the notedst Antiquaries of the British Nation does affirm expressly,
Tempore, ut scimus, summo Tiberii Caesaris, that in the latter days of Tiberius
Caesar, our Savior Christ the Sun of righteousness had with his beams
enlightened this frozen Island, and that his Gospel was here propagated without
let or hinderance. Now Christ our Savior suffered in the 18th. year of this
Tiberius, and he again deceased in the 39th. of our Savior; so that the faith
of Christ was at the furthest preached unto the Britains within five years
after the bitter passion of our Lord Christ Jesus. Whether at Rome so soon, or
not, let them prove that can. That it was here so early, we have showed a proof
above all exception; and yet we have one more to come as little liable to
exception, in the opinion of the Romanists as that before. It is a passage
extant in Baronius, Baron. in Annal. an. 25. n. 5.
and by him borrowed from the Acts or History of Mary Magdalen and her
Associats; which tells us this, that after the dispersion of the Disciples on
the death of Steven, Lazarus, Mary Magdalen, Martha, and Marcella, in quos
Judaei majori odio exardescebant, against whom the Jews were more incensed than
against any of the rest, were not only thrust out of Jerusalem, but together
with one Maximinus, one of the Disciples, put into a Boat without Oars, and so
committed unto the mercy, or the fury rather of the Sea, but were at last by
Gods great providence brought unto Marseilles in safety, together with Joseph
of Arimathea, who made himself a partner in the danger with them, and after
went from Gaul to Britain, illicque post praedicatum Evangelium, diem clausit
extremum, where having Preached the Gospel, he did end his days. With this, as
for the time of Joseph's coming into Britain, agrees the argument made by the
English Ambassadors at the Council of Constance, Citat. ap. Armacan. de
Primordiis Brit. eccles. c. 2.
upon occasion of a controversy therein agitated, touching the dignity and
greatness of the Kingdoms of England and France. In which it was thus pleaded
by the English Advocates, statim post passionem Christi, that presently on the
passion of Christ, Joseph of Arimathea that noble Counselor, who took our
Savior from the Cross, that he might early in the morning apply himself unto
the dressing of the Lords Vineyard, came with his twelve Associates into
England ( i.e. that part of Britain which was then called England) and
converted the People of it to the Faith. And this I take, Malmesbur. in hist.
Monast. Glaston. Joh. Capgrave. alii.
building upon the words of Gildas, to be more consonant to the truth of story,
than to put off his coming hither unto the 63. year after Christ's Nativity, or
the 20. after his Ascension, as some of our Historians do, on far less
Authority. But being come, and having Preached the Gospel here, as it is
generally delivered by our ancient writers, he retired himself unto the Isle of
Avalonia, Polyd. Virg. hist. Ang. l. 2. alii multi. Vide c. 3. and 4.
which we now call Glassenbury, and there applied himself unto his devotions;
leaving the work by him begun, to receive a further measure of perfection both
from S. Peter who was here in person, and from Aristobulus whom Saint Paul sent
hither, as before was said. And though we do not find any evident footstep,
that either Aristobulus being ordained Bishop of the Britains, or that those
Bishops who are said to have been ordained by Saint Peter, left any to succeed
them in that sacred office; or that Religion had gained much upon the People of
this Island, being then hardly civilized, and almost continually in wars and
troubles: Yet did the Sceleton or carcass of it continue still from this time
forwards, even to the days of Dioclesian; Gildas de excidio Brit. in initio.
sure I am Gildas does expressly say it, that howsoever the Gospel was received
here but very coldly at the first, apud quosdam tamen integre, apud alios
minus, usque ad persecutionem Diocletiani tyranni novennem, yet it continued
amongst some in greater, with others in a less perfection, until the nine years
Persecution raised by Dioclesian. Balaeus descriptor. Cent. 1. c. 27.28. Antiq.
P. it. alii.
And questionless from this old brood of Christians Eluanus and Meduinus before
remembered (whereof the one is called Avalonus, the other Belga, this being the
old name of that sept or nation, to which the Isle of Avalonia in those times
belonged) receive their first affections to the Faith of Christ.

But of this little question has been raised amongst our Antiquaries. Lucius,
and the number of Episcopal Sees by him erected, whom the opposers of this
story allow not to be King of Britain, which was reduced at that time to a
Roman Province; and so by consequence of no ability to build so many Christian
Churches, and endow the same, for the advancement of a Religion not publicly
allowed of in the Roman Empire. But this, as I conceive, is no such objection,
but what may easily be answered, considering what was vouched out of Bid,
before, the ancientest writer of the English Nation, and no great friend unto
the British. For they that know the customs of the Roman Empire, Tacit. de vit.
Ag^^c.
know this well enough, that nothing was more usual with them, quam habere
instrumenta servitutis, and Reges, than to permit Kings in the conquered
Countries, making them to be helps and instruments for bringing the People into
bondage. And they that know the passages of the present times cannot choose but
tell that Lucius Verus living in the times whereof we speak, having put an end
unto the War against the Parthians, Capitolinus in Vero.
regna Regibus, provincias vero Comitibus suis regendas dedisse, did give those
Kingdoms which he had subdued to be ruled by Kings; the Provinces to be ruled
by Earls or Counts. So that our Lucius might be very well a King in Britain,
notwithstanding the reduction of it to a Roman Province; especially considering
that besides his birthright, he was confirmed in the same. Balaeus de scrip.
Brit. Cen. 1. c. 29.
M. Antonini Very tum benevolentia, cum authoritate, both by the power and
favor of M. Antoninus Verus, then the Roman Emperor. A King then Lucius was,
and a King in Britain; in Britain as a King of some part thereof, such as
Pratusagus and Cordigunus, Tacit. Annal. l. 14. and l. de Vit. Agric.
of whom Tacitus speaks, had been before; but not a King of Britain, as of
all the Island, it being probable that there were other petty Kings and
Roytelets as well as he. But as it happened after in the Saxon Heptarchie, that
he which was more eminent than the rest for power and puissance, was called
commonly Rex Gentis Anglorum, the King or Monarch of the English Nation: So I
conceive, that of these tributary Kings in Britain, such as were in their
several times of more power than others, assumed unto themselves the style or
title of Reges Britannorum, the Kings of the Britains, by which name of Rex
Britannorum, and not Rex Britanniae, Lucius is called in Beda, as before was
said: And thus then the seeming difficulty may be better solved than by running
out I know not whither, beyond the territories of the Romans, to look for
Lucius in the North parts of the Isle which we now call Scotland; only because
it is affirmed by Tertullian, Tertul. li. adv. Judaeos cap. 7.
Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca, Christo esse subdita, that those remoter
parts of Britain which never had been Conquered by the Romans, were subdued to
Christ; which might well be after the Gospel had been first received in the
Southern Countries. In which, as I can no way blame the Scots for seeking to
appropriate this honor to their own part of the Island; so can I not but
wonder at our Learned Camden, Camden in B^l. deseript.
that without seeing better cards, he should so easily give up such an hopeful
game. As for the name of Lucius, it is merely Latin, and that derived upon him
either from the British Llos (fashioned on the Roman anvil) as in that language
he is called, or taken up from Lucius Verus, one of the partners in the Empire
at that very time, unto which family he stood indebted for his Crown and
dignity, or given him else upon the post-fact, after the glorious light of
truth had shined on him, in which regard the Britans call him Lever Maur, a man
of great splendour and renown, Addit. in Nin. ap. Armacan. de Primordies. c. 3.
propter fidem quae in ejus tempore venit, by reason of the faith which in his
time was brought into this Island.

But to go forwards with our story: Lucius and his Nobles being thus Baptized,
Faganus and Deruvianus return to Rome, giving to Eleutherius an account of
their great success; of whom being joyfully received, and their Acts applauded,
they returned back again to Britain, accompanied with many others, Matthew.
Westminster. hist. in an. 186.
quorum doctrina gens Britonum in fide Christi in brevi fundata refulsit, by
whose assiduous preaching the whole British Nation became in very little time
to be well settled and confirmed in the faith of Christ. Now at this time of
their repair unto the Pope, I conceive it was, that they received instructions
from him, for dealing with that godly King to found Episcopal Sees in the most
convenient places of his Dominions; themselves receiving at that time, in all
probability, the Episcopal Character. For after this I find them honored with
the name of Bishops, being by Rodburn in his Chronicle called Antistites,
Citat. ap. Ar. l. de Primor. c. 6. Id ibid. cap. 5.
and by the Author of the book entitled De Antiquitatibus Ecclesiae
Wintoniensis, in plain terms Episcopi: Faganus being further said by some to
have been made the first Archbishop of the Sea of York. Being returned into
Britain, and the King thoroughly established in the faith of Christ, it was no
difficult matter to persuade him to turn the Temples of the Idols into
Christian Churches, and to appropriate the revenues of them to more pious uses.
And this he did, as Matthew of Westminster observes, Matthew. westmor. hist. in
An. 187.
although he differ from us in his calculation, the very next year after their
return from Rome. Gloriosus Rex Britonum Lucius, etc. Lucius the glorious King
of the Britains, when he had seen the faith of Christ dispersed and propagated
over his dominions, possessiones and territoria Ecclesiis and viris
Ecclesiasticis abundanter conferens, bestowing with a liberal hand possessions
and revenues both on Church and Churchmen, did ratify the said donations by
his public Charters. And this he says on the Authority of Gildas, who in a
book of his, entitled De victoria Aurelii Ambrosii, not now extant, had
affirmed the same. Radulphus de Diceto speaks more fully to the point in hand:
Eleutherus, says he, Citat. ap. Armachan. lib. de Primord. c. 4.
sent into Britain Faganus and Diwanus (for so he calls him) who having
Baptized Lucius the King, templa etiam quae in honorem plurimorum deorum
fundata erant, did dedicate unto the one and only God those Temples which had
been built in former times to the honor of Idols. More fully, yet in fewer
words, Gervase of Tilbury does relate it thus: Hic Lucius omnia territoria,
templis pridem collata, contulit Ecclesiis, and ampliavit: Ap. eund. c. 6.
This Lucius, says he, bestowed upon the Churches those Lands and Territories
which had been formerly conferred on the Pagan Temples, and enlarged them also.
So that we find the Church endowed, and Bishops instituted in the time of
Lucius; and that I hold to be above all exception, as will appear more
evidently by the Episcopal succession, reckoned from this time; but whether in
so large a number, and upon that occasion, as it is laid before us in our
common Chroniclers, that is the point to be considered. Now our Historians, old
and new, very few excepted, report that in those times in Britain there were no
less than 28 Cities of name and eminency, whereof 25 had anciently been the
seats of the Heathen Flamines, the three remaining, viz. York, London, and
Caer-Leon upon Vske, of the Archiflamines; and that upon the introduction of
the Gospel hither, the Temples of the Idols being turned into Christian
Churches, instead of Flamines they placed Bishops, Archbishops in the place of
the Archi-Flamines. All our own Writers which speak of the foundation of these
Bishoprics, from Geofry of Monmouth down to Polydore Virgil, do report it
thus, And so do many foreign also, beginning with Martinus Polonus, who first
took it up, and so descending down to Platina, and since to other later
Authors, both ours and theirs. Erant tunc in Britannia vig inti octo Pontifices
Idolorum, quos Flamines vocabant; inter quos tres Archiflamines erant. Martin.
Polonus in Chron.
Sed praedicti Sancti (that is, Faganus and Deruvianus) de mandato Apostolici,
ubi erant Flamines, instituerunt Episcopos; ubi Archiflamines, Archiepiscopos.
We had the same before in England, save that the Popes appointment (mandatum
Apostolici) does here occur, which there we had not. And how far this may stand
with probability, or with truth of story, is in the next place to be looked on.

And for the number of them first, Britain which we now call England. Beda
Hist. Ecc. Angl. l. 1. cap. 1.
Beda affirms it so expressly, Erat and viginti octo Civitatibus quondam
nobilissimis insignita, that Britain anciently was ennobled with 28 signal and
noted Cities, besides Towns and Castles. Henry of Huntingdon does not only
declare as much, Huntingdonen. hist. l. 1. in init.
but lets us know the several names whereby they had been called in the
Britains time; and by the which the most of them were known in the later Ages,
when he lived. And possibly there might be Bishops in them all, according as
the Gospel did enlarge its borders, and Provinces were gained to the Faith of
Christ; though neither all so early as the days of Lucius, nor all of his
foundation and endowment, as it is supposed. It was a work too mighty for a
petty Prince to spread his arms at once over all the Island, especially so many
Provinces thereof being none of his. What might be done in times succeeding,
and by his example, is not now the question; nor whether that which was done
after, might in some sort be ascribed to him, as being the first that gave the
onset, and showed the way to others, how to do the like; as Rome is said to
have been built by Romulus, because he began it, the greatest part thereof
being built a long time after. And this seems probable to me, Ap. Bedam. hist.
Eccl. l. 1. c. 29.
as to the number of the Sees Episcopal, that there were so many, because that
Gregory the great by his constitution, appointed twelve Bishops for the
Province of Canterbury, and twelve also unto that of York, which with the four
in Wales, which are still remaining, will make up eight and twenty in the
total. But for the Flamines and Arch-flamines, I must confess I am not so well
satisfied in the probability and truth of that. That by the name of Flamines
the Gentiles used to call the Priests of their several Gods, Isidor. Origin. l.
7. c. 12.
I know well enough. Socerdotes Gentilium Flamines dicebantur, as it is in
Isidore. But being that one and the same City had not only many Flamines, but
also many Colleges of Flamines, according to the number of the Gods they
worshipped, some for Mars, others for Jupiter, and some for Romulus; and that
there is no ancient Writer of the Roman stories which mentions either
Archiflamines or Protoflamines, Godwin. Landavens. tract. de convers. Brit.
as is objected very well by B. Godwin: I must confess I am not so well
satisfied in this point, as to deliver it for a certain and undoubted truth. He
that desires to see what may be answered unto those objections, let him consult
the learned and laborious work of Francis Mason, Mason de Minist. Ang. l. 2. c.
3.
late Archdeacon of Norfolk, De Ministerio Anglicano, the sum whereof in brief
is this, Licet in una urbe multi Flamines, that though there were many Flamines
in one City, yet was there only one which was called Pontifex, or Primus
Flaminum, the Pope or principal of the Flamines; of which kind one for every
City were those whom our Historians speak of: And for the Archiflamines, or
Proto-Flamines, Beda hist. eccl. Angl. l. 2. c. 13.
though the name occur not, yet were there some in power and authority above
the rest, who were entitled primi Pontificum, (as indeed Coifi, by that name
is called in Beda) which is the same in sense with Archiflamines, although not
in sound. This if it satisfy the Reader, shall not thwart with me, who am no
enemy unto the story, or any part thereof, which may well be justified. If not,
but that it rather be accounted a device of Monkish ignorance, I shall desire
them who are so opinionated to consider this, that few of the records of those
elder days have come entire unto our hands; and that it is no marvel it such an
ancient story as this is (considering through whose hands it passed) has in so
long a tract of time contracted somewhat of that rust and rubbish wherewith the
middle ages of the Church did so much abound.

Yet if mine own opinion were demanded in it, Flamines and Archiflamines, which
is there pretended: And that this was not done at once, but in a longer tract
of time than the Reign of Lucius, as was in part affirmed before. That Lucius
did convert the Temples of the Idols into Christian Churches, settled the
revenues of the same upon the Churches by him founded, I shall easily grant, so
far forth as the bounds of his dominions will give way unto it; but being there
were but 28 Cities in all that part of Britain which we now call England, as
both from Huntingdon and Beda was before delivered; and that King Lucius was
but a Tributary Prince of those Regions only, which were inhabited by the
Trinobantes and Cattieuchlani, as I do verily conceive he was: I believe rather
that the number of the Bishops and Archbishops which our stories speak of,
related to the form of government, as it was afterward established in the
Roman Empire, Notitia Provinc. in div. cap.
and not to any other cause whatever. Now they which have delivered to us the
state of the Roman Empire, inform us this: That for the easier government and
administration of the same, it was divided into fourteen Diocesses (for so they
called those greater portions into the which it was divided:) every Diocese
being subdivided into several Provinces, and every Province in the same
containing many several Cities. And they which have delivered to us the estate
of the Christian Church, Notitia Prove. and dignitat. c.
have informed us this, that in each City of the Empire, wherein the Romans had
a Defensor Civitatis (as they called that Magistrate) the Christians when they
gained that City to the holy faith, did ordain a Bishop, that over every
Province in which the Romans had their Presidents, they did place an
Archbishop, whose seat being commonly in the Metropolis of the Province, gave
him the name of Metropolitan: and finally that in every Diocese in which the
Romans had their Vicarius, or Lieutenant General, the Christians also had their
Primate, and seated him in the same City also where the other was. This ground
thus laid, it will appear upon examination, that Britain in the time of the
Roman Empire was a full Diocese of it self, no way depending upon any other
portion of that mighty State, Ib. in Provinc. Occident. sup. c. 3.
as any way subordinate thereunto. And being a Diocese in it self, it was
divided in those times into these three Provinces, viz. Britannia prima, Cambd.
de divisione Britan.
containing all the Countries on the South of the River Thames, and those
inhabited by the Trinobantes, Cattieuchlani, and Iceni: 2. Britannia secunda,
comprising all the Nations within the Severn: and 3. Maxima Caesariensis, which
comprehended all the residue to the Northern border. In the which Provinces
there were no less than 28 Cities, as before is said; of which York was the
chief in Maxima Caesariensis; London the principal in Britannia prima;
Caer-Leon upon Vsk, being the Metropolis in Britannia secunda. And so we have a
plain and apparent reason, not only of the 28 Episcopal Sees, erected anciently
in the British Church; but why three of them, and three only, should be
Metropolitans. For howsoever after this there were two other Provinces taken
out of the former three, viz. Valentia and Flavia Caesariensis, which added to
the former, Id. ibid.
made up five in all: yet this being after the conclusion of the Nicene
Council, the Metropolitan dignity in the Church remained as before it did,
without division or abatement, according to the Canon of that famous Synod.
Council. Nicen. Can. 6.
And herewithal we have a pregnant and infallible Argument, that Britain being
in it self a whole and complete Diocese of the Roman Empire, no way subordinate
unto the Prefect of the City of Rome, but under the command of its own
Vicarius or Lieutenant General; the British Church was also absolute and
independent, owing nor suit nor service, as we use to say, unto the Patriarch
or Primate of the Church of Rome, but only to its own peculiar and immediate
Primate, as it was elsewhere in the Churches of the other Dioceses of the Roman
Empire. This I conceive to be the true condition of the British Church, and the
most likely reason for the number of Bishops and Archbishops here established,
according to the truth of Story, abstracted from those errors and mistakes,
which in the middle Ages of the Church, have by the Monkish Writers of those
times been made up with them.

But for the substance of the story, as by them delivered, Arles in France,
Anno 314. Tom. 1. Concilior. Gall. a Sirmundo edit.
we find three British Bishops at once subscribing, viz. Eborius Bish. of York,
Restitutus B. of London, and Adelfus B. of Colchester, there called Colonia
Londinensium. Gennadius also, in his Tract, de viris illustribus, mentions
one Fastidius, by the name of Fastidius Britanniarum Episcopus, Gennad. in
Catal.
amongst the famous Writers of old time, placing him Anno 420, or thereabouts;
whom B. God. win I cannot tell upon what reasons, Godwin in Catal. Episc.
Londinens. Cit. ap. Armachan. de Primor. c. 5. Cambden in Brigant.
reckons amongst the Bishops of the Sea of London. Particularly for the
Bishops or Archbishops of the British Church, we have a Catalogue of the
Metropolitans of London collected or made up by Joceline, a Monk of Fournest,
an ancient Monastery in the North, being 14 in all: which, howsoever the
validity thereof may perhaps be questioned by more curious Wits, yet I shall
lay down as I find it: taking their names from him; that little story which
concerns them, out of other Writers. First then we have Theon or Theonus: 2
Eluanus, one of the two Ambassadors sent by King Lucius to the Pope. 3 Cadar
or Cadoeus: 4 Obinus or Owinus: 5 Conanus: 6 Palladius: 7 Stephanus: 8 Iltutus:
9 Theodwinus: 10 Theodredus: 11 Hilarious: Geosr. Monmouth, hist. Brit. Speed in
descr. Britan.
12 Guitelinus sent as Ambassador to Aldrocnus King of Armorica or
Little-Britain, to crave his aid against the Scots and Picts, who then plagued
the Britains: 13 Vodius or Vodinus, slain by Hengist (but some say by Vortiger)
at the first entrance of the Sateons into this Isle: 14 And last of all,
Theonus who had been sometimes Bishop of Gloncester, but was after translated
hither, and was the last Bishop of London, of this line or Series. Of some of
these, viz. the second, and the three last, there is good constat in Antiquity:
whether there be the like of all the residue, I am not able to determine. So
for the Bishops or Archbishops of York, of the British line, besides Faganus
the first Archbishop of this See, as before was said and besides Eborius
formerly remembered amongst the Subscribers to the Council of Arles: Godw. in
Archiep. Ehoracen.
our Stories tell us of one Sampson said to be made the Bishop of the place in
the time of Lucius; Galfrid. Monumet. hist. l. 9. c. 8.
of one Pyramus preferred unto this honor by King Arthur, whose domestic
Chaplain he then was: and finally of Tadiacus, who together with Theonus the
last Bishop of London of this line or Race, fled into Wales, the better to
avoid the tyranny of the Saxons, Math. westmon. Matthew. Florilegus in An. 586.
Liber Eccles. Landavens.
who then made havoc of the Church. And for the Bishops or Archbishops of
Caerleon upon Vsk, which was the third Metropolitical City in the account and
estimate of those times, we have assurance of Dubritius a right godly man,
ordained Bishop of the same by Germanus and Lupus, two French Prelates, at such
time as they came to Britain for the suppressing of the Pelagian Heresy; whose
Successors we have upon Record, under the Title of Llandaffe to this very day.
That Gloucester also in those times was a Bishops See, besides what did appear
before, is affirmed by Cambden, Cambden in dedescript. Brit. in Dobunis.
who tells us that the Bishops of the same occur in the subscriptions to some
ancient Councils, under the name of Cluvienses; for by the name of Clevum or
Caer-Glowy was it called of old. But not to wander into more particulars,
either Sees or Bishops: Athanas. Apo. 2. in initio.
we find in Athanasius, that in the Council of Sardica holden in Anno 358. some
of the British Bishops were assembled amongst the rest, concurring with them in
the condemnation of the Arian Heresies. As also, that in the Council of
Ariminum, Sulpit. Severus in hist sacr. l. 2.
held the next year after, the British Bishops were there present: three of the
which were so necessitous and poor, that they were fain to be maintained at the
public charge, Sanctius putantes fiscum gravare quam singulos, thinking it far
more commendably honest to be defraied out of the Exchequer, than to be
burdensome unto their Friends. And when Pope Gregory sent Austin hither for the
conversion of the Saxons, Beda Ecc. hist. l. 2. cap. 2.
he found no fewer than seven Bishops in the British Churches, viz.
Herefordensis, Tavensis, Paternensis, Banchorensis, Elwiensis, Wiccensis, and
Morganensis (or rather Menevensis) as Balaeus counts them. Balaeus Cent. 1. c.
70.
All of which, that of Paternensis excepted only, do still remain amongst us
under other names.

Now if I should be asked, British Church during the time it flourished, and
stood upright, neither oppressed by the tyranny of Dioclesian, nor in a sort
exterminated by the Saxons fury; I answer, that it is most likely to be the
Metropolitan or Archbishop of York: And this I do upon these reasons. Tacit.
Annal. lib. 14.
For first, however it appears by Tacitus, that London was a Town of the
greatest Trade, copia negotiorum and commeatuum maxim celebris, as that Author
has it: Id. ibid.
yet neither was it ever made a Roman Colony, nor made the seat at any time of
the Roman Emperors. But on the other side, York was a Colony of the Romans,
even of long continuance, as appears not only by the testimony of Ptolomy and
Antoninus; Cambden in Brit. descript.
but by this ancient inscription vouched by Mr. Cambden, and by an old Coin of
Severus the Roman Emperor, bearing this inscription, COL. EBORACUM LEG. VI.
VICTRIX. And as it was a Colony of the Roman people, so was it also for a time
the seat of the Roman Emperors: For here the Emperor Severus before
remembered, yielded up his Soul: and here Constantius Chlorus deceased also, Id.
ibid.
having both kept their seat there a good time before: here Constantine the
great advancer of the Faith and Gospel, Id. ibid.
was first brought forth into the World; and here did he first take upon him,
together with the name of Caesar, the Government of that part of the Roman
Empire, which had belonged unto his Father. So that Eboracum or York, being the
ancient seat of the Roman Emperors, what time they pleased to be resident in
the Isle of Britain, was questionless the seat of their Vicarii or Lieutenants
General, when they were absent from the same: and so by consequence, the seat
of the British Primate, according to the Rules and Platform before laid down.
Add here that for the time the Romans held this Island in their possession,
they settled their Praetorium for the administration of Justice, in the City of
York, drawing thither the resort of all the subjects which had any business of
that kind, for dispatch thereof: in which regard it is called by Spartianus
(...), Spartian. in vita Severi.
the City, as by way of excellence. Veniens in Civitatem, primum in templum
Bellonae ductus est, speaking of the entrance which Severus made into the City
of York. But that which most of all confirms me, is the subscription of the
British Bishops to the Council of Arles, as it is published amongst the Gallick
Councils by Sirmundus, thus: Eborius, Episcopus de Civitate Eboracensi,
Provincia Britannia. Restitutus Episcopus de civitate Londinensi, Provincia
supradicta. Adelphius Episcopus de civitate Colonia Londinensium; exinde
Sacerdos Presbyter, Arminius Diaconus. By which subscription it is plain, that
the Bishop or Archbishop of York, having place of London, was Primate of the
British Church: there being otherwise no reason why he should have precedence
in the Subscription. And so much for the settling of Episcopacy in the Church of
Britain, at this reception of the Gospel from the Sea of Rome: being the first
time that the Faith of Christ was publicly received and countenanced; not in
this Island only, but any other part of the World whatever. All which I have
laid down together, that I might keep my self the closer to my other
businesses, to which now I hasten.

CHAP. III. The Testimony given unto Episcopal Authority, in the last part of
this second Century.
1. The difference betwixt Pope, Victor and the Asian Bishops, about the feast
of Easter. 2. The interpleading of Polycrates and Irenaeus, two renowned
Prelates, in the aforesaid cause. 3. Several Councils called about it, by the
Bishops of the Church then being; with observations on the same. 4. Of the
Episcopal succession in the four prime Sees, for this second Century. 5. An
Answer to some Objections made against the same. 6. The great authority and
esteem of the said four Sees, in those early days. 7. The use made of this
Episcopal succession by Saint Irenaeus. 8. As also by Tertullian and some other
Ancients. 9. Of the Authority enjoyed by Bishops in Tertullians time, in the
administration of the Sacraments. 10. As also in enjoining Fasts, and the
disposing of the Churches Treasury. 11. And in the dispensation of the Keys.
12. Tertullian misalledged in maintenance of the Lay-Presbytery. 13. The great
extent of Christianity and Episcopacy, in Tertullians time, concludes this
Century.


HAVING thus settled the affairs of the Church of Britain, Rome, where we find
Victor sitting as successor unto Eleutherius; and the whole Church though free
from persecutions, yet terribly embroyled with Schisms and Heresies. For in the
later end of Eleutherius, Blastus and Florinus two notorious Heretics had
broached this doctrine, (...), Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 19.
that God was the author of sin: and possibly might have spread the venom of
their Heresy exceeding far, if Irenaeus that great and learned Bishop of
Lions, being then at Rome, had not prescribed a speedy and a sovereign
Antidote, in several Tractates and Discourses against the same. But Eleutherius
being dead, and Victor in his place, there happened such a Schism in the Church
of Christ, by his precipitance and perverseness, that all the water, which
Irenaeus and many other godly men could pour into it, Id. l. 5. c. 23. and 24.
was hardly sufficient to quench the flame. The business which occasioned it,
was the feast of Easter: or indeed not the Feast it self, upon the keeping of
the which all Christians had agreed from the first beginnings: but for the day
in which it was to be observed, wherein the Churches of Asia had an old
Tradition, differing from the rest of Christendom. For whereas generally that
festival had been solemnized in the Church of Christ, on the Lords Day next
after the Jewish Passover, as being the day which our Redeemer honored with
his Resurrection: the Christians of the Asian Churches kept it, upon the 14th
day of the month precisely, being the very day prescribed for the Jewish
Passover. A business of no great importance, more than for a general
conformity in the Church of Christ; yet such as long had exercised the patience
of it, even from the time of Pius Pope of Rome, who first decreed it to be kept
on the Lords Day, Die Dominico Pascha celebrari, as it is in Platina; Platina
in vita Pii Pont. Euscb. Ecc. hist. l. 5. c. 24.
but followed with most heat and violence by this Victor, perhaps upon the Omen
of his name. Of whom Eusebius thus reports, (...), etc. that he attempted to
cut off the whole Church of Asia, together with the Churches adjacent, from the
Communion of the Catholic, (...), as if they had maintained some heterodox or
dangerous Doctrine contrary to the Faith of Christ. A matter taken very
tenderly not only by the Asian Bishops whom it most concerned, but also by some
other of the Western parts, who more endeavored the preservation of the
Churches peace, than the advancement and authority of the Sea of Rome: those of
chief note which interessed themselves therein, being Irenaeus, Polycrates: the
one Bishop of the Metropolitan Church of Lions in France; the other of the
Church of Ephesus, the Queen of Asia; both honorable in their times and places.

And first Polycrates begins deriving the occasion and descent of their
observation, Philip (...), Id. ibid.
one of the twelve Apostles (not of the seven Deacons, as our Christopherson
most ridiculously and falsely does translate it) who died at Hierapolis a City
of Phrygia; and from Saint John (...), who rested on the bosom of our Lord and
Savior; as also from Polycarpus, and Thracias, Bishops of Smyrna, and both
Martyrs; Sagaris B. of Laodicea, Papyrus and Melito and many others, who kept
the feast of Easter as the Asians did. As for himself, he certifieth, that
following the Traditions of his Elders he had done the like; that seven of his
kindred had been Bishops, (...), himself being the eighth, and all which did so
observe the feast of Easter, when the Jews did prepare the Passover; that
having served God 65 years, diligently canvassed over the holy Scriptures, and
held both intercourse and correspondence with many of the brethren over all the
World, (...), he was the least disturbed at those Bruta fulmina. Adding withal,
that he might here commemorate those several Bishops that were assembled at his
call to debate the point; (...), but that this bare retital of their names was
too great a trouble: who though they could not but be sensible of his
imperfections, yet thinking that he bare not those gray hairs for naught, did
willingly subscribe unto his Epistle. So far, Id. ibid. c. 24. (...).
and to this purpose he. And on the other side, Irenaeus writing unto Victor
utterly dislikes that his severe and rigid manner of proceeding, in cutting off
so many Churches from the Communion of our Lord, (...), only because they did
adhere to the Tradition of their Ancestors in a point of Ceremony: showing how
much he differed in this business from the temper and moderation of his
Predecessors, Soter, Anicetus, Pius, Higinus, Sixtus and Telesphorus, who
though they held the same opinions that he did, did notwithstanding entertain
the Asian Bishops, when they came unto them, with great affection and humanity;
sending to those who lived far distant, the most blessed Eucharist, in
testimony of their fellowship and Communion with them. Nor did he write thus
unto Victor only, (...), but to the Governors or Bishops of many other
Churches also. And certainly it was but need that such a Moderator should be
raised to atone the difference: the billows beating very highly, and Victor
being beset on every side for his stiff perverseness, by the Prelates of the
adverse party, (...), sharply assaulting him both with words and Writings.

For the composing of this business, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 22. (...).
(...), and many Synods and assemblies of the Bishops, were held about it: viz.
one in Caesarea of Palestine, wherein Theophilus B. of the place, and Narcissus
B. of Jerusalem did sit as Presidents: another at Rome: a third of all the
Bishops of Pontus, in the which Palmas, (...), as the chief amongst them of
that Order, did then preside: A fourth there was of the French or Gallick
Churches, in the which Irenaeus sat as chief: a fifth of all the Churches about
Osroena and the parts adjoining. Bachyllus Bishop of Corinth, (...), and many
other Bishops of particular Churches, held their Synod also apart and separate;
which all with one consent determined, that the feast of Easter was to be
observed on no other day than that upon the which our Savior rose: contrary to
the usage of the Asian Churches. In agitation of which business, I observe
these things. First, that Episcopacy in so short a time was settled and
confirmed over all the World, or so much of it at the least, as had received
the Faith and Gospel. Secondly, that on all emergent Controversies, that did
engage the Church of Christ, the Bishops, as men most concerned in the Churches
Peace, were still most forward also to compose the same. Thirdly, that on the
practices of the Popes of Rome to enlarge their border, the Bishops of the
Church of what part soever, have always been most ready to oppose the same; and
keep that proud and swelling See within the compass of its proper and peculiar
bounds. So far were those most godly and Religious men, S^ectymn. p. 30.
from making a stirrup for Antichrist to get into his Saddle, though some have
so given out in these later days to the dishonor of those glorious lights in
the House of Christ, and the profane reproach not only of the wisdom of that
Church, but also of the Holy Spirit of Almighty God. Fourthly, That on the
rising of such differences, as did disturb the Churches Peace, the Bishops of
the Church have an innate and proper power, Bellarm. de Con. l. 1.12.
of convocating and assembling Councils both National and Provincial for the
appeasing of the same; wherein the greatest Champions of the Popedom, do
consent also: Which Power as they made use of, as their own peculiar, when as
there were no Christian Princes to have a care unto the main: so since there
have been Christian Princes, that Power is not extinguished but directed only.
Fifthly, that in those Councils or Synodical meetings, the Bishops and their
Clergy had authority both to debate and to determine of all such matters, as
did concern the Church of Christ, either in point of Faith or Ceremony; not
seeking any confirmation of their Acts and Ordinances, from that Christian
People, who were to yield obedience to them. And last of all, that such things
as by them were then determined, did presently oblige all people under the
governance and direction of the said Prelates and Clergy, so met together and
assembled, as before is said; as appears partly by that calm which followed
over all the Church, upon the holding of these Synods; but principally by that
end, which afterward was put unto this Controversy, by the Council of Nice.

But to proceed with Irenaeus that Religious Prelate, Victor sat in the Chair
of Rome: which being in the close of the present Century, gives us opportunity,
to look as well upon his Predecessors, as his and their Cotemporaries in the
same. And first for Rome, from Clemens where we first began, Eusebius. in Chr^.
to Victor which is now the subject of our History, we find the names and
actions of nine intermediate Bishops: Clemens being the fourth, and Victor the
14th, in that Catalogue; most of the which had suffered death for the sake of
Christ, whose honor they preferred before worldly glories. For Antioch next, I
find that from Ignatius who began this Century, unto Serapion who sat Bishop
there in the conclusion of the same, were five Bishops only: and that in
Alexandria, from Cerdo to Demetrius inclusively, were no more than seven. By
which it is most clear and evident that the Bishops in neither of these
Churches, held the Chair by turns from week to week, or from month to month as
some men suppose, Beza de diversgrad.
but were invested with a constant and fixed pre-eminence, such as the Bishops
now enjoy in the Church of Christ: some of them, in the two last specially,
holding out ten years, some twenty, others more than that; as by the Tables of
Succession published by Eusebius, does at full appear. As for Jerusalem, the
Bishops thereof indeed held not out so long, there being no fewer than thirteen
from Simeon unto Marcus the first Bishop of that Church, which was not of the
Circumcision; and thirteen more betwixt this Marcus and Narcissus, who closed
this Century. So that within one hundred years there sat nine and twenty
Bishops in this Church: which shows, as Baronius well observes, Bar. in
Annal. An. 113.
Ecclesiam Hyerosolymitanam dira fuisse persecutione vexatam, that this poor
Church was terribly afflicted with persecutions. And so it is most like to be:
For standing as it did betwixt Jew and Gentile, and equally hated of them both;
how could it choose but suffer under a double tyranny; each of the adversaries
striving who should most afflict her? Nor has Eusebius only given a bare and
naked list of names, but calculated punctually and precisely, the time and
years, in which all the Bishops of the three first Sees did possess the
Government of those Churches, which he professes that he could not find in the
last exactly, by reason of the shortness of their lives, (...), Eusebius. Eccl.
hist. lib. 4. cap. 5. Niceph. Chron.
as his words there are. But what we fail of there, we find performed after by
Nicephorus; who has assigned to every one of them his own term and time: in
the which whether he be rather censured than rectified by Petavius, Animadvers.
in Epiph. hares. 66.
I mean not to examine in this place and time. For howsoever at the first
Jerusalem was not reckoned for a Patriarchal Church, as the others were: yet
in regard of the opinion which was held of the place it self, as being honored
with the Passion of our Lord and Savior, and with the Preaching of the Holy
Hpostles, and consequently reckoned for the Mother-City of the Christian
Church; the Bishops of that Church were in great esteem, and the Episcopal
succession there preserved on exact record, as in the three great Patriarchal
Sees before remembered.

But here I meet with an Objection that must first be answered, Anicetus, Pius,
Higinus, Smectym. p. 23.
Telesphorus, and Sextus, whom the Papists call Bishops, and the Popes
Predecessors, are by Eusebius termed Presbyters; and therefore (for what else
must be the inference?) that Bishops and Presbyters are the same. A passage in
the which there are almost as many fallacies and mistakes, as words; which I
shall briefly represent, and so pass them by. For first, Eusebius, whom they
cite, does not call them Presbyters, but Irenaeus in Eusebius, Eusebius. eccl.
hist. l. 1. c. 24. (...).
which so great Critics should have seen. The difference of the Age or time
when these Authors lived, makes a great difference in the use and acceptance
of the word: And I believe it cannot easily be found, whatever may be said of
Irenaeus, that Bishops are called Presbyters by Eusebius, or any Writer of his
time. 2. It is not evident by the Authors words, that (...) is there used to
denote the Office, but the Age or rather Seniority of those holy men which
preceded Victor in the Church of Rome. Or if it were, yet 3ly. it is past all
question, that simply Presbyters they were not, though by him so called, but
(...), such as had had the government of that famous Church, and so were
Bishops at the least both in name and office. 4. The calling of them by the
name of Presbyters does no more conclude that Presbyters and Bishops were the
same, than if a man discoursing of the state of London, should say that my Lord
Mayor was a wealthy Citizen; and thereupon a stander by should make this
conclusion, that every Citizen is Lord Mayor of London, and has as much to do
in the Government thereof, as he. 5. The Papists do not call Higinus, Pius,
Sixtus, and the rest there mentioned by the name of Bishops; or if they do,
they do not call them so qua Papists; or if so too, and that none call them so
but Papists, there is almost no Father in the Church of Christ who may not
presently be endited and condemned of Popery, because there is almost no
Father, nor any other ancient Writer who does not call them by that name. 6.
And lastly, it is no Popery, nor the language of a Papist neither, to say that
Pius, Sixtus, and the rest there named, were the Popes Predecessors; for
Predecessors of the Popes they were in their See and Government, though neither
in their Tyranny nor Superstition. Nor does this Argument strike only at the
Popes of Rome, though they only named, but at all the Bishops of the Primitive
Church, whether of the greater Patriarchal Sees, or of any other; who, if the
observation of these men be good and valid, were no more but Presbyters. The
best way to refel which fancy, is to behold the latitude and extent of that
jurisdiction which the Bishops of these Churches did enjoy at this present
time; which when we have laid down sincerely, according as it stood in the
times we speak of, it shall be left to be considered of by any sober-minded
man, whosoever he be, whether the men that held such ample jurisdiction were no
more than Presbyters, or whether such Bishops were the same with Presbyters,
which comes both to one.

Now that the latitude of jurisdiction belonging to these four prime Sees,
Antioch, Rome, and Alexandria, was as ancient as the times whereof we speak,
appears plainly by the Canon of the Nicene Council. For whereas it was
ordered by the aforesaid Council, Council. Nicen. Can. 6.
(...), that ancient customs should prevail, viz. the Churches of Alexandria,
Rome, and Antioch should enjoy those privileges which before they had; those
privileges or customs, call them which you will; could not of right be counted
ancient, unless we place them at the latest in this second Century, the close
thereof being not much above an hundred years before that Synod. Now for those
privileges what they were, we are in part informed by the self same Cannon;
Id. ibid.
where it is said, that the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Alexandria did extend
over all Egypt, Epiphan. adv. haer. 68.
Libya, and Pentapolis: To which though Epiphanius adds Thebais Maraeotica,
and Ammoniaca, yet he adds nothing in effect; the two first being Provinces of
Egypt, and the last of Libya: So that his jurisdiction reached from Gaza in the
parts of Syria, unto the Western border of Cyrenaica, (for that was the
Pentapolis mentioned in the Canon) where it conterminated on that of Africa.
The Canon having thus laid out the bounds of the command and jurisdiction
belonging unto him of Alexandria, proceeds unto that of Rome, who had his mos
parilis, or (...), an answerable latitude and extent of power. But for the
certainty of this extent we must refer our selves unto Ignatius, directing his
Epistle to the Romans, Ignat. in epist. ad Romanos.
with this superscription, (...), to the sanctified and illuminated Church of
God, presiding in the place of the Religion of the Romans. If Bellarmine can
out of this extract an Argument for the Popes supremacy, Bellar. de Romans Pont.
l. 2. c. 15.
as he pretends to have done, he is a better Chemist than I took him for. And
therefore I must turn him over to be better tutored by Vedelius, who howsoever
in his notes upon that Father, he lean too much on his own affections and
opinions, does in this very well declare the good Fathers meaning, agreeably
unto the tendries of antiquity. And by him we are told, Vedel. exercit. in epi.
ad To. c. 2.
that nothing here is meant by the place or Religion of the Romans, nisi
quicquid in Italia terrarum Praefecti urbis administrationi suberat; but only
those parts of Italy which were directly under the civil government of the
Provost of Rome; that is to say, Latium, Tuscia, and Picenum: To which perhaps
were added in the following Ages the whole East part of Italy, which we now
call Naple^ together with the Isles of Corsica, Sardinia, and Sicilia, all
which made up the proper Patriarchate of the Bishop of Rome. In which regard,
as anciently the Bishop of Rome was called Vrbicus, as does appear plainly by
Optatus, Optat. de. schis-Donatist. l. 1. Ruffin. hist. eccl. lib. 1. cap. 6.
calling Pope Zephyrinus by the name of Zephyrinus Vrbicus, the City-Bishop: So
the said Provinces or Regions unto him belonging, were called by Ruffinus, an
Italian writer, Suburbicariae Regiones, or the City Provinces. As for the
Church of Antiochia, it spread its bounds and jurisdiction over those goodly
Countries of the Roman Empire, from the Mediterranean on the West, unto the
furthest border of that large dominion, where it confined upon the Persian, or
the Parthian Kingdom, together with Cilicia and Isauria in the lesser Asia: But
whether at this time it was so extended, I am not able to determine. Certain I
am, that in the very first beginning of this Age, all Syria at the least was
under the jurisdiction of this Bishop: Ignatius, in his said Epistle to those
of Rome, Ignat. ad Romans
stiling himself (...), (not a Bishop in Syria, but) the Bishop of Syria; which
shows, that there being many Bishops in that large Province, he had a power
and superiority over all the rest. Indeed the Bishops of Jerusalem were hedged
within a narrower compass being both now and long time after subject unto the
Metropolitan of Caesarea, as appears plainly by the Nicene Canon; though after
they enlarged their border, and gained the title of a Patriarch, as we may see
hereafter in convenient time. Only I add, that howsoever other of the greater
Metropolitan Churches, such as were absolute and independent, as Carthage,
Cyprus, Millain, the Church of Britain, Council. Ni. c. 7^
and the rest, had and enjoyed all manner of Patriarchal rights which these
three enjoyed; yet only the three Bishops of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, had
in the Primitive times the names of Patriarchs, by reason of the greatness of
the Cities themselves, being the principal both for power and riches in the
Roman Empire, the one for Europe, the other for Asia, and the third for Africa.

This ground thus laid, Irenaeus, a Bishop and a Martyr both, derives an
argument from hence to convince those Heretics, which broached strange
Doctrines in the Church. Iren. contr. haer. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Habemus annumerari eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis,
etc. we are able to produce those men which were ordained Bishops by the
Apostles in their several Churches, and their successors till our times; qui
nihil tale docuerunt neque cognoverunt, quale ab hiis deliratur, who neither
knew nor taught any such absurdities as these men dream of. Which said in
general, he instanceth in the particular Churches of Rome, Ephesus and Smyrna,
being all founded by the Apostles; and all of them, hac ordinatione and
successione, by this Episcopal ordination and succession, deriving from the
Apostles the Preaching and tradition of Gods holy truth till those very times.
The like we find also in another place, where speaking of those Presbyteri, (so
he calls the Bishops) which claimed a succession from the Apostles: He tells
us this, quod cum Episcopatus successione charisma veritatis certum, secundum
placitum Patris acceperunt; that together with the Episcopal succession, Ir.
adv. haeres. l. 4. cap. 43.
they had received a certain pledge of truth, according to the good pleasure of
the Father. See to this purpose also cap. 63. where the same point is pressed
most fully, and indeed much unto the honor of this Episcopal succession. Where
because Irenaeus called Bishops in the former place by the name of Presbyters,
I would have no man gather, Smectym. p. 23.
as some men have done, that he does use the name of Bishops and Presbyters,
(...) in a promiscuous sense; much less conclude, that therefore Presbyters and
Bishops were then the same. For although Irenaeus does here call the Bishops,
either by reason of their age, or of that common Ordination which they once
received by the name of Presbyters, yet he does no where call the Presbyters by
the name of Bishops; as he must needs have done, if he did use the names (...)
in a promiscuous sense, as it is supposed. And besides, Irenaeus being at this
time Bishop, if not Archbishop of the Church of Lions, could not but know that
he was otherwise advanced both in power and title, as well in Dignity as
Jurisdiction, than when he was a Presbyter of that very Church, under Pothinus
his Predecessor in that See; and therefore not the same man merely which he was
before. But to let pass as well the observation as the inference, certain I am
that by this argument the holy Father did conceive himself to be armed
sufficiently against the Heretics of his time, and so much he expresses
plainly, saying, that by this weapon he was able to confound all those, qui
quoquo modo vel per sui placentiam malam, vel vanam gloriam, vel per coecitatem
and malam sententiam, praeter quam oportet, Ire. adv. haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
colligunt: Who any way, either out of an evil self- complacency, or
vainglorious humor, or blindness of the mind, or a depraved understanding, did
raise such Doctrins as they ought not. So much for blessed Irenaeus, a man of
peace as well in disposition and affection, as he was in name.

Next let us look upon Tertullian, Irenaeus, beginning first to be of credit
about the latter end of this second Century, Baron. ann. eccl. anno 196. Pamel.
in vita Tertull.
as Baronius calculates it; and being at the height of reputation, an. 210. as
Pamelius notes, about which time Saint Irenaeus suffered Martyrdom. And if we
look upon him well, we find him pressing the same point with greater efficacy
than Irenaeus did before him. For undertaking to convince the Heretics of his
time, as well of falsehood as of novelties, and to make known the new
upstartedness of their Assemblies (which they called the Church) he does thus
proceed. Tertull. de praes. adv. haeres. c. 32.
Edant ergo origines ecclesiarum suarum, evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum,
etc. Let them, says he, declare the original of their Churches, let them
unfold the course or order of their Bishops, succeeding so to one another from
the first beginning, that their first Bishop (whosoever he was) had some of the
Apostles, or of the Apostolical men at least, who did converse with the
Apostles to be their founder and Predecessor. For thus the Apostolical Churches
do derive their Pedigree. Thus does the Church of Smyrna show their Polycarpus
placed there amongst them by Saint John; and Rome her Clement Consecrated or
Ordained by Peter: even as all other Churches also do exhibit to us the names
of those, who being Ordained Bishops by the Apostles, did sow the Apostolical
seed in the field of God. This was the challenge that he made: And this he had
not done assuredly, had he not thought that the Episcopal succession in the
Church of Christ, had been an evident demonstration of the truth thereof: which
since the Heretics could not show in their Congregations or Assemblies, it was
a very pregnant evidence, that they had neither verity nor antiquity to defend
their Doctrins; nor could with any show of Justice challenge to themselves the
name and honor of a Church. Id. ibid. ca. 36.
And such, and none but such were those other Churches which he after speaks
of, viz. of Corinth, Philippi, Thessalonica, Ephesus, and the rest planted by
the Apostles, apud quas ipsae Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesidentur; in
which the Chairs of the Apostles to that time were sat in, being possessed,
not by themselves, but by their Successors. By the same argument Optatus first,
and after him St. Austin did confound the Donatists, that mighty faction in the
Church. St. Austin thus: Numerate Sacerdotes vel ab ipsa sede Petri, August.
contr. Petil. l. 2.
and in illo ordine quis cui successerit videte. Number the Bishops which have
sat but in Peter's Chair, and mark who have succeeded one another in the same.
A Catalogue of which he gives us in another place, Id. Epist. 165.
lest else he might be thought to prescribe that to others, on which he would
not trust himself. Nay so far he relied on the authority of this Episcopal
Succession in the Church of Christ, as that he makes it one of the special
motives, quae eum in gremio Ecclesiae justissime teneant, which did continue
him in the bosom of the Catholic Church. Id. contr. Epist. Manichaei. c. 4.
As for Optatus, having laid down a Catalogue of the Bishops in the Church of
Rome, till his own times: He makes a challenge to the Donatists to present the
like, Optat. de schis. Donat. l. 2.
Vestrae Cathedrae originem edite; show us, says he, the first original of
your Bishops, and then you have done somewhat to advance your cause: In which
it is to be observed, that though the instance be made only in the Episcopal
succession of the Church of Rome, Irt. adv. haere. lib. 3. cap. 3.
the argument holds good in all others also; it being too troublesome a labor,
as Irenaeus well observed, omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare successiones, to run
through the succession of all particular Churches; and therefore that made
choice of, as the chief or principal.

But to return again unto Tertullian, Tertul. lib. de Baptism. c. 17.
Dandi quidem jus habet summus sacerdos, i. e. Episcopus. The Right, says he,
of giving Baptism has the High Priest, which is the Bishop, and then the
Presbyters and Deacons; non tamen sine Episcopi antoritate, yet not without the
Bishops license and authority, for the Churches honor; which if it be
preserved, then is Peace maintained. Nay so far he appropriates it unto the
Bishop, as that he calls it dictatum Episcopi, officium Episcopatus, a work
most proper to the Bishop, in regard of his Episcopacy, or particular Office:
Which howsoever it may seem to ascribe too much unto the Bishop in the
administration of this Sacrament, is no more verily than what was after
affirmed by Hierom, Hieron. adver. Lucifer.
showing that in his time sine Episcopi jussione, without the warrant of the
Bishop, neither the Presbyters nor the Deacons had any authority to Baptize:
not that I think, that in the days of Hierom, before whose time Parishes were
assigned to Presbyters throughout the Church, the Bishops special consent and
warrant was requisite to the baptizing of each several Infant; but that the
Presbyters and Deacons did receive from him some general faculty, for their
enabling in and to those Ministrations. Next for the Sacrament of the blessed
Eucharist, that which is a chief part of that heavenly nourishment by which a
Christian is brought up in the assured hopes of Eternal life. he tells us in
another place, non de aliorum manu quam Praesidentium sumimus, Tertul. de
Corona Militis.
that they received it only from their Bishops hand; the (...) or President of
the Presbytery, as Justin Martyr, seconded by Beza, did before call him. Which
Exposition or construction lest it should be quarrelled as being injurious to
the Presbyters, who are thereby excluded from the honor and name of
Presidents: I shall desire the Reader to consult those other places of
Tertullian, in which the word Prefident is used, as viz. Prescriptio Apostoll,
Bigames non sinit praesidere. Tert. ad axor.
lib. ad uxorem, and lib. de Monogamia, in both of which the man that had a
second Wife is said to be disabled from Presiding in the Church of God; and on
consideration to determine of it, whether it be more probable that Presbyters
or Bishops be here meant by Presidents. Besides the Church not being yet
divided generally into Parishes, but only in some greater Cities, the Presbyter
had not got the style of Rector, and therefore much less might be called a
President, that being a word of Power and Government, which at that time the
Presbyters enjoyed not in the Congregation. And here Pope Leo will come in to
help us, if occasion be, assuring us that in his time it was not lawful for the
Presbyter in the Bishops presence, nisi illo jubente, Leo Epist. 88.
unless it were by his appointment, conficere Sacramentum corporis and
sanguinis Christi, to consecrate the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood. The
author of the Tract ascribed to Hierom, entitled de Septem Ecclesiae
ordinibus, does affirm as much: but being the author of it is uncertain, though
it be placed by Erasinus amongst the (...) docta, we will pass it by.

From the Administration of the Sacraments, ad potestatem ordinis, to the power
of Order; proceed we on to those which do appertain ad potestatem
jurisdictionis, unto the power of Jurisdiction. And the first thing we meet
with, is the appointing of the public Fasts, used often in the Church, as
occasion was. A privilege not granted to the common Presbyter, and much less to
the common people; but in those times, wherein the Supreme Magistrate was not
within the pale or bosom of the Church, entrusted to the Bishop only. This
noted also by Tertullian, in his book entitled de jejuniis; which though he
writ after his falling from the Church, and so not to be trusted in a point of
Doctrine, may very well be credited in a point of custom: Quod and Episcopi
universae plebi mandare jejunia assolent, non dico de industria stipium
conferendarum, sed ex aliqua sollicitudinis Ecclesiae causa; Tertul. lib. de
jejuniis. c. 13.
That Bishops use to impose Fasts upon the people, is not done of purpose for
lucre, or the Alms then given, but out of a regard of the Churches welfare or
the sollicitousness which they have thereof. Wherein as he removes a cavil,
which as it seems was cast upon the Church, about the calling of those Fasts:
so, plainly he ascribes the calling of them to the Bishop only; according unto
whose appointment, in unum omnes (...) agitabant, they met together for the
humbling of themselves before God the Lord. So for disposing of the Churches
Treasure (for Menstrua quaque die modicam quisque stipem vel quam velit, Id. in
Apol. c.
every month the people used to bring their Offerings, as we call them now,
every man as he would and could) that also appertained unto the Bishop. Which
as it was distributed most commonly amongst the Clergy, for their present
maintenance, so was it in the Bishops power to bestow part thereof upon other
uses, as in relief of Widows and poor Virgins: which appears plainly in that
place and passage of Tertullian, Tertul. de Virg. veland. cap. 9.
in his book de Virginibus velandis: where speaking of a Virgin which contrary
to the custom of the Church had been admitted into the rank of Widows; he adds,
cui si quid refrigerii debuerat Episcopus, that if the Bishop did intend to
allow her any thing toward her relief and maintenance, he might have done it
without trespassing on the Churches discipline, and setting up so strange a
Monster as a Virgin-Widow. And this is that which after was confirmed in the
Council of Antioch, Conc. Antioch. Can. 25.
where it is said (...), that the Bishop ought to have authority in the
disposing of the things (or goods) that appertained unto the Church; (...),
that so he might dispose them unto such as stood in need, in the fear of God.

Finally, reconciling of a Penitent to the Church of God, in the remitting of
his sins, Tertul. de pudicitia, cap. 18.
and bringing of him back to the fold again; that in Tertullians time was a
Peculiar of the Bishop also. For, speaking of Repentance after Faith received (
de poenitentia post fidem, as he calls it) he is content to give this efficacy
thereunto, though otherwise he held, being then a Montanist, that heinous
Sinners after Grace received were not to be admitted to Repentance; I say he is
content to give this efficacy thereunto, that for smaller sins it may obtain
pardon or remission from the Bishop; for greater and unpardonable, from God
alone. But take his own words with you for the greater surety, and his words
are these, viz. Salva illa poenitentiae specie post fidem, quae aut levioribus
delictis veniam ab Episcopo consequi potest, aut majoribus and irremissibilibus
a Deo solo. Pamel. Annot. praedict. lib. 159.
In which Pamelius seems to wonder at his moderation, as being of a better
temper in this point, than was Montanus, into whose Sect he now was fallen: who
would have no man to make confession of his sins to any other than to God, and
seek for reconciliation from no hands but from his alone. And in another place
of the same book also, Tertul. lib. de Pudicit. cap. 1.
although he seem to jeer and deride the usage, he grants that the Bishops of
the Christian Church did usually remit even the greatest fins, upon the
performance of the Penance formerly enjoined: For thus he brings in the
Bishop, whom in the way of scorn he calls Pontifex Maximus, and Episcopus
Episcoporum, proclaiming as it were a general Pardon to such as had performed
their Penance; Ego and moechiae and fornicationis delicta poenitenti functis
dimitto, that he remitted to all such even the sins of Fornication and
Adultery. Which words of his, declare not more his Error, than the Bishops
Power in this particular. What interest the Presbyters of the Church did either
challenge or enjoy in this weighty business of reconciling Penitents to the
Lord their God, we shall see hereafter, when as the same began to be in
practice, and was by them put in execution. Mean time I take it for a manifest
and undoubted Truth, that properly, originally, and in chief, it did belong
unto the Bishop both to enjoin Penance, and admit the Penitent; and not to the
inferior Presbyters, but as they had authority by and under him. Which lest I
may be thought to affirm at random, let us behold the manner of this
Reconciliation, as laid down by Sozomen, Sozomen. Eccl. hist. l. 7. c. 16.
not as relating to his own times, but to the times whereof we speak: (...),
etc. They stand, says he, in an appointed place, sorrowful and lamented, and
when the Eucharist is ended, whereof they are not suffered to be partakers,
they cast themselves with grief and lamentation flat upon the ground. (...),
The Bishop then approaching toward him, kneeleth also by him on the ground,
and all the multitude also do the like, with great grief and ejulation; (...),
This done, the Bishop rises first, and gently raises up the prostrate
Penitent, and having prayed for those that are thus in the state of Penance, as
much as he thinks fit and requisite, they are dismissed for the present: And
being thus dismissed, every man privately, at home, does afflict himself,
either by fasting, or by abstinence from Meats and Bathes for a certain time,
(...), as long as by the Bishop is enjoined him. Which time appointed being
come, and his Penance in this sort performed, he is absolved from his sins,
sins, (...), and joined again unto the residue of the Congregation. And this,
says he, has been the custom of the Western Church, and especially of the
Church of Rome, (...), from the very first beginning, to this present time. So
that both in the City of Rome, in which Tertullian sometimes lived, and in the
Western Church, whereof he was a member, being a Presbyter of Carthage, and in
the times in which he flourished, for thus it was from the beginning: the
Bishop regularly had the power both of enjoining Penance, and reconciling of
the Penitent as it still continues: Nor does that passage in Tertullian any
way cross the point delivered, where speaking of the several acts of
humiliation which were to be performed by the Penitent, before he could be
reconciled to the Church of God, Tertul. lib. de Poenitent. c. 9.
he reckons these amongst the rest, Presbyteris advolvi, aris, or caris Dei
adgeniculari, (for whether of the two it is adbuc sub Judice) omnibus fratribus
legationes deprecationis suae injungere; to cast themselves before the
Presbyters, to kneel before the Altars, or the Saints of God, to entreat the
Prayers of all the brethren. Where clearly, there is nothing ascribed unto the
Presbyters as in the way of reconciliation, but only in the way of
intercession, as unto other of the brethren: the main work being still reserved
unto the Bishop.

I know indeed Tertullian is alleged by some, Apologetick for the Christian
Churches, where having showed the manner of the Christian meetings in their
Congregations, for Prayer and hearing of Gods Word, he adds, Id. in Apol. c.
39.
that there are also Exhortations, Chastisements, and Divine censures, Judgment
being executed with great advice. Then follows, Praesident probati quique
seniores, honorem istum non pretio, sed testimonio adepti; the Presidents of
our meetings are approved Seniors, or Elders (call them which you will) who
have obtained this honor not by money, but by good Report. So he: And those
whom he calls Seniores, Elders, they will needs have to be such Elders as they
dream of, men of the Laity, taken in to day, and put out to morrow. A thing
which better might become the Conventicles of the Heretic and Sectary, than
the Church of Christ. And as it seems amongst the Heretics and Sectaries such
a course there was, hodie Presbyter qui cras Laicus, that he which was to day
an Elder, was on the next day to revert to his occupation; Id. de Praescr.
haeret. l. 41.
this day an Elder in the Consistory, the next a Botcher on the stall. The
Christian Church had no such custom, what ever might be found amongst the
Marcionites; if then it be demanded who these Seniors were, which are here said
to have presided in their Congregations; I answer that they were the Bishops:
those at whose hands, de manu Praesidentium, the people used in those times to
receive the Sacrament. Laymen they could not be, though called simply Elders,
because they did administer the blessed Eucharist: and simply Presbyters they
were not, and they could not be, because it is there said that they did
preside, and had the Power of Censure and Correction; which are the works and
badges of Authority. It then remains they were the Bishops, the Presidents or
(...) of the Church of Christ, such as we find described before by Justin
Martyr, and are affimed by Beza, to be such as Timothy whom we have proved to
be a Bishop. And this appears to me yet further by the words themselves, in
which we find that those who did attain that honor got it by good Report, and
not by Money. And this may very well be, might the Gentiles say, had it been
spoken of the Presbyters, for who would give money for so poor an Office,
wherein there was but little to be gotten, more than ones labor for his pains;
or at the best some bare allowance from the sportula, and that too on the
Bishops courtesy? When we can hear you say the like of Bishops, through whose
hands the money went, who had the keeping and disposing of the common Treasury,
and might enrich themselves by the spoil thereof; you then say somewhat to the
purpose. Till then it makes but little to the praise of your integrity and
candor, that such poor men whose places were not worth the haviing should pay
nothing for them. This makes it evident to me that the Elders mentioned here,
were not simply Presbyters: but such whose places were esteemed to be both of
Means and Credit; and therefore doubtless they were Bishops, that did so
preside. Nor is it any prejudice to the truth thereof, that they are called
Seniores in the plural number: Tertullian speaking not in the behalf of a
particular Church or City, wherein could be one Bishop only; but pleading in
the behalf of the Universal, wherein there were as many Presidents, or Bishops,
or Presiding Elders, call them which you will, as there were Cities gained to
the Faith of Christ.

Now if we please to take a view of the extent of Christianity, Tertullian, who
very fully has described the same in his Apologetick, presented to the
Magistrates of the Roman Empire, in the last year thereof, or the next year
after, as is affirmed both by Pamelius and Baronius out of ancient Writers:
Pamol. in vita Tertul. Bar. in Annal.
For having shown that Christians were not to avenge themselves upon their
Persecuters, or to take Arms for the repelling of those injuries which were
offered to them, he does thus proceed: Tertullian in Apologet. c. 37.
Si enim and hosts exertos, etc. For should we show our selves, says he, to
be open enemies unto the State, should we want either strength or numbers?
Behold what mischief is done daily to you by the Moors, Marcomannians, and
those of Parthia, Masters of a few Countries only; whereas the Christians are
diffused over all the World; you count us Aliens or strangers to you, and
vestra omnia implevimus, yet we have filled all places that are yours, Cities,
Isles, Castles, Burrowes, your places of Assembly, Camps, Tribes, Palaces, the
very Senate, and the Marketplace, with our numerous Troops. Only your Temples
are your own, etc. Nay, should we only go away from you, and retire into some
remote corner of the World, and carry all our Families with us, Suffudisset
utique dominationem vestram tot qualiumcunque amissio civium, the loss of so
many of your people, how ill soever you conceive of them, would be so shrewd a
weakening unto your Dominions, that you would tremble at that strange
desertion, and be astonished at the solitude and silence of your emptied
Cities, quite destitute of men to be commanded; there being more Enemies than
Citizens remaining in them. Whereas now, God be thanked, you have the fewer
Enemies amongst you, in that you have so many Christians, Pene omnes cives
Christianos habendo, most of your People being of that Religion. Which as it
shows the great extent of Christianity in Tertullians time, so does it show a
like extent also of Episcopacy; there being no place where Christianity had
been received, wherein Episcopacy was not planted also. Which lest it might be
taken for a bold assertion, without ground or Truth, I shall crave leave to
step a little out of this present Century, and borrow a testimony from Saint
Cyprian, who is next to follow; and if he may be credited, will affirm no less:
Cyprian. E. 52.
For by him we are told of a certain truth, per omnes Provincias and per urbes
singulas ordinatos esse Episcopos, that in all Provinces and in every City
Bishops had long since been ordained, reverend for their Age, for their Faith
sincere, tried in Affliction, and proscribed in time of persecution. Nor does
he speak this of his own time only, which was somewhat after, but as a matter
of some standing, cum jam pridem per omnes provincias, that so it had been long
ago: and therefore must needs be so doubtless in this present Age being not
long before his own. And this extent of Christianity I do observe the rather in
this place and time, because that in the Age which follows (the multitudes of
Christians being so increased) we may perhaps behold a new face of things: the
times becoming quicker and more full of action; Parishes or Parochial Churches
set out in Country-Villages and Towns, and several Presbyters allotted to them;
with an addition also both of trust and power unto the Presbyters themselves in
the Cure of Souls, committed to them by their Bishops; with many other things
which concern this business. And therefore here we will conclude this present
Century, proceeding forward to the next in the name of God.

CHAP. IV. Of the authority in the government of the Church of Carthage,
enjoyed and exercised by Saint Cyprian and other Bishops of the same.
1. Of the foundation and preheminences of the Church of Carthage. 2. Of
Agrippinus and Donatus two of St. Cyprian's Predecessors. 3. The troublesome
condition of that Church, at Cyprian's first being Bishop there. 4.
Necessitated him to permit some things to the discretion of his Presbyters, and
consent of the People. 5. Of the authority ascribed by Cyprian to the People,
in the Election of their Bishop. 6. What Power the people had de facto, in the
said Elections. 7. How far the testimony of the People was required in the
Ordination of their Presbyters. 8. The power of Excommunication reserved by St.
Cyprian, to the Bishop only. 9. No reconciliation of a Penitent allowed by
Cyprian without the Bishops leave and license. 10. The Bishop's power as well
in the encouragement, as in the punishment, and censure of his Clergy. 11. The
memorable case of Geminius Faustinus, one of the Presbyters of Carthage. 12.
The Bishop's Power in regulating and declaring Martyrs. 13. The Divine Right,
and eminent authority of Bishops fully asserted by St. Cyprian.


SAint Hierom tells us of S. Cyprian, Hieron. de Scri^tor. Eccl. in Tertul^d.
that he esteemed so highly of Tertulian's writings, that he never suffered any
day to pass over his head without reading somewhat in the same; and that he did
often use to say, when he demanded for his works, Da mihi magistrum, reach me my
Tutor or Praeceptor. So that considering the good opinion which S. Cyprian had
harbored of the man, for his Wit and Learrning, and the nearness of the time
in which they lived; being both also members of the same Church, the one a
Presbyter, the other Bishop of the Church of Carthage: We will pass on unto S.
Cyprian, and to those monuments of Piety and Learning which he left behind him.
And this we shall the rather do, because there is no Author of the Primitive
times, out of whose works we have such ample treasures of Ecclesiastical
Antiquities as we have in his; none who can give us better light for the
discovery of the truth in the present search than that blessed Martyr? But
first, before we come to the man himself, we will a little look upon his charge
on the Church of Carthage, as well before, as at his coming to be Bishop of it;
the knowledge of the which will give special light to our following business.
And first for the foundation of the Church of Carthage, Cited by Baronius in
Annal. Eccl. Anno 51.
if Metaphrastes may be credited, it was the action of Saint Peter, who leaving
Rome at such time as the Jews were banished thence by the Decree of Claudius
Caesar, in Africam navigasse and Carthaginensem erexisse Ecclesiam, is by him
said to sail to Africa, and there to found the Church of Carthage, leaving
behind him Crescens one of his Disciples to be the Bishop of the same: But
whether this be so or not, it is out of question, that the Church of Carthage
was not only of great Antiquity, but that it also was of great power and
credit, as being the Metropolitan Church of Africa, the Bishop of the same
being the Primate of all Africa, properly so called, together with Numidia, and
both the Mauritanias, as well Caesariensis as Sitisensis: So witnesses S.
Cyprian himself, Latius fusa est nostra Provincia; Cypri. Ep. 45.
habet enim Numidiam and Mauritanias duas sibi cohaerentes, as his own words
are. And this appears also by the subscription of the Bishops to the Council
of Carthage, convented ex Provincia Africa, Council. Tom. 1. p. 149. Edit. Binil.
Numidia, Mauritania, as is most clear on the record. For whereas anciently the
Roman Empire was divided into fourteen Diocesses, reckoning the Prefecture of
the City of Rome for one; every Diocese being subdivided into several
Provinces, as was said before, the Diocese of Africa was not of the meanest,
containing in it six large Provinces, Notitia Provinciarum.
and reaching from the greater Syrtis Eastward, where it confined upon the
Patriarchat of Alexandria to Mauritania Tingitana, on the West, which did
belong unto the Diocese of Spain. Now Carthage standing in that Province, which
was called Zeugitana, or Proconsularis, and being the Seat or Residence of the
Vicarius, or Lieutenant General of the Roman Empire for that Diocese: The
Bishop of it was not only the Metropolitan of his own Province, but the Primate
also, in regard of the other sive, which were Tripolitana, Byzacena, Numidia,
and the two Mauritanias before remembered. Nor was he only the supreme Bishop in
regard of them, but also absolute and independent in regard of others; as being
neither subject or subordinate to the Patriarchs of Alexandria, though the
prime City of all Africa, nor to the Popes of Rome, the Queen and Empress of
the world; Council. Carthaginiens. 6.
against whose machinations and attempts the Church of Carthage for a long time
did maintain her liberty.

Such being the Authority and power of the Church of Carthage, Antioch, Rome,
and Alexandria now had, and they of Constantinople and Jerusalem shall be
found to have in the times succeeding; yet had they all manner of Patriarchal
jurisdiction. Of these the first I meet withal was Agrippinus, who flourished
in the beginning of this Century, bonae memoriae vir, a man of blessed memory,
as S. Cyprian, Cyprian. Epist. 71. Vincent. Lerinen. adv. haeres. cap. 9. Aug.
de Bap. lib. 2. cap. 7, 8. Cypr. Epi. 71.
Venerabilis memoriae, of venerable memory, as Vincentius Lerinensis calls him.
S. Austin also mentions him in one of his discourses against the Donatists,
as a Predecessor of S. Cyprians; and all of them agree in this, that he held
those which were Baptized by Heretics, were to be Rebaptized by the Catholic
Ministers: for agitation of which business he caused a Council to be called of
all the Bishops, Qui illo tempore in Provincia Africae and Numidiae Ecclesiam
Dei gubernabant, which at that time did govern the Church of God in the
Provinces of Africa and Numidia; in which Re-baptization of men so Baptized,
was decreed as necessary. Which howsoever it does show that Agrippinus, as a
man, had his personal errors; yet shows it also, that as a Bishop of Carthage,
he had a power and jurisdiction over all the other Bishops of the Diocese of
Africa, and all the Provinces thereof; who on his summons met in Council, as by
those words of Cyprian plainly does appear. So that we find the holy Hierarchy
so settled from the first beginners; that as the Presbyters were subordinate
unto their Bishops, so it was there a subordination amongst the Bishops
themselves, according as it still continues in those parts of Christendom, in
which Episcopal Government does remain in force. But Agrippinus being dead, his
error or opinion died also with him, though it revived again not long after;
and his Successor, by name Donatus, looking more carefully unto his charge,
endeavored what he could to free the same from erroneous doctrines. And to
that purpose called a Council of 90 Bishops in Labesitum, a Colony in Africa,
in which Privatus, an old Heretic was by their joint consent condemned;
nonaginta Episcoporum sententia condemnatus, Cypr. Epi. 55.
as Cyprian has it. By which we may conjecture at the great spreading of
Episcopacy; over all this Province, I mean that of Africa: So great, Baron. in
Annal.
that at this time, being An. 242. as Baronius calculateth it, there could
assemble 90 Bishops at the command or summons of their Metropolitan; especially
if we consider that these were but a part of a greater number. Augustine. Epist.
48.
S. Austin telling us of a Council held in Carthage by the Donatists (placed by
Baronius, Anno 308.) in which there met together no fewer than 270 Bishops of
that one faction. But lest it may be said, as perhaps it was, that the
Donatists increased the number of Bishops the better to support their party, if
ever the business should come to be examined in a Synodical meeting; we find a
Council held in Carthage under Aurelius, who was Bishop there in S. Austins
time, Council. Tom. 1. Edit. Bin. p. 587.
Anno 398. in which Assembled to the number of 214 Bishops, all of them
Orthodox Professors. With such a strange increase did God bless this calling.
For certainly the Church had never brought forth such a large increase, if God,
even our own God had not given his blessing.

Donatus being dead, Anno 250. Cecilius Cyprianus, a right godly man, being
then one of the Presbyters of the Church, is chosen Bishop of the same; and
that not only by the joint consent of the Clergy there, Cypr. Ep. 55.
sed populi universi suffragio, but by the general suffrage of the people,
according to the general custom of that Church and time. And being so chosen
and ordained, did for four years enjoy himself in peace and quiet. But a fierce
persecution being raised against the Church, by the command of Decius, then the
Roman Emperor; being proscribed and threatened death, he retired himself,
expecting a return of better times, Idem. Epi. 10.
wherein he might do service to the Lord his God: Professing that in this
retreat he followed the direction of the Lord, qui ut secederet jussit, who had
commanded him so to do. In this recess of his, some of his Adversaries, (as who
lives without them) which had opposed him in the time of his Election, taking
an opportunity to ensnare the people, and draw them into factions against their
Bishops, had made a very strong party on their side, calumniating his recess as
a deserting of the Flock of Christ committed to him, which more afflicted the
good Father than the proscription of his goods, or any trial of his patience
which had been laid upon him by the Persecuters. Of this conspiracy he
certifieth the people of Carthage by way of Letter, wherein he gives them to
understand how the matter stood. Quorundam Presbyterorum malignitas and
perfidia perficit, Idem Epi. 40.
etc. That I could not come to you before Easter, the malice and perfidiousness
of some of the Presbyters has brought to pass; whilst mindful of their own
conspiracy, and retaining their former rancor against my being Bishop, or
indeed rather against your suffrages in my Election, and against the judgment
of God approving the same; they begin again to set on foot their former
opposition, renewing their sacrilegious machinations, and lying treacherously
in wait for my destruction. And after, in the same Epistle, Non suffecerat
exilium jam biennii, and a vultibus and oculis vestris lugubris separatio, etc.
It does not seem sufficient to them, that I have been now two years banished
from your presence, and to my great affliction separated from your sight; that
I am overwhelmed with grief and sorrow, vexing my self with my continual
complaints, and day and night washing my cheeks with tears, because it has not
been as yet my good fortune to embrace or salute you, whom you had chosen for
your Bishop with such expressions of your love and zeal. Accessit huic
tabescenti animo nostro major dolor. And yet a greater grief afflicts my
fainting soul, that in so great distress and need I cannot come my self unto
you, fearing lest at my coming, if I should so do, some greater tumult should
arise through the threats and secret practices of perfidious persons: And that
considering, as a Bishop, I am to take care for the peace and quiet of the
Church, ipse materiam seditioni dedisse, I might seem to be or give occasion of
some sedition likely to be raised, and so renew the persecution which is now
well slaked. Nay as it seems, some of the Presbyters of his Church which were
not otherwise engaged in the faction, or carried any ill affections toward
him; out of an inclination natural to man, to enlarge their power, and get as
much authority into their hands, as the times would give to the advantage of
his absence also, and began sensibly to encroach upon his Office, and undertake
such things as appertained to his jurisdiction. Thus he complains of his
Clergy, that such as yet stood fair in their respects, and firm in their
obedience to him might be confirmed in the same: and that the rest, being made
acquainted with their Error, might in fine desist, Tacere ultra non oportet,
etc. It is no time, says he, to be longer silent, Idem Ep. 10.
when as the danger is so imminent both on my self and on my people. For what
extremity of danger may we not justly fear from Gods displeasure, when some of
the Presbyters, neither mindful of the Gospel, or their own duty, or the day of
Judgment, nor thinking that they have a Bishop set over them, cum contemptu and
contumelia praepositi totum sibi vendicent, with the contempt and reproach of
him that is their Bishop shall arrogate all Power unto themselves. Which their
behavior he calls also contumelias Episcopatus nostri, the reproach and
slander of his Government; in having such affronts put on him, as never had
been offered to any of his Fredecessors. The like complaint to which he does
also make, but with more resolution and contempt of their wicked practices, in
an Epistle to Cornelius, being the 55. in number, according to the Edition of
Pamelius.

I have the more at large laid down the storms and troubles raised against this
godly Bishop, at his first coming to the place; Carthage, quod a primordio
Episcopatus mei statuerim, Idem Epist. 6.
nihil sine consilio vestro and consensu plebis meae, privata sententia gerere;
that he resolved from his first entrance on that Bishopric, to do nothing of
his own head, as we use to say, without the Counsel of his Clergy and the
consent of his People: and that on his return, (for he was then in exile when
he wrote this Letter) he would communicate his affairs with them, Et in commune
tractabimus, and manage them in common with their assistance. And certainly
this was a prudent resolution, as the World went with him: For by this means he
stood assured, that whatsoever Schism or Faction should be raised against him,
it would be never able to prevail, or get ground upon him, as long as he had
both the People and the Presbyters so obliged unto him, for the support of his
authority. But this being but a private case, and grounded on particular
reasons makes no general Rule: no Bishop being bound unto the like, by this
Example, but where all circumstances do concur, which we meet with here; and
then not bound neither, except he will himself, but as it does conduce to his
own security. So that it is to me a wonder, why the example of St. Cyprian
should be pressed so often, and all those passages so hotly urged, wherein the
Presbyters or People seem to be concerned in matters of the Churches
Government; as if both he and all other Bishops had been bound by the Law of
God, not to do any thing at all in their holy function, but what the Presbyters
should direct, and the people yield their suffrage and consent unto. For being
but a resolution taken up by him, the better to support himself against his
Adversaries; it obliges no man to the like, as before I said. And he himself
did not conceive himself so obliged thereby, but that he could and did dispense
with that resolution, as often as he thought it necessary, or but expedient so
to do: performing many actions of importance, in the whole course and Series of
his Episcopal Government, wherein he neither craved the advice of the one, nor
the good liking of the other; and which is more, doing some things not only
without their knowledge, but against their wills, as we shall make appear in
that which follows. Now whereas the points of most importance in the
Government and Administration of the Church, are the Election of Bishops, the
Ordination of Ministers, the Excommunicating of the Sinner, and the reconciling
of the Penitent: it will not be amiss to see, what and how much in each of
these St. Cyprian did permit, as occasion was, either unto the People or the
Presbyters; and what he did in all and every one of these, as often as he saw
occasion also, without their knowledge and consent.

First for Election of their Bishops, all their Elections were ordered by the
privity, Semctymn. page 33. Sect. 7.
consent and approbation of the people, where the Bishop was to serve: and for
the proof of this St. Cyprian is alleged, as one sufficient in himself to make
good the point. The place most commonly alleged is in his 68. Epistle touching
the Case of Basilides and Martialis, two Spanish Bishops, who had defiled
themselves with Idols and many other grievous Crimes: concerning whom, the
people of those parts repaired unto him for his resolution. But he remitting
the cause back to them, tells them how much it did concern them, A peccatore
Praeposito se separare, to separate themselves from such sinful Prelates, and
not to participate with them in the Sacrifice, Cypr. Ep 68.
giving this reason for the same, quando ipsa maxim habeat potestatem, vel
eligendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi: because the people
specially have power either of choosing worthy Prelates, or of rejecting the
unworthy. For that by Sacerdotes here the Father understands Bishops,
Smectymn. p. 33.
is confessed on all hands. Nor does the Father only say it, but he goes
forward to make good the same by Divine Authority, ut Sacerdos plebe praesente,
that the Bishop should be chosen in the presence of the People, under all men's
eyes: that so he may be proved to be fit and worthy by their public testimony.
And for the proof of this, is urged a Text from Moses in the book of Numbers,
where God is said to speak thus to Moses: Apprehende Aaron fratrem tuum, Take
Aaron thy brother and Eleazar his son, and thou shall bring them to the Mount
before all the Assembly, and put off Aarons garments, and put them on Eleazar
his son. By which it is apparent that God wills the Priest to be made before
all the multitude, showing thereby that the Priest should not be ordained but
in the presence of the People, that so the People being present, the offenses
of the evil may be detected, and the merits of the good made known, and
consequently the Election, or rather Ordination may be good and lawful, being
discussed by the opinion and voice of all. The like he also proves by the
electing of Matthias Bishop, in the place of Judas, which was performed in
medio Discentium, in the midst of the Disciples, and in the choosing of the
seven, done in the face of all the People. This is the sum of what is there
delivered by St. Cyprian: and out of this I find three Corollaries or
Conclusions gathered. Smectymn. p. 34.
First, that the special Power of judging of the worthiness and unworthiness of
a man for the Prelacy, was in the breast of the People.

Secondly, The special Power of choosing or rejecting to his place, according as
they judged him worthy or unworthy, resided in the People.

Thirdly, That this power did descend upon the People, de Divina Autoritate, by
Divine authority. These are the points collected from St. Cyprians words; which
with the words themselves out of the which they are collected, are to be taken
into consideration, because the weight of all this business does rest upon them.

And first as for St. Cyprians words, there is no such command of God touching
Eleazar, Pamel. Annot. in Cypr. fol. 68.
in any Bibles now remaining, as is there laid down, which thing Pamelius well
observed. And more than so, the Text of Scripture now remaining, is contrary to
that which is there alleged: God willing or commanding Moses, to bring Aaron
and Eleazar his son, up into Mount Hor, whither the people neither did nor
might ascend, Government of the Church. c. 15. Numb. 20.27, etc.
as it is well observed by our learned Bilson. So that Eleazar not being chosen
by the People, but by God immediately; and his Ordination solemnized on the top
of the Mount, Moses and Aaron being only at the doing of it: this can be no
good Argument, that the Election of the Prelate does specially pertain unto the
People. And therefore it is very probable that Cyprian met with some corrupted
Copy of the Book of God; or else that we have none but corrupted Copies of the
books of Cyprian. As for the Election of Matthias, Acts 1.15.
though it was done in medio Discentium, in the presence of the Disciples, as
the Scripture tells us; yet surely the Disciples had no hand in the Hection:
the calling of an Apostle being too high a work for any of the sons of men to
aspire unto, ibid. ver. 24.
peculiar only to the Lord our God, to whom the choice is also attributed in
holy Scripture. As for the Seven, being they were to be the Stewards of the
People, in the disposing of their goods for the common benefit of the Church,
as before was noted: good reason that the Election should be made by them,
whose goods and fortunes were to be disposed of. So that there is no Law of
God, no Divine Ordinance of his, expressed in Scripture, by which the People
are entitled either unto a special power of choosing their Bishops, or to a
necessary presence of the action; though there be many good and weighty
reasons, which might induce the Fathers in the Primitive times, not only to
require their presence, but sometimes also to crave their approbation and
consent in the Elections of the Prelate. Now for the presence of the People,
that seems to be required on this reason chiefly, that their testimony should
be had touching the life and behavior of the party that was to be Ordained,
lest a wicked and unworthy person should get by stealth into the function of a
Bishop; it being required of a Bishop, by St. Paul, amongst other things, that
he must have a good report. And who more able to make this report, than the
People are, 1 Timothy 3.
quae [plebs viz.] singulorum vitam plenissime novit, who being naturally
inquisitive, Cypr. Epi. 68.
know each man's life, and has had experience of his Conversation. And as for
their consent there wanted not some reasons why it was required; especially
before the Church was settled in a constant maintenance, and under the
protection and defense of a Christian Magistrate. For certainly, as our
Reverend Bilson well observes, Bilson's perpetual Government. c. 15.
the People did more willingly maintain, more quietly receive, more diligently
hear and more heartily love their Bishops, when their desires were satisfied in
the choice (though merely formal) of the man; than when he was imposed upon
them, or that their fancies and affections had been crossed therein. But yet I
cannot find upon good authority, that the special power of choosing or
rejecting, did reside in them: though indeed somewhat did depend upon their
approbation of the party; and this no otherwise than according to the custom of
particular Churches. In Africa as it seems the use was this, that on the death
or deposition of a Bishop: Cypr. Ep. 68.
Episcopi ejusdem Provinciae quique proximi conveniant, the neighboring
Bishops of the Province did meet together, and repair unto that People, who
were to be provided of a Pastor, that so he might be chosen praesente Plebe,
the People being present at the doing of it, and certifying what they knew of
his Conversation. And this appears to be the general usage, per Provincias fere
universas, through almost all parts of Christendom: Where plainly the Election
of the new Prelate resided in the Bishops of the same Province so convened
together: and if upon examination of his life and actions, there was no just
exception laid against him, manus ei imponebatur, he was forthwith ordained
Bishop, and put into possession of his place and Office. But it was otherwise
for a long while together, in the great Patriarchal Church of Alexandria: in
which the Presbyters had the Election of their Bishop, Presbyteri unum ex se
Electum, as St. Hierom notes, Hieron. ad Euagrium.
the Presbyters of that Church did choose their Bishop from amongst themselves:
no care being had, for ought appears in the Father, either unto the Peoples
consent or presence. And this continued till the time of Heraclas and
Dionysius, as he there informs us, of whom we shall speak more hereafter. But
whatsoever interest, either the Clergy in the one Church, or the People
challenged in the other; there is remaining still a possession of it in the
Church of England: the Chapter of the Cathedral or Mother Church making the
Election in the name of the Clergy; the King, as Caput Reipublicae, the head
and heart also of his people, designing or commending a man unto them; and
freedom left unto the People, to be present if they will at his Election, and
to except against the man, as also at his Confirmation, if there be any legal
and just exception to be laid against him.

Next for the Ordination of the Presbyters, Cyprians usual custom to take the
approbation of the People along with him; as he himself does inform us in an
Epistle of his, to his charge at Carthage, inscribed unto the Presbyters and
Deacons, and the whole body of the people. In ordinandis clericis, fratres
charissimi, Cypr. Ep. 33. vii l. 2. Ep. 5.
solemus vos ante consulere, and mores and merita singulorum, communi consilio
ponderare, which is full and large. Whatever he says elsewhere to the same
effect is in effect no more than what here is said; and therefore we shall save
the labor of a further search. Nor was this Cyprians custom only. It had
prevailed as it seems in most parts of Christendom; and was so universally
received, that even the Roman Emperors took notice of it. For Alexander
Severus, one of the hopefullest young Princes in the declining times of the
Roman Empire, noting this custom of the Christians, Lamprid. in vita Alex.
Siveri.
was wont when he promoted any unto the Government of Provinces, to post up, as
it were, the names of the persons, inviting the People to come in against them,
if they could charge them on just proof, with any crimes: And used to say it
were a shame not to observe that care in choosing of the Rulers of Provinces, to
whom men's lives and fortunes were to be committed; cum id Christiani and Judaei
facerent in praedicandis sacerdotibus, qui sunt ordinandi, when as the Jews and
Christians did it in publishing the merit of those Priests which were to be
ordained by them. Which kind of publication of the life and merits of the
party, that was to be Ordained, may possibly relate as well unto the popular
manner of Electing Bishops, at that time in use. But as there is no general
observation, but does and must give way unto particular occasions: so neither
was this Rule so generally observed, but that sometimes it was neglected. Even
Cyprian himself how much soever it concerned him to continue in the Peoples
favor, would many times make use of his own authority, in choosing and
ordaining men to Functions and Employments in the Church, without consulting
with the People, or making them acquainted with his mind therein. Cypr. Ep. 33.
For minding to advance Aurelius unto the Office of a Reader (an Office, but no
Order, in the Church of God) he tarried not the Peoples liking and consent: but
did it first, and after gave them notice of it: not doubting of their taking it
in good part, (quod vos scio and libenter amplecti) and so commends him to
their Prayers. Id. Epi. 34.
The like we find of Celerinus, a man highly prized, admitted first into the
Clergy by him and his Colleagues then present with him in his exile, and then
acquainteth the People that he had so done, non humana suffragatione, sed
divina dignatione, not being guided in it by any humane suffrage, but by Gods
appointment. And although Celerinus and Aurelius being known unto the People by
their former merits, the matter might be taken with the less resentment; yet
this no way can be affirmed of Numidicus: who being before a Presbyter in some
other Church, Baron. in Annal. Anno 253. n. 94. Cypr. Ep. 35.
as Baronius very well observes, and in all likelihood utterly unknown de
facie, to those of Carthage, was by Saint Cyprian of his sole authority,
without consulting either with Presbyters or People, (for ought which does
appear) taken into the number of the Presbyters of that Church, ut nobiscum
sedeat in Clero, and so to have a place, together with the Bishop himself,
amongst the Clergy of the same, and that we do not find as yet in Saint
Cyprians Writings, that the People had any special power either in the Election
or Ordination of their Presbyters, more than to give testimony of their well
deservings, or to object against them if they were delinquent. And more than
that is still remaining to them in the Church of England: in which the People
are required at all Ordinations, Book of Ordination.
that if they know any notable crime in any of them which are to be Ordained,
for which he ought not to be received into the Ministry, to declare the same,
and on the declaration of the same, the Bishop must desist from proceeding
further. This is as much as was permitted to them in the Primitive times, for
ought I perceive; and yet the Church of England gives them more than this: the
Presbyter who is to serve the Cure in particular Churches, being elected by the
Patrons of them, for and in the name of the rest of the People.

As for the power of Excommunication, Cyprian reckoned of it, as his own
prerogative; a point peculiar to the Bishop: in which he neither did advise
either with the Presbyters or People. When as the wickedness of Felicissimus
the leader of the Faction raised against him was grown unto the height, the
Father of his own authority denounced him Excommunicant abstentum se a nobis
sciat, Cypr. Ep. 38. vel l. 5. Ep. 1.
as the phrase then was; as he did also on Augendus, and diverse others of that
desperate party: committing the execution of his sentence to Herculanus and
Caldonius two of his Suffragan Bishops, and to Rogatianus and Numidicus, two of
the Presbyters of his charge; whom as for other matters, so for that he had
made his Substitutes, or Commissaries if you will, Cum ego vos pro me Vicarios
miserim, as the words are. And they accordingly being thus authorized proceed
in execution of the same, and that in a formality of words, which being they
present unto us the ancient form of the Letters of Excommunication used of old,
Apud Cypr. Epist. 39.
I will here lay down, Abstinuimus communicatione Felicissimum, and Augendum,
item Repostum de extorribus, and Irenem, Rutilorum, and Paulam Sarcinatricem;
quod ex annotatione mea scire debuistis. In which we may observe that this
Excommunication was so published, that all the residue of the Clergy, to whom
the publication of it was committed, might take notice of it: quod ex
Annotatione mea (or nostra rather, as Pamelius very probably conjectureth)
scire debuistis. So that the process of the whole is this, that those
Incendiaries were denounced excommunicate by St. Cyprian himself, the execution
of it left to those above remembered, whom he had authorized in that behalf; and
they accordingly proceeding made certificate of it unto the Clergy of Carthage,
that publication might be made thereof unto the People. Which differs very
little in effect from what is now in use amongst us. Nor did St. Cyprian do
thus only of himself, de facto; but he advises Rogatianus, one of his
neighboring Bishops, to exercise the like authority, as properly belonging to
his place de jure. Rogatianus had complained as it seems, Cyp. Ep. 65.
of some indignities and affronts which had been offered to him by his Deacon:
which his respect, in making his complaint unto him, as Cyprian took exceeding
kindly; so he informs him withal, that he had the Law in his own hands; and
that pro Episcopatus vigore and Cathedrae authoritate haberet potestatem qua
posset de illo statim vindicari; by vigor of his Episcopal function and the
Authority of his Chair, he had power enough, to be straightway avenged of him
for the same. Yet being the matter was referred unto him, he declares his
thoughts, that if the Deacon, whom he writ of, would repent his folly, and give
some humble satisfaction to the offended Bishop, he might not do amiss, to
remit the fault. But if he did provoke him further by his perverse and petulant
behavior; fungeris circa eum potestate honoris tui, ut eum vel deponas vel
abstineas; he should exercise the authority of his place, or honor, and either
degrade or excommunicate him, as he saw occasion. Here was no sending to the
Clergy to have their advice, no offering of the matter unto their better
consideration, but all referred unto the Bishop, to do therein as unto him
seemed best, of his own authority. So that both Cyprian, and other Bishops,
both might, and did, and durst do many things without advising with the Clergy
contrary to what some have told us: And this they might do well enough, without
dread or fear, Smectymn. sect. 9. p. 38. Ibid.
that any of their Sentences might be made irrita, or void, by the fourth
Council of Carthage; which was not held until 130 years and upwards, after
Cyprian's death. And for the interest of the People in these public Censures,
I find them not at all considered, but where the crime was heinous, and the
Church scandalized by the sins and lewdness of the party punished. In which
case there was such regard had of them, that the Sentence was published in
facie Ecclesiae, in the full Congregation of Gods people: And that as well that
they might the more heartily detest such scandalous and sinful courses; as that
they might eschew his company, and conversation, as they would do the company
of an Heathen or of a Publican: Tunc se ab ejus conjunctione salubriter
continet, Aug. cont. Ep. Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 2.
ut nec cibum quisquam cum eo sumat; not one of them so much as eating with the
man, who is so accursed. Which as they are St. Austins words, so by the tenor
of the place, they seem to intimate St. Cyprians practice. So that if
Excommunications had not passed in former times, Smectymn. p. 40.
without the knowledge and approbation of the body of the Church, to which the
delinquent did belong; as some men suppose, it was upon this reason only, as
themselves affirm, because the people were to forbear Communion with such. And
being that in the Church of England, the Excommunication of notorious sinners,
is publicly presented unto the knowledge of the People, for that very reason,
because they should avoid the company of Excommunicated persons: I see not any
thing in this particular, (I mean as to the publication of the Sentence) in
which the Church of England differs from the Primitive and ancient practice.
And did our Bishops keep the power of Excommunicating to themselves alone, and
not devolve it upon others: they did not any thing herein, but what was
practiced by Saint Cyprian.

For Reconciling of the Penitent, which naturally and of course is to come
after Excommunication, Cyprian took along with him, the counsel and consent
both of his Presbyters and People. And certainly it stood with reason that it
should so be, that as the whole Church had been scandalized at the heinousness
of the offense; so the whole Church also should have satisfaction in the
sincerity of the Repentance. Many and several are the passages in this Fathers
Writings, which do clearly prove it: none more exactly than that in his Epistle
to Cornelius, where wishing that he were in presence when perverse persons did
return from their sins and follies, Videres quis mihi labor sit persuadere
patientiam fratribus nostris, Cypr. Ep. 55.
you would then see, says he, what pains I take to persuade our brethren, that
suppressing their just grief of heart, recipiendis malis curandisque
consentiant, they would consent to the receiving and the curing consequently of
such evil members. Yet did he not so tie himself to this observance, but that
sometimes, according as he saw occasion, unus atque alius obnitente plebe and
contradicente, mea tamen facilitute suscepti sunt, some, though not many, had
been reconciled and reimbosomed with the Church, not only without the Peoples
knowledge, but against their wills. So that the interesse which the People had
in these relaxations of Ecclesiastical Censures, were not belonging to them as
in point of right, but only in the way of contentation. The leading voice was
always in the Bishop, and so the negative voice was also when it came to that:
He was to give his fiat first, before the Clergy had any thing to do therein:
St. Cyprian telling of himself, Id. Ibid.
quam prompta and plena dilectione, that he received such Penitents as came
unto him, with such affection and facility, that by his overmuch indulgence to
them, pene ipse delinque, he was even culpable himself. And if it were no
otherwise in his time with the Church of Carthage in this case, there it
appears to be in the third Council there assembled: the Bishop had not only the
leading voice, but the directing and disposing power, Council Car. III. cap. 32.
a negative voice into the bargain. For there it is ordained, Vt Presbyter
Episcopo inconsulto, non reconciliet Poenitentem, that the Presbyters were not
to reconcile a Penitent, unless it were in the Bishops absence, or in a case of
urgent and extreme necessity: (as in point of death) it being there declared
withal, that it belonged unto the Bishop, Ibid. c. 31.
poenitentiae tempora designare, to appoint the time, and the continuance of
the Penance, as he saw occasion. And this to be the practice of S. Cyprians
time, is most clear and evident, by the displeasure he conceived against some
Presbyters, who had admitted men (which before were lapsed) without leave from
him, to the blessed Sacrament. Cypr. Ep. 10.
A matter which he aggravates to the very height, charging them, that neither
mindful of the Gospel, nor their own place and station, nor of the future day
of Judgment, nor of the authority of him their Bishop; they had admitted such
as fell in time of persecution to the Churches Sacraments, not being by him
authorized so to do. And this he says, was sure an insolency, quod nunquam
omnino sub Antecessoribus factum, which never had been done in any of his
Predecessors times: and being now done, cum contumelia and contemptu
Praepositi, was done in manifest contempt and reproach of their Bishop,
threatening withal, that if they did persist in these wilful courses, he would
make use of that authority, qua me uti Dominus jubet, which God had given him
for that purpose; viz. suspend them from their Ministry, and bring them to a
public trial for their misdemeanors, before himself and all the People. It Is
true indeed, that in the outward action and formality of this great work of
Reconciliation, the Clergy did impose hands with the Bishop, upon the head of
him that was reconciled: Epist. 10.11, etc.
for we find often in St. Cyprian, Manus ab Episcopo and clero imposita; but
this was only, as I said before, in the outward action; the power of admitting
him unto that estate, and giving way to his desires in making of him capable of
so great a favor, belonging only to the Bishop, as before appears.

Thus have we seen how and in what particulars, Cyprian communicated some part
of his Episcopal Authority, either unto the Presbyters, or to the People; or to
both together. We will next look on those particulars, which he reserved wholly
and solely to himself: and they concern his Clergy chiefly; in his behavior
toward whom, in matters of reward and punishment, he was as absolute, and
supreme, as ever any Bishop since his time. And first in matter of reward, the
greatest honor whereof the Clergy in his time, were capable, was their place
of sitting, distinct and separate from the People. A place by Sozomon, Sozom.
l. 5. c. 14. Council. Laodi. Can. 55. Canon Sacerdot. distinct. 2. Cypr. Ep. 35.
called (...) as it were, the Sacrarie; by the Council of Laodicea, entitled
(...), by reason it was higher than the rest, that all the people might behold
it; by others, Presbyterium the place for Presbyters: but by what names soever
called, a place it was appointed for the Bishop and his Clergy only. Into this
place St. Cyprian admits Numidicus, a stranger to the Church of Carthage, as
before was noted from Baronius: but by him added to the number of the
Presbyters there, adscriptus Presbyterorum Carthaginiensium numero, as his own
phrase is, that so he might enjoy the honor of that place, with the less
distaste.

And so for point of maintenance, which was another part of the Reward, that
did belong to the Laborious and painful Presbyter: the distribution of the same
was wholly in the Bishops power. So wholly in his power, that howsoever it
belonged unto none of right, but unto the Presbyters: yet, he, having bestowed
on Celerinus, and Aurelius, the place of Readers in the Church; did also give
unto them or assign the same full maintenance, Id. Epi. 34.
which was allowed to any of the Presbyters. Presbyterii honorem designasse nos
illis jam Sciatis, ut and sportulis iisdem cum Presbyteris honorentur, and
divisiones menstruas aequatis portionibus partiantur. Know you (says he) in an
Epistle to the whole Church of Carthage, that we have assigned them to the full
honor of Presbyters, appointing that they should receive the same proportion
of allowance, and have as great a share in the monthly dividends, as any of the
Presbyters had. Where, by the way, this portion or allowance had the name of
Sportula, from the reward or fees which anciently were allowed to Judges, and
by that name are mentioned in the Civil Laws; which being assigned to the
Presbyters, pro singulorum meritis, according to the merits of the persons, to
some more, some less, at the discretion of the Bishop, gave them the name of
Fratres sportulantes, whereof we read in Cyprian, Ep. 66. And they were called
divisiones mensurnae, the monthly Dividends, because that as the contributions
of the people were made once every month, menstrua quaque die, as Tertullian a
Presbyter of this Church has told us; so, as it seems, Tertul. in Apolog. c.
36.
the Dividend was made accordingly, as soon as the money had been brought to the
Bishops hands. So also in the way of punishment, when any of the Clergy had
offended, the Bishop had Authority to withdraw his maintenance, and withold
his stipend. For when complaint was made to Cyprian of Philumenus and
Fortunatus, two of his Subdeacons, Cypr. Ep. 28.
and of Favorinus an Acolythite, qui medio tempore recesserunt, who formerly
had forsook their calling, and now desired to be restored again unto it;
although he neither would nor could determine in it, before he had consulted
with his Colleagues, and the whole body of his People, (the matter being great
and weighty) yet in the mean time he suspends them from their monthly pay,
interim se a divisione mensurna tantum contineant, as he there resolves it,
leaving the cause to be determined of at better leisure. This was a plain
suspension a Beneficio, and could he not suspend ab Officio also? Assuredly he
both could and did, as appears evidently by his proceeding with these
Presbyters, who had entrenched upon his jurisdiction, as before was said. Whose
great offense, though he reserved unto the hearing both of the Confessors
themselves, and the whole body of the People for a final end; yet in the mean
time, prohibeantur interim offerre, Idem Ep. 10.
it was his pleasure to suspend them for the Ministry from their attendance at
the Altar. Suspend them then he might, there is no doubt of that; but might he
not if he saw cause, deprive them also. He might assuredly, or otherwise he had
never given that counsel to Rogatianus, that if the Deacon formerly remembered,
did not repent him of his faults, eum vel deponat vel abstineat, Idem Ep. 65.
he either might deprive or excommunicate him, which he would himself. He were
a very greedy Bishop, who would not be content with that allowance of Authority
which S. Cyprian had.

The like authority he used toward the People also, Geminius Victor, who at
his death had made Geminius Faustinus, one of the Presbyters of Carthage,
tutorem testamento suo, Idem Ep. 66.
the Executor of his last Will and Testament? which being like to be a means
whereby Faustinus might be taken off from his employment in the Ministry; the
displeased Bishop does declare, ne deprecatio aliqua nomine ejus in Ecclesia
frequentetur, that he should neither be remembered in the Offertory, nor any
Prayer be made in his name in the Church. And this he did upon this reason, ne
quis Sacerdotes and Ministros Dei, Altari ejus and Ecclesiae vacantes, ad
seculares molestias devocet, that none hereafter should presume to withdraw the
Priest and Ministers of God from their attendance at the Altar in the Churches
service, unto the cares and troubles of the world. Which passage as it shows
expressly the great tie which the Bishops of those times had upon the Conscience
of the People, whom they could punish thus after death it self: So is it
frequently alleged, Smectym. p. 46.
to show that neither Presbyters nor Bishops were to be molested with handling
of worldly affairs. And so far I agree with them, that Presbyters and Bishops
are to be restrained from these worldly matters, so far forth as they are a
molestation to them, whereby they are disabled from the executing of their holy
function, as this Faustinus seems to be, ab Altari avocatus, Cypr. Ep. 66.
quite taken off from the attendance of his place; so far forth as the ancient
Canons on the which Cyprian grounds himself, they are and ought to be
restrained. V. par. 2. c. 1.
But we have shown before that many secular affairs were not inconsistent with
the true meaning of those Canons, as neither possibly might this of Faustinus,
had it happened at some other time, been reputed by him. But at this time, partly
by reason of the persecution, and partly on occasion of the factious, the
Church was almost destitute and unprovided. This as he intimates in his 35
Epistle, Desolata Presbyterii nostri copia. ep. 35. Cypr. Ep. 24.
touching the admission of Numidicus into the number of their Presbyters; so he
affirms the same at large in another place: where he declares, plurimos
nostros absentes esse, paucos vero qui illic sunt vix ad ministerium quotidiani
operis sufficere, that many of the Presbyters did absent themselves, and that
those which did remain upon their Charge, could not suffice for the performance
of the daily offices. So that the Church being in that necessity, and such a
manifest need or want of Presbyters, as then appearing in the Church; Faustinus
could the less be spared from the attendance on the Ministry, and consequently
Geminius Victor the more unadvised, in putting him on such a business by which
he was ab administratione Divina avocatus, Cypr. Ep. 66.
quite taken off from the employment of his calling in Gods holy Service. And
this I rather take to be the true condition of the business, and that which
gave S. Cyprian so great cause of Anger, than with Saravia, De honor Praesul.
debito. c. 16.
to affirm that the Decree or Canon whereof Cyprian speaks, was but
particular and provincial, illi tempori and loco serviens, calculated for the
Meridian only of the Church of Carthage, and fitted to the present time; the
Canon being ancient and universal, as before was shown.

Another point, Cyprian exercised the height of his Episcopal Authority, (and
an high point it was indeed, as the times then were) was in restraining of
those Indulgences, which usually the Martyrs, or such as were prepared for
Martyrdom, did too promiscuously bestow on collapsed Christians. For in the
Primitive times, the Discipline of the Church being very rigid and severe, such
as in time of Persecution had denied the Faith, either by offering unto Idols,
or by some formal abnegation under their handwriting, Albaspin. de Eccl.
ritibus.
whom they called Libellatici, were doomed unto perpetual penance; no
restitution being to be hoped for, to the Churches favor, and to the benefits
and comforts of it, until the very moment of their last departure. Yet such was
the regard which was born to those, who did already suffer duresse and
imprisonment, and were resolved to suffer death for the sake of Christ; that
such to whom they gave their Letters of recommendation, Cypr. Ep. 11.13, 14, 15.
were by the Bishops readmitted into the bosom of Church. And this at first was
done without any sensible inconvenience following thereupon, the Martyrs or
Confessors rather being very wary, on whom they did bestow those favors, and
very sparing of them also. But when that it was grown so general, that either
they did pacem lapsis dare, receive such men into their favors, and the
Churches peace promiscuously without care and difference; Id. Ep. 17.19, 20,
21, 22.
or that the Presbyters taking their warrant for sufficient, without the leave
and liking of their Bishop, admitted them to the Communion; then did the Father
manifest his dislike thereof, whereof consult, Ep. 11.13, 14, 15. For when it
once was come to this, he first addressed himself unto the Confessors or
Martyrs to be more sparing of the like Indulgences, and after to the Presbyters
and People severally, for the repressing of this foul disorder. And when that
would not serve the turn, he resolved at last, that for the time to come, Cypr.
Ep. 15.
Quamvis libello a Martyribus accepto, such Bills or Letters notwithstanding,
as they had received from those Martyrs, they should stay his leisure, and the
whole business concerning them be respited until his return. Which check thus
given, and certain of the Presbyters rebuked and threatened by him for their
officiousness in this kind, as before we saw; it came to pass, that in a very
little time, as well the Discipline of the Church, as the Authority of the
Bishops, reverted to its former rigor, especially after that on the sight of
this inconvenience, the Lapsi, or Collapsed Christians were by the general
consent of holy Church admitted unto penance, like to other Sinners, which as
it happened chiefly by S. Cyprians means, so was it brought to pass in S.
Cyprians time. But here take notice by the way, that though these Indulgences
had been granted by these Confessors, whilst they were Martyrs, but in voto,
they were not yet to take effect, Albaspinae. de rit. Eccl. li. 1. obseru. 2.
as the late Learned Bishop of Orleans very well observed, till that they had
received the crown of Martyrdom, which he proves very evidently out of certain
places of S. Cyprian compared together; for which I leave you to that Author.
It is enough that the first check that had been given to that promiscuous
liberty which the Martyrs took, of doing what they pleased with the Churches
Keys, was given by Cyprian. Whose footsteps one of his Successors following,
after brought to pass, Baro. in Annal. Eccl. Anno. 302. n. 126.
that none should have the honor of being counted Martyrs after their decease,
but such whose life and sufferings, and the occasion of those sufferings were
first reported by the Bishop of the place in which he lived, to his
Metropolitan or Primate, and by the Metropolitan to the chief Primate, who was
he of Carthage; who on deliberation was to decree, Cuinam Martyris cultus
deberet impendi, who ought to have the honor and repute of Martyrs, as
Baronius notes. And this he proves out of a passage in S. Austin, Brev. Coll.
die 3. c. 5.
wherein Mensurius Bishop of Carthage, writing unto Secundus Primate of
Numidia, (for all the Metropolitans of Africa were called Primates) is said to
have disliked of those, which without cause or questioning exposed themselves
to open danger; Et ab iis honorandis prohibuisse Christianos, and that he did
prohibit the Christian People to give them that regard and honor which was due
to Martyrs. And indeed Optatus speaks of one who was reputed for a Martyr,
Opta^. de Schism. lib. 1.
Sed nondum vindicatus, but not asserted to that honor, not established in it.
So great was the Authority of Bishops over that of Martyrs, whether dead or
living.

But to return unto S. Cyprian, Theory. For if we look into his writings, we
shall soon find what his opinion was touching the institution of Episcopacy,
which he maintains in several places to be Jure Divino, no Ecclesiastical
device, no humane Ordinance. For grounding the Authority of his calling on
those words of Christ, Tibi dabo Claves, Cypr. Ep. 27.
he shows that ever since that time the Church has been constituted upon
Bishops, and every Act thereof by them administered. Then adds, Cum hoc itaque
Divina lege fundatum sit, that since it is so ordered by the Law of God, or by
Divine Law, which you will; he marveleth much that any one should write such
Letters to him, as he had formerly received from some of the collapsed
Christians. In his Epistle to Cornelius, Id. Ep. 55.
he calls the Office of a Bishop in governing the Church of God, Sublimem and
Divinam potestatem, an high and Divine Authority, and tells us of the same, de
Divina dignatione firmatur, that it is founded and confirmed by Divine
Providence or favor: In that unto Rogatianus, Idem Ep. 65.
Apostolos, i. e. Episcopos and Praepositos Dominus elegit, the Lord says he,
did choose Apostles, that is, the Bishops and Governors of the Church:
Therefore, if we that are the Bishops ought to do nothing against God, qui
Episcopos facit, who made us Bishops, so neither ought the Deacons to do any
thing in despite of us, who made them Deacons. Finally in that unto Florentius
Pupianus, Idem Ep. 69.
who had charged him, as it seems, with some filthy crimes, he affirms often,
that the Bishop is appointed by God himself, Sacerdotes per Deum in Ecclesia
constitui, that they are placed in the Church by God, Deum Sacerdotes facere,
that God makes Bishops; and in a word, Apostolis Vicaria ordinatione succedere,
they that succeeded the Apostles as their proper Substitutes. As for the
excellency of the Episcopal power, take this once for all, where he affirms
to Cornelius, non aliunde haereses abortas esse, Idem Ep. 55.
that Schisms and Heresies do proceed from no other fountain than this, That
there is no obedience yielded to the Bishop or Priest of God (for in the
ancient style of many of the Fathers, Sacerdos and Bishop is the same) Vel unus
in Ecclesia ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus Judex vice Christi cogitatur; and
that men do not think that there is one Bishop only for the time in a Christian
Church, one for the time that judges in the place of Christ. Pamel. Annot. in
Cypr. Ep. 55.
Which words since many of the Advocates for the Popes Supremacy have drawn
against all right and reason from their proper purpose, to the advancement of
the dignity of the Sea of Rome; S. Cyprian writing this unto Cornelius, then
the Bishop there; we may hear him speaking the same words almost in his own
behalf, Inde enim Schismata, etc. From hence, says he, do Schisms and Heresies
arise, Cypr. Ep. 69.
whilst the Bishop being but one in every Church, is slighted by the proud
presumption of some men; and he by man is judged unworthy, whom God makes
worthy of his favors. And because possibly it may be thought that Cyprian
might be partial in the heightning of his own Authority, I shall crave leave to
back him with Saint Hierom's words, Hieron. adv. Luciferian.
none of the greatest fautors of Episcopacy, who affirms as much; who tells us
plainly, that the safety of the Church depends on the chief Priest or Bishop,
Cui si non exors and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, to whom, in case there
be not given an eminent and transcendent power, there will be shortly as many
Schisms in the Church, as Priests. But it is time to leave S. Cyprian, who went
unto the Lord his God through the door of Martyrdom, Anno 261. proceeding from
the Church of Carthage to that of Alexandria, the next neighbor to it.

CHAP. V. Of the condition and affairs of the two Patriarchal Churches of
Alexandria and Antiochia.
1. Of the foundation and first Professors of the Divinity-School in
Alexandria. 2. What is affirmed by Clemens, one of those Professors, concerning
Bishops. 3. Origin the Divinity-Reader there, permitted to expound the
Scriptures, in the presence of the Bishop of Caesarea. 4. Contrary to the
custom of the Alexandrian and Western Churches. 5. Origin ordained Presbyter by
the Bishops of Jerusalem ad Caesarea, and excommunicated by the Bishop of
Alexandria. 6. What does occur touching the superiority and power of Bishops in
the works of Origin. 7. The custom of the Church of Alexandria, altered in the
election of their Bishops. 8. Of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, and his great
care and travails for the Churches peace. 9. The Government of the Church in
the former times, by letters of intercourse and correspondence amongst the
Bishops of the same. 10. The same continued also in the present Century. 11.
The speedy course taken by the Prelates of the Church, for the suppressing of
the Heresies of Samosatenus. 12. The Civil Jurisdiction, train and thrones of
Bishops, things not unusual in this Age. 13. The Bishops of Italy and Rome made
Judges in a point of title and possession, by the Roman Emperor. 14. The
Bishops of Italy and Rome, why reckoned as distinct in that Delegation.


AND being come to Alexandria, Eus. hist. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 10.
A School, as it appears by Eusebius, of no small Antiquity; who speaking of
the times of Commodus, says, (...), that of an ancient custom there had been a
School for teaching of Divinity, and other parts of Literature, which had been
very much frequented in the former times, and so continued till his days.
According to which platform, first Schools, and after Universities had their
consideration in the Church; from whence, as from a fruitful Seminary, she has
been stored ever since with the choicest wits for the advancement of her
public service. But for this School of Alexandria, the first Professor there,
which occurs by name, Id. ibid.
is said to be Pantaenus, (...), a man renowned in all parts of Learning: first
a Philosopher of the Sect of Stoics, and afterward a famous Christian Doctor.
A man so zealously affected to the Gospel of Christ, that for the propagating
of the same, he made a journey to the Indies; and after his return, he took
upon him the Professorship in the School aforesaid, (...), opening the
treasures of Salvation both by word and writing. Id. l. 5. c. 11.
And I the rather instance in him, because that under him Clemens of Alexandria
learned his first Principles of Religion; and after him succeeded in his Chair
or Office: who being by birth of Athens, and of the same family with the former
Clemens, the fourth Bishop of Rome, upon his coming and abode at Alexandria,
gained the surname or additament of Alexandrinus. Now that Clemens was
Divinity-reader in the School of Alexandria, Id. l. 6. c. 5.
is said expressly by Eusebius; where he affirms also, (...), that Origin was
one of his Disciples: Who after coming to the place himself, Id. li. 6. cap.
12. (...).
was followed in the same by Heraclas, and Dionysius successively; both of them
Scholars in the School of Origin, both severally and successively Readers or
Doctors in the same, and both, first Heraclas, Dionysius next, Bishops or
Patriarchs of Alexandria. So that within the space of half an hundred years,
this School thus founded, or at the least advanced in reputation by Pantaenus,
brought forth the said four famous Doctors, Clemens and Origin, Heraclas and
Dionysius, all of them in their times men of great renown, and the lights and
glory of their Age. And though I might relate the names of many other men of
fame and credit, who had their breeding in these Schools, did it concern the
business which I have in hand; yet I shall instance in no more but these, and
these it did concern me to make instance of, because their Acts and Writings
are the special subject of all that is to come in this present Chapter; and
were indeed the greatest business of that Age.

And first for Clemens, Eusebius gives us, and from him St. Hierom: Eusebius. hist
Ecc. l. 6. c. 11. (...).
those which concern us most, were his eight books inscribed (...), which are
now not extant, and those entitled (...), which are still remaining. In the
first eight, he tells us in the way of story, that Peter, James, and John,
after Christ's Ascension, Id. l. 2. c. 2.
how high soever in the favor of their Lord and Master, contended not amongst
themselves for the place and honor, (...), but made choice of James surnamed
the Just, to be the Bishop of Jerusalem: that Peter, on perusal of the Gospel,
writ by Mark, (...), Id. ib. c. 14.
confirmed the same by his authority, for the advancement of the Church that
James (...), Id. Ibid. cap. 22. (...).
to whom the Bishopric of Jerusalem had been committed by the Apostles, was
by the malice of the Jews done to a cruel death: that John the Apostle, after
Domitian's death, Id. l. 3. c. 17. (...).
returned to Ephesus from Patmos, and going at the entreaty of his friends to
the neighbor Nations, (...), in some parts he ordained Bishops, in others
planted or established Churches, in others, by the guidance of the holy Spirit,
electing fit men for the Clergy; telling withal the story of a certain Bishop,
to whom the said Apostle did commit a young man to be trained up. All which he
might affirm with the greater confidence, because he tells us of himself, Id.
l. 6. cap. 11. (...).
(...), that he lived very near the Apostles times, and so might have the
better light to discern their actions. And for the other eight remaining,
although there is but little in them, which concerns this Subject, the Argument
of which he writes, not having any thing to do therewith: yet in that little
we have mention of the several Orders, of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons in
the Churchof God. And first for Bishops, speaking of the domestic Ministeries
that belong to marriage, he shows that by the Apostles Rule, Clement. Alexand.
Stroma. lib. 3.
such Bishops are to be appointed for the Church of God, (...), as by the
orderly government of their private families, may be conceived most fit and
likely to have a care unto the Church. Where clearly, by his (...) he means not
Presbyters, as the Apostle is conceived to mean in his Epistle to Timothy. For
howsoever the Presbyters might be trusted with the charge of a particular
Congregation; yet had they never the inspection, the care or governance, (...),
of a whole Church, or many Churches joined together, as the word (...) may be
rendered. That was the privilege and power of Bishops. So for the two inferior
Orders, we find them in another place, Id. ibid. li. 7.
where he divides such things as concern this life, into (...), matters of
improvement and advantage, and (...), subservient only thereunto; then adds,
that in the Church of God, the Deacons exercise the subservient Offices; (...),
but that the Presbyters attend those others, which conduce to our amendment or
improvement in the way of godliness. Out of which words if any man can gather
that judging of the conversation or crimes of any members of the Church, that
discipline, which works emendation in men, is in the power of the Elders,
Smectymn. p. 38.
as I see some do, he must needs have a better faculty of extraction, than the
best Chemist that I know of. In all that place of Clemens not a word of
Judging, nor so much as a syllable of Discipline. A power of bettering and
amending our sinful lives, he gives indeed unto the Presbyters: but that I hope
both is and may be done by the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, with which
the Presbyters are and have been trusted. This is the (...), the bettering and
improving power which belongs to them; and not the dispensation of the Keys,
which have been always put into other hands, or if at any time into theirs, it
has been only in a second and inferior place, not in the way of judging, in
the course of Discipline.

Next let us look on Origin, Catechist, in the Church, Hieron. de Script. Eccl.
in Origin.
and afterward a public Reader in the Schools of Alexandria, a man in whom
there was nothing ordinary, either good or ill: for when he did well, none
could do it better; and when he erred or did amiss, none could do it worse. The
course and method of his studies, the many Martyrs which he trained up in the
School of Piety, the several Countries which he traveled, either for informing
of himself or others, belong not unto this Discourse. Suffice it, that his
eminence in all parts of Learning, and his great pains in his profession,
Eusebius. bist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 7. (...). Id. ib. c. 13. (...).
made him most grateful, for a time, unto Demetrius the Patriarch of
Alexandria, though after upon envy at the man's renown, he did endeavor to
diminish his reputation. For on occasion of the Wars in Egypt, seeing he could
not stay in safety there, he went unto Caesarea, the Metropolitan See of
Palestine: where, though not yet in holy Orders, he was requested by the
Bishop, not only to dispute in public, as his custom was, (...), but also to
expound the Scriptures; and that too (...) in the open Church. Which when it
came unto the knowledge of Demetrius, he forthwith signified by Letters his
dislike thereof: affirming it to be an unaccustomed and unheard of thing,
(...), that any Layman should presume to Preach, or Expound Scripture in the
Bishops presence. But hereunto it was replied by Theoctistus Bishop of
Caesarea, and Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem who was also there, that he had
quite mistook the matter: it being lawful for such men as were fit and eminent,
to speak a word of exhortation to the People, or to preach unto them, (...), if
they were thereunto required by the Bishop; instancing in Euelpis, Paulinus,
and Theodorus, godly brethren all, who on the like authority had so done
before; and they, for their parts, being of opinion, that others besides them
had done so too. In agitation of which business, there are these two things
presented to us, first the regard and reverence, which was had, in those Pious
times, unto the person of a Bishop; and then the power and authority that was
vested in them. For first, it seems that men of whatsoever parts, though of
great spirit and abilities, did notwithstanding think it an unfitting thing, to
meddle with expounding Scripture, or edifying of the People, in case the Bishop
was in place. And yet as strange and uncouth as it was, or was thought to be,
the License of the Bishop made it lawful. But then withal we must conceive of
Preaching in this place and story, not as a Ministerial Office, but only as an
Academical or Scholastical exercise: according as it is still used in our
Universities, where many not in holy Orders, preach their turns and courses.

And yet indeed Demetrius was not so much out as they thought he was, Eastern
Churches; the use was otherwise in Alexandria, and in the Churches of the West:
in which it was so far unusual for Laymen to expound, or preach in the Bishops
presence, that it was not lawful for the Presbyters. For in the neighbor
Church of Carthage it was thus of old, in these times at least. For when
Valerius Bishop of Hippo, a Diocese within that Province, being by birth a
Grecian, and not so well instructed in the pronunciation of the Latin Tongue,
perceived his Preaching not to be so profitable to the common People, for
remedy thereof, having then lately ordained Augustine Presbyter, eidem
potestatem dedit coram se in Ecclesia Evangelium praedicandi, Possidon. in vit.
Aug. c. 5.
he gave him leave to preach the Gospel in the Church, though himself were
present. And this, says Possidonius, who relates the story, was contra usum
and consuetudinem Ecclesiarum Africanarum, against the use and custom of the
African Churches; and many Bishops thereabouts did object as much. But the old
man, bearing himself upon the custom of the Eastern Church, where it was
permitted, would not change his course. By means whereof it came to pass, that
by this example, some Presbyters in other places, accepta ab Episcopis
potestate, being thereto licenced by the Bishop, did preach before them in the
Church, without control. For Austin being afterward Bishop of Hippo in the
place of Valerius, applauds Aurelius the Metropolitan of Carthage, Aug. Ep. 77.
for giving way unto the same: commending him for the great care he took in his
Ordinations, but specially, de sermon Presbyterorum qui te praesente populo
infunditur, for the good Sermons preached by the Presbyters unto the People in
his presence. But this permission or allowance was only in some places, in some
Churches only; perhaps in none but those of Africa. For Hierom writing to
Nepotian, (being himself a Presbyter in the Church of Rome) complains thereof
ut turpissimae consuetudinis, Hieron. ad Nepotianum.
as of a very evil custom, that in some Churches the Presbyters were not to
preach if the Bishop were by. And though he was a man of great authority with
Damasus and others his Successors, Popes of Rome; yet got he little by
complaining, the custom still continuing as before it was. And this is clear by
the Epistle of Pope Leo, in which as it is declared unlawful, to perform diverse
other Sacred Offices in the Bishops presence, Leon. Ep. 88.
without his special Precept and Command; so also is there a non licet in this
point of Preaching, which was not to be done [nec populum docere, ncc plebem
exhortari] if the Bishop were then present in the Congregation. So that this
being then an ancient and received custom, must needs be now in force when
Demetrius lived; and, as it seems by his expostulation in the case of Origin,
had been no less observed in Alexandria than in Rome or Africa. There was
indeed a time, and that shortly after, in which the Presbyters of Alexandria
might not preach at all, (...), as it is in Socrates. Socrat. hist. Eccl. l. 5.
c. 21.
Which general restraint, as it was occasioned by reason of the factions raised
by Arius, or other troubles of that Church, in the beginning of the Age next
following; so it continued till the times of Socrates and Sozomen, Sozom. hist.
Eccl. l. 7. c. 19.
who lived about the middle of the sixth Century, and take notice of it. So
that as it appeared before in the case of Austin, that the Bishops have a power
to License; so it appears by that of Arius, that they also have a power to
silence.

But to return again to Origin, Caesarea and Jerusalem finding how profitable
a Servant he might prove in the Church of God, did at another time, as he
passed through Palestine to go toward Greece, ordain him Presbyter. And this
was done (...), says Eusebius, by the Bishops there, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 6.
c. 17. (...). etc. 7.
by the two Bishops formerly remembered; no Presbyter concurring in it for ought
there we find. Yet when Demetrius moved with his wonted envy, did not only what
he could to disgrace the man, but also sought to frame an accusation against
those, (...), Id. l. 6. c. 7. n.
which had advanced him to the order of a Presbyter: We do not find that he
objected any thing against them, as to the Act of Ordination, but only as unto
the irregularity of the person, by reason of a corporal defect of his own
procuring. And on the other side, when as Demetrius saw his time, and found
that some few passages in his many writings, either by him or in his name at
least set forth and published, had made him liable unto danger, obnoxious to
the censures of the Church; he did not only excommunicate him, which had been
enough either to right the Church or revenge himself, but he prevailed with
many other Churches also, Hier. in Apo. l cont. Ruffinum.
to confirm the sentence. Ab eodem Demetrio Episcopo Alexandrino fuisse
excommunicatione damnatum, prolatamque in eum sententiam a caeteris quoque
Ecclesiis ratam habitam, as S. Hierom has it. Whereas before we had his
Ordination performed only by the two Bishops of Caesarea and Jerusalem,
without the hands of any of the Presbyters; and yet the Ordination good and
valid, the whole Church after reckoning him for a Presbyter without doubt or
scruple; so here we find him Excommunicated by one Bishop only, without the
votes or suffrages of the Presbyters, or any show or color of it; and yet the
Church concurring with that Bishop, though his ancient Enemy, in confirmation
of that censure. So fully was the Church persuaded in the former times, that
these were parts of the Episcopal jurisdiction and authority, that there was no
objection made against this last, though Origin had many friends, and those
great ones too; nor nullity or invalidity in the first, although Demetrius, who
by reason of his great place and power, had made him many Enemies, did except
against it.

From that which does occur concerning Origin in the Books and Works of other
Writers, Origin. And there we find in the first place the several Orders of
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons. For speaking of those words of the Apostle, He
that desires the Office of a Bishop, desires a good work; he tells us this,
Origin in Mat. cap. 15.
Talis igitur Episcopus non desiderat bonum opus, that such a Bishop desires
not a good work, who desires the Office, either to get glory amongst men, or
be flattered and courted by them, or for the hope of gain from those which
believe the Gospel, and give large gifts in testimony of their Piety. Then
adds, Idem vero and de Presbyteris and de Diaconis dices, that the same is to
be said of Presbyters and Deacons also. Nor does he only show us, though that
were sufficient, the several ranks and orders in the Hierarchy, but also the
ascent or degrees from the one to the other, In Ecclesia Christi inveniuntur,
In the Church of Christ, Orig. tract. 24. in Mat. c. 23.
says he, there are some men who do not only follow Feasts and them that make
them, but also love the chiefest places, and labor much, primum ut Diaconi
fiant, first to be made Deacons, not such as the Scripture describes, but such
as under pretense of long Prayers devour Widows houses. And having thus been
made Deacons, cathedras eorum qui vocantur Presbyteri praeripere ambiunt, they
very greedily aspire to the chairs of those who are called Presbyters; and some
not therewithal content, practice many ways, ut Episcopi vocentur ab hominibus,
to have the place or name of Bishops, which is as much to say as Rabbi, And
shortly after, having endeavored to depress this ambitious humor, he gives
this caveat, that he who exalts himself shall be humbled, which he desires all
men to take notice of, but specially the Deacons, Presbyters, and Bishops,
which do not think those words to be spoken of them. Here have we three degrees
of Ministers in the Church of God, one being a step unto the other, whereof the
Bishop is Supreme, in the highest place. And not in place only, but in power
also, and authority, as being the men unto whose hands the keys were trusted by
our Savior. Id. Tract. 1. in Matthew.
For in another place he discourses thus. Quoniam ii qui Episcoporum locum
sibi vendicant, etc. When they which challenge to themselves the place of
Bishops, do make the same confession that Peter did, and have received from our
Savior the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, teaching that what they bind on
Earth is bound in Heaven, and what they loose in Earth is loosed in Heaven; we
must acknowledge that what they said is true, if withal they have those things
for which it was so said to Peter. For if he be bound with the Chains of his
own sins, frustra vel ligat vel solvit, in vain he takes upon him to bind or
loose. In the which words (not taking notice of his error, seeming to make the
efficacy of the Ministry to depend upon the merit of the Minister) we find
that in the time of Origin the dispensation of the Keys was the Bishops office.
This, if it should not be sufficient to declare their power, we may hear him in
another place calling them Principes populi Christiani, Id. in Mat. 19.
Tractat. 12.
the Princes of the Christian people, blaming them, such especially as lived in
the greatest Cities (in which he secretly upbraids the proud behavior of
Demetrius toward him) for want of affability and due respect to their
Inferiors: And writing on these words of our Savior Christ, Who is that
faithful and wise Servant, Id. in Mat. 24. Tractat. 31.
etc. he applies them thus, Peccat in Deum quicunque Episcopus, qui non quasi
conservis servus ministrat, sed quasi Dominus. That Bishop whosoever he be,
does offend against God, which does not minister as a Servant to his
Fellow Servants, but rather as a Lord amongst them; yea, and too often as a
sharp and bitter Master, domineering over them by violence (remember how
Demetrius used him) like the Taskmasters in the Land of Egypt, afflicting the
poor Israelites by force. Finally, as he does acquaint us with their power and
eminency, so does he tell us also of their care and service; Id. Homil. 6. in
Esaiam.
assuring us, that he who is called unto the Office of a Bishop, non vocatur ad
principatum, sed ad servitutem totius Ecclesiae, is not invited to an Empire or
a Principality, but to the Service of the whole Church. And this he keeps
himself to constantly in that whole discourse (being the sixth Homily on the
Prophet Esaias) in which although he afterward does call the Bishop, Ecclesiae
Princeps, yet he affirms that he is called ad servitutem, to a place of
service; and that by looking to his service well, ad solium coeleste ire
posset, he may attain an Heavenly Throne. And so much shall suffice for Origin,
a Learned but unfortunate man, with whom the Church had never peace, either
dead or living.

From him then we proceed unto his Successor, Heraclas, an Auditor at first of
Clemens, ^^s^b. hist. l. 6. c. 12. (...).
then of Origin, who being marvellously affected with the great Learning of the
man, (...), made him his Partner in the Chair; which after Origin was laid by,
Id. c. 20. (...).
he managed wholly by himself with great applause. A man that had the happiness
to succeed the two greatest Enemies in the world, Origin and Demetrius; the one
in the Schools, the other in the Church of Alexandria; unto which honor he was
called on Demetrius death, who had sat Bishop there three and forty years. On
this preferment of Heraclas unto the Patriarchate, the Regency of the
Alexandrian Schools, was forthwith given to Dionysius, another of Origens
Disciples, who after fourteen years or thereabout, succeeded also in the
Bishopric. And here began that alteration in the Election of the Bishops of
this Church, which S. Hierom speaks of. Hieron. ad Evagrium.
The Presbyters before this time used to Elect their Bishop from among
themselves. Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium
Episcopos, Presbyteri unum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu collocatum,
Episcopum nominabant, as the Father has it. But here we find that course was
altered, though what the alteration was, in what it did consist, whether in the
Electors, or the condition of the party to be Elected, is not so clearly
evident in S. Hierom's words. For my part, I conceive it might be in both, both
in the unum ex se, and the collocabant. For first the Presbyters of that Church
had used to choose their Bishop from amongst themselves, Electing always one of
their own body. But in the choice of these two Bishops that course was altered;
these two not being Presbyters of the Church, but Readers in the Schools of
Alexandria, and so not chosen from amongst themselves. And secondly, I take it
that the course was altered, as to the Electors, to the Collocabant. For
whereas heretofore the Presbyters had the sole power of the Election, to choose
whom they listed, and having chosen, to enthrone him without expecting what the
people were pleased to do; the people seeing what was done in other Churches,
begun to put in for a share, not only ruling, but finally overruling the
Election. What else should further the Election of these two, I can hardly
tell; but that their diligence and assiduity in the discharge of the employment
they had took upon them; the great abilities they showed therein, and the great
satisfaction given thereby unto the people, who carefully frequented those
public Readings, had so endeared them to the multitude, that no other Bishops
could content them, had not these been chosen. And this I am the rather induced
to think, because that in a short time after, the interess of the people in the
Election of their Bishop was improved so high, that the want of their consent
and suffrage was thought by Athanasius a sufficient bar against the right of
the Elected, Atha. in Epi. ad Orthodoxos.
affirming it to be against the Churches Canons, (...), and to the precept of
the Apostles. But which of these soever it was, an alteration here was made of
the ancient custom, which is as much as is intended by S. Hierom in the words
alleged. How others have abused this place, to prove that the imparity of
Bishops is not of Divine Authority, but only brought in by the Presbyters, we
have shown before. Part I. Cha. 3.

But to go on with Dionysius (for of Heraclas and his acts there is little
mention) we find the time in which he sat to be full of troubles; Novatus had
begun a faction in the Church of Rome, grounding the same upon a false and
dangerous doctrine; the sum whereof we find in an Epistle of this Dionysius,
Eus. hist. Ec. lib. 7. cap. 7.
unto another Dionysius Pope of Rome. And whereas Fabius Bishop of Antiochia,
was thought to be a fautor of that Schism, he writes to him about it also. Id.
l. 6. c. 36. (...). Id. l. 7. c. 5. (...). Id. l. 7. c. 21. (...). Id. l. 7. c.
22. (...).
So when Sabellius had begun to disperse his Heresies, he presently gives
notice of it to Sixtus, or Xystus Bishop of the Church of Rome; as also unto
Ammon Bishop of Bernice, and Basilides the Metropolitan of Cyrenaica or
Pentapolis, and to diverse others. And when that Paulus Samosatenus began to
broach strange doctrins in the Church of Christ, although he could not go in
person to suppress the same, yet writ he an Epistle to the Bishops Assembled
there, (...), declaring his opinion of the point in question. And on the other
side, when as the Persecutors made foul havoc in the Church, and threatened
utterly to destroy the Professors of it; Id. l. 6. c. 34. (...).
he by his Letters certifieth his neighboring Bishops in what estate Gods
Church stood with him, with what heroic resolutions the Christians in his
charge did abide the fury, and conquered their tormenters by their patient
sufferings; so giving houour to the dead, and breathing courage in the living.
Indeed what Bishops almost were there in those parts of Christendom, with whom
he held not correspondence, with whom he had not mutual and continual
intercourse by the way of Letters, from whom he did not carefully receive in
the self-same way both advice and comfort? Witness his several Epistles,
besides those formerly remembered, unto Cornelius Pope of Rome, Id. li. 6. c. 38.
commending him for an Epistle by him written against Novatus; and giving
notice to him of the death of Fabius, and how Demetrianus did succeed him in
the Sea of Antioch; and also to the Church of Rome, discoursing of the public
Ministeries in the Christian Church. Witness that also unto Stephanus, the
Predecessor of Cornelius, Id. l. 7. c. 2. Id. l. 7. c. 4.
entitled De Baptismate; a second to the aforesaid Stephanus, about the
faction of Novatus. To Dionysius Bishop of Rome, besides that before remembered
from Eusebius, a second extant in the works of Athanasius. And one to Paulus
Samosatenus, Athanas. opera graec. lat. Tom. 1. p. 558. Euse. l. 7. c. 24.
Nicephorus, Ecc. hist. l. 6. c. 27. Biblio. Patr. T. 3. edit. Col. Bar. An.
265. Eusebius. bist. l. 6. cap. ult.
the wretched Patriarch of Antiochia, of which though there is no mention in
Eusebius, who tells us that he would not vouchsafe to write unto him, yet is it
intimated in Nicephorus, who affirms the contrray, and extant in the
Bibliotheca Patrum, and in the Annals of Baronius. It were an infinite and
endless labor to recite all those, which besides these inscribed unto the
Bishops of the greater Churches, he writ and sent to others of less note and
quality, as viz. to Conon Bishop of Hierapolis, the Churches of Laodicea and
Armenia, (...), and to whom not almost either Priest or Bishop that was of any
merit and consideration in the Church of Christ?

If you demand to what end serves this general muster of the Epistles of this
Prelate, pari consortio praediti potestatis and honoris, as S. Cyprian has it;
Cyprian de Ecclesiae unitate.
by consequence all Bishops also were founded in the like equality. So that the
government of the Church, as to the outward form and polity thereof, was
Aristocratical. And being so, there was in manner a necessity imposed upon the
Prelates of the Church, to maintain mutual intercourse and correspondence
betwixt one another by Letters, Messages, and Agents, for the communicating of
their Councils, and imparting their advice, as occasion was in all omergent
dangers of the Church. For howsoever that the Church had followed in some
things the pattern of the Roman Empire, and in each Diocese thereof (taking the
Word according to the civil sense) had instituted and ordained a Primate, to
whom the final resolution of all businesses did appertain, that fell within the
compass of that Diocese: Yet all these Primates being of equal power and
authority, each of them absolute and independent with the bounds and limits of
his own jurisdiction, there was no other way to compose such differences as
were either indeterminable at home, or otherwise concerned the public, but
this of mutual intercourse and correspondence. And this, what ever is opined
unto the contrary both by the Masters and the Scholars in the Church of Rome,
who have advanced the Pope into the Sovereign or Supreme direction in all
points of doubt; will prove to be the practice of the Christian Church in all
times and Ages, till the Authority of all other Churches in the worst and
darkest times of Christianity, came to be swallowed up in the gulf of Rome.
For presently upon the death of the Apostles, who questionless had the frequent
resort, the final ending of all businesses which concerned the Church, a full
and plenary authority to direct the same; Ruseb. hist. Ec. l. 3. c. 12. (...)
Id. c. 30. (...).
we find that Clemens, one of their Disciples, sends his Epistle to the Church
of Corinth for the composing of some Schisms which were raised amongst them,
and that Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, another of their Scholars sends the like
to Rome, for their confirming in the faith. Besides which, as he traveled
toward Rome, or rather was haled thither to his Execution, he dispatched
others of his Epistles unto other Churches, and one amongst the rest unto
Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, commending unto him the good estate of the Church
of Antioch. Id. l. 4. c. 22. (...).
The like we find of Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, a right godly man, of whose
Epistles to the Lacedaemonians, Athenians, Nicomedians, and those of Crete; as
also to the Churches in Pontus, nay to that of Rome, conducing either to the
beating down of Heresies, or to the preservation of peace and unity, or to the
confirmation of the faith, or rectifying of what was amiss in the Churches
discipline, there is full mention in Eusebius.

Thus when Pope Victor by his rash perverseness had almost plunged the Church in
an endless broil; Id. l. 5. c. 23.24. (...).
the Bishops of these times bestirred themselves by public writings to
compose the quarrel; particularly Irenaeus and Polyerates, the one the
Metropolitan of the Gallick, the other of the Asian Churches. And when that
many of the Bishops severally had convocated Councils and Synodical meetings to
make up this breach; upon the rising of the same they sent out their Letters,
Ib. c. 22. (...).
signifying what they had Decreed, advising what they would have done by all
Christian people. Ib. c. 25. (...).
For though Eusebius instanceth in none but the Bishops of Caesarea and
Jerusalem, (in the records of which, in two Churches, he had been most versed)
which sent out these Synodical Epistles; yet being so many other Metropolitans
had called Synods also to the same intent, I doubt not but they took the same
course as the others did in manifesting their Decrees and Counsels. Nay so
exact and punctual they were in the continuance of this mutual amity and
correspondence, that there was almost no occurrence of any moment o^
consideration, Id. l. 6. c. 28. (...). Id. l. 6. c. 10.16. and Cyprian. Epist.
42.
not so much as the death of some eminent Prelate, and the succession of a new;
but they gave notice of it unto one another, ending their Letters of
congratulation unto the party so advanced: Examples of the which in
Ecclesiastical Histories are both infinite and obvious. By means of which
continual intercourse there was maintained, not only an Association of the
several Churches for their greater strength, nor a Communication only of their
Councils for the public safety, but a Communion also with each other, Optat.
de Schi. Donat. l. 2.
as Members of the Mystical Body of our Savior Christ. And this is that
Optatus speaks of, when having made a Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome, from S.
Peter down unto Siricius, who then held that place; or, as his words there are,
Qui noster est Socius, who was his Partner or Associate in the common
Government of the Church: He adds, Cum quo nobis totus orbis commercio
formatarum in una communionis societate concordant, with whom the whole world
does agree with us in one communion or society, by Letters of intercourse and
correspondence. For Literae formatae, or communicatoriae, were these Letters
called, as in the 163 Epistle of S. Austin, where both names occur.

This as it was the usage of the former times, so was there never more need to
uphold the same, than in the latter part of this present Age. So mighty a
distemper had possessed the Church, that no part almost of it was in a
tolerable constitution: and therefore it concerned the Bishops to be quick and
active, before the maladies thereof became incurable. In that of Carthage,
besides the faction raised by Felicissimus, which had no countenance from the
Church; there was an erroneous doctrine publicly received about the Baptism of
Heretics. The Church of Alexandria, besides the heat she fell into concerning
Origin, was much disquieted by the Heresy of Sabellius, broached within the
same. And that no sooner was suppressed, or at lest quieted for the present,
but a great flame brake out in the Church of Antioch, which beginning in the
House of Paulus Samosatenus before remembered, had like to have put all the
Church into combustion. Rome in the mean time was afflicted more than all the
rest, by the Schism raised, and the false doctrines preached therein, by
Novatianus: and that not for a fit only and no more but so, but in a constant
kind of sickness, which disturbed her long. In this distemper of the Church,
the Bishops had no way to consult her health; but by having recourse to their
old way of mutual commerce and conference: which being it could not be
performed in person, must be done by Letters. And so accordingly it was.
Witness those several Letters written by St. Cyprian to the Bishops of Rome:
viz. from him to Stephanus, Epist. 71. to Lucius, Epist. 58. and to Cornelius,
Epist. 42, 43, 47, 54, 55, 57. to the Church there, Epist. 23, 29. and from the
Church of Rome and the Bishops of it, unto him again, Epist. 31, 46, 48, 49. In
all of which they mutually both give and take advice, as the necessities of
their affairs, and the condition of the Church required: Nor was the business
of the Church of Carthage, in agitation between Cyprian only and the Roman
Prelates; but taken also into the care and consideration of Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, Eusebius. hist. Ecc. l. 7. cap. 2.
who writ his judgment in it, and advice about it, to Stephanus then Pope of
Rome, who held against St. Cyprian, or indeed rather for the truth, in the
point in question. What the same Dionysius did, for the suppressing of the
faction of Novatus, raised in Rome at first, but after spreading further over
all the Church, we have in part beheld already, by his Epistle unto Fabius of
Antiochia who was suspected to incline that way; and that inscribed unto
Cornelius, written about that business also, which before we spoke of. And we
may see what Cyprian did in recompense of that advice and comfort which he had
from Rome, in his own afflictions, by the great care he took for the composing
of her Schisms and troubles when she fell into them; by his Epistles to that
only purpose: as viz. those unto Cornelius, Cypr. Ep. 41. Id. Ep. 42. Id. Ep.
43. Id. Ep. 50, 51. Id. Ep. 48, 49.
entitled Quod ordinationem Novatiani non receperit, De ordinatione ejus a se
comprobata, Quod ad Confessores a Novatiano seductos literas fecerit: The
Letters of those seduced Confessors to him, and his congratulation unto them
upon their return to their obedience to the Church; Cornelius writing unto him
touching the faction of Novatian, and their wicked practices, with his Reply
unto Cornelius. Thus also when Sabellius began to broach his Heresies within
the jurisdiction of Alexandria; he did not only signify the same to the Bishop
of Rome, which by the Cardinal is used I know not how, for a prime Argument,
Baron. in Annal. Eccl. Anno 260. n. 62.
to prove the Popes Supremacy: but unto diverse other Bishops, as before was
shown, to whom assuredly he owed no obedience. This as he did, according to the
usage of the Church, at that time in force: so took he other courses also for
the suppression of that Heresy, both by power and pen. For finding upon
certain information (...), that diverse Bishops of Pentapolis, Athan. de
sentent. Dionys.
being within the Patriarchat of Alexandria, began to countenance and embrace
the said desperate doctrines, and had so far prevailed therein, that there was
hardly any mention in their Churches of the Son of God; he knowing that the
care and oversight of the said Churches did belong to him, first labored by
his Messengers and Commissioners to dissuade them from those lewd opinions; and
when that would not do the deed, he was constrained to write unto them an
Epistle, in which he thoroughly confuted their erroneous Tenets. By which as we
may see the care and piety of this famous Prelate, triumphing in the fall of
Heresy; so we may see the power and eminency of that famous See, having the
governance and superintendency of so many Churches.

But that which was indeed the greatest business of his time, Paulus
Samosatenus, the sixteenth Bishop of the Church of Antioch, great in relation
to the man, Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 7. c. 22. (...).
one of the three prime Bishops in the Christian Church; and great inference to
the danger which was like to follow. When one of the main Pillars of a Church
is foundred, the whole edifice is in danger of a present ruin. And therefore
presently upon the apprehension of the mischief likely to ensue, in case there
was no speedy course taken to prevent the same, the Bishops of all parts
repaired to Antioch, not only those which were within the jurisdiction of that
Patriarchate, but such as lived far off; and in all possibility, might have
kept their Churches from the infection of the Heresy, being so remote. For
thither came Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea, Id. Ibid.
in Cappadocia, Gregory surnamed Thaumaturgus, Bishop of Neo-Caesarea in
Pontus, and Athenodorus his brother, another Bishop of that Province, Helenus
Bishop of Tarsus, Nicomas Bishop of Iconium, Hymenaeus Bishop of Jerusalem,
Maximus Bishop of Bostra, Theoctecnus Bishop of Caesarea, the Metropolis of
Palestine; and so many others, (...), that the number of them was innumerable.
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria was required also to be there, Id. ibid.
(...), but he excused himself by reason of his age and weakness. And well
indeed he might do so, being then very ill at ease, and dying whilst the Synod
was in preparation. Id. ibid.
But what he could not do in person, he performed by his Pen: writing not only
to the Fathers, who were there assembled, which Eusebius speaks of; but to the
Heretic himself, a Copy of the which we have both in Baronius and the
Bibliotheca, as before was said. As for the other Dionysius the then Pope of
Rome, I find not any thing that he did, to quench the flame. Baron. Annal.
Eccl. Anno 1272. 18.
For though Baronius being sensible how much it might redound to this Popes
disgrace, that he alone should be a looker on in so great a business, wherein
the honor of our Lord and SAVIOR was so much concerned; has fained a Council
to be held at Rome at the same time, and for the same intent, and purpose; yet
there is no such thing in Athanasius whom he cites to prove it; neither does
Binius, though in other things he takes up much of his Commodities on the
Cardinals word, speak the least word of such a Council. It may be that the
Popes then being, had so much work cut out at home by the Novatian faction
there; that they had little leisure to attend a business so remote and distant:
which is the best excuse I can see for them. And yet welfare the Cardinal and
his Binius too. For though the Pope was neither there, nor had so much as sent
his Letters for ought we can find; and that the Synodical Epistle written by
the Fathers, Eusebius. hist. Ecc. l. 7. c. 24. (...).
was inscribed to this Dionysius Maximus Bishop of Alexandria, (...), and to
all other their Colleagues, the Bishops, over all the World, and to the
Presbyters and Deacons, and the whole Catholic Church, Bin. Annot. in Council.
Tom. 1. p. 161. Baron. in Annal. An. 272.17.
as the Title runs: yet they will needs inscribe it to the Pope, none else;
Ad Dionysium Romanum Pontificem scripserunt, so says Binius, Synodicam ad
Dionysium Papam scriptam: So Baronius has it; and both ridiculously false.

But to return again unto the Council, the issue of the whole was this; that
Paulus was deposed from his place and dignity; Domnus succeeding in the seat.
And whereas Paulus notwithstanding his abdication, Eusebius. hist. Ecc. l. 7. c.
24. (...).
still kept possession of his House, (...), the House belonging to his
Bishopric. as the story has it: the Emperor Aurelian, being made acquainted
with it, did determine thus, that it should be delivered unto them, (...), to
whom the Bishops of Italy and Rome should adjudg the same.

Now in this business there are these two things to be considered; Paulus
first, the Fathers of the Council laying down the course and passages of his
behavior, Id. ibid.
do describe him thus: that being born of mean and ordinary parentage, he had
amassed great sums of money, and full heaps of Treasure: which he had gotten by
bribery and corruption, from those that were in Suits and differences, (...)
and had repaired to him to be righted in their several causes: next, that he
never went abroad in public, but that he was attended by a Cuard; some of them
going before him, others following after, to the great scandal of the Gospel:
And last of all, that he had caused a Throne of State to be erected for him,
not such as did become one of CHRIST'S Disciples, but high and lofty, such as
the Princes of the World (or rather secular Princes) did use to sit in. Which
passages (for I omit the rest that follow, as not conducing to the story which
I have in hand) as they do manifestly set forth unto us the extreme pride, and
base corruptions of the man: so do they also give us no obscure light, whereby
we may discern the customs of the Church in these particulars.

For first, I find it not objected against Paulus, that he did deal sometimes
in such Suits and differences, (matters of secular business out of question) as
were brought before him: Id. nbid.
but that he took bribes, (...), and received money of such men as came for
Justice, and yet abused them too, and did nothing for them. So that it is not
faulted by the Fathers, for ought I can see, that he made himself a Judge
amongst his brethren, or took upon him to compose such differences, as were
brought before him (which certainly was no new matter in these times:) but that
he was corrupt and base, not Ministering, but selling Justice to the People;
perhaps not selling Justice neither, but making them pay dearly for an unjust
Sentence.

The next thing I observe is this, that Paulus is not charged by the Synod for
being well attended, for having many followers waiting on him, according to the
greatness of his place and quality. Their words as in Eusebius they are laid
before me, will bear no such meaning: though some indeed, to raise an Odium on
the Prelacy, Smectymn. p. 55.
do expound it so, as if a great part of his pride and insolency consisted in
that numerous train which attended on him in the Streets. (...). Id. ibid.
He did not stir abroad without a Guard, says the Original, Magna satellitum
stipatus turba, says the Translator of Eusebius, Cum satellitio publicitus
ingrediens, Niceph. Eccl. hist. l. 6. c 30.
as the Translator of Nicephorus has it. Now whether we look upon this passage
in the Greek, as given us in the word (...), or in the Latin Satellitium, or
Satellitum turba: I must profess my ignorance to be such in both the Languages,
that though I find it charged on Paulus, that he was guarded when he went
abroad with a band of Spear-men; I find it not objected that he was Attended by
a Train of servants.

Last of all for his Throne, the charge consists not as I take it, in the thing
it self, for Bishops were allowed their Thrones in the Primitive times; but in
the raising of it to a greater height than had been accustomed. Cassiodore,
Cassiodor. hist. tripart. l. 7.
I am sure does expound it so: Intra Ecclesiam vero tribunal in alto altius
quam fuerat extrui, and thronum in excelsioribus collocari jubet, secretarium
quoque sterni and parari, sicut judicibus seculi solet. He caused his Tribunal
in the Church to be built much higher than it had been formerly, and his Throne
to be placed more aloft than before it was, and a Closet also to be trimmed and
furnished, as secular Judges used to have. By which it seems, taking the
Authors words as they lie together, Eusebius. hist, Ecc. l. 7. c. 24. (...).
that it was not the Throne but (...) the state and exaltation of the Throne,
that gave the scandal. A Throne he might have had, (...), as other Bishops
Christ's Disciples used to have before. But he would have his Throne exalted,
adorned and furnished like a Closet, (...), after the manner of Kings and
Princes: Or if the Seat or Throne here spoken of, were a Tribunal, as it is
said by Cassiodore; we must not look upon him in the Church, but in the
Consistory: in which he would have nothing ordinary like to other Bishops, but
all things suited and adorned like the Bench or Judgment Seat of a Civil
Magistrate.

As for the men to whom the execution of the Sentence was committed, Eusebius
tells us that they were the Bishops of Rome and Italy. And possibly the
Emperor might commit the judgment of the cause to them, because being
strangers to the place, and by reason of their absence not engaged in the
business, or known to either of the two Pretenders; they might with greater
equity and indifference, determine in it. This is more like to be the reason,
than that the Emperor should take such notice of the Popes authority, as to
conceive the Judgments and Decrees of other Bishops to be no further good and
valid, quam eas authoritas Romani Pontificis confirmasset, Baron. in Annal.
Anno 272. n. 18.
than as they were confirmed by the Bishop of Rome, as fain the Cardinal would
have it. If so, what needed the Italian Bishops to be joined with him? The Pope
might do it of himself without their advice, indeed without the Emperors
Authority. This was not then the matter, whatsoever was; and what was like to
be the matter we have said already. And more than that I need not say, as to
the reason of the reference, why the Emperor made choice rather of the Western
than the Eastern Bishops to cognizance the cause, and give possession on the
same accordingly. But there is something else to be considered, as to the
matter of the reference to the point referred; as also to the persons who by
this Sovereign Authority were enabled to determine in the cause proposed.

And first as for the point referred, whereas there were two things
considerable in the whole proceedings against Paulus; viz. his dangerous and
heretical Doctrine, and next his violent and unjust possession: the first had
been adjudged before in the Council, and he deposed for the same. With that the
Bishops either of Rome or Italy had no more to do, than to subscribe unto the
judgment of the Synod: or being being a matter merely of spiritual cognizance,
might in a like Synodical meeting, without the Emperors Authority as their case
then stood, have censured and condemned the Heresy, though with his person
possibly they could not meddle, as being of another Patriarchat. But that which
here I find referred unto them, was a mere Lay-fee, a point of title and
possession, and it was left unto them to determine in it, whether the Plaintiff
or Defendant had the better right to the house in question. This was the point
in issue between the parties, and they upon the hearing of the cause, gave
sentence in behalf of Domnus; who presently upon the said award or sentence,
was put into possession of the house, and the force removed by the appointment
of the Emperor. And it is worth our notice also, that as they did not thrust
themselves into the employment, being a matter merely of a secular nature: so
when the Emperor required their advice therein, or if you will make them his
Delegates and High Commissioners; they neither did delay or dispute the matter,
nor pleaded any Ancient Canons, by which they might pretend to be disabled from
intermedling in the same. A thing which questionless some one or other of them
would have done, there being so many Godly and Religious Prelates interessed
therein, had they conceived that the employment had been inconsistent with
their holy calling.

A second thing to be considered in this delegation, Italy, and of the City of
Rome. In which it will not be impertinent to examine briefly why the Bishops of
Italy, Niceph. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 29.
and the Bishops of Rome, (...), as by Nicephorus it is given us in the plural
number, should be here reckoned as distinct, since both the City of Rome was
within the limits and bounds of Italy, and Italy subordinate, or rather subject
to the City of Rome, Quaere, we may please to know that in the distribution of
the Roman Empire, the continent of Italy, together with the Isles adjoining was
divided into two parts, viz. the Prefecture of the City of Rome, containing
Latium, Tuscia, and Picenum, the Realm of Naples, Vide chap. 3. of this 2. Part.
and the three Islands of Sicily, Corsica, and Sardinia, as before was said,
the head City or Metropolis of the which was the City of Rome.

And secondly, the Diocese of Italy containing all the Western and broader part
thereof from the River Magra to the Alps, in which were comprehended seven
other Provinces, and of the which the Metropolis, or prime City was that of
Millain, (...), as in Athanasius. Athanas. in Epist. iad solitar. vitam
agentes. Optat. de Schis. Dona. l. 2.
So that that Church being in the Commonwealth, according to that maxim of
Optatus, and following the pattern of the same, in the proportion and fabric
of her public Government, the Bishops of the Diocese of Italy were no way
under the command of the Patriarch or Primate of the Church of Rome, but of
their own Primate only, which was he of Millain. And this division seems to be
of force in the times we speak of, because that in the subscriptions to the
Council of Arles, Conc. Tom. 1.
being about 40 years after that of Antioch; the Bishops of Italy stand divided
into two ranks or Provinces, that is to say Provincia Italiae, and Provincia
Romana, the Province of Italy, of which Orosius the Metropolitan of Millain
subscribeth only, and then the Province of the City of Rome, for which
Gregorius Bishop of Porto subscribeth first. In after Ages the distinction is
both clear and frequent, as in the Epistle of the Council of Sardica extant in
Athanasius, In Athanas. Apolog. 2. Atha. ad solitar. vitam agentes.
and an Epistle of the said Athanasius written unto others. So that according
to the Premises this conclusion follows, that the Popes or Patriarchs of
Rome had no Authority in the Church more than other Primates, no not in Italy
it self, more than the Metropolitan of Millain, as may appear, should all
proofs else be wanting by this place and passage, by which the Bishops of the
Diocese of Italy (taking the word Diocese in its civil sense) were put into a
joint commission, with the Bishops of the Patriarchat of Rome with the Pope
himself. Which tending so expressly to the overthrow of the Popes Supremacy, as
well Christopherson in his Translation of Eusebius, as the great Cardinal
Baronius in his Application of the place, are fain to falsify their Author.
For whereas in the Text we have that he of the Petenders was to have
possession, (...), to whom the Bishops of Italy, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 24
(...) Baron. in Annal. An. 272. n. 18.
and the City of Rome should adjudge the same: Christopherson translates it
thus, Quibus Christiani Italiae and Vrbis Romae Episcopi tribuenda
praescriberent; Baronius with less ambiguity, Cui Italiae Christiani, and Vrbis
Romanae Episcopi dandam praescriberent; to whom the Christians of Italy and the
Bishops of the City of Rome should think fit to give it. And for a further
testimony of this equality betwixt Rome and Millain, we may note also on the
by, that each Church had its proper and peculiar customs; Rome neither giving
Law to Millain, nor she to Rome. Witness that signal difference betwixt them in
the Saturdays fast, which in those times was kept at Rome, but not at Millain;
according to that memorable saying of Saint Ambrose, quando Romae sum, jejuno
Sabbato; quando hic sum, non jejuno Sabbato: In Aug. Ep. 86. in fine.
Indeed the Church of Millain might well stand on her own Prerogatives, as
being little inferior unto that of Rome, either in the condition of her
founder, or the Antiquity of her foundation: S. Barnabas the Apostle being
generally reported for the first Bishop here, to whom Anathalon succeeded,
Gaius after him, Baron. Annet. in Martyr. Romans Junii 11. Martyr. Romans Sept.
25.27.
and so successively Bishop after Bishop, till these very times. Thus having
prosecuted the affairs of this second Century from the Church of Carthage, unto
that of Alexandria, from thence to Antioch; and on occasion of Samosatenus
Bishop of this last, being forced to take a journey over unto Rome and Italy,
we will next look on the condition of these Western Churches, and the estate
wherein Episcopacy stood amongst them for this present Age.

CHAP. VI. Of the state wherein Episcopacy stood in the Western Churches,
during the whole third Century.
1. Of Zephyrinus Pope of Rome, and the decrees ascribed unto him concerning
Bishops. 2. Of the condition of that Church, when Cornelius was chosen Bishop
thereof. 3. The Schism raised in Rome by Novatianus, with the proceedings of
the Church therein. 4. Considerable observations on the former story. 5.
Parishes set forth in Country Villages by Pope Dionysius. 6. What the words
(...) and (...), do fignifie most properly in Ancient Writers. 7. The great
Authority which did accrue unto the Presbyters, by the setting forth of
Parishes. 8. The rite of Confirmation reserved by Bishops to themselves, as
their own Prerogative. 9. Touching the ancient Chorepiscopi, and the authority
to them entrusted. 10. The rising of the Manichean Heresy, with the great care
taken by the Bishops for the crushing of it. 11. The lapse of Marcellinus Pope
of Rome, with the proceedings of the Church in his Condemnation. 12. The
Council of Eliberis in Spain, what it decreed in honor of Episcopacy. 13.
Constantine comes unto the Empire, with a brief prospect of the great honors
done to Bishops in the following Age. 14. A brief Chronology of the state of
holy Church in these two last Centuries.


BEing thus returned at last to the Western Churches, Victor Bishop of the
Church of Rome, who lived in the conclusion of the second Century, and the
beginning of the third; to whom succeeded Zephyrinus, Optat. de Schism. Donat.
l. 2. Platina in vita Zephyrini.
who by Optatus is entitled Vrbicus, or the City-Bishop; the style of
Oecumenicaal or Universal, being then unknown. Of him it is affirmed by
Platina, Mandasse ne Episcopus vel a Patriarcha vel Primate, vel a
Metropolitano suo in judicium vocatus, sine authoritate Apostolica damnaretur;
how he decreed that no Bishop being called in question, either by Patriarch,
Primate, or Metropolitan, should be condemned without the leave and liking of
the Sea Apostolic; that is to say, the Bishop of Rome, as the Author means it.
A matter fit enough indeed for an Ecumenical, but of too high a nature for a
City-Bishop to attempt or think of. And therefore I desire to be excused of
Platina, if I believe neither his report, nor the Epistles Decretal ascribed
unto Zephyrinus, on which the said report was founded. Sure I am Damasus in the
Pontifical tells us no such matter. Council. Tom. 1. a Binio edit. Apud Binium
in Council. Tom. 1. Sozom. Eccl. hist. l. 8. c. 6.
And no less sure I am that the practice of the Church was contrary for a long
time after: Saint Chrysostom being then Patriarch of Constantinople, deposing
thirteen Bishops in one Visitation, whom he had found unworthy of so high a
calling, without consulting with the Church of Rome, or fearing that his acts
might have been repealed by the Popes thereof. Nor can that strange report of
Platina consist, if looked on with indifferent eyes, either with the condition
of the times of which he writes, in which the Popes had hardly meditated on
their future greatness; or with the Constitutions of the Church, by which the
Primate in each Diocese had the dernier resort, as the Lawyers phrase it, there
being regularly no Appeal from him but only to a general Council. Which
Constitution of the Church, as it was afterward confirmed by the great Council
of Chalcedon, Con. Calcedon. Can. 9.
so was it finally established by the Laws Imperial, whereof consult Novel.
Constitut. 123. c. 22. More likely is that other Ordinance or Decree ascribed
to Zepherinus by this Author, Platina in Zepherino.
ut astantibus Clericis and Laicis fidelibus, and levita and sacerdos
ordinaretur, that Priests and Deacons should be ordained in the presence of the
Clergy, and other of Gods faithful people; in which, as he is backed by
Damasus, who affirms the same: So is the truth or probability thereof, at least
confirmed by the following practice. Where note, that in the Ordination of
these Priests and Deacons there is not any thing required but the peoples
presence, adstantibus Laicis, as that Author has it; the Church being never so
obliged unto the votes and suffrages of the people, but that the Bishop might
ordain fit Ministers without requiring their consent, though on the reasons
formerly delivered it was thought fit that Ordinations should be made in
public, as well the People as the Clergy being present at them.

The seventh from Zepherinus was Cornelius, Roman, elected to that place and
ministry, Cypr. Epist. 52.
Coepiscoporum testimonio, by the consent and suffrage of his Com- Provincials,
as also by the voices of the Clergy, and Plebis quae tunc adfuit suffragio, and
with the liking of the people, or as many of them as did attend at the
Election; the number of the Bishops there Assembled being sixteen in all, Ib.
ibid.
as by S. Cyprian is recorded. Which as it was the manner of Electing, not only
of the Bishops of Rome, but of most Bishops else, Leo. Epist. 89.
in the times we speak of, so it continued long in use; the voices of the
Clergy in the point and substance, the presence and approbation of the people
for the form and ceremony, electio Clericorum, and testimonia populorum, being
joined together by Pope Leo. Now the condition of the Church of Rome under this
Cornelius, besides the Schism raised in it by Novatianus, of which more anon,
is to be seen most fully in a Letter of his to Fabius Patriarch of Antiochia;
Extat ap. Ruseb. hist. l. 6. c. 35. p. (...).
in which he certifieth him that besides the Bishop, (...), who was but one in
every Church, and could not be more, there were forty-six Presbyters, seven
Deacons, and Subdeacons seven; forty-two Acolythites, Exorcists, Readers,
Sextons, (Ostiarij) fifty-two in all; Widows and other poor People, pressed
with want and sickness, fifteen hundred, (...): All which, says he, are
maintained at the public charge by the grace and bounty of the Lord. Out of
which place and passage of my Author there are these several points to be
considered in reference to our present business. First, the exceeding large
revenue of the Church of Rome in these early days, so great as to maintain the
numbers before specified, according to the rank and quality of each particular;
the distribution of the which did ordinarily, and of common course belong unto
the Bishop only, or such to whom he pleased to entrust the same. And secondly,
we may observe the singularity of succession, wherein the Bishop differed from
the other Clergy; he being but one, they many in their ranks and stations,
sometimes more, sometimes fewer, according to the greatness of the Church in
which they served, and the emergent necessities and occasions of it. Here in
the Church of Rome to one only Bishop we find a Clergy of inferior Ministers
consisting of 154 persons; which doubtless was exceedingly increased in the
following times; Hierom. in epist. ad Evagr.
Hierom complaining in his time, Presbyteros turbam contemptibiles facere, that
the great number of them made them be the less regarded. And last of all, we
may observe, that though Cornelius mentions Acolythites, Readers,
Subdeacons, Exorcists, and Sextons; these are not to be reckoned as distinct
Orders in the Church, although now so accounted in the Church of Rome; but only
several services and employments which were required in the same. Concerning
which, take here the learned resolution of judicious Hooker. Hooker Eccl.
Polit. l. 5. n. 78.
There is an error, says he, which beguileth many, who much entangle both
themselves and others by not distinguishing Services, Offices, and Orders
Ecclesiastical; the first of which three, and in part the second may be
executed by the Laity, whereas none have or can have the third but the Clergy.
Catechists, Exorcists, Readers, Singers, and the rest of like sort, if the
nature only of their labor and pains be considered, may in that respect seem
Clergymen, even as the Fathers for that cause term them usually Clerks; as
also in regard of the end whereunto they were trained up, which was to be
ordered or ordained when years and experience should make them able.
Notwithstanding, in as much as they no way differed from others of the Laity
longer than during that work of Service, which at any time they might give
over, being thereunto but admitted, not tied by irrevocable Ordination, we find
them always exactly severed from that body, whereof those three before
rehearsed Orders of Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons only are, the natural
parts. So the judicious Divine indeed, as one truly calls him. I add this
further of Cornelius, Holy Table.
having thus fallen upon the Orders in the state Ecclesiastic, that he had
passed through all inferior Offices, per omnia Ecclesiastica officia promotus,
as Saint Cyprian has it, Cypr. Ep. 52.
and exercised each several Ministry in the Church of God, before he mounted
to this height, ad Sacerdotij sublime fastigium, are the Fathers words; which
showed that the estate of Bishops was as a different office, so an higher
dignity than any other in the Church.

Now as the speech of Heaven does many times put us in mind of Hell, Cornelius,
an holy Bishop and a Martyr, occasioneth me to speak of Novatianus, in whom it
is not easy to determine whether the Heretic or the Schismatic had the most
predominancy. Certain it is, he proved in both respects one of the cunningest
instruments of Satan, for the disturbance of the Church, who suffered most
extremely by him both in peace and truth; the Schism or Heresy by him raised
at this very time, being both more sudden in the growth, and permanent in the
duration of it, than ever had been set on foot before in the Church of Christ.
Now this Novatianus was a Presbyter of the Church of Rome; and being much
offended, as well at the Election of Cornelius, as that himself was
pretermitted in the choice, associates himself with one Novatus an African
Bishop, as near unto him in conditions, as he was in name, whom Cyprian, omnium
sacerdotum voce, Cypr. Epist. 49.
by the consent and suffrages of all his Comprovincial Bishops had before
condemned. By them it was agreed that Novatianus should take upon himself the
name and title of the Bishop of Rome. And being there could be no show nor
color for it, did he not first receive Episcopal Consecration from some hands
or other, they sent unto the obscurest parts of Italy, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib.
6. c. 35. (...).
(...), as my Author has it, to find out three poor Country Bishops that had
not been acquainted with the like affairs. Who being come to Rome, and
circumvented by the Arts of these wicked men, and partly also forced by their
threats and menaces, (...), they Ordained him Bishop; if at the least an Act so
void and null from the beginning, may be called an Ordination. And this being
done, because they found that people naturally are inclined to embrace new
fancies, especially where pretense of piety seems to bear a stroke, they took
upon them to be very strict in their conversation, precise in their opinions,
and wonderfully devout in all their carriage; raising withal this doctrine
suitable thereto, That such as fell in time of Persecution, though they
repented never so truly, and did what ever was thought necessary to testify
their grief and sorrow for their great offense, yet (...), there was no hope of
their salvation, Id. ibid.
no mercy to be looked for at the hands of God. By means whereof they drew unto
their side some Confessors, as they called them then, who being well persuaded
of their own safestanding, and perhaps having suffered much in testimony of
their perseverance, became the worse opinionated of those who had not been
endued with an equal constancy. So that upon a sudden, unawares, the Church of
Rome was in a very great distemper; the neighboring Churches also suffering
with it, either in regard of their own peace, which presently began to be
endangered by this plausible and popular faction, or out of commiseration unto
the distresses of so great a number in the body mystical. Nor was Cornelius
wanting to the Church, or the Church to him. For presently upon the breaking
out of the flame, he gives notice of it to his dear Brother and Colleague, S.
Cyprian the Metropolitan of Carthage to Fabius, Inter. Epistolas Cypr. Ep.
46.48. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 35. n. (...).
Patriarch of the Church of Antioch, acquainting them with the whole story of
the business; assembling also (...), a great and famous Synod in the City of
Rome, consisting of sixty Bishops, and as many Presbyters or more, besides
Deacons. For being a Provincial Council, and not General, the Presbyters and
others of the inferior Clergy had their Votes therein, according as they still
enjoy on the like occasions. And on the other side, the Orthodox and Catholic
Bishops made the cause their own; neither repelling of his Agents, who came to
justify his Ordination, as S. Cyprian did, Cypr. Epist. 41. Eusebius. hist. Eccl.
lib. 6. c. 36. (...). Id. c. 35. (...).
or writing in behalf of the Church against him, as did Dionysius, the Learned
and renowned Bishop of Alexandria. The like no doubt did other Bishops. And
more than so, they caused several Councils to be called about it, (...), in
their several Provinces and charges, as well in Italy as Africa; in each of
which, the faction was condemned, and the Arch-Schismatick, with all his
Fautors, deprived of the communion of the Church.

I have the rather been more copious in the description of this Schism, and the
Authors of it, than otherwise I would have been, not only because of that great
power and influence which it had after in the Church, which we shall find
hereafter in the prosecution of this present story, if it please God to give me
means and opportunity, to go through with it: but also for those many
observations which any one that would be curious in collecting them, might
raise or gather from the same, For first of all it must be noted, that though
Novatianus had a great desire to be made a Bishop, and that he could not get it
by a fair orderly Election, as he should have done: yet he could find no other
entrance thereunto, than by the door of Ordination; and therein he would be
Canonical, though in nothing else. For being a Presbyter before, as Cornelius
tells us in his Epistle unto Fabius (...) (says that holy Prelate: Id. ibid.
) he thought that did not qualify him enough for the place and office of a
Bishop, unless he might receive Episcopal Ordination also. And when he was
resolved on that, he would not be ordained but by three Bishops, at the least,
according to the ancient Canon, and the present practice of the Church; and
therefore (...), he procures three Bishops to be drawn together for the
purpose. And being thus Ordained, he sends abroad his Agents into foreign
Churches, Cypr. E. 41.
as viz. Maximus a Presbyter, and Augendus a Deacon, Macheus and Longinus, and
perhaps some others to the Sea of Carthage; to have his Ordination ratified,
and himself acknwledged for a Bishop, according to the commendable usage of
those watchful times. In which, who would not but observe, that Bishops had a
different Ordination from the Presbyters, and therefore do not differ from them
only in degree, or potestate Jurisdictionis, but in the power of Order also:
and that this power of Order cannot be conferred, regularly I mean, and when
there is no urgent and unavoidable necessity unto the contrary, but by the
joint assistance of three Bishops. For how can any give that power of Order
unto others, with which they never were endued themselves? Secondly, it might
be observed (not to take notice of his seeking for the approbation of his
neighboring Prelates) that the first Schism, which did disturb the peace of
these Western Churches, was made by those, who by the rigidness of their
Profession, were in that very instant termed Catharists, Eusebius. hist. Eccles.
l. 6.35. (...).
(...), as that Author has it; and that not to be Englished in a fuller Word,
than that of Puritans. And thirdly, that however in these later times, the
Scene be changed, and that the greatest stirrs that have been raised in the
Church, have been for pulling down Bishops; yet in the former times, the course
was otherwise; most of their troubles and commotions, being for setting up of
Bishops, when certain factious and unquiet spirits, not willing to submit to
the Chuches Government, would have a Bishop of their own. Certain I am, that
thus it was with the Novatians; who though they stood divided from the
Catholic Church a long time together, yet they desired to be accounted for a
Church: and that they might be so accounted, maintained an Episcopal Succession
from the first Apostle of their Sect; Socrat. bist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 21.
the names of many of their Bishops, Agellius, Sisinnius, Marcianus, others
being to be found upon good record.

But from these counterfeit and schismatical Bishops, Rome, the fourth in order
from Cornelius, Baron. Annal. Eccl. An. 261. Ap. Binium, Council. Tom. 1.
was Dionysius, who entered on that weighty charge, Anno 261. Of him we find in
the Pontifical, Presbyteris Ecclesias divisisse, and coemeteria, Parochiasque
and dioeceses constituisse; that he divided to the Presbyters their several
Churches, and Churchyards, and that he first did set out Parishes, and
apportioned Diocesses. Which as they were two several Actions so Platina,
Platina in vita Dionys.
assigns each action to its proper place: making the first, which was the
distributing of the Presbyters into their several Churches, and Churchyards,
then common places of Assembly, to relate only to the City of Rome. In urbe
Roma statim divisit, as his words there are. Which being it had been done
before by Pope Euaristus, as has been formerly observed, we must resolve it
with Baronius, Baron in Annal. An. 270. n. ult.
that this was a reviver only of the former Act: and that the Presbyters, being
ravished from their Churches, and the Churchyards taken from the Presbyters,
during the persecution of Valerian; were afterward restored again to their
former state by the Authority of Dionysius. In other places, and perhaps here
also, this was not done by the Authority, but in the time of Dionysius; the
Order, or Authority proceeding from an higher hand, Nicephorus Callist. Eccl.
hist. l. 6. c. 12.
even from the Emperor Gallienus: who did not only prohibit the persecution
raised by his Father Valerianus, but also did permit by his public Edict, ut
Christiani loca coemeteriorum suorum recigerent, as by Nicephorus it is
related. And for the other part of the Relation, viz. the setting out of
Parishes, and the apportioning of Diocesses; that Platina refers unto the
Country, unto the parts and Provinces abroad, Parochias and Dioeceses foris
distribuit; Platina in vita Dionys.
so he tells us there: adding withal, quo quisque finibus suis, limitibusque
contentus esset, that this was done, that every Bishop might contein himself
within the limits of his Diocese, and every Presbyter be confined to his proper
Parish. And this as Dionysius did within the limits and precincts of his
jurisdiction, viz. that is to say, the Patriarchate of Rome; (for it were vain
to think that he could do the like over all the World, being beyond the sphere
of his activity:) so other Primates, seeing the convenience and ease which
redounded by it to the Church, might and did also do the like within their
Commands. Concerning which, it is to be remembered, that as the Romans in each
City had a Civil Magistrate, called a Defensor Civitatis, who was to do justice
for, and in the name of the Commonwealth, not only in the City it self, but
also unto all the Towns and Villages within the Territory of the same: so in
each City, there had been placed a Bishop in the former times, who was not only
to take care of the Church of God, within the walls and circuit of that City,
but also of the parts adjoining, accordingly, as they were gained to the faith
of Christ. And then the substance of the Institution, will be briefly this,
that when the faith had spread it self in the Country Villages, and that it
was too cumbersom a work for the City-Presbyters, to repair thither upon all
occasions: it was thought fit by Dionysius, and afterward by other Primates
following the Example, that every Country Town and Village which had received
the faith of Christ, should be furnished with its proper Presbyter; and that
the Presbyters so settled and dispersed in the Country Villages, should be
responsible to the Bishop of that City, within the Territory of the which, the
said Village stood. Which distribution of the Church into those smaller
portions, and particular Congregations, as we now call Parishes; so the
Collection of these Parishes into one united body, under one Pastor or chief
Governor, which was the Bishop of the City, we do call a Diocese: borrowing
the names of both from the Ancient Writers, in whom the same are very frequent;
and frequent also in the sense, in which now we use them, specially in those
Authors, and Synodical Acts, which did succeed the times we speak of.

It Is true, the words being used otherwise in the Ancient Writers, Bishop in
the Primitive Church, but a Parish-bishop, viz. the Rector of each several
Congregation, to whom the cure of Souls is trusted; because they find that in
Eusebius, the Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria, are called
Paroeciae: and that there were no Diocesses, nor Diocesan Bishops in the purest
times, because they find them not so called in those Ancient Writers. For
satisfying of which doubt, it is first confessed, that by Eusebius, the
Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch and Alexandria, as also of Corinth, Ephesus,
Lions, Carthage, Vide Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 2. l. 4. c. 1, 4, 5, 11, 15,
19, 23, 31, and l. 5. c. 5, 22, 23, 27. etc.
and many other famous Cities, are called (...), or Paroeciae: There is no
doubt at all of that. But then it is to be confessed, that (...), in that
Author, is never used to signify a Countrey-parish, or a sole Congregation
only, which we call a Parish: but for the whole City, with the Suburbs and
adjoining Villages, within the circuit of the which, were many Congregations,
and material Churches. The very composition of the word does import no less,
the (...), of a City, containing not alone the Citizens, but all such Borderers
and Strangers as dwelt near, or repaired to any chief Church or City, for Gods
public Worship; as our learned Bilson does observe, Perpetual Government of
Christ's Chapter cap. 11.
comprizing not the City only, but the Towns and Villages near the City, as
Master Brerewood also notes. And this may be made good even from Eusebius
himself, so often cited to the contrary, who having said that Laetus was
President of Alexandria, and the rest of Egypt, adds next, (...), but the
inspection, M.S. Discourse of the Ancient Government.
or superintendency of the Paroeciae, or Churches there, Demetrius, had of late
received: So that Demetrius, being Bishop of the Church of Alexandria, (...),
as he after calls him, was not the Bishop of a Parish only, Eusebius. hist. Ecc.
l. 6. c. 2. (...).
or of the Congregations in the City only; but (...), of all the Churches
throughout Alexandria, and those parts of Egypt, Id. l. 6. c. 20. (...).
which were under the command of Laetus, for their Civil Government.

And lest it may be thought, that the word being (...), in the plural number,
may bear a different construction, from what it does, being used in the
singular: the same Eusebius tells us of the same Demetrius, Id. l. 6. c. 7.11.
that he was (...), the Bishop of the Paroecia, or Church of Alexandria,
whereas at that time there were many Parish-Churches, as we now call Parishes,
within the circuit of that City; as does appear by Epiphanius, Epiphan. adv.
haeres. 69.
who does not only show the names of many of them, but tells us also who
officiated in the same, as Presbyters. So that the word Paroecia, in its first
and primitive acception, signified not a Parish, but a Diocese; nor only the
Cathedral, but all other Churches, how near or far soever situated, within the
Rule and Government of a Bishop. But for the sense, in which we use it in our
Age, it gained it not but by degrees, after this division made by Dionysius,
and that the Country Churches grew to be considerable for their means and
numbers. And in this sense, Council. Carthag. IV. Can. 102.
we find it used in the Fourth Council of Carthage, where we find mention of
these Presbyters which did Paroeciis praeesse, and were the Rectors, as we call
them, of particular Churches, Council. Tole. Can. IV. Can. 25, 26.
and in the fourth Council of Toledo, where we read of Presbyters ordained in
paroeciis and per paroecias, for the use and service of particular Parishes.
And in this sense, but specially indeed for a Country Parish, the word is
taken in an Epistle of Pope Innocentius, Innocent. lib. ad Decentium. c. 5.
in which, Ecclesiae intra Civitatem constitutae, the Churches situated in the
City, are distinguished plainly from Paroecias, the Churches scattered in the
Country. Other Examples of this nature, in the later Ages, being almost
infinite, and obvious to the eye of every Reader; I forbear to add. So for the
word (...), which we English Diocese, it signified at first, that part or
portion of the Roman Empire (there being thirteen of them in all, besides the
Prefecture of the City of Rome, as before was noted) which was immediately
under the command of the Vicarius or Lieutenant General of those parts. And was
so called of (...), which signifies to Govern or Administer, Isocrat. ad
Nicoclen.
as (...), in Isocrates, (...), in Demosthenes: a Diocese, being that part or
portion of the Empire, which was committed to the Government and Administration
of some principal Officer. In which regard, the word (...), or dioecesis, when
it was first borrowed by the Church from the civil State, was used to signify
that part or portion of the Church, which was within the jurisdiction of a
Primate, containing all the circuit of the civil Diocese, as was showed before:
the Primate being styled ordinarily (...) as in the Council of Chalcedon;
Council. Chalcedon. Car. 9.17. Novel. constable. 123. c. 22.
the Patriarch of the Diocese, in the Laws Imperial. But after, as the former
(...), began to lose its former latitude, in which it signified the whole
command or Jurisdiction of a Bishop, which we call a Diocese, and grew to be
restrained to so narrow a compass, as the poor limits of a Parish: so did
(...), grow less also, than at first it was, and from a Patriarchal Diocese,
Horat. de Art.
fell by degrees, custom and use prevailing in it ( quem penes arbitrium est,
and ju and norma loquendi, as the Poet has it) to signify no more than what
Paroecia had done formerly, a Diocese, as now we call it: whereof see Council.
Antioch, cap. 9. Con. Sardicens. cap. 18. Constantinop. ca. 2. Chalcedon. ca.
17. Carthag. III. can. 20. and IV. can. 36. So then the just result of all is
this, that the Bishops of the Primitive times were Diocesan Bishops, though
they are called (...), by some ancient Writers: and that in the succeeding
Ages, as the Church increased, and the Gospel of our Savior did enlarge its
borders, so did the Country Villages obtain the name of Parishes, or (...),
having to each of them a Presbyter, for the administration of the Sacraments,
for their instruction both in Faith and Piety, whom at this day we call the
Rector of the Church or Parish.

And with this Presbyter or Rector, Institution, I mean the setting out of
Parishes, in the Country Villages, did grow exceedingly both in authority and
reputation. For whereas upon the setting out of Parishes, Council. Neo-Caesar.
ca. 13.
the Presbyters became divided into (...), and (...), the City and the Country
Presbyters: each of them had their several privileges: the City Presbyters
continuing, as before, the great Council of Estate unto the Bishop, Council.
Neo. ca. 13.
and doing many things, which were not suffered to be done by the Country
Presbyters; and on the other side, the (...), or Country Presbyters, being more
remote, did many Ministerial Acts of their own authority, which in the presence
of their Bishop, it was not lawful for them to have done. And therefore I
conceive the resolution of Bishop Downham in this case, Defense of the Sermon,
l. 1. cap. 2.
to be sound and good, who tells us, That since the first distinguishing of
Parisher, and allotting of several Presbyters to them, there has been ever
granted to them both potestas Ordinis, the power of Orders, as they are
Ministers, Et potestas jurisdictionis spiritualis seu internae, a power of
spiritual and inward jurisdiction, to rule their flock after a private manner,
as it were in foro Conscientiae, in the Court of Conscience, as they are
Pastors of that flock. But because this allowance of a Jurisdiction in foro
Conscientiae, in the Court of Conscience, seems not sufficient unto some; who
reckon the distinction of a Jurisdiction in foro externo, Vindication of the
Answ.. 9.
and in foro interno, to be like that of Reflexius and Archipodialiter: they do
in this not only put the Schoolmen unto School again, in whom the like
distinctions frequently occur; but cross the best Divines in the Church of
England, who do adhere unto, and approve the said distinctions. And because
many of both sorts may be found in one, and that one publick's declared to be
both Orthodox in doctrine, and consonant in discipline to the Church of
England, by great Authority; I will use his words. Holy Table. Chapter 3.
A single Priest, qua talis, in that formality and capacity only as he is a
Priest, has no Key given him by God or man, to open the doors of any external
Jurisdiction. He has a Consistory within in foro poenitentiae, in the
conscience of his Parishioners, and a Key given him upon his institution, to
enter into it. But he has no Consistory without, in foro causae, in meddling
with Ecclesiastical causes, unless he borrow a Key from his Ordinary. For
although they be the same Keys, yet one of them will not open all these wards:
the Consistory of outward Jurisdiction, not being to be opened by a Key alone,
but as you may observe in some great men's gates, by a Key and a Staff, which
they usually call a Crosier. This (says he) I have ever conceived to be the
ancient doctrine in this kind, opposed by none but professed Puritans;
affirming further, that all learned men in the Church of England, do adhere
unto it: allowing the School-mens double power, that of Order, and that of
Jurisdiction, and the subdivision of this Jurisdiction, into the internal and
external, appropriating this last to the Bishop only. So he, judiciously
indeed; and for the Authors by him cited, both Protestant and School-Divines, I
refer you to him. So then upon this setting out of Parishes, the Presbyters,
which attended in the same, had potestatem jurisdictionis, a power of
Jurisdiction granted to them, in the Court of Conscience: which needed not to
have been granted before this time, when as Gods people, which were scattered
up and down the Country, did either come unto the Cities, there to be made
partakers of the Word and Sacraments, in which the Bishop was at hand to attend
all businesses; or that the Presbyters were by the Bishop sent into the
Country, with more or less authority entrusted to them, as the business was.
And for the other power, the power of Order, although it was no other than
before it was, as to the power and faculty conferred upon the Presbyters in
their Ordination: yet did they find a great enlargement and extension of it, in
the free execution of the same. For whereas formerly, as was observed both from
Ignatius, and Tertullian, and some other Ancients, Vide Chap. 1. and Chap. 3.
of this 2d. part.
the Presbyter could not baptize, nor celebrate the blessed Eucharist, sine
Episcopi authoritate, without the leave and liking of the Bishop; who then was
near at hand to be asked the question: after this time, the Presbyters became
more absolute in their ministration, baptizing, celebrating, preaching, and
indeed what not, which potestate ordinis, did belong unto him only by virtue of
that general faculty, which had been granted by the Bishop, at his Institution,
I mean his special designation to that place or Cure.

And yet the Bishops did not so absolutely invest the Presbyters, confirmation
of such acts as had been done by virtue of the same, might generally be
observed to proceed from them. And of this kind especially was that rite or
ceremony, which now we call by the particular name of Confirmation; being
called anciently, impositio manuum, the laying on of hands. For howsoever the
original institution of it, be far more ancient, and Apostolical, as most
think: yet I conceive it neither was so frequent, nor so necessary in the
former times, as in those that followed. For when the Sacrament of Baptism,
either was administered to men grown in years, or by the Bishop himself in
person, or in his presence at the least; he giving his Fatherly and Episcopal
blessing to the work in hand: the subsequent laying on of hands, which we call
Confirmation, might not seem so necessary. Or if it did, yet commonly, it was
administered with Baptism, as a Concomitant thereof, Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5. n.
66. Tertul. de Baptismo. c. 7.
to confirm and perfect that which the Grace of the Spirit had already begun in
Baptism. And so we are to understand Tertullian, where having spoken before of
Baptism, he adds next, Dehinc manus imponitur, per benediciionem advocans and
invitans Spiritum sanctum, etc. Then, says he, follows imposition of hands,
with invocation, and invitation of the holy Ghost, which willingly comes down
from the Father, to rest upon the purified and blessed bodies, acknowledging,
as it were, the Waters of Baptism for a fit seat. And so long as they went
together, and were both commonly performed by the same Minister, that is, the
Bishop, there was the less notice taken of it, and possibly the less efficacy
ascribed unto it. But when they came once to be severed, as in the necessary
absence of the Bishop they had been before, and on this setting out of
Parishes, were likely for the most part to be after: the Bishops, out of their
abundant care of the Churches welfare, permitted that which was most necessary,
to the common Presbyter; reserving that which was more honorary, to themselves
alone. Thus was it, in the first case, in St. Cyprians time, who lived, as was
before observed, Vid. Chapter 4. of this 2d. part.
in a kind of voluntary exile, as did also diverse other Bishops in the heat and
violence of persecutions: during whose absence from their Cities, and their
much distance from the Country, there is no question to be made, but that the
Presbyters performed their Office in administration of that Sacrament, and
after which there is little question, but that the Children so baptized, were
at some time or other brought for Confirmation. Certain I am, that to him they
were brought to be confirmed, and that he grounds the Institution of that Right
on the example of Peter and John, Cypr. Epist. 73.
in the Eighth Chap. of the Acts. Illi qui in Samaria crediderant, etc. The
faithful in Samaria, says he, had already received Baptism. Only that which
was wanting, Peter and John supplied, by Prayer, and imposition of hands to the
end the holy Ghost might be poured on them. Then adds, Quod nunc quoque apud
nos geritur, which also is done amongst our selves, when they which be already
baptized, are brought unto the Prelates of the Church (Praepositis ^cclesiae
offeruntur,) that by our Prayer and Imposition of our hands) they may receive
the holy Ghost, and be strengthened by the seal of the Lord. And in the second
case, Hier. advers. Luciferianos.
it is whereof Hierom speaks, where he observes it to be the custom of the
Church, ut ad eos, qui long in minoribus urbibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos
baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad invocationem Spiritus Sancti manum impositurus
excurrat; that the Bishop should go abroad, as in Visitation, and imposing
hands, pray for the gift of the Holy Ghost, on them, who far off in the lesser
Cities (as also in Viculis and Castellis, in small Towns and Villages) had by
the Presbyters and Deacons been baptized. But note withal that Hierom tells us,
that this imposition of hands was reserved only to the Bishop, ad honorem
potius sacerdotii quam ad legis necessitatem, not that the Sacrament of Baptism
was not perfect and complete without it, but rather out of a certain congruity
and fitness to honor Prelacy with such preheminencies; the safety of the
Church depending upon the dignity of the chief Priest or Bishop. By which, it
does appear to be St. Hieroms opinion, Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5. n. 66.
as Hooker excellently collects, That the Holy Ghost is received in Baptism,
that Confirmation is only a Sacramental complement; that the reason why Bishops
alone did ordinarily confirm, was not because the benefit, grace, and dignity
thereof was greater than of Baptism, but rather for that by the Sacrament of
Baptism men being admitted into Gods Church, it was both reasonable and
convenient, that if he baptize them not, unto whom the chiefest authority and
charge of their souls belongs, yet for Honors sake, and in token of his
spiritual superiority over them, because to bless, is an act of Authority, the
performance of this annexed Ceremony should be sought for at his hands. What
other reasons there are for it, in reference to the parties that receive the
same, I forbear to specify as not conducing to the History of Episcopacy,
which I have in hand: to which estate the honor of giving Confirmation, has
always been reserved to this very day.

Another thing which followed upon this setting forth of Parishes by Dionysius,
Rural Bishops; Of which, being that there were two sorts, according to the
times and Ages, when they were employed; we must distinguish them accordingly.
Now of these Chorepiscopi, or Country Bishops, some in the point and power of
Order, were no more than Presbyters, having received no higher Ordination, than
to that function in the Ministry: but were enabled by the Bishop under whom
they served, to exercise some parts of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as much as
was thought fit to commit unto them, for the better reiglement of the Church.
And these I take it, were more ancient than the present times, appointed as the
Bishops Visitors, to go abroad into the Country, to parts more remote, to
oversee such Presbyters as had been sent forth for the instruction of the
people in small Towns and Villages, and to perform such further Offices, which
the ordinary Presbyter, for want of the like latitude of Jurisdiction was
defective in. Con. Neo-Caesaviens. Can. 13.
These I conceive to be of the same nature with our Rural Deans in some parts
of England; And these are they which in the Council of Neo-Caesarea, are said
to be ordained (...), after the manner of the Seventy: and if no more than so,
then but simply Presbyters in the power of Order; though ranked above them in
regard of their Jurisdiction. To which Pope Damasus agrees also, affirming
quod ipsi iidem sunt qui and Presbyteri, Damas. Ep. 5. ap. Bin. Council. T. 1.
Bellarm. de Clericis. l. 1. c. 17.
that they are the very same with Presbyters, being first ordained, ad exemplum
Septuaginta, after the example of the Seventy. Others there were, whom we find
furnished with a further power, qui vere Episcopalem consecrationem acceperant,
which really and truly had received Episcopal Consecration, and yet were called
Chorepiscopi, because they had no Church nor Diocese of their own, sed in
aliena Ecclesia ministrabant, but executed their authority in another charge.
And these, says Bellarmine, are such as we now call Titular or Suffragan
Bishops: such as those heretofore admitted in the Church of England: whereof
consult the Act of Parliament, 26 H. 8. cap. 14. Now that they had Episcopal
consecration, appears evidently by the Council of Antioch, where it is said
expressly of them, (...), that they had received the Ordination of Bishops:
Conc. Anti. cap. 10.
and so by virtue of their Ordination, might execute all manner of Episcopal
Acts, which the Bishop of the City might perform. And to this Power, they were
admitted on two special reasons: whereof the first was to supply the absence of
the Bishop, who being intent upon the business of the City, where his charge
was greatest; could not so well attend the business of the Country, or see how
well the Presbyters behaved themselves in their several Parishes, to which,
upon the late division, they were sent abroad. And this is called in the said
Council of Antioch, Id. Ibid.
(...), the looking to the Administration of the Churches under their
authority. The other was to content such of the Novatian Bishops, who rather
would continue in their schism and faction, than return unto the Catholic
Church, with the loss of the honor and calling which they had before: whom
they thought fit, if they were willing to return to the Church again, to suffer
in the state of a Chorepiscopus. And this is that which was so prudently
resolved on in the Council of Nice (in which fifteen of those which assembled
there, were of this Order or Estate) viz. Conc. Nicen. can. 8.
That if any of them did return to the Catholic Church, either in City or
Village, wherein there was a Bishop, or a Presbyter before provided, (...), he
should enjoy the place and honor of a Presbyter: but if that pleased him not,
(...), he should be fitted with the Office of a Chorepiscopus. Which being the
true condition of those Chorepiscopi, it seems to me a plain and evident
mistake, that the Chorepiscopus, who was but a Presbyter, Smectymn. page 36.
should be affirmed to have power to impose hands, and to ordain within his
Precincts, with the Bishops license. For certainly, it is apparent by the
Council of Antioch, that the Chorepiscopi which had power of conferring Orders,
had to that end received Episcopal consecration, and consequently, could not
but be more than Presbyters: though at the first indeed they meddled not
therewith, without the leave and license of the Bishop, whose Suffragans and
Substitutes they were. But when they had forgot their ancient modesty, and did
not keep themselves within the bounds and limits appointed to them; which was
to make two Bishops in one Diocese, contrary to the ancient Canons; the Church
thought fitting to reduce them to their first condition. And thereupon it was
decreed in the Council of Ancyra, (...), Conc. Ancyran. can. 13.
that it should no more be lawful for them to ordain either Presbyters or
Deacons: that is to say, as it was afterward explained in the Council of
Antioch, (...), Conc. Antio. can. 10.
without the liking of the Bishop under whom he served. Howsoever, that they
might have somewhat of the Bishop in them, they were permitted by that Canon,
to ordain Subdeacons, Exorcists, and Readers; with which they were required to
rest contented: as also (...), to send abroad their Letters unto other Bishops,
Ibid. can. 8.
which they called Literas Formatas, and Communicatorias (as before was noted)
as those that had the full authority and power of Bishops, did use of old to do
at their Ordinations. A point of honor, denied unto the ordinary Presbyters,
in that very Canon.

Now to proceed. The next Successor unto Dionysius, in the Sea of Rome, Ibid.
Sept. 18.
is called Felix; but no more happy in some things, than his Predecessor: the
Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, taking beginning in the time or Government in
the one; that of the Manichees, commencing almost with the other. Hujus tempore
Manes quidam gente Persa, vita and moribus barbarus, etc. During his time,
says Platina, arose one Manes, Platina in vita Felicis.
by birth a Persian, in life and manners a Barbarian, who took upon him to be
Christ, gathering unto him Twelve Disciples, for the dispersing of his
frenzies. In this he differed amongst many things from Samosatenus: he making
Christ to be no better than a man; and Manes making a vile sinful man to be the
Christ. I know Baronius does place the rising of this Manicbean Heresy, under
Eutychianus, Baron. Ann. Eccl. in An. 277.
his next Successor; and let them reconcile the difference that list, for me.
Suffice it that the Heresy, being risen up, and being so directly contrary
both to Faith and Piety: the Bishops of the Church bestirred themselves both
then and after, for the suppressing of the same, according to their wonted care
of Her peace and safety. Not as before, in the case of Paulus Samosatenus, by
Synodical meetings, which was the only way could be taken by them, for the
deposing of him from his Bishopric, which followed as a part of his
condemnation: but by discourse and Argument in public Writings, which might
effectually suppress the Heresy, although the person of the Heretic was out
of distance, and to say truth, Epiph. advers. haeres. 66. n. 12.
beyond their reach. The Persian King had eased them of that labor, who
seizing on that wretched miscreant, (...), commanded him to be flayed alive,
and thereby put him to death, as full of ignominy, as of pain. But for the
confutation of the Heresy, which survived the Author, that was the business of
the Bishops; by whom, as Epiphanius notes, (...), Id. Ibid. n. 21.
many most admirable Disputations had been made in confutation of his Errors.
Particularly, he instanceth in Archelaus, Bishop of the Caschari, a Nation of
Mesopotamia, Titus Bishop of Bostra; Diodorus, one of the Bishops of Cilicia;
Serapion, Bishop of Thmua; Eusebius the Historian Bishop of Caesarea, Eusebius
Emisenus, Georgius and Apollinaris, Bishops successively of Laodicea,
Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, with many other Prelates of the Eastern
Churches. Not that the Bishops of the West did nothing in it, though not here
named by Epiphanius, who being of another Language, could not so well take
notice of their Works and Writings. For after this, St. Austin, Bishop of
Hippo, wrote so much against them; and did so fully satisfy and confute them
both, that he might justly say with the Apostle, that he labored more
abundantly than they all. So careful were the Bishops of the Churches safety,
that never any Heretic did arise, but presently they set a watch upon him, and
having found what Heresies or dangerous doctrines he dispersed abroad,
endeavored with all speed to prevent the mischief.

This, Paulus, Patriarch of the Church of Antioch; so we may see the like in
their proceedings against Marcellinus, one of the Popes of Rome, the third from
Felix, who though he broached no Heresy, as the other did; yet gave as great a
scandal to the Church as he, if not greater far. The times were hot and fiery,
in the which he sat: so fierce a persecution being raised against the Church by
Dioclesian, and his Associates in the Empire, as never had been before: A
persecution which extended not only to the demolishing of Churches, Theod.
Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 28. Arnob. cont. gent. l. 4. in fine. Damas. in vita
Marcellini.
the Temples of Almighty God; but to the extirpation of the Scriptures, the
Books and Oracles of the Almighty. And for the bodies of his Servants, some of
which were living Libraries, and all lively Temples, even Temples of the holy
Ghost; it raged so terribly amongst them, that within Thirty days, Seventeen
thousand Persons of both sexes, in the several parts and Provinces of the Romam
Empire were crowned with Martyrdom, the Tyrants so extremely raging,
Marcellinus comes at last unto his trial: where being wrought upon either by
flattery, or fear, or both, he yielded unto flesh and blood, and to preserve
his life, Id. ibid.
he betrayed his Master. Ad sacrificium ductus est ut thurificaret; quod and
fecit, says Damasus in the Pontifical; He was conducted to the Temple, to
offer incense to the Roman Idols, which he did accordingly. And this I urge not
to the scandal and reproach of the Church of Rome. Indeed it is no Reproach unto
her, that one amongst so many godly Bishops, most of them being Martyrs also,
should waver in the constancy of his resolutions, and for a season, yield unto
those persuasions, which flesh and blood, and the predominant love of life did
suggest unto him. That which I urge it for is, for the declaration of the
Course which was taken against him, the manner how the Church proceeded in so
great a cause, and in the which so great a Person was concerned. For though the
crime were great and scandalous, tending to the destruction of the flock of
Christ, which being much guided by the example of so prime a Pastor, might
possibly have been seduced to the like Idolatry; and that great numbers of them
ran into the Temple, and were spectators of that horrid action: yet find we not
that any of them did revile him in word or deed, or pronounced hasty judgment
on him; but left the cognizance of the cause to them, to whom of right it did
belong. Nor is it an hard matter to discern who these Judges were. Laymen they
could not be, Amb. Epist. l. 5. Ep. 32.
that is sure. Quando audisti in causa fidei Laicos de Episcopis judicasse? When
did you ever hear, says Ambrose, speaking of the times before him, that
Laymen in a point of Faith did judge of Bishops? And Presbyters they were not
neither, they had no Authority to judge the Person of a Bishop. That Bishops
had Authority to censure and depose their Presbyters we have shown already;
that ever any Presbyters did take upon them to judge their Bishop is no where
to be found, I dare boldly say it, in all the practice of Antiquity. For being
neither munere pares, Id. ibid.
nor jure suniles, equal in function, nor alike in law, they were disabled now
in point of reason from such bold attempts, as afterward disabled by Imperial
Edict. A simple Biship might as little intermeddle in it as a simple Presbyter;
for Bishops severally and apart were not to judge their Metropolitan, no nor
one another. Being of equal Order and Authority, and seeing that Par in parem
non habet potestatem, that men of equal rank, qua tales, are of equal power,
one of them cannot be the others Judge for want of some transcendent power to
pass sentence on him. Which as it was of force in all other cases wherein a
Bishop was concerned, so most especially in this wherein the party Criminal was
a Metropolitan, and more than so, the Primate or Patriarch of the Diocese. So
that all circumstances laid together, there was no other way conceivable in
these ancient times, than to call a Council, the greatest Ecclesiastical
Tribunal of Christ on earth, there to debate the business, and upon proof of
the offense, to proceed to judgment. This had been done before in the case of
Paulus, and this is now resolved on in the present too. Accordingly the Bishops
of those Churches, and as many other as could be drawn together in that
dangerous time, Platina in vita Marcel.
Assembled at Sinuessa (now called Suessa) a City of Campania, 180. in the
total, as it is in Platina. Where though they had sufficient proof of that foul
offense, yet because Marcellinus stood upon the Negative, negabat se
thurifieasse, as the Acts declare, Acta Conc. Sinuessani, ap. Bin. To. 1.
they thought it fit not to proceed unto the sentence, till they had brought
him to confession. Ex ore tuo justificaberis, and ex ore tuo condemnaberis, as
Petrus, one of the Bishops then assembled did press it on him. Not that being
met Synodically they did want Authority to proceed against him, as the
Pontifician Doctors vainly say; Bellarm. de Pont. Romans l. 2. c. 26. Act.
Council. Sinuessani.
but that it was more consonant to the Roman Laws, that to the testimony of the
Witnesses the confession of the party should be added also. Which when they had
procured from him, Subscripserunt in ejus damnationem, and damnaverunt eum
extra Civitatem, they all condemned him, say the Acts, and all subscribed unto
the Condemnation: Helchiades one of the Bishops there Assembled, being the
first that led the way. And therefore that which follows after, Prima seeds
non judicabitur a quoquam, that the Bishop of the first See shall be judged of
none, which Bellarmin so much insists on, was either foisted in by some later
hand, Bellar. ut supra.
the better to advance the Popes Supremacy, or else must be interpreted, as it
fairly may, non judicabitur a quoquam, that no particular person of what rank
soever, had any power to judge his Primate.

So great a person as Marcellinus being fallen so foully (though after he
recovered footing and died a Martyr for the Gospel) It is the less to be
admired, Damas. Platina. Alij.
if many of inferior quality did betray the cause, and fell into the like
Idolatries. The persecution was both fierce and long, though never at the
height till the last years of Dioclesian, and more than ever were the Lapsi,
who had for saving of their lives denied their Savior. Who when they came unto
themselves, and having made their way unto it by some appearance of contrition,
desired to be admitted to the blessed Sacrament, the Bishops were much troubled
with their importunity; those godly Prelates being as well careful of the
Churches Discipline as the unfortunate estate of those wretched men. Besides
the quality of their offense appearing in some greater, in some less than
others, it put them unto no small trouble how to proportion the intended
penance unto the nature of the crime. For remedy whereof, Petrus the godly
Patriarch of Alexandris, diversa adhibens pro condition cujusque medicamenta
vulneribus, Id. ibid. n. 20.
fitting each several wound with a proper plaster, as Baronius has it,
published certain Canons and instructions for their direction in the same. A
copy of the which we have both in Baronius and the Bibliotheca. This, as it
gave great ease unto the Prelates in the Eastern parts, where the authority of
the man was great and prevalent: So in the West the Bishops of particular
Churches spared no pains nor labor for the upholding of that Discipline which
they received from the hands of their Predecessors. In Spain particularly,
where both the number and condition of these Lapsi seemed more considerable,
Id. ibid. n. 39.
the Bishops of the Province of Betica called a Council at Eliberis, then a
prime City of those parts (near to the ruins of the which, the City of Granada
stands,) Osius, that famous Confessor being there amongst them, where they
established diverse Canons, 81. in all, for confirmation of the public
Discipline, and holding up of that severity, by which the same had been
maintained. Of all which number those which concern our business are these five
especially. Conc. Eliberit. Can. 19.
First, it is ordered that neither Bishops, Presbyters, nor Deacons should
leave the place in which they served to follow Merchandise, de locis suis
negociandi causa non discedant, nor wander up and down the Country after
gainful Markets. In which it was provided notwithstanding, that ad victum sibi
conquirendum that for their necessary maintenance they might send abroad on
those employments their Sons, or Freed-men, or Servants, or any other; and for
their own parts, if they would needs take that course, intra Provinciam
negotientur, they were required to contain themselves within the compass of the
Province, in the which they ministered. It seems the Fathers of the Council were
not so severe, though otherwise tenacious enough of the Ancient Canons; as to
conceive that Merchandising, a secular employment doubtless, was utterly
inconsistent with holy Orders; especially if either it conduced unto the
maintenance of their selves and Families, or that it did not take them off from
the attendance on those places in which their Ministry was required. This for
the maintenance, the next was for the honor of Episcopacy. For in the 32. it
is ordained, Ibid. can. 32.
that those who in some grievous Lapse be in danger of eternal death, apud
Presbyterum poenitentiam agere non debere, sed potius apud Episcopum, ought not
to make confession to, or be enjoined penance by a Presbyter, but to or by the
Bishop only, unless it be in urgent and extreme necessity, in the which case a
Presbyter might admit him unto the Communion, as might a Deacon also by the
appointment of the Presbyter. Of this sort also this that follows, Ibid. can.
53.
by which it is decreed, ut ab eo Episcopo quis accipiat Communionem, that
Sinners be admitted to the Sacrament by that Bishop only, by whom for their
offenses they had been formerly Excommunicated; and that if any other Bishop
presumed to admit him thereto, the Bishop who had Excommunicated him, neither
being made acquainted with it, nor consenting to it, he was to render an
account of it unto his Colleagues, Cum status sui periculo, even with the
danger of his place, Ibid. can. 77.
Of the same temper is a fourth, wherein it is enacted, That if any Deacon,
having a cure or charge committed to him, shall Baptize any of that cure
without a Presbyter or Bishop, Episcopus eos per benedictionem perficere
debebit; the Bishop is required to confirm the party by his Episcopal
benediction. With this Proviso notwithstanding, that if the party do decease
before confirmation, Sub fide qua quis credidit, poterit esse justus, it is to
be conceived that by the Sacrament of Baptism, he had received all things
necessary to salvation. Nor did the Fathers in this Council take order only for
the Bishops in point of honor, but they provided also for the whole Clergy in
point of safety; Ibid. 75.
decreeing by a full consent, that if any person whatsoever should accuse
either Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon falsely, and could not make just proof of
the Accusation, nec in fine dandam ei communionem, that he should not be
admitted to the blessed Sacrament, no not upon his deathbed, in his last
extremity. So tender were they in that Age, of the good name and reputation of
their Clergy.

And now methinks I see a blessed Sunshine, Dioclesian and Maximianus his
Colleague, either afflicted with the guilt of Conscience, or tired with the
effusion of so much innocent blood as had by them been shed in this
Persecution, did of their own accord resign the Empire, Anno 304. as Baronius
calculates it; leaving the same unto Constantius and Galerius, whom they had
long before created Caesar's. Baron. Annal. Eccl. An. 304. n. 1.
Of these Constantius taking to himself the Western parts, lived not full two
years, leaving his own part of the Empire, and a fair ground for all the rest
to Constantine his Son; not only born of Helena a British Woman, but born at
York, the Mother-City, or Metropolis of the British Nation. A Prince whom God
raised up of purpose, not only to give end to the Persecutions, wherewith the
Innocent Spouse of Christ had been so tortured and tormented; but to become the
greatest nursing Father thereunto, that ever was before him in the Church of
Israel, or since him in the Israel of the Church. So that if heretofore you
find the Clergy reckoned as the filth of men, neglected, slighted, or
disgraced, esteemed unworthy either of public trust or favor in the
employments of the State: It is to be imputed unto this, that they were held a
dangerous and suspected party to the Commonwealth, maintaining a Religion
contrary unto that which was allowed in the Empire. Hereafter you shall find it
otherwise. Hereafter you shall find an Edict made by Constantine, enabling such
as would decline the sentence of the Secular Judges, Sozom, hist. Eccl. l. c. 9.
(...), lawfully to appeal unto the judgment of their Bishops; whose judgment
he commanded to be put in execution by all his Officers, with as much
punctuality and effect, as if himself in person had pronounced the same.
Hereafter we shall find Saint Ambrose a right godly Bishop, Aug. Confess. l. 6.
c. 3.
so taken up with hearing and determining men's suits and causes that he had
very little leisure either for corporal repast or private study: Saint Austin,
who relates the former, saying also this, that he had long waited an
opportunity to have conference with him, and had as long been hindered from
access unto him; Secludentibus me ab ejus aure atque ore catervis negotiosorum
hominum, quorum infirmitatibus serviebat, his access to him being barred by
multitudes of Suitors, whose businesses he was pleased to undertake. Hereafter
we shall find the same Saint Austin no such lazy Prelate, but that he has
transmitted to us as many monuments both of his Piety and Learning, as any
other whosoever; so busied on the like occasions, that he could hardly save the
Mornings for his Meditations: Aug. Epist. 210
Post meridiem occupationibus hominum teneri, the afternoons being wholly taken
up in the dispatch or hearing of men's private Connoversies. Nay, when the
Councils of Carthage and Numidia had imposed a certain task upon him, propter
curam Scripturarum, in some things that concerned the holy Scriptures; and that
he asked but five days respite from the affairs and business of the people for
the performance of the same: the People would not have the patience to forbear
so long, Sed violenter irruptum est, but violently brake in upon him. And this,
lest the good Father may be thought to speak it in commendation of his own
abilities, we find related also by Possidonius in the narration of his life;
where we are told, aliquando usque ad horam refectionis, Possidon in vita Aug.
c. 19.
aliquando tota die jejunans, that sometimes he gave hearing to men's causes
till the hour of repast, and sometimes fasted all the day for dispatch thereof,
but always bringing them unto some end or other, pro arbitrata aequitate,
according to the rules of equity and a wellgrounded Conscience. Hereafter we
shall find the Prelates honored with the titles of (...), most honorable
Lords; and that not once or twice, Athanas. in apol. 2. Nazianz. Epist. ad
Nyssen. Theod. l. 1. c. 4, 5. and others passim. Ambros. Epist. 33. l. 5.
but of common course. Hereafter (not to wander through more particulars) we
shall find Saint Ambrose employed in the most weighty matters of the
Commonwealth, and sent Ambassador from the young Emperor Valentinian to the
Tyrant Maximus, who had usurped on his Dominions, and much endangered the whole
Empire, which he performed to so good purpose, that he preserved Italy from an
imminent ruin; the Tyrant afterward confessing, se legationis ejus objectu ad
Italiam non potuisse transire, that he was hindered by the same, from passing
forwards into Italy with his conquering Army. So little was it either thought
or found in those blessed times, that holy Orders did superinduce a disability
for civil Prudence.

But these things we do here behold but at a distance, Moses from Mount Nebo
saw the Land of Canaan. They appertain of right to the following Age; Deuter.
ult.
and they which had the happiness to live till then could not but easily
discern the great alteration, which was between a Church under Persecution and
a Church in Peace; between a Church oppressed by Tyrants, and a Church
cherished and supported by a Christian Prince. And in this flourishing estate I
should gladly show her, but that my wearied pen does desire some rest; and that
I would fain see with what acceptance my present pains will be received in the
world, before I give the second onset. In the mean time I will lay down a
brief Chronology of such of the remarkable occurrences which have been
represented in these two last Centuries, it being the office of an upright
Judge, and only such I do desire should peruse these Papers, ut res, ita
tempora rerum noscere, to know as well the times and circumstances of business
as the things themselves.

A Brief CHRONOLOGY of the Estate of Holy Church, in these two last Centuries.
An. Christ. 102. CLemens Bishop of Rome, the true Author of the Epistle to the
Church of Corinth, and the supposed Author of the Apostles Canons, departs
this life. 103. Evaristus succeeds Clemens in the Sea of Rome, in the which
Church he afterward ordained Parishes. 109. Simeon B. of Jerusalem Martyred;
Justus succeeded in his place. Ignatius led a Prisoner toward Rome, writes his
Epistles to the Churches. 110. Ignatius Martyred, designing Hero his Successor
in the Church of Antioch. Onesimus B. of Ephesus, mentioned in the former
Century, is made a Martyr. 118. Papias B. of Hierapolis, in Phrygia, at this
time flourishes. 128. Quadratus B. of Athens publishes an Apology in behalf
of Christians. 138. Marcus made B. of Jerusalem, the first that ever had that
place of the Uncircumcision. 150. Justin Martyr writes his Apology. 160.
Hegesippus begins his travels toward Rome, conferring with the Bishops as
he past along. 169. Polycarpus, the famous B. of Smyrna Martyred, 172. Melito
B. of Sardis publishes an Apology. 175. Dionysius B. of Corinth flourished,
and writes many of his Epistles. Theophilus B. of Antioch writes in defense of
Christianity. 177. Eleutherius succeeds Soter in the Church of Rome. Lucius a
British King, sends an Embassage unto Eleutherius, desiring to be made a
Christian. 178. Several Episcopal Sees erected in the Isle of Britain. 180. The
holy Father Irenaeus made B. of Lions. 190. Demetrius succeeds Julianus in
the Sea of Alexandria, being the twelfth Bishop of that Church. 191. Serapion
succeeds Maximinus in the Church of Antioch, the ninth Bishop of that See.
198. Victor the Successor of Eleutherius, excommunicates the Asian Churches,
about their observation of the Feast of Easter. Irenaeus B of Lions, and
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, write against him for it. Several Councils called
about it, by the Metropolitans and other Bishops of this time. 199. Theophilus,
Bishop of Caesarea, at this time flourished, as did Narcissus also, the
thirtieth Bishop of Jerusalem. 200. Tertullian, Who began to be in estimation,
Anno 196. does this year publish his Apology. 203. Zepherinus succeeds
Victor in the Church of Rome. 204. Clemens of Alexandria flourishes in the
public Schools of that famous City. 205. Origin, one of his Disciples,
begins at this time to be of Credit. Irenaeus B. of Lions crowned with
Martyrdom. 217. Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage lived about this time. Origin
preaches in Caesarea. Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria, and Theoctistus of
Caesarea disagree about it. 230. Origin made a Presbyter by Theoctistus, B. of
Caesarea, and Alexander, B. of Jerusalem. 232. Origin Excommunicated by
Demetrius. 233. Heraclas, Origen's Successor in the Schools of Alexandria, is
made the Bishop of that City. 240. Donatus Successor of Agrippinus in the Sea
of Carthage. 248. Dionysius, who before succeeded Heraclas in the Professorship
of Alexandria, does now succeed him in his See. 250. Cyprian, a right godly man
succeeds Donatus in the Church of Carthage. 253. Cyprian, by reason of the
Persecution, retires awhile. Fabius succeeds Babilas in the Sea of Antioch.
254. A faction raised against Saint Cyprian by Felicissimus, and his
Associates. Cornelius chosen Pope of Rome in the place of Fabian. Novatianus
makes a Schism in the Church of Rome, causing himself to be ordained B. of the
same. Cyprian returns again to Carthage. 255. Several Councils held against the
Schism and Heresy of the Novatians. 256. The death of Origin. 257. The
memorable case of Geminius Faustinus, one of the Presbyters of the Church of
Carthage. 261. Cyprian, and diverse other Bishops Martyred: Lucian succeeding
Cyprian in the Sea of Carthage: Dyonisius chosen Pope of Rome, who caused
Parishes to be set forth in Country Villages. 266. The first Council of Antioch
against Samosatenus. 272. Paulus Samosatenus, the sixteenth Bishop of Antioch,
deposed for his Heresy by the Council there, and Doninus chosen in his place.
Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria dies, and Maximus succeeds in that See. The
Bishops of Italy and Rome made Judges in the case of Paulus, by the Emperor
Aurelianus. 277. The Manichean Heresy now first made known; and the impiety
thereof confuted by several Bishops. Felix succeeds Dionysius in the Sea of
Rome. Doninus Bishop of Antioch dies, and Timaeus succeeds in that charge.
283. Cyrillus Successor unto Timaeus. 285. Theonus succeeds Maximus in the
Church of Alexandria. 296. Zamdas succeeds Hymenaeus in Jerusalem.
Marcellinus, the third from Felix, succeeds Eutychianus in the Sea of Rome.
298. Tyrannus succeeds Cyril in the Church of Antioch, being the twentieth
Bishop of this See, and the last of this Age. 299. Hermon succeeds Zamdas in
the Church of Jerusalem, the thirty-ninth Bishop of the same, and the last of
this Century. 300. Petrus succeeds Theonus in the Sea of Alexandria, the
seventeenth Bishop of that Church. 302. the Persecution raised by Dioclesian
grows unto the height. The grievous lapse of Marcellinus, Pope of Rome. 303.
The Council held at Sinuessa by the Western Bishops for the condemnation of
Marcellinus. Mensurius Bishop of Carthage, the Successor of Lucianus at this
time flourishes. 304. Marcellinus honored with the crown of Martyrdom,
leaves Marcellus his Successor, who was the twenty-ninth Bishop of this
Church, reckoning from S. Peter. 305. The Council of Eliberis assembled by the
Spanish Prelates. 306. Constantine, most worthily surnamed the Great, attaineth
the Empire, setleth the Church of Christ in peace, safety, and honor on the
Clergy.
The end of the Second Part.
FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH.

IN TWO BOOKS.

By PETER HEYLYN, D. D.

DEUTERONOMY. xxxii. 7. Remember the days of old, consider the years of many
Generations; ask thy Father, and he will show thee; thy Elders, and they will
tell thee.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, to be sold by C. Harper. 1681.

TO THE MOST HIGH and MIGHTY Prince Charles, By the Grace of God, KING of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Dread Sovereign,
YOUR Majesty's most Christian care to suppress those rigours which some in
maintenance of their Sabbath-Doctrines, had pressed upon this Church in these
latter days, justly deserves to be recorded amongst the principal Monuments of
your Zeal and Piety. Of the two great and public Enemies of Gods holy Worship,
although Profaneness in it self, be the more offensive; yet Superstition is
more spreading, and more quick of growth. In such a Church as this, so settled
in a constant practice of Religious Offices, and so confirmed by godly Canons,
for the performance of the same; there was no fear that ever the Lords Day (the
day appointed by Gods Church for his public Service) would have been overrun
by the Profane neglect of any pious duties on that day required. Rather the
danger was, lest by the violent torrent of some men's affections it might have
been o're-flown by those Superstitions; wherewith, in imitation of the Jews,
they began to charge it, and thereby made it far more burdensome to their
Christian Brethren than was the Sabbath to the Israelites, by the Law of MOSES.
Nor know we where they would have staid, had not your Majesty been pleased, out
of a tender care of the Churches safety, to give a check to their proceedings,
in Licencing on that day those Lawful Pastimes, which some, without Authority
from Gods Word, or from the practice of Gods Church, had of late restrained.
Yet so it is, your Majesty's most Pious and most Christian purpose has not
found answerable entertainment; especially amongst those men who have so long
dreamt of a Sabbath day, that now they will not be persuaded that it is a
Dream. For the awakening of the which, and their reduction to more sound and
sensible Counsels, (next to my duty to Gods Church, and your Sacred Majesty)
have I applied my self to compose this Story, wherein I doubt not but to show
them how much they have deceived both themselves and others, in making the old
Jewish Sabbath of equal age and observation with the Law of Nature; and
preaching their new Sabbath-Doctrines in the Church of Christ, with which the
Church has no acquaintance; wherein I doubt not but to show them, that by
their obstinate resolution, not to make Publication of your Majesty's pleasure,
they tacitly condemn, not only all the Fathers of the Primitive times; the
Learned Writers of all Ages, many most godly Kings and Princes of the former
days, and not few Councils of chief note, and of faith unquestionable; but even
all states of Men, Nations, and Churches at this present, whom they most
esteem. This makes your Majesty's interest so particular in this present
History, that were I not obliged unto your Majesty in any nearer bond than that
of every common Subject, it could not be devoted unto any other with so just
propriety. But being it is the work of your Majesty's Servant, and in part
fashioned at those times, which by your Majesty's leave were borrowed from
Attendance on your Sacred Person; your Majesty has also all the rights unto it
of a Lord and Master. Institut. l. 1. tit. 8.. 1.
So that according to that Maxim of the Civil Laws, Quodcunque per servum
acquiritur, id domino acquirit suo; your Majesty has as absolute power to
dispose thereof as of the Author; who is,

Dread Sovereign, Your Majesty's most Obedient Subject, and most faithful
Servant, PET. HEYLYN.

A PREFACE To them, who being themselves mistaken, have misguided others in
these new Doctrines of the Sabbath.
NOT out of any humor or desire of being in action, or that I love to have my
hands in any of those public quarrels, wherewith our peace has been
disturbed; but that Posterity might not say we have been wanting, for our
parts, to your information, and the direction of Gods People in the ways of
truth, have I adventured on this Story. A Story which shall represent unto you
the constant practice of Gods Church in the present business, from the Creation
to these days; that so you may the better see how you are gone astray from the
paths of Truth, and tendries of Antiquity, and from the present judgment of all
Men and Churches. The Arguments whereto you trust, and upon seeming strength
whereof you have been emboldned to press these Sabbatarian Doctrins upon the
Consciences of poor people, I purpose not to meddle with in this Discourse,
(...). They have been elsewhere thoroughly canvassed, and all those seeming
strengths beat down, by which you were your selves misguided; and by the which
you have since wrought on the affections of unlearned men, or such at least
that judged not of them by their weight, but by their numbers. But where you
give it out as in matter of fact, how that the Sabbath was ordained by God in
Paradise, and kept accordingly by all the Patriarchs before Moses time; or
otherwise ingraft by Nature in the soul of man, and so in use also amongst the
Gentiles: In that, I have adventured to let men see that you are very much
mistaken, and tell us things directly contrary unto truth of Story. Next, where
it is the groundwork of all your building, that the Commandment of the Sabbath
is Moral, Natural, and Perpetual, as punctually to be observed as any other of
the first or second Table: I doubt not but it will appear by this following
History, that it was never so esteemed of by the Jews themselves; no not when
as the observation of the same was most severely pressed upon them by the Law
and Prophets, nor when the day was made most burdensome unto them by the
Scribes and Pharisees. Lastly, whereas you make the Lords day to be an
institution of our Savior Christ, confirmed by the continual usage of the holy
Apostles, and both by him and them imposed as a perpetual Ordinance on the
Christian Church, making your selves believe, that so it was observed in the
times before, as you have taught us to observe it in these latter days: I have
made manifest to the world that there is no such matter to be found at all,
either in any writings of the Apostles, or monument of true Antiquity, or in
the practice of the middle or the present Churches. What said I, of the present
Churches? So I said indeed, and doubt not but it will appear so in this
following Story: The present Churches, all of them both Greek and Latin,
together with the Protestants of what name soever, being far different, both in
their Doctrine and their practice from these new conceptions. And here I cannot
choose but note, that whereas those who first did set on foot these Doctrines,
in all their other practices to subvert this Church, did bear themselves
continually on the Authority of Calvin, and the example of those Churches which
came most near unto the Platform of Geneva: In these their
Sabbath-speculations, they had not only none to follow, but they found Calvin
and Geneva, and those other Churches directly contrary unto them. However in
all other matters they cried up Calvin and his Writings, Hooker in his Preface.
making his Books the very Canon, to which both Discipline and Doctrine was to
be confirmed; yet hic magister non tenetur, here by his leave they would
forsake him, and leave him fairly to himself, that they themselves might have
the glory of a new invention.

For you my Brethren, and beloved in our Lord and Savior, as I do willingly
believe that you have entertained these Tenets upon mis-persuasion, not out of
any ill intentions to the Church your Mother; and that it is an error in your
judgments only, not of your affections: So upon that belief have I spared no
pains, as much as in me is, to remove that error, and rectify what is amiss
in your opinion. I hope you are not of those men, Quos non persuadebis, etiamsi
persuaseris, who either hate to be reformed, or have so far espoused a quarrel,
that neither truth nor reason can divorce them from it. Nor would I gladly you
should be of their resolutions, Qui volunt id verum esse quod credunt, nolunt
id credere quod verum est; who are more apt to think all true which themselves
believe, than be persuaded to believe such things as are true indeed. In
confidence whereof, as I was first induced to compose this History; so in
continuance of those hopes, I have presumed to address it to you, to tender it
to your perusal, and to submit it to your censure: That if you are not better
furnished, you may learn from hence that you have trusted more unto other men
than you had just reason. It is my chief end avour, as it is my prayer, that
possibly I may behold Jerusalem in prosperity, all my life long. Nor doubt I by
the grace of God, to reduce some of you at the least, to such conformity with
the practice of the Catholic Church; that even your hands may also labor in
the advancement and promotion of that full prosperity, which I so desire. This
that I may the better do, I shall present you, as I said, with the true story
of the Sabbath, and therein lay before your eyes both what the Doctrine was,
and what the practice of all former times; and how it stands in both respects
with all Gods Churches at this present. First, for the Sabbath, I shall show
you that it was not instituted by the Lord in Paradise, nor naturally imprinted
in the soul of man, nor ever kept by any of the Ancient Fathers before Moses
time: And this not generally said, and no more but so; but proved particularly
and successively in a continued descent of times and men. Next, that being
given unto the Jews by Moses, it was not so observed or reckoned of as any of
the moral precepts, but sometimes kept, and sometimes not, according as men's
private businesses, or the necessities of the state might give way unto it; and
finally was for ever abrogated, with the other Ceremonies, at the destruction
of the Temple. As for the Gentiles all this while, it shall hereby appear that
they took no more notice of it, (except a little at the latter end of the
Jewish State) than to deride both it, and all them that kept it. Then for the
Lords day, that it was not instituted by our Savior Christ, commanded by the
Apostles, or ordained first by any other Authority than the voluntary
Consecration of it by the Church to religious uses; and being Consecrated to
those uses, was not advanced to that esteem which it now enjoys, but liesurely
and by degrees, partly by the Edicts of secular Princes, partly by Canons of
particular Councils, and finally by the Decretals of several Popes, and Orders
of inferior Prelates; and being so advanced, is subject still, as many
Protestant Doctors say, to the Authority of the Church to be retained or
changed as the Church thinks fit. Finally, that in all Ages heretofore, and in
all Churches at this present, it neither was nor is esteemed of as a Sabbath
day; nor reckoned of so near a kin to the former Sabbath, but that at all such
leisure times as were not destinate by the Church to Gods public service; men
might apply their minds, and bestow their thoughts either about their
businesses or upon their pleasures, such as are lawful in themselves, and not
prohibited by those powers, under which they lived. Which showed and manifestly
proved unto you, I doubt not but those Paper-walls which have been raised
heretofore to defend these Doctrines, how sair soever they may seem to the
outward eye, and whatsoever colors have been laid upon them, will in the end
appear unto you to be but Paper-walls indeed; some beaten down by the report
only of those many Canons which have successively been mounted in the Church of
God, either to fortify the Lords day, which it self did institute, or cast
down those Jewish fancies which some had labored to restore. Such passages as
occurred concerning England, I purposely have deferred till the two last
Chapters, that you may look upon the actions of our Ancestors with a clearer
eye, both those who lived at the first planting of Religion; and those who had
so great an hand in the reforming of the same. And yet not look upon them only,
but by comparing your new Doctrines with those which were delivered in the
former times; your severe practice, with the innocent liberty which they used
amongst them: You may the better see your errors, and what strange Incense you
have offered in the Church of God. A way in which I have the rather made choice
to walk, that by the practice of the Church in general, you may the better
judge of those Texts of Scripture which seem to you to speak in the behalf of
that new Divinity which you have preached unto the People; and by the practice
of this Church particularly, it may with greater ease be showed you, that you
did never suck these Doctrines from your Mothers Breasts.

It is an observation and a rule in Law, that custom is the best interpreter of
a doubtful statute, and we are lesson'd thereupon, to cast our eyes in all such
questionable matters unto the practice of the state in the self-same case. Si
de interpretatione legis quaeritur, imprimis inspiciendnm est, quo jure civitas
retro in hujusmodi casibus usa fuit: Consuetudo enim optima interpretatio legis
est. De legib. and longa consuet.
If you submit unto this rule, and stand unto the Plea which you often have made,
I verily persuade my self that you will quickly find your error; and that
withal you will discover how to abet a new and dangerous Doctrine, you have
deserted the whole practice of the Christian Church, which for the space of
1600 years has been embraced and followed by all godly men. These are the
hopes which we project unto our selves. The cause of this our undertaking was
your Information; and the chief end we aim at is your Reformation. Your selves
my Brethren, and your good, if I may procure it, are the occasion and the
recompense of these poor endeavors; Pretiumque and causa laboris, in the Poets
language.

Nor would I you should think it any blemish to your reputation, should you
desert a cause which with so vehement affections you have first maintained; or
that the world would censure you of too deep a folly, should you retract what
you have either taught or written in the times before. Rather the world and all
good men shall praise both your integrity and ingenuity, in that you think it
no disparagement to yield the better unto truth, whenever you find it. Being
men conceive it not impossible, but that you may be in an error; and having
erred, think it your greatest Victory that you are conquered by the truth;
which being mighty will prevail, and either here or elsewhere, enforce all of
us to confess the great powers thereof. S. Austin and the Cardinal, two as
great Clerks as almost any in their times, have herein showed the way unto you,
one in his Retractations, the other in his Recognitions; nor did it ever turn
unto their disgrace. Therefore abandoning all such fond conceits, as enemies
unto the truth, which I trust you seek, and above all things wish to find; let
me beseech you to possess your souls with desire of knowledge, and that you
would not shut your eyes against the tendry of those truths, which either here
or elsewhere are presented to you for your information. Which that you may the
better do, I do adjure you in the name, and for the sake of Jesus Christ, to
lay aside all prejudice which possibly you may be possessed withal, either in
reference to the Argument, or unto the Author; and to peruse this following
Story with as much singleness of heart, and desire of truth, and invocation of
Gods Spirit to find out the same, as was by me used in the writing of it. It is
your welfare which I aim at, as before was said; your restitution to your
functions, and reconciliation to the Church, from which you are at point of
falling; that we with you, and you with us, laying aside those jealousies and
distrusts which commonly attend on divided minds, may join our hearts and hands
together for the advancement of Gods honor, and the Churches peace. And God
even our own God shall give us his blessing.

For others which shall read this Story, whether by you misguided or yet left
emire, I do desire them to take notice that there is none so much a stranger to
good Arts and Learning, whom in this case and kind of writing I dare not trust
with the full cognizance of the cause herein related. In points of Law, when as
the matter seems to be above the wit of common persons, or otherwise is so
involved and intricate, that there has been no Precedent thereof in former
times; it is put off to a demurrer, and argued by my Lords the Judges, with
their best maturity of deliberation. But in a matter of fact we put our selves
upon an ordinary Jury, not doubting if the evidence prove fair, the Witnesses
of faith unquestioned, and the Records without suspicion of imposture, but they
will do their Conscience, and find for Plaintiff or Defendant, as the cause
appears. So in the business now in hand, that part thereof which consists most
of Argument and strength of Disputation, in the examining of those reasons
which Pro or Con have been alleged, are by me left to be discussed, and
weighed by them, who either by their place are called, or by their Learning are
enabled to so great a business. But for the point of practice, which is matter
of fact, how long it was before the Sabbath was commanded, and how it was
observed, being once commanded; how the Lords day has stood in the Christian
Church, by what Authority first instituted, in what kind regarded; these things
are offered to the judgment and consideration of the meanest Reader. No man
that is to be returned on the present Jury, but may be able to give up his
Verdict, touching the title now in question, unless he come with passion, and
so will not hear, or else with prejudice, and so will not value the evidence
which is produced for his information. For my part, I shall deal ingenuously,
as the cause requires, as of sworn counsel to the truth, not using any of the
mysteries or arts of pleading, but as the holy Fathers of the Church, the
learned Writers of all Ages, the most renowned Divines of these latter times,
and finally as the public Monuments and Records of most Nations christened have
furnished me in this enquiry. What these or any of them have herein either said
or done, or otherwise left upon the Register for our direction, I shall lay
down in order in their several times; either the times in which they lived, or
whereof they writ: that so we may the better see the whole succession both of
the doctrine and the practice of Gods Church in the present business. And this
with all integrity and sincere proceeding, not making use of any Author who
has been probably suspected of fraud or forgery, nor dealing otherwise in this
search than as becomes a man who aims at nothing more than Gods public
service, and the conducting of Gods People in the ways of truth. This is the
sum of what I had to say in this present Preface; beseeching God, the God of
truth, yea the truth it self, to give us a right understanding, and a good will
to do thereafter.

THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH.
BOOK I. From the Creation of the World to the destruction of the Temple.
CHAP. I. That the SABBATH was not instituted in the Beginning of the World.
1. The entrance to the Work in hand. 2. That those words, Genes. 2. And God
blessed the seventh day, etc. are there delivered as by way of anticipation. 3.
Anticipations in the Scripture confessed by them, who deny it here. 4.
Anticipations of the same nature not strange in Scripture. 5. No Law imposed by
God on Adam, touching the keeping of the Sabbath. 6. The Sabbath not ingraft by
Nature in the soul of man. 7. The greatest Advocates for the Sabbath, deny it
to be any part of the Law of Nature. 8. Of the morality and perfection,
supposed to be in the number of seven, by some learned men. 9. That other
numbers in the confession of the same learned men, particularly the first,
third, and fourth, are both as moral, and as perfect as the seventh. 10. The
like is proved of the sixth, eighth, and tenth; and of other numbers. 11. The
Scripture not more favorable to the number of seven, than it is to others. 12.
Great caution to be used by those, who love to recreate themselves in the
mysteries of numbers.


I Purpose by the grace of God to write an History of the Sabbath, practically
has been done therein, by the Church of God, in all Ages past, from the
Creation till this present; Primaque ab origin mundi, ad mea perpetuum
deducere tempora carmen. One day, as David tells us, teaches another. Nor can
we have a better Schoolmaster in the things of God, than the continual and most
constant practice of those famous men, that have gone before us. An undertaking
of great difficulty, but of greater profit. In which I will crave leave to say,
as does St. Austin, in the entrance to his Books de Civitate; Lib. 1. c. ^.
Magnum opus and arduum, sed Deus est adjutor noster. Therefore, most humbly
begging the assistance of Gods holy Spirit to guide me in the way of truth, I
shall apply my self to so great a work; beginning with the first Beginnings,
and so continuing my Discourse, successively, unto these times, wherein we
live. In which no accident of note, as far as I can discern, shall pass
unobserved, which may conduce to the discovery of the truth, and se^ling of the
minds of men in a point so controverted. On therefore (...) to the present
business. Genesis 2.
In the beginning (says the Text) God created the Heaven and the Earth. Which
being finished, and all the hosts of them made perfect, on the seventh day God
ended his work which he had made, and he rested on the seventh day from all his
work which he had made. And then it follows, And God blessed the seventh day
and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his work, which
God created and made. Unto this passage of the Text, and this point of time,
some have referred the institution and original of the Sabbath; taking these
words to be a plain Narration of a thing then done, according to that very
time, wherein the Scripture does report it: And that the sanctifying of the
seventh day therein mentioned, was a Commandment given by God to our Father
Adam, touching the sanctifying of that day to his public Worship. Conceiving
also that there is some special Mystery and morality in the number of seven,
for which that day, and none but that, could be designed and set apart for this
employment. Others and those the ancienter, and of more authority, conceive
these words to have been spoken by a Prolepsis or Anticipation: and to relate
unto the times wherein Moses wrote. And that it was an intimation only of the
reason why God imposed upon the Jews, the sanctifying rather of the seventh
day, than of any other: no Precept to that purpose being given to Adam and to
his posterity; nor any mystery in that number, why of it self it should be
thought most proper for Gods public service. The perfect stating of these
points, will give great light to the following story. And therefore we will
first crave leave to remove these doubts before we come to matter of fact, that
afterward I may proceed with the greater ease unto my self, and satisfaction
to the Reader. The groundwork or foundation laid, the Building will be raised
the surer.

And first it is conceived by many learned men, Moses in the second of Genesis
relates unto the times in the which he lived, and wrote the History of the
Creation: when God had now made known his holy Will unto him, and the
Commandment of the Sabbath had by his Ministry been delivered to the house of
Israel. This is indeed the ancienter and more general tendry, unanimously
delivered both by Jew and Christian; and not so much as questioned till these
later days. And howsoever some ascribe it to Tostatus, as to the first inventer
of it; yet is it ancienter far than he: though were it so, it could not be
denied, but that it had an able and a learned Author. A man, considering the
times in which he lived, and the short time of life it pleased God to give him;
that hardly ever had his equal. It Is true, Tostatus thus resolves it. In Genesis 2.
He makes this quaere first, Number Sabbatum cum a Deo sanctificatum fuerit in
primordio mundi rerum, etc. Whether the Sabbath being sanctified by God in the
first infancy of the World, had been observed of men, by the Law of Nature. And
thereunto returns this Answer, quod Deus non dederit praceptum illud de
observatione Sabbati in principio, sed per Mosen datum esse, etc. that God
commanded not the Sabbath to be sanctified in the beginning of the World, but
that it was commanded afterward by the Law of Moses; when God did publicly
make known his Will upon Mount Sinai. And that whereas the Scripture speaks
of sanctifying the seventh-day, in the second of Genesis, it is not to be
understood, as if the Lord did then appoint it, for his public Worship; but is
to be referred unto the time wherein Moses wrote, which was in the Wilderness.
Et sic Moses intendebat dicere quod Deus illum diem sanctificavit sc. nobis,
etc. And so the meaning of the Prophet will be briefly this, that God did
sanctify that day, that is to us, to us that are his people of the house of
Jacob, that we might consecrate it to his service. So far Tostatus. In which I
must confess, that I see not any thing. but what Josephus said before him,
though in other words: who speaking of the Worlds Creation, does conclude it
thus, (...), etc. Antiqu. l. 1.2.
So that Moses says, that the World and all that is therein was made in six
whole days and that upon the seventh day God took rest; and ceased from his
labors. (...), etc. By reason whereof we likewise desist from travail on that
day, which we call the Sabbath, i. e. Repose. So that the institution of the
Sabbath by Tostatus; and the observation of it, by Josephus; are both of them
referred, by their us, and we, unto the times of Moses, and the house of
Israel. Nor is Josephus the only learned man amongst the Jews, that so
interprets Moses's meaning: Solomon Iarchi, one of the principal of the
Rabbis speaks more expressly to this purpose; and makes this Gloss or Comment
upon Moses words. Benedixit ei, i. e. in manna, etc. God blessed the seventh
day, i. e. in Mannah, because for every day of the week, an Homer of it fell
upon the Earth, and a double portion on the sixth, and sanctified it, i. e. in
Mannah, because it fell not on the seventh day at all. Et scriptura loquitur de
re futura. And in this place (says he) the Scripture speaks as of a thing that
was to came. But what need more be said. Mercer a learned Protestant, and one
much conversant in the Rabbis, In Genesis 2.
confesses that the Rabbis generally referred this place and passage to the
following times, even to the sanctification of the Sabbath, established by the
Law of Moses. Hebraei fere ad futurum referunt, i.e. sanctificationem Sabbati
postea lege per Mosen sancitam: unde and Manna eo die non descendit. And
howsoever for his own part, he is of opinion, that the first Fathers being
taught by God, kept the seventh day holy: yet he conceives withal, that the
Commandment of keeping holy the Sabbath day, was not made till afterward. Nam
hinc (from Gods own resting on that day) postea praeceptum de Sabbato natum
est, as he there has it. Doubtless, the Jews, who so much doted on their
Sabbath, would not by any means have robbed it of so great antiquity; had they
had any ground to approve thereof, or not known the contrary. So that the scope
of Moses in this present place, was not to show the time when; but the
occasion, why the Lord did after sanctify the seventh day for a Sabbath day:
viz. because that on that day he rested from the works which he had created.

Nor was it otherwise conceived, Moses here did speak by way of Prolepsis, or
Anticipation, till Ambrose Catharin, one of the great sticklers in the
Trent-Council, opined the contrary. He in his Comment on that Text falls very
foul upon Tostatus; and therein leads the Dance to others, who have since taken
up the same opinion. Ineptum est quod quidam commentus est, etc. It is a
foolish thing (says he) that, In Genesis 2.
(as a certain Writer fancieth) the sanctification of that day which Moses
speaks of, should not be true as of that very point of time whereof he speaks
it, but rather to be referred unto the time wherein be wrote: as if the meaning
only were, that then it should be sanctified when it was ordered and appointed
by the Law of Moses. And this he calls Commentum ineptum, and contra literam
ipsam, and contra ipsius Moseos declarationem; A foolish and absurd conceit,
contrary unto Moses words, and to his meaning. Yet the same Catharin does
affirm in the self-same Book. Scripturis frequentissimum esse multa per
anticipationem narrare; that nothing is more frequent in the holy Scriptures,
than these anticipations. And in particular, that whereas it is said in the
former Chapter, male and female created he them, per anticipationem dictum esse
non est dubitandum, that (without doubt) it is so said by anticipation: the
Woman not being made, as he is of opinion, till the next day after, which was
the Sabbath. For the Anticipation he cites St. Chrysostom, who indeed tells us
on that Text, (...). Behold, says he, how that which was not done as yet, is
here related as if done already. He might have added, for that purpose, Origin
on the first of Genesis, and Gregory the Great, Moral. lib. 32. cap. 9. both
which take notice of a Prolepsis, or Anticipation in that place of Moses. For
the creation of the Woman he brings in St. Jerome, who in his Tract against the
Jews expressly says, mulierem conditam fuisse die septimo, that the Woman was
created on the seventh day or Sabbath: to which this Catharin assents, and
thinks that thereupon the Lord is said to have finished all his works on the
seventh day; that being the last that he created. This seems indeed to be the
old Tradition, if it be lawful for me to digress a little: it being supposed
that Adam being wearied in giving names unto all creatures on the sixth day, in
the end whereof he was created; did fall that night into a deep and heavy
sleep: and that upon the Sabbath or the seventh day morning his side was
opened, and a rib took thence, for the creation of the Woman. Aug. Steuchius in
Genesis 2.
So Augustinus Steuchius reports the Legend. And this I have the rather noted,
to meet with Catharinus at his own weapon. For whereas he concludes from the
rest of God, that, without doubt, the institution of the Sabbath began upon
that very day wherein God rested: it seems, by him, God did not rest on that
day, and so we either must have no Sabbath to be kept at all; or else it will
be lawful for us by the Lords example to do whatever works we have to do, upon
that day; and after sanctify the remainder. And yet I needs must say withal,
that Catharinus was not the only he, that thought God wrought upon the Sabbath.
Aretius also so conceived it. Dies itaque tota non fuit quiet transacta,
Problem loc. 55.
sed perfecto opere ejus deinceps quievit, ut Hebraeus contextus habet. Mercer
a man well skilled in Hebrew, denies not but the Hebrew Text will bear that
meaning. Who thereupon conceives that the seventy Elders in the translation of
that place, did purposely translate it, (...), that on the sixth day God
finished all the work that he had made, and after rested on the seventh. And
this they did, says he, ut omnem dubitandi occasionem tollerent, to take away
all hint of collecting thence, that God did any kind of work upon that day. For
if he finished all his works on the seventh day, it may be thought (faith he)
that God wrought upon it. Saint Hierom noted this before, that the Greek Text
was herein different from the Hebrew; and turns it as an argument against the
Jews; and their rigid keeping of the Sabbath. Artabimus igitur Judaeos qui de
ocio Sabbati gloriantur, Q^. Hebraicae in Genesis
quod jam tunc in principio Sabbatum dissolutum sit, dum Deus operatur in
Sabbato, complens opera sua in eo; and benedicens ipst diei, quia in ipso
universa compleverat. If so, if God himself did break the Sabbath, as St.
Hierom turns upon the Jews: we have small cause to think that he should at that
very time, impose the Sabbath as a Law upon his creatures.

But to proceed. Catharinus against Tostatus, have had as ill success as he; in
being forced either to grant the use of Anticipation in the holy Scripture; or
else to run upon a Tenet, wherein they are not like to have any seconds. I will
instance only in two particulars, both Englishmen, and both exceeding zealous
in the present cause. The first is Doctor Bound, who first of all did set afoot
these sabbatarian speculations in the Church of England, 2. Edit. p. 10.
wherewith the Church is still disquieted. He determines thus, I deny not,
says he, but that the Scripture speaks often of things, as though they had
been so before, because they were so then, when the things were written. As
when it is said of Abraham, that he removed unto a Mountain Eastward of Bethel,
whereas it was not called Bethel till above a hundred years after. The like may
be said of another place in the Book of Judges called Bochin, etc. yet in this
place of Genesis it is not so. And why not so in this, as well as those?
Because (says he) Moses entreats there of the sanctification of the Sabbath,
not only because it was so then when he wrote that Book, but specially because
it was so even from the Creation. Medulla Theol. l. 2. c. 15. 9.
Which by his leave, is not so much a reason of his opinion, as a plain begging
of the question. The second Doctor Ames, the first I take it, that sowed Bounds
doctrine of the Sabbath, in the Netherlands. Who says expressly first, and in
general terms, hujusmodi prolepseos exemplum nullum in tota scriptura dari
posse, that no example of the like anticipation can be found in Scripture; the
contrary whereof is already proved. After more warily, and in particular, de
hujusmodi institutione Proleptica, that no such institution is set down in
Scripture, by way of a Prolepsis or Anticipation, either in that Book, or in
any other. And herein, as before I said, he is not like to find any seconds. We
find it in the sixteenth of Exodus, that thus Moses said, This is the thing
which the Lord commands: Fill an Omer of it [of the Mannah] to be kept for
your generations, that they may see the bread wherewith I have fed you in the
Wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt. It follows in
the Text, that as the Lord commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the
Testimony to be kept. Here is an Ordinance of Gods, an institution of the
Lords, and this related in the same manner, by anticipation, as the former was.
Lyra upon the place affirms expressly, that it is spoken there per
anticipationem: and so does Vatablus too, in his Annotations on that Scripture.
But to make sure work of it, I must send Doctor Ames to school to Calvin, who
tells us on this Text of Moses, non contexuit Moses historiam suo ordine, sed
narratione (...) interposita, melius confirmat, etc. Indeed it could not well
be otherwise interpreted. For how could Aaron lay up a pot of Mannah to be kept
before the Testimony, when as yet there was neither Ark, nor Tabernacle, and so
no Testimony before which to keep it. To bring this business to an end, Moses
has told us in the place before remembered, children of Israel did eat Mannah
forty years, which is not otherwise true, in that place and time, in which he
tells it, but by the help and figure of anticipation. And this St. Austin noted
in his questions upon Exodus, Qu. 62.
significat scriptura per Prolepsin, i. e. hoc loco commemorando quod etiam
postea factum est. And lastly, where Amesius sets it down for certain, that no
man ever thought of an anticipation in this place of Moses, Verse supra.
qui praejudicio aliquo de observatione diei Dominicae non prius fuit prius
anticipatus, who was not first possessed with some manifest prejudice against
the sanctifying of the Lords day: this cannot possibly be said against
Tostatus, who had no Enemy to encounter, nor no opinion to oppose, and so no
prejudice. We conclude then, that for this passage of the Scripture, we find
not any thing unto the contrary, but that it was set down in that place and
time, by a plain and mere anticipation; and does relate unto the time wherein
Moses wrote: And therefore no sufficient warrant to setch the institution of
the Sabbath, from the first beginnings. One only thing I have to add, and
that is the reason which moved Moses to make this mention of the Sabbath, even
in the first beginning of the Book of God, and so long time before the
institution of the same. Which doubtless was, the better to excite the Jews to
observe that day, from which they seemed at first to be much averse: and
therefore were not only to be minded of it, by a Memento in the front of the
Commandment; but by an intimation of the equity and reason of it, even in the
entrance of Gods Book, derived from Gods first resting on that day after all
his works. Theodoret has so resolved it, in his Questions on the Book of
Genesis. Maxim autem Judaeis ista scribens, necessario posuit hoc,
sanctificavit eum, Qu. 21.
ut majore cultu prosequantur Sabbatum. Hoc enim in legibus sanciendis inquit,
sex diebus creavit Deus, etc.

I say an intimation of the Equity and Reason of it, sanctifying of the seventh
day, therein mentioned, a Precept given by God to our Father Adam touching the
sanctifying of that day, to his public worship. Of this I shall not now say
much, because the practice will disprove it. Only I cannot but report the mind
and judgment of Pererius a learned Jesuit. Who amongst other reasons that he
has alleged, to prove the observation of the Sabbath not to have taken
beginning in the first infancy of the World, makes this for one: that generally
the Fathers have agreed on this, Deum non aliud imposuisse Adamo praeceptum
omnino positivum, nisi illud de non edendo fructu arboris scientiae, etc, that
God imposed no other Law on Adam, than that of the forbidden fruit of the Tree
of knowledge. Of which since he has instanced in none particularly, I will make
bold to lay before you some two or three; that so out of the mouths of two or
three witnesses the truth hereof may be established. And first we have
Tertullian, who resolves it thus. Adv. Judaeos.
Namque in principio mundi ipsi Adae and Evae legem dedit, etc. In the
beginning of the World, the Lord commanded Adam and Eve that they should not
eat of the fruit of the tree, which is in the middle of the Garden. Which Law
(says he) had been sufficient for their justification, had it been observed.
For in that Law, all other Precepts were included, which afterward were given
by Moses. St. Basil next. who tells us first, De jejunio.
that abstinence or fasting was commanded by the Lord in Paradise. And then,
(...), etc. the first Commandment given by God to Adam, was that he should not
eat of the Tree of knowledge. The very same, which is affirmed by St. Ambrose in
another language, Et ut sciamus non esse novum jejunium, primam illic legem,
Lib. de Elia and jejunio c. 3.
[ i. e. in Paradise] constituit de jejunio. So perfectly agree in this, the
greatest lights both of African, the Eastern, and the Western Churches. If so,
if that the law of abstinence had been alone sufficient for the justification
of our Father Adam, as Tertullian thinks; or if it were the first Law, given by
God unto him, as both St. Basil and St. Ambrose are of opinion: then was there
no such Law at all then made, as that of sanctifying of the Sabbath; or else
not made according to that time and order, wherein this passage of the
Scripture is laid down by Moses. And if not then, there is no other ground for
this Commandment in the Book of God, before the wandering of Gods people in the
Wilderness, and the fall of Mannah. A thing so clear, that some of those, who
willingly would have the Sabbath to have been kept from the first Creation: and
have not the confidence to ascribe the keeping of it, to any Ordinance of God,
but only to the voluntary imitation of his people. And this is Torniellus way,
amongst many others, Anno 236.
who though he attribute to Enos both set Forms of Prayer, and certain times by
him selected for the performance of that Duty; praecipue vero diebus Sabbati,
In die 7.
especially upon the Sabbath: yet he resolves it as before, that such as
sanctified that day, if such there were; non ex praecepto divino, quod nullum
tunc extabat, sed ex pietate solum, id egisse. Of which opinion, Mercer seems
to be, as before I noted. So that in this particular point, the Fathers and the
Modern Writers; the Papist and the Protestant, agree most lovingly together.

Much less did any of the Fathers, or other ancient Christian Writers, Law,
which naturally was ingrafted in him. So Chrysostom affirms, that neither Adam,
In Romans 7.12. hom. 12.
nor any other man, did ever live without the guidance of this Law: and that it
was imprinted in the soul of man, as soon as he was made a living creature,
(...), as that Father has it. But neither he nor any other, did ever tell us
that the Sabbath was a part of this Law of Nature: nay, In Ezech. c. 20.
some of them expressly have affirmed the contrary, Theodoret for example, that
these Commandments, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou
shall not steal, and others of that kind, alios quoque homines natura edocuit,
were generally implanted by the law of Nature, in the minds of men. But for the
keeping of the Sabbath, it came not in by Nature, but by Moses Law. At Sabbati
observandi non natura magistra, sed latio legis. So Theodoret. And answerably
thereunto Sedulius does divide the Law into three chief parts. In Romans 3.
Whereof the first is de Sacramentis, of signs and Sacraments, as Circumcision,
and the Passover: the second is, quae congruit legi naturali, the body of the
Law of Nature, and is the summary of those things which are prohibited by the
words of God: the third and last, factorum, of Rites and Ceremonies (for so I
take it is his meaning) as new Moons and Sabbaths: which clearly does exempt
the Sabbath, from having any thing to do with the Law of Nature. And Damascen
assures too, De Orthod. fide l. 4. c. 24.
that when there was no Law enacted, nor any Scripture inspired by God, that
then there was no Sabbath neither, (...). To which three Ancients we might add
many more of these later times, In Decalog. Medulla. theol. l. 2. cap. 15.
Rivet and Ames, and diverse others, who though they plead hard for the
antiquity of the Sabbath: dare not refer the keeping of it, to the Law of
Nature, but only (as we shall see anon) unto positive Laws, and divine
Authority. But hereof we shall speak more largely when we are come unto the
promulgating of this Law, in the time of Moses: where it will evidently appear
to be a positive Constitution only, fitted peculiarly to the Jews; and never
otherwise esteemed of, than a Jewish Ordinance.

It Is true, seventh day, than any other, that they impute not unto any thing in
Nature; but either to Divine, Legal, or Ecclesiastical institution. The
Schoolmen, Papists, Protestants, men of almost all persuasions in Religion,
have so resolved it. And for the Ancients, our venerable Bede assures us, that
to the Fathers before the Law, all days were equal; the seventh day having no
prerogative before the others: and this he calls naturalis Sabbati libertatem,
In Luc. 19.
the liberty of the Natural Sabbath, which ought (says he) to be restored at
our Saviors coming. If so, if that the Sabbath or time of rest unto the Lord,
was naturally left free and arbitrary, then certainly it was not restrained
more unto one day than another; or to the seventh day, more than to the sixth
or eighth. Even Ambrose Catharin, as stout a Champion as he was for the
antiquity of the Sabbath, finds himself at a loss about it. For having took for
granted, as he might indeed, that men by the prescript of Nature, were to
assign Peculiar times for the service of God; and adding that the very Gentiles
used so to do: is fain to shut up all with an Ignoramus. Nescimus modo quem
diem praecipue observarunt prisci illi Dei cultores. We cannot well resolve
(says he) what day especially was observed by those who worshipped God in the
times of old. Wherein he does agree exactly with Abulensis, against whom
principally he took up the Bucklers; who could have taught him this, if he
would have learnt of such a Master, that howsoever the Hebrew people, or any
other, before the giving of the Law, were bound to set apart some time for
religious Duties: In Exodus 20. Qu. 11.
non tamen magis in Sabbato, quam in quolibet aliorum dierum, yet were they no
more bound to the Sabbath day than to any other. So for the Protestant Writers,
two of the greatest Advocates of the Sabbath, have resolved accordingly. Quod
dies ille solennis unus debeat esse in septimana, hoc positivi juris est;
that is Amesius doctrine. And Ryvet also says the same, Lege de Sabbato
positivam, non naturalem agnoscimus. The places were both cited in the former
Section; and both do make the Sabbath a mere positive Law. But what need more
be saidin so clear a case; or what need further Witnesses be produced to give
in evidence, when we have confitentem reum? For Dr. Bound, who first amongst us
here endeavored to advance the Lords day into the place of the Jewish Sabbath;
and feigned a pedigree of the Sabbath even from Adams infancy: has herein said
enough to betray his cause, and those that since have either built upon his
foundation; or beautified their undertakings with his collections. Indeed
(says he) this Law was given in the beginning, not so much by the light of
Nature, as the rest of the nine Commandments were; but by express words when
God sanctified it. For though this be in the Law of Nature, that some days
should be separated to Gods worship, 2. Edit. p. 11. and 16.
as appears by the practice of the Gentiles: yet that it should be every
seventh day, the Lord himself set down in express words; which otherwise by the
light of Nature they could never have found. So that by his confession, there
is no Sabbath to be found in the Law of Nature: no more than by the testimony
of the Fathers, in any positive Law, or divine appointment, until the Decalogue
was given by Moses.

Nay, Doctor Bound goes further yet; Danaeus asks this question, Why one of
seven rather than one of eight or nine? and thereunto makes answer that the
number of seven does signify perfection and perpetuity: First, says the
Doctor, I do not see that proved, that there is any such mystical
signification, Ib. p. 60.
rather than of any other. And though that were granted, yet do I not find that
to be any cause at all in Scripture, why the seventh day should be commanded to
be kept holy, rather than the sixth or eighth. And in the former page, The
special reason why the seventh day should be rather kept than any other, is not
the excellency or perfection of that number, or that there is any mystery in
it, or that God delights more in it, than in any other: Though, I confess
(says he) that much is said that way, both in divine and humane Writers. Much
has been said therein: indeed, so much, that we may wonder at the strange
niceties of some men, and the unprofitable pains they have taken amongst them,
in fearching out the mysteries of this number; the better to advance, as they
conceive, the reputation of the Sabbath. Aug. Steuchius has affirmed in
general, In Genesis 2.
that this day and number is most natural, and most agreeable to divine
employments, and therefore in omni aetate inter omnes gentes habitus
venerabilis and sacer, accounted in all times and Nations, as most venerable;
and so have many others said since him. But he that led the way unto him, and
to all the rest, is Philo the Jew; who being a great follower of Platos, took
up his way of trading in the mysteries of several numbers: wherein he was so
intricate and perplexed, that numero Platonis obscurius, did grow at last into
a Proverb. This Philo therefore Platonizing, Tall. ad Attie. l. 7. ^pl. 13.
(...) opisi^^o.
first tells us of this number of seven, (...), that he persu^^les himself,
there is not any man able sufficiently to extol it; as being far above all the
powers of Rhetoric: and that the Pythagoreans (from them first Plato learnt
those trifles) did usually resemble it, (...), even to Jove himself. Then, that
Hippocrates does divide the life of man into seven Ages, ^a^^ age c^nteining
seven full years; to which the changes of man's constitution are all framed and
fitted: as also that the Bear, or Arcturus, as they use to call it, and the
constellation called the Pleiades, consist of seven Stars severally, neither
more nor less. He shows us also, how much Nature is delighted in this number,
(...), De legis Alleg. l. 1.
as viz. that there are seven Planets, and that the Moon quartereth every se
venth day, that Infants born in the seventh month are usually like enough to
live; that they are seven several motions of the body, seven intrails, so many
outward members, seven holes, or out-lets, in the same, seven sorts of
excrements; as also that the seventh is the Critical day in most kinds of
maladies. And to what purpose this, and much more of the same condition, every
where scattered in his Writings; but to devise some natural reason for the
Sabbath. For so he manifests himself in another place. Ap. Eu^^b Praepar. l. 8.
c. 7.
(...), etc. Now why God chose the seventh day, and established it by Law for
the day of rest, you need not ask at all of me, since both Physicians and
Philosophers have so often declared, of what great power and virtue that number
is, as in all other things, so specially on the nature and state of man. (...).
And thus (says he) you have the reason of the seventh-day Sabbath. Indeed
Philosophers and Physicians and other learned men of great name and credit,
have spoken much in honor of the number of seven, and severally impute great
power unto it in the works of Nature: and several changes of man's Body. Whereof
see Censorinus de die natali, cap. 12. Varro in Gellium lib. 3. c. 10.
Hippocrates, Solon, Hermippus Beritus in the sixth Book of Clemens of
Alexandria, besides diverse others. Nay, it grew up so high in the opinion of
some men, that they derived it at the last, (...), i. e. ab insita majestate.
So Philo tells us. Macrobius also says the same. Apud veteres (...) vocitatur,
De legis Allegor.
quod graeco nomine testabatur venerationem debitam numero. Thus he in somnio
Scipionis.

But other men as good as they find no such mystery in this number, but that
the rest may keep pace with it, if not go before it: and some of those which so
much magnify the seventh, have found, as weighty mysteries in many of the
others also. In which I shall the rather enlarge my self, that seeing the
exceeding great both contradiction and contention that is between them in these
needless curiosities; we may the better find the slightness of those Arguments,
which seem to place a great morality in this number of seven; as if it were by
Nature the most proper number for the service of God. And first, whereas the
learned men before mentioned, affix a special power unto it in the works of
Nature, Respons. ad qu. 69.
Justin the Martyr plainly tells us, (...), etc. that the accomplishment of the
works of Nature is to be ascribed to Nature only, not unto any period of time
accounted by the number of seven: and that they oft-times come to their
perfection sooner, or later, than the said periods; which could not be, in case
that Nature were observant of this number, as, they say, she is, and not this
number tied to the course of Nature. (...), etc. Therefore (says he) this
number has no influence on the works of Nature. Then whereas others attribute
I know not what perfection to this number above all the rest; Cicero affirming
that it is plenus numerus; Macrobius, that it is numerus solidus and perfectus:
De Republ. l. 4.
Bodinus does affirm expressly, neutrum de septenario dici potest, that neither
of those Attributes is to be ascribed unto this number; that the eighth number
is a solid number, although not a perfect one; the sixth a perfect number also.
Now as Bodinus makes the eighth more solid, and the sixth more perfect; So
Servius on these words of Virgil, In Georgic. 1.
Septima post decimam foelix, prefers the tenth number a far deal before it: Vt
primum locum decimae ferat, quae sit valde foelix; secundum septimae, ut quae
post decimae foelicitatem secunda sit. Nay, which may seem more strange than
this, Oration secunda.
the Arithmeticians generally, as we read in Nyssen, make this seventh number
to be utterly barren and unfruitful, (...). But to go forwards in this matter.
Macrobius who before had said of this number of seven, that it is plenus and
venerabilis; has in the same Book said of this number of one, that it is
principium finis and omnium, and that it has a special reference or
resemblance unto God on high: which is by far the greater commendation of the
two. And Hierom, In Amos 5.
that however there be many mysteries in the number of seven: prima tamen
beatitudo est, esse in primo numero, yet the prime happiness or beatitude is to
be sought for in the first. So for the third, Origin generally affirms that it
is aptus sacramentis, even made for Mysteries: In Genesis hom. 8.
and some particulars he names. Macrobius finds in it all the natural
faculties of the Soul; (...), or rational; (...), or irascible, Ad Antioch. qu.
51.
and last of all (...), or concupiscible. Saint Athanasius makes it equal
altogether with the seventh; the one being no less memorable for the holy
Trinity, than the other for the Worlds Creation. And Servius on these words of
Virgil, numero Deus impare gaudet, says that the Pythagoreans hold it for a
perfect number, and do resemble it unto God, In Eclog. 8.
a quo principium and medium, and finis est. Yet on the contrary, De Republ. l.
4.
Bodinus takes up Aristotle, Plutarch, and Lactantius, for saying that the
third is a perfect number: there being in his reckoning, but four perfect
numbers in 100000; which are 6.28.496. and 8128. De mundi opif.
Next for the fourth, Philo, not only has assured us, that it is (...), a
perfect number, wherein Bodinus contradicts him: but that it is highly
honored, De Abrahamo.
as amongst Philosophers, so by Moses also, who has affirmed of it, that it
is, (...), both holy, and praiseworthy too. And for the mysteries thereof,
Clemens of Alexandria tells us, that both Jehovah in the Hebrew, Strom. l. 5.
and (...) in the Greek, consists of four Letters only: and so does Deus in
the Latin. Orat. 44.
Nazianzen further does enform us, that as the seventh amongst the Hebrews, so
was the fourth honored by the Pythagoreans: (...), and that they used to swear
thereby when they took an Oath. Yet for all this, Saint Ambrose thought this
number not alone unprofitable but even dangerous also. Numerum quartum plerique
canent, Lib. 4. c. 9. In Levit. hom. 16.
and inutile putant, as he in his Hexaemeron. Then for the fifth, Macrobius
tells us that it comprehends all things both in the Heavens above, and the
Earth below. And yet by Origin it is placed indifferently, partly in
laudabilibus, partly in culpabilibus; there being five foolish Virgins for the
five wise ones.

Now let us look upon the sixth, Beda reckons to be numerus perfectus; and
Bodin, In Genesis 2. De Rep. l. 4. De mundi opif. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 4. In
Levit. 12.
primus perfectorum. Philo, and generally the Pythagoreans do affirm the same.
Yet the same Bodin tells us in the self-same Book, that howsoever it be the
first perfect number, such as according unto Plato, did sort most fitly with
the workmanship of God, Videmus tamen vilissimis animantibus convenire, yet was
it proper, in some sort, to the vilest creatures. As for the eighth, Hesychius
makes it an expression, or figure of the World to come. Macrobius, tells us
that the Pythagoreans used it as an Hieroglyphick of Justice, quia primus
omnium solvitur in numeros pariter pares; because it will be always divisible
into even or equal members. Nay, whereas those of Athens did use to sacrifice
to Neptune, In Theseo.
on the eighth day of every month: Plutarch has found out such a mystical
reason for it, out of the nature of that number, as others in the number of
seven, for the morality of the Sabbath. They sacrifice (says he) to Neptune on
the eighth day of every month, because the number of eight is the first Cube,
made of even numbers: and the double of the first square: (...), which does
represent an immovable stedfastness properly attributed to the might of
Neptune; whom for this cause we name Asphalius and (...), which signifies the
safe keeper and stayer of the Earth, As strong an Argument for the one, as any
mystery or morality derived from Numbers, can be for the other. But if we look
upon the tenth, we find a greater commendation given to that, than to the
seventh: yea, by those very men themselves, to whom the seventh appeared so
sacred, Philo affirms thereof, that of all Numbers it is most absolute and
complete; De mundi opif. D. congress. qu. erudit. gr. De Decalogo.
not meanly celebrated by the Prophet Moses; most proper and familiar unto God
himself, that the Powers and Virtues of it are innumerable: and finally, that
leaned men did call it (...) quasi (...), because it comprehended in it self
all kind of numbers. With whom agree Macrobius, who styles it numerum
perfectissimum; Strom. l. 6.
and Clemens Alexandrinus, who gives it both the Attributes of Holiness and
Perfection, Qu. ad Antioch. 51. Orat. 42.
Nazianzen and Athanasius are as full, as they. And here this number seems to
me to have got the better: there being nothing spoken in disgrace of this, as
was before of the seventh, by several Authors there remembered. So that for
ought I see, in case the argument be good for the morality of the Sabbath, we
may make every day, or any day a Sabbath, with as much reason as the seventh:
and keep it on the tenth day, with best right of all. Adeo argumenta ab absurdo
petita ineptos habent exitus, said Lactantius truly. Nay, by this reason, we
need not keep a Sabbath oftener, than every thirtieth day, or every fiftieth, or
every hundredth: because those numbers have been noted also to contain great
mysteries, and to be perfecter too than others. In Genesis hom. 2.
For Origin has plainly told us, that if we look into the Scriptures, invenies
multa magnarum rerum gesta sub tricenario and quinquagenario contineri; we
shall find many notable things delivered to us in the numbers of thirty and
fifty. De vita contempl.
Of fifty more particularly Philo affirms upon his credit, that it is (...),
the holiest and most natural of all other numbers: and Origin conceived so
highly of it, that he breaks out into a timeo hujus numeri secreta discutere,
and durst not touch upon that string. In Number. hom. 8.
So lastly for the Centenary the same Author tells us, that it is plenus and
perfectus, no one more absolute. We may have Sabbaths at our will, either too
many, or too few, In Genesis hom. 2.
if this plea be good.

Yea, but perhaps, there may be some thing in the Scripture, seventh day may be
thought more capable, in Nature, of so high an honor. Some have so thought
indeed, and thereupon have mustered up all those Texts of Scripture, in which
there has been any good expressed or intimated which concerns this number, or
is reducible unto it. Bellarmine never took more pains, out of that fruitless
topic to produce seven Sacraments: than they have done from thence to derive
the Sabbath. I need not either name the men, or recite the places: both are
known sufficiently. Which kind of proof if it be good, we are but where we were
before, amongst our Ecclesiastical and humane Writers. In this, the Scriptures
will not help us, or give the seventh day naturally, and in it self, more
capability or fitness for Gods Worship, than the ninth or tenth. For first the
Scriptures give not more honor to this number in some Texts thereof, than it
detracts from it in others: and secondly, they speak as highly of the other
numbers, as they do of this. In Genesis 6. n. 17.
The Jesuit Pererius shall stand up to make good the first; and Doctor
Cracanthorp to avow the second. Pererius first resolves it clearly, numerum
Septenarium etiam in rebus pessimis and execrandis saepenumero positum esse in
Scriptura sacra. As for example. The evil spirit (says St. Luke) brought with
him seven spirits worse than himself: and out of Mary Magdalen did Christ cast
out seven Devils, as St Mark tells us. So in the Revelation, St. John informs
us of a Dragon that had seven Heads and seven Crowns, as also of seven Plagues,
sent into the Earth, and seven Viols of Gods wrath poured out upon it. (He
might have told us had he listed, that the purple Beast whereon the great Whore
rid, had seven Heads also, and that she sat upon seven Mountains.) It Is true
(says he) which David tells us, that he did praise God seven times a day: but
then as true it is, which Solomon has told us, that the just man falls seven
times a day. So in the Book of Genesis, we have seven lean Kine, and seven thin
ears of Corn; as well as seven fat Kine, and seven full Ears: To proceed no
further. Pererius hereupon makes this general resolution of the case; Apparet
igitur eosdem numeros, aeque in bonis and malis poni, and usurpari in sacra
scriptura. Next whereas those of Rome, as before I noted, have gone the same
way to find out seven Sacraments: Contra Spalat. cap. 30.
our Cracanthorpe, to show the vanity of that Argument, does the like, for the
proof of two. Quod and si nobis fas esset, etc. If it were lawful for us to
take this course, we could produce more for the number of two, than they can
for seven. As for example, God made two great lights in the Firmament, and gave
to man two Eyes, two Ears, two Feet, two Hands, two Arms. There were two Nations
in the womb of Rebecca, two Tables of the Law, two Cherubins, two Sardonich
stones in which were written the names of the sons of Israel. Thou shall offer
to the Lord, two Rams, two Turtles, two Lambs of an year old, two young
Pigeons, two Hee-goats, two Oxen for a Peace Offering. Let us make two
Trumpets, two Doors of the wood of Olives, two Nets, two Pillars. There were
two Horns of the Lamb, two Candlesticks, two Olive-branches, two Witnesses, two
Prophets, two Testaments; and upon two Commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets, says our Savior. Congruentiis facile vinceremus, si nobis in hunc
campum descendere libet, etc. We should (says he) presume of an easy victory,
should we thus dally with congruities, as do those of Rome. Hence we conclude,
that by the light of Scripture, we find not any thing in Nature, why either
every seventh day should; or every second day should not be a Sabbath. Not to
say any thing of the other Numbers, of which the like might be affirmed; if we
would trouble our selves about it.

It Is true, Platonists and the Pythagoreans; by the ancient Heretics, Marcion,
Valentinus, Basilides, and the rest of that damned crew; the better to disguise
their errors, and palliate their impieties. Some of the Fathers afterward
took up the device, perhaps to foil the Heretics at their own weapons: though
many of them purposely declined it. Sure I am Chrysostom dislikes it. In Genesis
hom. 24.
Who on those words in the 7th of Genesis, by seven and by seven (which is the
Number now debated) does instruct us thus, (...), etc. Many (says he) do tell
strange matters of this fact, and taking an occasion hence, make many
observations out of several Numbers. Whereas not observation, but only an
unseasonable curiosity has produced those fictions, (...), from whence so many
Heresies had their first original. For oftentimes (that out of our abundance we
may fit their fancies) we find the even or equal number no less commemorated in
holy Scripture, as when God sent out his Disciples by two, and two: when he
chose twelve Apostles and left four Evangelists. But these things it were
needless to suggest to you, who have so many times been lessoned, (...), to
stop your Ears against such follies. Saint Augustine also, though he had
descanted a while upon the mysteries of this Number: yet he cuts off himself,
in the very middle, De Civit. Dei, l. 11. c. 31.
as it were, Ne scientiolam suam leviter magis quam utiliter, jactare velle
videatur; lest he should seem to show his reading, with more pride, than
profit. And thereupon he gives this excellent Rule, which I could wish had been
more practiced in this case; Habenda est itaque ratio moderationis and
gravitatis, ne forte cum de numero multum loquimur, mensuram and pondus
negligere judicemus. We must not take, says he, so much heed of Numbers, that
we forget at the last, both weight and measure. And this we should the rather
do, because that generally there is no Rule laid down, or any reason to be
given in Nature, why some particular numbers have been set apart for particular
uses, when other numbers might have served: why Hiericho should be rather
compassed seven times, than six or eight; why Abraham rather trained three
hundred and eighteen of his servants, than three hundred and twenty; or why his
servant took ten Camels with him into Padan Aram, and not more or less: with
infinite others of this kind in the Law Levitical. Yet I deny not, but that
some reason may be given, why in the Scripture, things are so often ordered by
sevens and sevens: Respons. ad qu. 69.
viz. as Justin Martyr tells, (...), the better to preserve the memory or the
Worlds Creation. Another reason may be added, which is, by this inculcating of
the number of seven, unto the Jews, to make that people, who otherwise were at
first averse from it, as before I noted, continually mindful of the Sabbath. In
Isaia 4.
Numerum septenarium propter Sabbatum Judaeis familiarem esse, was the
observation of S. Hierom. To draw this point unto an end, It is apparent by
what has before heen spoken, that there is no Sabbath to be found in the
beginning of the World; or mentioned as a thing done, in the second of Genesis:
either on any strength of the Text it self, or by immediate Ordinance and
command from God, collected from it, or by the law and light of nature
imprinted in the soul of man at his first Creation; much less by any natural
fitness in the number of seven, whereby it was most capable in it self of so
high an honor, which first premised, we shall the easier see what has been
done in point of practice.

CHAP. II. That there was no Sabbath kept, from the Creation to the Flood.
1. Gods rest upon the Seventh day, and from what he rested. 2. Zanchius
conceit touching the Sanctifying of the first Seventh day, by Christ our
Savior. 3. The like of Torniellus, touching the Sanctifying of the same, by
the Angels in Heaven. 4. A general demonstration that the Fathers before the
Law did not keep the Sabbath. 5. Of Adam, that he kept not the Sabbath. 6. That
Abel and Seth did not keep the Sabbath. 7. Of Enos, that he kept not the
Sabbath. 8. That Enoch and Methusalem did not keep the Sabbath. 9. Of Noah,
that he kept not the Sabbath. 10. The Sacrifices and devotions of the Ancients
were occasional.


HOW little ground there is, whereon to build the original of the Sabbath,
Genesis, we have at large declared in the former Chapter. Yet we deny not but
that Text affords us a sufficient intimation of the equity and reason of it,
which is Gods rest upon that day, after all his works that he had made. Origin.
contra Cells. l. 6.
Not as once Celsus did object against the Christians of his time, as if the
Lord, (...), etc. like to some dull Artificer, was weary of his labors, and
had need of sleep; for he spoke the word only, and all things were made. There
went no greater labor to the whole Creation than a dixit Dominus. De Genesis ad
lit. l. 4. c. 14.
Therefore Saint Austin rightly notes, nec cum creavit defessus, nec cum
cessavit refectus est; that God was neither weary of working, nor refreshed
with resting. The meaning of the Text is this, that he desisted then from
adding any thing, de novo, unto the World by him created; as having in the six
former days, fashioned the Heaven and Earth, and every thing in them contained,
and furnished them with all things necessary, both for use and ornament. I say,
from adding any thing, de novo, unto the World by him created, but not from
governing the same; which is a work by us as highly to be prized as the first
Creation; and from the which God never rests. Sabbaths and all days are alike
in respect of providence, in reference to the universal government of the World
and Nature. Semper videmus Deum operari, Hom. 23. in Number.
and Sabbatum nullum est in quo Deus non operetur, in quo non producat Solemn
suum super bonos and malos. No Sabbath, whereon God does rest from the
administration of the World by him Created, whereon he does not make his Sun to
shine both on good and bad; whereon he rains not plenty upon the Sinner and the
Just, as Origin has truly noted. Nor is this more than what our Savior said
in his holy Gospel, I work, and my Father also works. Contra Faustum Man. l.
16. c. 6.
A saying, as Saint Augustine notes, at which the Jews were much offended; our
Savior meaning by those words that God rested not, nec ullum sibi cessationis
statuisse diem, and that there was no day wherein he tended not the
preservation of the Creature; and therefore for his own part, he would not
cease from doing his Fathers business, ne Sabbatis quidem, no, though it were
upon the Sabbath. By which it seems, that when the Sabbath was observed, and
that if still it were in force, it was not then, and would not be unlawful unto
any now to look to his estate on the Sabbath day, and to take care that all
things thrive and prosper which belong unto him; though he increase it not, or
add thereto by following, on that day, the works of his daily labor. And this
according to their rules, who would have Gods example so exactly followed in
the Sabbaths rest; who rested, as we see, from Creation only, not from
preservation. So that the rest here mentioned, was as before I said, no more
than a cessation or a leaving off from adding any thing, as then, unto the
World by him Created. Upon which ground he afterward designed this day for his
Holy Sabbath, that so by his example the Jews might learn to rest from their
wordly labors, and be the better fitted to meditate on the works of God, and
to commemorate his goodness manifested in the Worlds Creation.

Of any other Sanctification of this day, Jews that they should sanctify the
same, we have no Constat in the Scriptures; nor in any Author that I have met
with, until Zanchies time. Indeed he tells us a large story of his own making,
how God the Son came down to Adam, and sanctified this first Sabbath with him,
that he might know the better how to do the like. De creat. hominis l. 1. ad
finem.
Ego quidem non dubito, etc. I little doubt, says he, (I will speak only what
I think, without wrong or prejudice to others, I little doubt) but that the Son
of God taking the shape of man upon him, was busied all this day in most holy
conferences with Adam, and that he made known himself both to him and Eve,
taught them the order that he used in the Worlds Creation, exhorted them to
meditate on those glorious works, in them to praise the Name of God,
acknowledging him for their Creator; and after his example, to spend that day
for ever in these pious exercises. I doubt not, finally, says he, but that he
taught them on that day the whole body of divinity; and that he held them
busied all day long, in hearing him, and celebrating with due praises their
Lord and God; and giving thanks unto him for so great and many benefits as God
had graciously vouchsafed to bestow upon them. Which said, he shuts up all with
this conclusion. Haec est illius septimi diei benedictio and sanctificatio, in
qua filius Dei una cum patre and spiritu sancto, quievit ab opere quod facerat.
This was (says he) the blessing and sanctifying of that seventh day, wherein
the Son of God, together with the Father and the Holy Ghost, did rest from all
the works that they had made. How Zanchie thwarts himself in this, we shall see
hereafter. Such strange conceptions, See n. 5.
though they miscarry not in birth, yet commonly they serve to no other use
than monsters in the works of nature, to be seen and shown, with wonder at all
times, and sometimes with pity. Had such a thing occurred in Pet. Comestors
supplement, which he made unto the Bible, it had been more tolerable. The
Legendaries and the Rabbis might fairly also have been excused if any such
device had been extant in them. The gravity of the man makes the tale more
pitiful, though never the more to be regarded. For certainly, had there been
such a weighty conference between God and Man, and so much tending unto
information and instruction, it is not probable but that we should have heard
thereof in the holy Scriptures. And finding nothing of it there, it were but
unadvisedly done, to take it on the word and credit of a private man. Non
credimus quia non legimus, was in some points Saint Hieroms rule, and shall now
be ours.

As little likelihood there is, Torniellus says it. Annal. d. 7.
And though he seem to have some Authors, upon whom to cast it; yet his
approving of it makes it his, as well as theirs who first devised it. Quidam,
non immerito, existimarunt hoc ipso die in Coelis omnes Angelorum choros,
speciali quadam exultatione in Dei lauds prorupisse, quod tam praeclarum and
admirabile opus absolvisset. Nay, he, 38.4.6.
and they, whoever they were, have a Scripture for it, even Gods word to Job:
Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth; when the morning
stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy? Who, and from
whence those Quidam were, that so interpreted Gods words, I could never find,
and yet have took some pains to seek it. De Civit. Dei, l. 11. c. 9.
Sure I am, Saint Austin makes a better use of them, and comes home indeed unto
the meaning. Some men, it seems, affirmed that the Angels were not made till
after the six days were finished, in which all things had been created; and he
refers them to this Text for their confutation. Which being repeated, he
concludes, Jam ergo erant Angeli, quando facta sunt sydera, facta autem sunt
sydera die quarto. Therefore (says he) the Angels were created before the
Stars; and on the fourth day were the Stars created. Yet Zanchius, and those
Quidam, be they who they will, fell short a little of another conceit of
Philos, De vita Mosis lib. 3.
who tells us that the Sabbath had a privilege above other days, not only from
the first Creation of the World (though that had been enough to set out the
Sabbath:) (...), but even before the Heavens and all things visible were
created. If so it must be sanctified by the holy Trinity, without the tongues
of Men and Angels, and God, not having worked, must rest, and sanctify a time,
when no time was: But to return to Torniellus, however those Quidam did mislead
him, and make him think that the first Sabbath had been sanctified by the holy
Angels; Annal. d. 7.
yet he ingenuously confesses that sanctifying of the Sabbath here upon the
earth, was not in use till very many Ages after, not till the Law was given by
Moses. Veruntamen in terris ista Sabbati sanctificatio non nisi post multa
secula in usum venisse creditur, nimirum temporibus Mosis, quando sub praecepto
data est filiis Israel. So Torniellus.

So Torniellus, and so far unquestionable. Moses, the Christian Fathers
generally, and some Rabbis also, have agreed together. Which that we may the
better show, I shall first let you see what they say in general, and after what
they have delivered of particular men, most eminent in the whole story of Gods
Book, until the giving of the Law. And first, that never any of the Patriarchs
before Moses time, did observe the Sabbath, Justin the Martyr has assured us,
(...). Dial. cum Tryph.
None of the righteous men, says he, and such as walked before the Lord, were
either circumcised or kept the Sabbath, until the several times of Abraham and
Moses. And where the Jews were scandalized, in that the Christians did eat hot
meats on the Sabbath days, the Martyr makes reply, that the said just and
righteous men, not taking heed of any such observances, (...), obtained a
notable testimony of the Lord himself. Adv. haeres. l. 4. c. 30.
So Irenaeus having first told us that Circumcision and the Sabbath were both
given for signs; and having spoken particularly of Abraham, Noah, Lot, and
Enoch, that they were justified without them; adds for the close of all, that
all the multitude of the faithful, before Abraham, were justified without the
one; Et Patriarcharum eorum qui ante Mosen fuerunt, and all the Patriarchs
which preceded Moses without the other. Adv. Judaeos.
Tertullian next, disputes thus against the Jews, that they which think the
Sabbath must be still observed as necessary to salvation; or Circumcision to be
used upon pain of death: Doceant in Praeteritum justos sabbatizasse, aut
circumcidisse, and sic amicos Dei effectos esse; ought first of all, says he,
to prove, That the Fathers of the former times were Circumcised or kept the
Sabbath, or that thereby they did obtain to be accounted the friends of God.
Then comes Eusebius the Historian, and he makes it good, Hist. l. 1. c. 4.
that the Religion of the Patriarchs before Moses Law, was nothing different
from the Christian: And how proves he that? (...), They were not Circumcised,
no more are we; they kept not any Sabbath, no more do we; they were not bound
to abstinence from sundry kinds of meats, which are prohibited by Moses, nor
are we neither. Which argument he also uses to the selfsame purpose in his
first book, de demonstr. Evang. and sixth Chapter. And in his seventh, de
praeparatione, he resolves it thus, (...), Cap. 6.
etc. The Hebrews which preceded Moses, and were quite ignorant of his Law
(whereof he makes the Sabbath an especial part) disposed their ways according
to a voluntary kind of piety, (...), framing their lives and actions to the law
of nature. This argument is also used by Epiphanius, Adv. haereses l. 1. n. 5.
who speaking of the first Ages of the World, informs us, that as then there
was no difference among men in matters of opinion, no Judaism, nor kind of
Heresy whatsoever; (...), etc. but that the faith which does now flourish in
Gods Church, was from the beginning. If so, no Sabbath was observed in the
times of old, because none in his. I could enlarge my Catalogue, but that some
testimonies are to be reserved to another place; when I shall come to show you
that the Commandment of the Sabbath was published to Gods People by Moses only,
See Chapter 4.
and that to none but to the Jews. After so many of the Fathers, the modern
Writers may perhaps seem unnecessary; yet take one or two. First, Musculus, 2
Edit. p. 12.
(as Doctor Bound informs me, for I take his word) who tells us that it cannot
be proved that the Sabbath was kept before the giving of the Law, either from
Adam to Noah, or from the Flood to the times of Moses, or of Abraham and his
Posterity. Which is no more than what we shall see shortly out of Eusebius.
Hospinian next, De festis. 1. cap. 3.
who though he fain would have the sanctifying of the Sabbath to be as old as
the beginning of the world; yet he confesses at the last, Patres idcirco
Sabbatum observasse ante legem, that for all that it cannot be made good by the
Word of God, that any of the Fathers did observe it before the Law. These two I
have the rather cited, because they have been often vouched in the public
controversy, as men that wished well to the cause, and say somewhat in it.

We are now come unto particulars. Adam. The time of his Creation as the
Scriptures tell us, the sixth day of the week, being as Scaliger conjectured in
the first Edition of his work, Emend. temp. l. 5.
the three and twentieth day of April; and so the first Sabbath, Sabbatum
primum, so he calls it, was the four and twentieth. Doctrina temp. l. 4. c. 6.
Petavius, by his computation, makes the first Sabbath to be the first day of
November; and Scaliger, in his last Edition, the five and twentieth of October;
more near to one another than before they were. Yet says not Scaliger, that
that primum Sabbatum had any reference to Adam, though first he left it so at
large, that probably some might so conceive it; for in his later thoughts he
declares his meaning to be this, Sabbatum primum in quo Deus requievit ab opere
Hexaemeri. Indeed the Chaldee paraphrase seems to affirm of Adam, that he kept
the Sabbath. For where the 92 Psalm does bear this title, A Song or Psalm for
the Sabbath day, the Authors of that Paraphrase do expound it thus, Laus and
Canticum quod dixit homo primus pro die Sabbati, the Song or Psalm which Adam
said for the Sabbath day. Somewhat more wary in this point was Rabbi Kimchi,
who tells us how that Adam was created upon Friday about three of the Clock,
fell at eleven, was censured and driven out of Paradise at twelve, that all the
residue of that day, and the following night he bemoaned his miseries; was
taken into grace next morning, being Sabbath day; and taking then into
consideration all the works of God, brake out into such words as those,
although not the same. A tale that has as much foundation, as that narration
of Zanchy, before remembered. Who though he seem to put the matter out of doubt
with his three non dubito's, that Christ himself did sanctify the first
Sabbath with our Father Adam, and did command him ever after to observe that
day; yet in another place, he makes it only a matter of probability, In 4.
Mandatum.
that the commandment of the Sabbath, was given at all to our first Parents.
Quomodo autem sanctificavit? Non solum decreto and voluntate sed reipsa; quia
illum diem, (ut non pauci volunt and probabile est) mandavit primis parentibus
sanctificandum. So easily does he overthrow his former structure. But to return
unto the Rabbis, and this dream of theirs, besides the strangeness of the
thing, that Adam should continue not above eight hours in Paradise, and yet
give names to all the ^^atures, fall into such an heavy sleep, and have the
Woman taken out of him, that the must be instructed, tempted, and that both
must sin, and both must suffer in so short a time: Besides all this, the
Christian Fathers are express, that Adam never kept the Sabbath. Justin the
Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho, a learned Jew, makes Adam one of those,
(...), etc. (...), which being neither circumcised, nor keeping any Sabbath,
Adv. Judaeos.
were yet accepted by the Lord. And so Tertullian in a Treatise written against
the Jews, affirms of Adam, quod nec circumcisum nec sabbatizantem Deus eum
instituerit. Nay, which is more, he makes a challenge to the Jews, to prove
unto him if they could, that Adam ever kept the Sabbath. Doceant Adamum
sabbatizasse, as he there has it. Which doubtless neither of them would have
done, considering with whom the one disputed, and against whom the other wrote;
had they not been very well assured of what they said. The like may be affirmed
both of Eusebius and Epiphanius, De Praepar. Evang. l. 7. c. 8.
and most learned Fathers. Whereof the first, maintaining positively that the
Sabbath was first given by Moses, makes Adam one of those which neither
troubled himself with Circumcision, (...), nor any of the Law of Moses: Adv.
haereses. l. 1. n. 5.
The other reckons him amongst those also, who lived according to that faith,
which when he wrote, was generally received in the Christian Church. Therefore
no Sabbath kept by our Father Adam.

But whatsoever Adam did, Abel, I hope, was more observant of this duty. Thus
some have said indeed, but on no authority. It is true the Scriptures tell us,
that he offered Sacrifice: but yet the Scriptures do not tell us, that in his
Sacrifices he had more regard unto the seventh day, than to any other. To offer
Sacrifice he might learn of Adam, or of natural reason, which does sufficiently
instruct us, that we ought all to make some public testimony of our subjection
to the Lord. But neither Adam did observe the Sabbath, nor could Nature teach
it, as before is shown. And howsoever some Modern Writers have conjectured, and
conjectured only, that Abel in his Sacrifices might have respect unto the
Sabbath: yet those whom we may better trust, have affirmed the contrary. For
Justin Martyr disputing against Trypho, brings Abel in for an example; that
neither Circumcision nor the Sabbath, the two great glories of the Jews, were
to be counted necessary. For if they were, says he, God had not had so much
regard to Abels Sacrifice, being as he was uncircumcised: and then he adds
(...), etc. (...), that though he was no Sabbath-keeper, yet was he acceptable
unto God. Adv. Judaeos.
And so Tertullian, that God accepted of his Sacrifice, though he were neither
circumcised, nor kept the Sabbath. Abelem offerentem sacrificia incircumcisum
neque sabbatizantem laudavit Deus, accepta ferens quae in simplicitate cordis
offerebat. Yea, and he brings him also into his challenge, Doceant Abel hostiam
Deo sanctam offerentem, Sabbati religionem placuisse: which is directly
contrary to that, which is conjectured by some Modern Writers, Adv. haeres. l.
1. n. 5.
So Epiphanius also makes him one of those, who lived according to the tendries
of the Christian Faith. The like he also says of Seth, whom God raised up
instead of Abel, to our Father Adam. Therefore no Sabbath kept by either.

It is conceived of Abel that he was killed in the one hundred and thirtieth
year of the Worlds Creation: of Enos, Seths son, that he was born Anno two
hundred thirty six. Sabbath. But then, as some conceive the Sabbath day began
to be had in honor, because it is set down in Scripture, that then began men
to call upon the Name of the Lord. That is, as Torniellus descants upon the
place, then, Genesis 4. Annal. Anno 236. n. 4.
were spiritual Congregations instituted, as we may probably conjecture,
certain set Forms of Prayers and Hymns devised to set forth Gods glory, certain
set times and places also set apart for those pious duties: praecipue diebus
Sabbati, especially the Sabbath Days, in which most likely they began to
abstain from all servile works, in honor of that God, whom they well knew had
rested on the seventh day from all his labors. Sure Torniellus's mind was upon
his Mattins, when he made this Paraphrase. He had not else gathered a Sabbath
from this Text, considering that not long before he had thus concluded; That
sanctifying of the Sabbath here on Earth was not in use, until the Law was
given by Moses. But certainly this Text will bear no such matter, were it
considered as it ought. The Chaldee Paraphrase thus reads it, Tunc in diebus
ejus inceperunt filii hominum, ut non orarent in nomine Domini; V. 3. of this
Chapter.
which is quite contrary to the English. Our Bibles of the last Translation in
the margin, thus; then began men to call themselves by the name of the Lord:
and generally the Jews, as Saint Hierom tells us, do thus gloss upon it, Tunc
primum in nomine Domini, Qu. Hebraic. in Genesis
and in similitudine ejus fabricata sunt idola; that then began men to set up
Idols both in the name, and after the similitude of God. Ainsworth in his
Translation thus, Then began men profanely to call upon the Name of the Lord:
who tells us also in his Annotations on this Text, out of Rabbi Maimony, That
in these days Idolatry took its first beginning, and the people worshipped the
stars and all the host of Heaven; so generally that at the last there were few
left which acknowledged God, as Enoch, Methuselah, Noah, Sem, and Heber. So
that we see not any thing in this Text, sufficient to produce a Sabbath. But
take it as the English reads it, which is agreeable to the Greek, and vulgar
Latin; and may well stand with the Original: yet will the cause be little
better. For men might call upon Gods Name, and have their public meetings and
set Forms of Prayer, without relation to the seventh day more than any other.
As for this Enos, Eusebius proposes him unto us, (...), De Praeparat. Evang.
l. 7, ^.
as the first man commended in the Scripture for his love to God: that we by
his example might learn to call upon Gods Name with assured hope. But yet
withal he tells us of him, that he observed not any of those Ordinances which
Moses taught unto the Jews, whereof the Sabbath was the chief; as formerly we
observed in Adam. And Epiphanius ranks him amongst those Fathers, who lived
according to the Rules of the Christian Church: Therefore no Sabbath kept by
Enos,

We will next look on Enoch, who, as the Text tells us, walked with God,
Sabbath, had it been required. But of him also, the Fathers generally say the
same, as they did before of others. For Justin Martyr not only makes him one of
those which without Circumcision and the Sabbath, had been approved of by the
Lord: but pleads the matter more exactly. The substance of his plea is this,
that if the Sabbath or Circumcision were to be counted necessary to eternal
life, we must needs fall upon this absurd opinion, (...), Dial. cum Tryphone
that the same God whom the Jews worshipped, was not the God of Enoch, and of
other men about those times: which neither had been Circumcised, (...), nor
kept the Sabbath, nor any other Ordinances of the Law of Moses. So Irenaeus
speaking before of Circumcision and the Sabbath, places this Enoch among
those, Lib. 4. cap. 30.
qui sine iis quae praedicta sunt justificationem adepti sunt, which had been
justified without any the Ordinances before remembered. Tertullian more fully
yet. Enoch justissimum nec circumcisum, Adv. Judaeos.
nec sabbatizantem, de hoc mundo transtulit, etc. Enoch that righteous man
being neither Circumcised nor a Sabbath-keeper, was by the Lord translated, and
saw not death, to be an Item or instruction unto us, that we, without the
burden of the Law of Moses, shall be found acceptable unto God. He sets him
also in his challenge, as one whom never any of the Jews could prove, Sabbati
cultorem esse, to have been a keeper of the Sabbath. De Demonstr. l. 4. c. 6.
Eusebius too, who makes the Sabbath one of Moses's institutions, has said of
Enoch, that he was neither circumcised, nor meddled with the Law of Moses:
(...), etc. and that he lived more like a Christian, than a Jew. the same
Eusebius in his seventh de praeparatione, and Epiphanius in the place before
remembered, affirm the same of him, as they do of Adam, Abel, Seth, and Enos:
and what this Epiphanius says of him, Scal. de Emend. Temp. l. 7.
that he affirms also of his son Methusalem. Therefore nor Enoch, nor
Methusalem ever kept the Sabbath. It Is true, the Aethiopians in their Calendar
have a certain period, which they call Sabbatum Enoch, Enoch's Sabbath. But
this consists of seven hundred years, and has that name, either because
Enoch was born in the seventh Century from the Creation, viz. in the year six
hundred twenty two, or because he was the seventh from Adam. It Is true, that
many of the Jews, Beda in Ger. 4.
and some Christians too, have made this Enoch an Emblem of the heavenly and
eternal Sabbath, which shall never end: because he was the seventh from Adam,
and did never taste of death, as did the six that went before him. But this is
no Argument, I trow, that Enoch ever kept the Sabbath whiles he was alive. Note
that this Enoch was translated about the year nine hundred eighty seven: and
that Methusalem died but one year only before the Flood, which was 1655. And so
far we are safely come, without any rub.

To come unto the Flood it self, Noah, who both saw it, and escaped it; it is
affirmed by some, that he kept the Sabbath: and that both in the Ark, and when
he was released out of it, if not before. Yea, they have arguments also for the
proof hereof, but very weak ones: such as they dare not trust themselves. It is
delivered in the eighth of the Book of Genesis, that after the return of the
Dove into the Ark, Noah stayed yet other seven days before he sent her forth
again. Ver. 10. and 12. De festis c. 3.
What then? This seems unto Hospinian to be an argument for the Sabbath. In
hostoria diluvii, columbae ex arca emissae septenario dierum intervallo,
ratione sabbati videntur. So he, and so verbatim, Josias Simler, in his Comment
on the twentieth of Exodus. But to this argument, if at the least it may be
honored with that name, Tostatus has returned an Answer as by way of
Prophecy. He makes this Quaere first, sed quare ponit hic, quod Noe exspectabat
semper septem dies, In Genesis 8.
etc. Why Noah, betwixt every sending of the Dove, expected just seven days,
neither more nor less: and then returns this answer to it, such as indeed does
excellently satisfy both his own Quaere, and the present argument. Resp. quod
Noah intendebat scire utrum aquae cessassent, etc. Noah (says he) desired to
know whether the waters were decreased. Now since the Waters being a moist
body, are regulated by the Moon, Noah was most especially to regard her
motions: for as she is either in opposition or conjunction with the Sun, in her
increase or in her wane, there is proportionably an increase or falling of the
Waters, Noah then considering the Moon in her several quarters, which commonly
we know are at seven days distance, sent forth his Birds to bring him tiding:
for the Text tells us that he sent out the Raven and the Dove four times. And
the fourth time, the Moon being then in the last quarter, when both by the
ordinary course of Nature the Waters usually are, and by the Will of God were
then much decreased: the Dove which was sent out had found good footing on the
Earth, and returned no more. So far the learned Abulensis; which makes clear
the case. Nor stand we only here, upon our defense. For we have proof
sufficient that Noah never kept the Sabbath. Justin the Martyr, Ubi supra.
and Irenaeus both make him one of those, which without Circumcision and the
Sabbath, were very pleasing unto God, and also justified without them.
Tertullian, positively says it, that God delivered him from the great
Water-flood, nec circumcisum, nec sabbatizantem: Adv. Judaeos.
and challenges the Jews to prove if any way they could, sabbatum observasse,
that he kept the Sabbath. Eusebius also tells us of him, that being a just man,
and one whom God preserved as a remaining spark to kindle Piety in the World,
De demonstr. l. 1. c. 6.
yet knew not any thing that pertained to the Jewish Ceremony: not Circumcision
(...), nor any other thing ordained by Moses. Remember that Eusebius makes the
Sabbath one of Moses's Ordinances. Finally, Epiphanius in the place before
remembered, ranks Noah in this particular, with Adam, Abel, Seth, Enos, and the
other Patriarchs.

It Is true, Joseph Sealiger once made the day, whereon Noah left the Ark, and
offered sacrifice to the Lord, De Emendat. Temp. l. 5.
to be the seventh day of the week, 28. Decembris, feria septima, egressus
Noah, (...) immolavit Deo, says his first Edition. Which were enough to cause
some men, who infinitely admire his Dictates, from thence to have derived a
Sabbath: had he not changed his mind in the next Edition, and placed this
memorable action, not on the seventh day, but the fourth. I say it might have
caused some men, for all men would not so have doted, as from a special
accident to conclude a practice. Considering especially that there is no ground
in Scripture to prove that those before the Law, had in their Sacrifices any
regard at all to set Times and Days, either unto the sixth day, or the
seventh, or eighth, or any other: but did their service to the Lord. I mean the
public part thereof, and that which did consist in external action, according
as occasion was administered unto them. The offerings of Cain and Abel, for
ought we can inform our selves, were not very frequent, The Scripture tells us
that it was in process of time; Genesis 4.3.
at the years end as some expound it. For at the years end; as, Ainsworth
notes; men were wont in most solemn manner, to offer sacrifice unto God, with
thanks for all his benefits, having then gathered in their fruits. The Law of
Moses so commanded; Exodus 23.16.
the ancient Fathers so observed it, as by this place we may conjecture; and so
it was accustomed too among the Gentiles; their ancient Sacrifices and their
Assemblies to that purpose, (as Aristotle has informed us) being after the
gathering in of fruits. Ethic. l. 8.
No day selected for that use, that we can hear of. This Sacrifice of Noah, as
it was remarkable, so it was occosional: an Eucharistical Oblation for the
great deliverance, which did that day befall unto him. And had it happened on the
seventh day, it were no argument that he made choice thereof as most fit and
proper, or that he used to sacrifice more upon that day, than on any other. So
that of Abraham in the twelfth of Genesis, was occasional only. The Lord
appeared to Abraham saying, Genesis 12.7.
Unto thy seed will I give this land (the land of Canaan.) And then it
follows that Abraham builded there an Altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto
him. The like he did when he first set his footing in the promised Land, and
pitched his Tents not far from Bethel, Ver. 8. and when he came to plant in the
Plain of Mamre, in the next Chapter. See the like, Genesis 21.33. and 1.22, 13. Of
Isaac, Genesis 26.25. Of Jacob, Genesis 28.8. and 31.54. and 33.20. and 35.7, 14. No
mention in the Scripture of any Sacrifice or public Worship, but the occasion
is set down. Hoc ratio naturalis dictat, In Genesis 8.20.
ut de donis suis honoretur imprimis ipse qui dedit. Natural reason, says
Rupertus, could instruct them, that God was to be honored with some part of
that, which he himself had given unto them: but natural reason did not teach
them, that one day differed from another.

CHAP. III. That the SABBATH was not kept from the Flood to Moses.
1. The sons of Noah did not keep the Sabbath. 2. The Sabbth could not have
been kept, in the dispersion of Noah's sons, had it been commanded. 3. Diversity
of Longitudes and Latitudes, must of necessity make a variation in the Sabbath.
4. Melchisedech, Heber, Lot, did not keep the Sabbath. 5. Of Abraham and his
sons, that they kept not the Sabbath. 6. That Abraham did not keep the Sabbath
in the confession of the Jews. 7. Jacob nor Job no Sabbath keepers. 8. That
neither Joseph, Moses, nor the Israelites in Egypt did observe the Sabbath. 9.
The Israelites not permitted to offer Sacrifice while they were in Egypt. 10.
Particular proofs that all the Moral Law was both known and kept amongst the
Fathers.


WE are now come unto the hither side of the Flood, to the sons of Noah. Hebrew
Doctors say, their Father did bequeath seven several Commandments, which they
and their posterity were bound to keep. In Lexilo. p. 1530.
Septem praecepta acceperunt filii Noah, etc. as Shindler reckons them out of
the Rabbi Maimony. First, That they dealt uprightly with every man: Secondly,
That they should bless and magnify the Name of God: Thirdly, That they
abstained from worshipping false gods, and from all Idolatry: Fourthly, That
they forbear all unlawful lusts and copulations: The fifth against shedding
Blood: The sixth against Theft and Robbery: The seventh and last, a prohibition
not to eat the flesh, or any member of a Beast, taken from it when it was
alive; whereby all cruelty was forbidden. These precepts whosoever violated,
either of Noah's Sons, or their Posterity, was to be smitten with the sword.
Yea, these Commandments were reputed so agreeable to nature, that all such
Heathens as would yield to obey the same, were suffered to remain and dwell
amongst the Israelites, though they received not Circumcision, nor any of the
Ordinances which were given by Moses. So that amongst the precepts given unto
the Sons of Noah, we find no footstep of the Sabbath. And where a Modern
Writer, whom I spare to name, has made the keeping of the Sabbath a member of
the second precept, or included in it; it was not so advisedly done: there
being no such thing at all, Cunaeus de repab. Hebr. 2.19.
either in Schindler, whom he cites, nor in Cunaeus, who repeats the self-same
precepts from the self-same Rabbi. Nay, which is more, the Rabbin out of whom
they cite it, does in another place exclude expressly the observation of the
Sabbath out of the number of these Precepts given to the Sons of Noah. Ap.
Ainsworth in Exodus 20.
The Man and Woman- servant, says he, which are commanded to keep the Sabbath,
are Servants that are Circumcised, or Baptized, etc. But Servants not
Circumcised nor Baptized, but only such as have received the seven
Commandments given to the Sons of Noah, they are as sojourning strangers, and
may do work for themselves openly on the Sabbath, as any Israelite may on a
working day. So Rabbi Maymony, in his Treatise of the Sabbath, chap. 20.. 14.
If then we find no Sabbath amongst the Sons of Noah, whereof some of them were
the Sons of their Fathers piety; there is no thought of meeting with it in
their Children, or their Childrens Children, the builders of the Tower of
Babel. For they being terrified with the late Deluge, as some conjecture, and
to procure the name of great undertakers, as the Scripture says, resolved to
build themselves a Tower, unto the top whereof, the waters should in no wise
reach. Antiqu. Jud. l. 1. cap. 5.
A work of a most vast extent, if we may credit those reports that are made
thereof, and followed by the People, as Josephus tells us, with their utmost
industry, there being none amongst them idle. If none amongst them would be
idle, as likely that no day was spared from so great an action as they
conceived that work to be. They that durst bid defiance to the Heaven of God
were never like to keep a Sabbath to the God of Heaven. The action was begun
and ended, Anno 1940. or thereabouts.

To ruinate these vain attempts, longitude, which is the distance of a place
from the first Meridian, beginning at such different times, that no one day
could be precisely kept amongst them. The proof and ground whereof, I will make
bold to borrow from my late Learned friend Nath. Carpenter, that I may manifest
in some sort the love I bore him; though probably I might have furnished out
this argument from mine own wardrobe; at least have had recourse to many other
Learned men, who have written of it. For that the difference of time is varied
according to the difference of longitudes, in diverse places of the earth may be
made manifest to every man's understanding, out of these two principles: First,
if the earth is sphaerical, and secondly, that the Sun does compass it about in
twenty-four hours. From hence it comes to pass, that places situate Eastward
see the Sun sooner than those do that are placed Westward. And that with such a
different proportion of time, that unto every hour of the Suns motion, there is
assigned a certain number of miles upon the Earth; every fifteen degrees, which
is the distance of the Meridians, being computed to make one hour; and every
fifteen miles upon the Earth, correspondent to one minute of that hour. By this
we may perceive how soon the noontide happens in one City before another. For
if one City stands Eastward of another, the space of three of the aforesaid
Meridians, which is 2700. miles, it is apparent that it will enjoy the
noontide no less than three hours before the other; and consequently in 10800.
miles, which is half the compass of the Earth, there will be found no less than
twelve hours difference in the rising and setting of the Sun, as also in the
noon and midnight. The reason of which difference of times, is as before we
said the difference of longitudes, wherein to every hour, Cosmographers have
allotted fifteen degrees in the Suns diurnal motion; so that fifteen degrees
being multiplied by twenty-four hours, which is the natural day, the product
will be 360. which is the number of degrees in the whole circle. Now in these
times, wherein the Sons of Noah dispersed themselves, in case the Sabbath was
to have been kept, as simply moral, it must needs follow that the moral Law is
subject unto manifold mutations and uncertainties, which must not be granted.
For spreading as they did over all the Earth, some farther, some at shorter
distance, and thereby changing longitudes with their habitations; they must of
mere necessity alter the difference of times and days, and so could keep no day
together. Nor could their issue since their time observe exactly and precisely
the self-same day, by reason of the manifold transportation of Colonies, and
transmigration of Nations from one Region to another, whereby the times must of
necessity be supposed to vary. The Author of the Practice of Piety, though he
plead hard for the morality of the Sabbath, cannot but confess, that in respect
of the diversity of the Meridians, and the unequal rising and setting of the
Sun, every day varieth in some places a quarter, in some half, in others an
whole day; therefore the Jewish Sabbath cannot (says he) be precisely kept in
the same instant of time, every where in the World. Certainly if it cannot now,
then it never could; and then it would be found, that some at least of Noah's
posterity, and all that have from them descended, either did keep at all no
Sabbath, or not upon the day appointed, which comes all to one. Or else it
needs must follow that God imposed a Law upon his People, which in it self,
without relation to the frailty, ne dum to the iniquity of poor man, could not
in possibility have been observed: Yea, such a Law as could not generally have
been kept, had Adam still continued in his perfect innocence.

To make this matter yet more plain, It is a Corollary or conclusion in
Geography, Eastward, the other Westward, and meet in the same place again; it
will appear that he which has gone East, has gotten, and that the other going
Westward, has lost a day in their account. The reason is, because he that from
any place assigned does travel Eastward, moving continually against the proper
motion of the Sun, will shorten somewhat of his day; taking so much from it, as
his journey in proportion of distance from the place assigned, has first
opposed, and so anticipated in that time the diurnal motion of the Sun. So
daily gaining something from the length of day, it will amount in the whole
circuit of the Earth to twenty-four hours, which are a perfect natural day. The
other going Westward, and seconding the course of the Sun by his own journey,
will by the same reason add as much proportionably unto his day, as the other
lost, and in the end will lose a day in his account. For demonstration of the
which, suppose of these two Travelers, that the former for every fifteen miles
should take away one minute from the length of the day, and the latter add as
much unto it in the like proportion of his journey. Now by the Golden Rule, if
every fifteen miles subtract or add one minute in the length of the day, then
must 21600. miles, which is the compass of the Earth, add or subtract 1440.
minutes, which make up twenty-four hours, a just natural day. To bring this
matter home unto the business now in hand, suppose we that a Turk, a Jew, and a
Christian, should dwell together at Jerusalem, whereof the one does keep his
Sabbath on the Friday, the other on the Saturday, and the third sanctifies the
Sunday; then, that upon the Saturday the Turk begin his Journey Westward, and
the Christian Eastward; so as both of them compassing the world do meet again
in the same place, the Jew continuing where they left him. It will fall out,
that the Turk by going Westward, having lost a day; and the Christian going
Eastward, having got a day: one and the same day, will be a Friday, to the
Turk, a Saturday unto the Jew, and a Sunday to the Christian; in case they
calculate the time exactly from their departure to their return. To prove this
further yet by a matter of fact, The Hollanders in their Discovery of Fretum le
Maire, Anno 1615. found by comparing their account, Westward in that tedious
Voyage:) that which was Monday to the one, being the Sunday to the other. And
now what should these People do when they were returned? If they are bound by
nature, and the moral Law to sanctify precisely one day in seven, they must
then sanctify a day apart from their other Countrymen, and like a crew of
Schismatics, divide themselves from the whole body of the Church; or to keep
order, and comply with other men, must of necessity be forced to go against the
Law of nature, or the moral Law, which ought not to be violated for any
by-respect whatever. But to return unto Noah's Sons, whom this case concerns: It
might, for ought we know, be theirs in this dispersion, in this removing up and
down, and from place to place. What shall we think of those that planted
Northwards, or as much extremely Southwards; whose issue now are to be found,
as in part is known near and within the Polar Circles: What Sabbath think we
could they keep? Sometimes a very long one sure, and sometimes none; indeed
none at all, taking a Sabbath, as we do, for one day in seven. For near the
Polar Circles, as is plainly known, the days are twenty-four hours in length.
Between the Circle and the Pole, the day, if so it may be called, increases
first by weeks, and at last by months; till in the end, there is six months
perpetual day, and as long a night. No room in those parts for a Sabbath. But
it is time to leave these speculations, and return to practice.

And first we will begin with Melchisedech, Salem, the Priest of the most high
God, Rex idem hominumque divumque sacerdos, a type and figure of our Savior,
whose Priesthood still continues in the holy Gospel. With him the rather,
because it is most generally conceived that he was Sem the Son of Noah. Of him
it is affirmed by Justin Martyr, that he was neither Circumcised, not yet kept
the Sabbath, and yet most acceptable unto God, Dial. cum. Tryphone.
(...). Tertullian also tells us of him, Incircumcisum nec sabbatizantem ad
sacerdotium Dei allectum esse; Adv. Judaeos.
and puts him also in his challenge, as one whom none amongst the Jews could
ever prove to have kept the Sabbath. Eusebius yet more fully than either of
them: Them. l. 1. c. 6.
Moses, says he, brings in Melchisedech Priest of the most high God, neither
being Circumcised nor anointed with the holy Oil, as was afterward commanded
in the Law, (...), no not so much as knowing that there was a Sabbath, and
ignorant altogether of those Ordinances which were imposed upon the Jews, and
living most agreeably unto the Gospel. Somewhat to that purpose also does occur
in his seventh de praeparatione. cap. 8.
Melchisedech, whosoever he was, gave meeting unto Abraham, about the year of
the world 2118. and if we may suppose him to be Sem, as I think we may, he
lived till Isaac was fifty years of age, which was long after this famous
interview. Now what these Fathers say of Sem, if Sem at least was he whom the
Scriptures call Melchisedech, the same almost is said of his great Grandchild
Heber; he being named by Epiphanius for one of those who lived according to the
faith of the Christian Church, wherein no Sabbath was observed in that Fathers
time. And here we will take Lot in too, although a little before his time, as
one of the Posterity of Heber; that when we come to Abraham, we may keep our
selves within his Family. Him, Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus both, in the places
formerly remembered, make to be one of those which without Circumcision and the
Sabbath, were acceptable to the Lord, and by him justified. And so Tertullian,
that sine legis observatione, ( Sabbath and Circumcision, and the like) de
Sodomorum incendio liberatus est. Therefore nor Lot, nor Heber, nor
Melchisedech ever kept the Sabbath.

For Abraham next, Item to point out the Sabbath, had it been observed. This is
enough to make one think there was no such matter. Et quod non invenis usquam,
esse putes nusquam, in the Poets Language. I grant indeed that Abraham kept the
Christian Sabbath in righteousness and holiness, serving the Lord his God all
the days of his life; and so did Isaac and Jacob. Sanctificate diem Sabbati,
says the Prophet Jeremiah to the Jews, i.e. ut omne tempus vitae nostrae in
sanctificatione ducamus, sicut fecerunt patres nostri, In Hier. 17.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as Saint Hierom glosseth it. Our venerable Bede
also has affirmed as much, that Abraham kept indeed the spiritual Sabbath,
quod semper a servili, In Luc. 19.
i.e. noxia vacabat action, whereby he always rested from the servile works of
sin; but that he kept or sanctified any other Sabbath, the Christian Fathers
deny unanimously. In Dial. cum Tryphone.
Justin the Martyr numbering up the most of those before remembered, concludes
that they, (...), were justified without the Sabbath; (...). and so was Abraham
after them, and all his Children, until Moses. And whereas Trypho had exacted a
necessary keeping of the Law, Sabbaths, New Mons, and Circumcision; the Martyr
makes reply, that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job, and all the other Patriarchs,
both before and after them, until Moses time; yea, and their Wives, Sarah,
Rebecca, Rachel, Lea, and all the rest of religious Women unto Moses Mother,
(...). Neither kept any of them all, nor had commandment so to do, till
Circumcision was enjoined to Abraham and his Posterity. So Irenaeus, that
Abraham, Lib. 4.30.
sine Circumcisione and observatione sabbatorum credidit Deo, without or
Circumcision or the Sabbath did believe in God, which was imputed to him for
righteousness. And where the Jews objected in defense of their ancient
Ceremonies, that Abraham had been circumcised: Tertullian makes reply, sed ante
placuit Deo quam circumcideretur; nec tamen sabbatizavit; Adv. Judaeos.
that he was acceptable unto God before his being Circumcised, and yet he never
kept the Sabbath. See more unto this purpose in Eusebius de Demonstr. l. 1. c.
6. de praeparat. l. 7. c. 8. (where Isaac and Jacob are remembered too:) as also
Epiphanius adv. haeres. l. 1. n. 5.

Thus far the ancient Christian Writers have declared of Abraham, Sabbath; and
this in conference with the Jew, and in Books against them. Which doubtless
they had never done, had there been any possibility for the Jews to have proved
the contrary. Some of the Jews indeed, not being willing thus to lose their
Father Abraham, have said, and written too, that he kept the Sabbath, as they
do; and for a proof thereof, they ground themselves on that of Genesis, because
that Abraham obeyed my Voice, and kept my Charge, my Commandments, my Statutes,
and my Laws. The Jews conclude from hence, as Mercer and Tostatus tell us upon
the Text, that Abraham kept the Sabbath, and all other ceremonies of the Law;
as much I think the one, as he did the other. Who those Jews were that said it,
of what name and quality, that they have not told us; and it were too much
forwardness to credit any nameless Jew, before so many Christian Fathers.
Tostatus, though he do relate their dicunt, yet believes them not; and herein
we will rather follow him than Mercer, who seems a little to incline to that
Jewish fancy. The rather since some Jews of name and quality have gone the same
way that the Fathers did, before remembered. De Arianis l. 11. c. 10.
For Petrus Galatinus tell us how it is written in Beresith Ketanna, or the
lesser exposition upon Genesis, a Book of public use, and great authority
among them, that Abraham did not keep the Sabbath. And this he tells us on the
credit of Rabbi Johannan, who says expressly that there, upon these words, God
blessed the seventh day; it is set down positively, Non scripta est de Abrahamo
observatio Sabbati. And where it is objected for the Jew, that in case Abraham
did not keep it, it was because it was not then commanded: This Galatinus makes
reply, Ex hoc saltem infertur sabbati cultum non esse de lege naturae, that
therefore it is evident that the Sabbath is no part of the Law of nature. As
for the Text of Genesis, we may expound it well enough, and never find a
Sabbath in it, which that it may be done with the least suspicion, we will take
the exposition of Saint Chrysostom, who very fully has explained it. Because
he has obeyed my voice, etc.] Right, says the Father, God said unto him, Get
thee out from thy Fathers house, and and from thy kindred, and go into the Land
that I shall show thee: And Abraham went out, (...), and left a fair possession
for an expectation; and this not wavering, but with all alacrity and readiness.
Then follows his expectation of a Son in his old age, (when nature was
decayed in him) as the Lord had promised, his casting out of Ismael, as the
Lord commanded; his readiness to offer Isaac, as the Lord had willed, and many
others of that nature. Enough to give occasion unto that applause, because he
has obeyed my voice, although he never kept the Sabbath. Indeed the Sabbath
could not have relation to those words in Genesis because it was not then
commanded.

Next look on Jacob the heir as well of Abraham's travels, as of his faith.
Labans Shepherd, and the Text informs us of the pains he took. Genesis 31.40.
In the day time the drought consumed me, and the frost by night, and the sleep
departed from mine eyes. No time of rest, much more no seventh part of his time
allotted unto rest from his daily labors. And in his flight from Laban, it
seems he stood not on the Sabbath. For though he fled thence with his Wives and
Children, and with all his substance, and that he went but easily, according as
the Cattle and the Children were able to endure; yet he went forwards still
without any resting. Otherwise Laban, who heard of his departure on the third
day, and pursued after him amain, must needs have overtaken him before the
seventh. Now for the rest of Jacobs time, when he was settled in the Land
appointed for him, and afterward removed to Egypt, See n. 5. of this Chapter.
we must refer you unto Justin Martyr, and Eusebius; whereof one says
expressly, (...), that he kept no Sabbath; the other makes him one of those
which lived without the Law of Moses, whereof the Sabbath was a part. Having
brought Jacob into Egypt, we should proceed to Joseph, Moses, and the rest of
his offspring there; but we will first take Job along, as one of the posterity
of Abraham; that after we may have the more leisure to wait upon the Israelites
in that house of bondage. I say as one of the posterity of Abraham, the fifth
from Abraham, Demonstr. l. 1. c. 6.
so Eusebius tells us; who says moreover, that he kept no Sabbath. What (says
he) shall we say of Job, that just, that pious, that most blameless man? What
was the rule whereby be squared his life, and governed his devotions? Was any
part of Moses Law? Not so. (...): Was any keeping of the Sabbath, or
observation of any other Jewish order? How could that be, says he, considering
that he was ancienter than Moses, and lived before his Law was published? For
Moses was the seventh from Abraham, and Job the eighth. So far Eusebius. And
Justin Martyr also joins him with Abraham and his Family, as men that took not
heed of New Moons, or Sabbaths, whereof see before n. 5. 2. Edit. p. 14.
I find indeed in Dr. Bound, that Theodore Beza on his own Authority has made
Job very punctual in sanctifying septimum saltem quemque diem, every seventh
day at least, as God, says he, from the beginning had appointed. But I hold
Beza not a fit match for Justin and Eusebius; nor to be credited in this kind,
when they say the contrary, considering in what times they lived, and with whom
they dealt.

And now we come at last unto the Israelites in Egypt, Joseph, who first
brought them thither, to Moses, who conducted them in their flight from thence,
and so unto the body of the whole Nation. Them. l. 1. c. 6.
For Joseph first, Eusebius first tells us in the general, that the same
institution and course of life, which by the Ordinance of Christ was preached
unto the Gentiles, had formerly been commended to the ancient Patriarchs;
particular instances whereof he makes Melchisedech, and Noah, and Enoch, and
Abraham, till the time of Circumcision. And then it follows, (...), etc. (...).
That Joseph in the Court of Egypt, long time before the Law of Moses, lived
answerably to those ancient patterns, and not according as the Jews. Nay, he
affirms the same of Moses, (...), the very Lawgiver himself, the Chieftain of
the Tribes of Israel. As for the residue of the People, we can expect no more
of them, that they lived in bondage, under severe and cruel Masters, who called
upon them day by day to fulfill their tasks, See Exodus 5. v. 5. and 14. De vita
Mosis lib. 1.
and did expostulate with them in an heavy manner, in case they wanted of their
Tale. The Jews themselves can best resolve us in this point. And amongst them
Philo does thus describe their troubles. (...), etc. The Taskmasters or
Overseers of the works were the most cruel and unmerciful men in all the
Country, who laid upon them greater tasks than they were able to endure,
inflicting on them no less punishment than death it self, if any of them, yea,
though by reason of infirmity, should withdraw himself from his daily labor.
Some were commanded to employ themselves in the public structures, others in
bringing in materials for such mighty buildings, (...), never enjoying any rest
either night or day, that in the end they were even spent and tired with
continual travel. Antiqu. Jud. lib. 2. c. 5.
Josephus goes a little further, and tells us this, that the Egyptians did not
only tire the Israelites with continual labor, (...), but that the Israelites
endeavored to perform more than was expected. Assuredly in such a woeful state
as this they had not leave nor leisure to observe the Sabbath, And lastly,
Rabbi Maimony, makes the matter yet more absolute, Apud Ryvit. in Deealog.
who says it for a truth, that when they were in Egypt, neque quiescere, vel
sabbatum agere potuerunt, they neither could have time to rest, nor to keep the
Sabbath, seeing they were not then at their own disposing. So he ad Deuteronomy. 5.15.

Indeed it easily may be believed that the People kept no Sabbath in the Land
of Egypt, Israelites to have been wanton, lazy, and I know not what, because
they did desire to spend one only day in religious exercises: What would they
not have done, had they desisted every seventh day from the works imposed upon
them. Doubtless they had been carried to the house of Correction, if not worse
handled. I say in all that time they were not permitted to offer sacrifice in
that Country; and therefore when they purposed to escape from thence, they
made a suit to Pharaoh, Exodus 8.
that he would suffer them to go three days journey into the Wilderness, to
offer sacrifice there to the Lord their God. Rather than so, Pharaoh was
willing to permit them for that once, to sacrifice unto the Lord in the Land of
Egypt: And what said Moses thereunto? It is not meet (says he) so to do. For
we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord our God, before
their eyes, and they will stone us. His reason was, because the Gods of the
Egyptians were Bulls, and Rams, and Sheep, and Oxen, Lyra notes upon that
place; talia vero animalia ab Hebraeis erant immolanda, quod non permisissent
Aegyptii in terra sua: And certainly the Egyptians would not endure to see
their Gods knocked down before their faces. If any then demand wherein the
Piety and Religion of Gods People did consist especially; we must needs answer,
that it was in the integrity and honesty of their conversation; Adv. haeres. l.
1 har. 5.
and that they worshipped God only in the spirit and truth. Nothing to make it
known that they were Gods people, (...), but only that they feared the Lord and
were Circumcised, as Epiphanius has resolved it; nothing but that they did
acknowledge one only God, and exercised themselves in justice, in modesty, in
patience and long suffering, both toward one another, and amongst the
Egyptians, framing their lives agreeably to the will of God, and the law of
nature. Therefore we may conclude with safety, that hitherto no Sabbath had
been kept in all the World from the Creation of our first Father Adam, to this
very time, which was above 2500. years, no nor commanded to be kept amongst
them in their generations.

I say there was none kept, no nor none commanded; for had it been commanded,
Pharaoh, or subtle tyranny of his subjects that could have made them violate
that sacred day, had it been commended to them from the Lord. The miseries
which they after suffered under Antiochus, rather than that they would profane
the Sabbath; and those calamities which they chose to fall upon them by the
hands of the Romans, rather than make resistance upon that day, when lawfully
they might have done it; are proofs sufficient, that neither force nor fear
could now have wrought upon them not to keep the same, had such a duty been
commanded. Questionless Joseph for his part, that did prefer a loathsome Prison
before the unchaste embraces of his Masters Wife, would no less carefully have
kept the Sabbath, than he did his chastity; had there been any Sabbath then to
have been observed, either as dictated by nature, or prescribed by Law. And
certainly either the Sabbath was not reckoned all this while, as any part or
branch of the Law of nature, or else it finds hard measure in the Book of God,
that there should be particular proofs how punctually the rest of the moral Law
was observed and practiced amongst the Patriarchs, and not one word or Item
that concerns the observation of the Sabbath. Now that the whole Law was
written in the hearts of the Fathers, and that they had some knowledge of all
the other Commandments, and did live accordingly, the Scripture does
sufficiently declare unto us. First, for the first, I am God all-sufficient,
Genesis 17.1.
walk before me, and be thou perfect. So said God to Abraham. Then Jacobs going
up from Bethel, to cleanse his house from Idolatry, Genesis 25.2.
is proof enough that they were acquainted with the second. The pious care they
had not to take the Name of the Lord their God in vain, appears at full in the
religious making of their Oaths, Genesis 21.27. etc. 31.51.
Abraham with Abimelech, and Jacob with Laban. Next for the fifth Commandment
what duties Children owe their Parents, the practice of Isaac and Jacob does
declare abundantly, Genesis 24.67. and 28.42.
in being ruled by them in the choice of their Wives, and readily obeying all
their directions. So for the sin of Murder, the History of Jacobs Children,
Genesis 34.26, 30.
and the grieved Fathers curse upon them for the slaughter of the Sichemites,
together with Gods precept given to Noah against shedding blood, Genesis 9.6.
show us that both it was forbidden and condemned being done. The continency of
Joseph before remembered, Genesis 39.8.
and the punishment threatened to Abimelech for keeping Sarah, Abraham's Wife;
Genesis 30.3.31.30.44.4.
the quarrelling of Laban for his stolen Idols; and Joseph's pursuit after his
Brethren for the silver cup that was supposed to be purloined, are proofs
sufficient that Adultery and Theft were deemed unlawful. And last of all,
Abimelechs reprehension of Abraham and Isaac for bearing false witness in the
denial of their Wives, Genesis 20.9.26.10.
show plainly that they had the knowledge of that Law also. The like may also
be affirmed of their not coveting the Wives and goods, or any thing that was
their Neighbors. For though the History cannot tell us of men's secret
thoughts, yet we may judge of good men's thoughts by their outward actions. Had
Joseph coveted his Masters Wife, he might have enjoyed her. And Job, more home
unto the point, affirms expressly of himself, Job 31.26.
that his heart was never secretly enticed, which is the same with this, that
he did not covet. We conclude then, that seeing there is particular mention how
all the residue of the Commandments had been observed and practiced by the
Saints of old, and that no word at all is found which concerns the sanctifying
of the Sabbath; that certainly there was no Sabbath sanctified in all that
time, from the Creation to the Law of Moses; nor reckoned any part of the Law
of Nature, or an especial Ordinance of God.

CHAP. IV. The nature of the fourth Commandment: and that the SABBATH was not
kept among the Gentiles.
1. The Sabbath first made known in the fall of Mannah. 2. The giving of the
Decalogue; and how far it binds. 3. That in the judgment of the Fathers, in
the Christian Church, the fourth Commandment is of a different nature from the
other nine. 4. The Sabbath was first given for a Law by Moses. 5. And being
given was proper only to the Jews. 6. What moved the Lord to give the
Israelites a Sabbath. 7. Why the seventh day was rather chosen for the Sabbath,
than any other. 8. The seventh day not more honored by the Gentiles, than the
eighth or ninth. 9. The Attributes given by some Greek Poets to the seventh
day, no argument that they kept the Sabbath. 10. The Jews derided for their
Sabbath, by the Graecians, Romans, and Egyptians. 11. The division of the year
into weeks not generally used of old, amongst the Gentiles.


THus have we shown you how Gods Church continued without a Sabbath, the space
of 2500 years and upwards; Israel came out of Egypt. And if the Saints of God,
in the line of Seth, and the house of Abraham; assigned not every seventh day
for Gods public Worship: it is not to be thought that the posterity of Cain,
and the sons of Canaan, were observant of it. To proceed therefore in the
History of the Lords own people, as they observed no Sabbath when they were in
Egypt, so neither did they presently after their departure thence. The day of
their deliverance thence, was the seventh day, as some conceive it, which after
was appointed for a Sabbath to them. Torniellus I am sure is of that opinion:
and so is Zanchie too, who withal gives it for the reason, why the seventh day
was rather chosen for the Sabbath, In quartum praeceptum.
than any other. Populus die septima liberatus fuit ex Egypto; and tunc jussit
in hujus rei memoriam diem illam sanctificare. Which were it so, yet could not
that day be a Sabbath, or a day of rest, considering the sudden and tumultuous
manner of their going thence: their sons and daughters, maidservants, and
menservants, the cattle and the strangers within their gates, being all put
hardly to it, and fain to fly away, for their life and safety. And if St.
Austins note be true, and the note be his, Sermon. de temp. 154.
that on the first day of the week, transgressi sunt filii Israel mare rubrum
siccis pedibus, the Israelites went dry-foot over the Red Sea, or Sea of Edom:
then must the day before, if any, be the Sabbath Day; the next seventh day
after the day of their departure. But that day certainly was not kept, as a
Sabbath day. For it was wholly spent in murmuring and complaints against God
and Moses, They cried unto the Lord, Exodus 14.11. and 12.
and they said to Moses, why have thou brought us out of Egypt to die in the
Wilderness? Had it not been better far for us to serve the Egyptians? Nothing
in all these murmurings and seditious Clamours, that may denote it for a
Sabbath, for an holy Festival. Nor do we find that for the aftertimes, they
made any scruple of journying on that day, till the Law was given unto the
contrary, in Mount Sinai, which was the eleventh station after their escape
from Egypt. It was the fancy of Rabbi Solomon, that the Sabbath was first given
in Marah, and that the sacrifice of the Red Cow mentioned in the nineteenth of
Numbers, Exodus 15.26.
was instituted at that time also. This fancy founded on those words in the
Book of Exodus, If thou will diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy
God, etc. then will I bring none of those Diseases upon thee, that I brought on
the Egyptians, But Torniellus, and Tostatus, and Lyra, though himself a Jew,
count it no other than a Jewish and Rabbinical folly. Sure I am, that on the
fifteenth day of the second month after their departure out of Egypt; being
that day seventhnight before the first Sabbath was discovered, in the fall of
Manna: we find not any thing that implies either Rest or Worship. We read
indeed how all the Congregation murmured as they did before against Moses and
against Aaron, Exodus 16.2.
wishing that they had died in the Land of Egypt, where they had Bread their
bellies full, rather than be destroyed with Famine. So eagerly they murmured,
that to content them, God sent them Quails that night, and rained down Bread
from Heaven next morning. Was this, think you the sanctifying of a Sabbath to
the Lord their God? Indeed the next seventh day that followed, was by the Lord
commended to them for a Sabbath; and ratified by a great and signal miracle the
day before: wherein it pleased him, to give them double what they used to
gather on the former days, that they might rest upon the seventh, with the
greater comfort. This was a preamble or preparative to the following Sabbath:
for by this miracle, this rest of God from raining Mannah, on the seventh day,
the people came to know which was precisely the seventh day from the Worlds
Creation: whereof they were quite ignorant at that present time. Philo assures
us in his third Book de vita Mosis, that the knowledge of that day on which God
rested from his works, had been quite forgotten, (...), by reason of those many
miseries which had befaln the World by fire and water: and so continued, till
by this miracle, the Lord revived again the remembrance of it. And in another
place, De vita Mosis, l. 1.
when men had made a long enquiry after the birthday of the World, and were
yet to seek: (...), etc. God made it known to them by a special miracle, which
had so long been hidden from their Ancestors. The falling of a double portion
of Mannah on the sixth day, and the not putrefying of it on the seventh; was
the first light that Moses had to descry the Sabbath: which he accordingly
commended unto all the people, to be a day of rest unto them; that as God
ceased that day from sending, so they should rest from looking after their
daily Bread. But what need Philo be produced, when we have such an ample
Testimony from the word it self? For it is manifest in the story, that when the
people, on the sixth day, had gathered twice as much Mannah, as they used to
do; Exodus 16.5.
according as the Lord had directed by his servant Moses: they understood not
what they did, at least why they did it. The Rulers of the Congregation, as the
Text informs us, came and told Moses of it: and he as God before had taught
him, acquainted them, that on the morrow should be the rest of the holy Sabbath
unto the Lord; and that they were to keep the overplus until the morning. Nay,
so far were the people from knowing any thing of the Sabbath, or of Gods rest
upon that day, that though the Prophet had thus preached unto them of a
Sabbaths rest, the people gave small credit to him. For it is said, that some
of the people went out to gather on the seventh day, Mannah stank not, as on
other days. So that this resting of the people, was the first sanctifying of
the Sabbath mentioned in the Scriptures: and Gods great care to make provision
for his people on the day before, the blessing he bestowed upon it. And this is
that, which Solomon Iarchi tells us, Chapter 1. n. 2.
as before we noted, Benedixit ei [i.e. in Mannah, quia omnibus diebus
septimanae descendit Omer pro singulis, and sexto panis duplex: and
sanctificavit eum] i.e. in Mannah, quia non descendit omnino. Nay, generally
the Hebrew Doctors do affirm the same: assuring us that the Commandment of the
Sabbath is the foundation and ground of all the rest, as being given before
them all, at the fall of Mannah. Vnde dicunt Hebraei sabbatum fundamentum esse
aliorum praeceptorum, quod ante alia praecepta hoc datum sit, De fest Judaeor.
c. 3.
quando Mannah acceperunt. So Hospinian tells us. Therefore the Sabbath was not
given before, in their own confession. This happened on the two and twentieth
day of the second month after their coming out of Egypt, and of the Worlds
Creation, Anno 2044. the people being then in the Wilderness of Sin, which was
their seventh station.

The seventh day after, being the nine and twentieth of the second month, Moses
said, went out to gather Mannah, Numb. 35.
as on other days: but whether they were then in the Wilderness of Sin, or were
encamped in Dophkath, Alush, or Rephidim, which were their next removes, that
the Scriptures say not. Most likely that they were in the last station,
considering the great businesses there performed; the fight with Amalek, and
the new ordering of the Government by Jethroes Counsel; and that upon the third
day of the third month which was Thursday following, they were advanced so far
as to the Wilderness of Sinai. I say the third day of the third month; For
where the Text has it, Exodus 19.1.
In the third month when the Children of Israel were gone forth out from Egypt,
the same day came they into the Wilderness of Sinai: by the same day is meant
the same day of the month, which was the third day, Exodus 19. ver. 3.10, 11.
being Thursday, after our Account. The morrow after went Moses up unto the
Lord, and had commandment from him to sanctify the people that day, and to
morrow, and to make them ready against the third day: God meaning on that day
to come down in the eyes of all the People in Mount Sinai, and to make known
his Will unto them. Sabbath, the people were brought out of the Camp to meet
with God, and placed by Moses at the nether part of the Mountain: Moses
ascending first to God, and descending after to the people, to charge them that
they did not pass their bounds before appointed. It seems the Sabbath rest was
not so established, Decalogue, or the ten Commandments, and contains in it the
whole Moral Law, or the Law of Nature. This had before been naturally imprinted
in the minds of men; however that in tract of Time, the character thereof had
been much defaced; so dimmed and darkened that Gods own people stood in need of
a new impression: and therefore was proclaimed in this solemn manner, that so
the letter of the Law might leave the clearer stamp in their affections. A Law
which in it self was general and universal, equally appertaining both to Jew
and Gentile; Romans 2.14.
the Gentiles which know not the Law, doing by nature the things contained in
the Law, as S. Paul has told us: but as at this time published on Mount Sinai,
and as delivered to the people by the hand of Moses, they obliged only those of
the house of Israel. Zanchius has so resolved it amongst the Protestants, (not
to say any thing of the Schoolmen who affirm the same: De Redempti. l. 1. c.
11. Th. 1.
) ut Politicae and ceremoniales, sic etiam morales leges quae Decalogi nomine
significantur, quatenus per Mosen traditae fuerunt Israelitis, ad nos
Christianos nihil pertinent, etc. As neither the Judicial nor the Ceremonial,
so nor the Moral Law contained in the Decalogue, does any way concern us
Christians, as given by Moses to the Jews: but only so far forth, as it is
consonant to the Law of Nature, which binds all alike: and after was confirmed
and ratified by Christ, our King. His reason is, because that if the Decalogue
as given by Moses to the Jews; did concern the Gentiles; the Gentiles had been
bound by the fourth Commandment, to observe the Sabbath, in as strict a manner
as the Jews. Cum vero constet ad hujus diei sanctificationem nunquam fuisse
Gentes obligatas, etc. Since therefore it is manifest that the Gentiles never
were obliged to observe the Sabbath, it follows that they neither were, nor
possibly could be bound to any of the residue, as given by Moses to the Jews.
We may conclude from hence, that had the fourth Commandment been merely Moral,
it had no less concerned the Gentiles, than it did the Israelites.

For that the fourth Commandment is not of the same condition with the rest,
Irenaeus tells us, how God, Lib. 4. cap. 31.
the better to prepare us to eternal life, Decalogi verba per semetipsum
omnibus similiter locutus est, did by himself proclaim the Decalogue to all
people equally: which therefore is to be in full force amongst us, as having
rather been enlarged than dissolved, by our Saviors coming in the flesh. Which
words of Irenaeus, if considered rightly, must be referred to that part of the
fourth Commandment which indeed is Moral; or else the fourth Commandment must
not be reckoned as a part or member of the Decalogue: because it did receive no
such enlargement, as did the rest of the Commandments, by our Saviors
preaching; (whereof see Matthew. 5.6, and 7 Chapters) but a dissolution rather by
his practice. Dial. cum Triphone.
Justin the Martyr more expressly, in his dispute with Trypho a learned Jew,
maintains the Sabbath to be only a Mosaical Ordinance; as we shall see anon
more fully; and that it was imposed upon the Israelites, (...), because of
their hard heartedness, and irregularity. Contra Judaeos.
Tertullian also in his Treatise against the Jews, says that it was not
spirituale and aeternum mandatum; sed temporale, quod quandoque cessaret, not a
spiritual and eternal Institution, but a temporal only. Saint Austin yet more
fully, that it is no part of the Moral Law. In Epistola ad Galat.
For he divides the Law of Moses into these two parts, Sacraments and Moral
Duties: accounting Circumcision, the new Moons, Sabbaths, and the Sacrifices to
appertain unto the first: ad mores autem, non occides, etc. and these
Commandments, Thou shall not kill, nor commit adultery, nor bear false witness,
and the rest, De spiritu and lit. c. 11.
to be contained within the scond. Nay more, he tells us, that Moses did
receive a Law to be delivered to the people, writ in two Tables made of stone
by the Lords own finger: wherein was nothing to be found either of
Circumcision, or the Jewish Sacrifices. And then he adds, In illis igitur december
praeceptis, ecceepta Sabbati observatione, dicatur mihi quid non sit
observandum a Christiano: Tell me, says he, what is there in the Decalogue,
except the observation of the Sabbath day, which is not carefully to be
observed of a Christian man. To this we may refer all those several places,
wherein he calls the fourth Commandment, praeceptum figuratum, and in umbra
positum, a Sacrament, a shadow, and a figure: as Tract the third in Joh. 1. and
Tract 17. and 20. in Joh. 5. ad Bonifac. l. 3. T. 7. contra Faust. Manich. l.
19. c. 18. the 14th Chapter of the Book de spiritu and lit. before remembered:
and finally, to go no further, Qu. in Exodus l. 2. qu. 173. where he speaks most
home, and to the purpose. Ex december praeceptis hoc solum figurate dictum est. Of
all the ten Commandments this only was delivered as a sign or figure. See also
what is said before out of Theodoret, and Sedulius, Chap. 1. n. 6. Hesychius
goes yet further, and will not have the fourth Commandment to be any of the
ten; Etsi december mandatis insertum sit, non tamen ex iis esse; In Levit. l. 6.
c. 26.
and howsoever it is placed amongst them, yet it is not of them. And therefore
to make up the number, divides the first Commandment into two, as those of Rome
have done the last, to exclude the second. But here Hesychius was deceived, in
taking this Commandment to be only Ceremonial, whereas it is indeed of a mixed
or middle nature: for so the Schoolmen, and other learned Authors in these
later times, grounding themselves upon the Fathers, have resolved it generally.
Moral it is as to the Duty, that there must be a time appointed for the service
of God: and Ceremonial, as unto the Day, to be one of seven, and to continue
that whole day, and to surcease that day from all kind of work. As moral,
placed amongst the ten Commandments, extending unto all mankind, and written
naturally in our hearts by the hand of Nature: as Ceremonial, appertaining to
the Law Levitical, peculiar only to the Jews, and to be reckoned with the rest
of Moses Institutes. Aquinas thus, c. 2. 2ae. qu. 122. art. 4. resp. ad primum.
Tostatus thus in Exodus 20. qu. 11. So Petr. Galatinus also lib. 11. cap. 9. and
Bonaventure in his Sermon on the fourth Commandment. And so diverse others.

I say, the fourth Commandment, so far as it is Ceremonial, Moses Institutes,
and proper only to the Jews. For proof of this, we have the Fathers very
copious. And first, that it was one of Moses Institutes, Justin the Martyr
says expressly. Dial. eum Triphone.
(...), etc. As Circumcision began from Abraham, and as the Sabbath,
Sacrifices, Feasts, and Offerings came in by Moses; so were they all to have an
end. And in another place of the same discourse, seeing there was no use of
Circumcision until Abraham's time, (...), nor of the Sabbath until Moses; by the
same reason there is as little use now of them, as had been before. So does
Eusebius tell us, (...), De praeparat. l. 7. c. 6.
etc. That Moses was the first Lawgiver amongst the Jews, who did appoint them
to observe a certain Sabbath in memory of Gods rest from the Worlds Creation,
as also diverse anniversary Festivals, together with the difference of clean and
unclean Creatures, and of other Ceremonies not a few. Next Athanasius lets us
know that in the Book of Exodus, we have the Institution of the Passover,
Synopsis sacrae Script.
the sweetning of the bitter waters of Marah, the sending down of Quails and
Mannah, the waters issuing from the rock; (...), what time the Sabbath took
beginning, and the Law was published by Moses on Mount Sinai. Macarius a
Contemporary of Athanasius does affirm as much, viz. that in the Law (...),
Hom. 35.
which was given by Moses, it was commanded, as in a figure or a shadow that
every man should rest on the Sabbath day from the works of labor. In Ezech. 20.
Saint Hierom also lets us know, though he name not Moses, that the observation
of the Sabbath amongst other Ordinances was given by God unto his People in the
Wilderness. Haec praecepta and justificationes, and observantiam Sabbati,
Dominus dedit in deserto; which is as much as if he had expressly told us that
it was given unto them by the hand of Moses. Then Epiphanius, God says he,
rested on the seventh day from all his labors; De Pond. and mensur. n. 22.
which day he blessed and sanctified, (...), and by his Angel made known the
same to his servant Moses. See more unto this purpose advers. haeres. l. 1.
haer. 6. n. 5. And lastly, Damascen has assured us, De fide Orthod. lib. 4. c.
24.
that when there was no Law nor Scripture, that then there was no Sabbath
neither; but when the Law was given by Moses, (...), then was the Sabbath set
apart for Gods public worship. Add here, that Tacitus and Justin refer the
Institution of the Sabbath unto Moses only; of which more hereafter.

Next that the Sabbath was peculiar only to the Jews, Israel, the Fathers do
affirm more fully than they did the other. For so Saint Basil, (...), the
Sabbath was given unto the Jews, in his first Homily of Fasting. Saint Austin
so, Sabbatum datum est priori populo in otio corporali, Epistola 119. and
Sabbatum Judaeis fuisse praeceptum in umbra futuri, de Genesis ad lit. l. 4. c.
11. and in the 13. of the same Book, unum diem observandum mandavit populo
Hebraeo: The like to which occurs Epist. 86. ad Casulanum. The Jews, the
Hebrews, and the former People, all these three are one; and all do serve to
show that Saint Austin thought the Sabbath to be peculiar unto them only. That
it was given unto the Jews exclusively of all other Nations, is the opinion and
conceit also of the Jews themselves. This Petrus Galatinus proves against them,
on the authority of their best Authors. Chapter 16.29.
Sic enim legitur apud eos in Glossa, etc. We read, says he, in their Gloss on
these words of Exodus, The Lord has given you the Sabbath: What mean, say
they, these words, he has given it you? Quia vobis, viz. Judaeis dedit, and
non gentibus saeculi; because it was given unto the Jews, and not unto the
Gentiles. It is affirmed also, says he, by R. Johannan, that whatsoever
statute God gave to Israel, he gave it to them publicly, except the Sabbath;
and that was given to them in secret, according unto that of Exodus. Exodus
31.17. Ainsworth in Exodus 13.9.
It is a sign between me and the Children of Israel. Quod si ita est, non
obligantur gentes ad sabbatum. If so, says Galatinus, the Gentiles were not
bound to observe the Sabbath. A sign between me and the Children of Israel? It
seems the Jews were all of the same opinion. For where they used on other days
to wear their Phylacteries on their arms or foreheads, to be a sign or token to
them, as the Lord commanded, they laid them by upon the Sabbaths; because, say
they, the Sabbath was it self a sign. In Genesis 2.
So truly said Procopius Gazaeus, Its Judaeis imperavit supremum numen, ut
segregarent a caeteris deibus diem septimum, etc. God, says he, did command
the Jews to set apart the seventh day to his holy worship; that if by chance
they should forget the Lord their God, that day might call him back unto their
remembrances; where note, it was commanded to the Jews alone. Add, that
Josephus calls the Sabbath in many places a national or local custom, (...), a
law peculiar to that People, as Antiue. l. 14. c. 18. and de bello l. 2. c. 16.
as we shall see hereafter more at large. Lastly, so given to the Jews alone,
that it became a difference between them and all other People. Saint Cyril has
resolved it so. In Ezech. 20.
God, says he, gave the Jews a Sabbath, not that the keeping of the same
should be sufficient to conduct them to eternal life: Sed ut haec civilis
administration is ratio peculiaris a gentium institutis distinguat eos; but
that so different a form of civil government should put a difference between
them, and all Nations else. Theodoret more fully, that the Jews being in other
things like to other People, in observatione sabbati propriam videbantur
obtinere rempublicam, In Ezech. 20.
seemed in keeping of the Sabbath to have a custom by themselves. And which is
more, says he, their Sabbath put a greater difference between the Jews, and
other People, than their Circumcision: For Circumcision had been used by the
Idumaeans, and Egyptians: Sabbati vero observation (...) a Judaeorum natio
custodiebat, but the observation of the Sabbath was peculiar only to the Jews.
Nay, even the very Gentiles took it for a Jewish Ceremony; sufficient proof
whereof we shall see ere long. But what need more be said in this, either that
this was one of the Laws of Moses, or that it was peculiar to the Jews alone,
seeing the same is testified by the holy Scripture? Thou came down upon Mount
Sinai, says Nehemiah, Cap. 19.13. and Verse. 14.
and spakest with them [the house of Israel] from Heaven, and gave them right
judgments and true Laws, good Statutes and Commandments, what more? It
follows, And made known unto them thy holy Sabbaths, and command them
Precepts, Statutes and Laws by the hand of thy Servant Moses.

Now on what motives God was pleased to prescribe a Sabbath to the Jews, Justin
Martyr, as before we noted, gives this general reason, Qu. ex Nov. Test. 69.
because of their hard-heartedness, and irregular courses; wherein Saint Austin
closes with him. Cessarunt onera legis quae ad duritiem cordis Judaici fuerunt
data, in escis, sabbatis, and neomeniis: Where note how he has joined together
New Mons and Sabbaths, and the Jewish difference between meat and meat.
Particularly Gregory Nyssen makes the special motive to be this, Testim.
adventus Dei in carne.
ad sedandum nimium eorum pecuniae studium, so to restrain the People from the
love of money. For coming out of Egypt very poor and bare, and having almost
nothing but what they borrowed of the Egyptians, they gave themselves, says
he, unto continual and incessant labor, the sooner to attain to riches.
Therefore said God, that they should labor six days, and rest the seventh.
Damascen somewhat to this purpose, (...), etc. God, De side Orth. l. 4. c. 24
says he, seeing the carnal and the covetous disposition of the Israelites,
appointed them to keep a Sabbath, that so their Servants and their Cattle might
partake of rest. And then he adds, (...), etc. as also, that thus resting from
their worldly businesses, they might repair unto the Lord in Psalms, and Hymns,
and spiritual Songs, and meditation of the Scriptures. Rupertus harps on the
same string that the others did, L 5. in Joh c. 5.
save that he thinks the Sabbath given for no other cause, than that the
laboring man being wearied with his weekly toil, might have some time to
refresh his spirits. Sabbatum nihil aliud est nisi requies, vel quam ab causam
data est, nisi ut operarius fessus caeteris septimanae diebus uno die
requiesceret? Gaudentius Brixianus in his twelfth Homily or Sermon, is of the
same mind also that the others were. These seem to ground themselves on the
fifth of Deuteronomy, where God commands his People to observe his Sabbaths,
that thy Man servant, and thy Maid servant may rest as well as thou. And then
it follows, Remember that thou wast a Servant in the Land of Egypt, and that
the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, though with a mighty hand, and an
outstretched arm; therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the
Sabbath Day. The force of which illation is no more than this, that as God
brought them out of Egypt, wherein they were Servants, so he commands them to
take pity on their Servants, and let them rest upon the Sabbath; considering
that they themselves would willingly have had some time of rest, had they been
permitted. A second motive might be this, to make them always mindful of that
spiritual rest, which they were to keep from the acts of sin; and that eternal
rest that they did expect from all toil and misery. In reference unto this
eternal rest, Saint Augustine tells us, that the Sabbath was commanded to the
Jews, in umbra suturi, De Genesis ad lit. l. 4. c. 11.
quae spiritalem requiem figuraret, as a shadow of the things to come, in S.
Paul's Language, which God does promise unto those that do the works of
Righteousness. And in relation to the other, the Lord himself has told us that
he had given his Sabbath unto the Jews, to be a sign between him and them, that
they might know that he was the Lord that sanctified them, Exodus 31.13. which
is again repeated by Ezech. cap. 20.12. That they may know that I am the Lord
which sanctifies them. For God, as Gregory Nyssen notes it, seems only to
propose this unto himself, that by all means he might at least destroy in man
his inbred corruption. (...). This was his aim in Circumcision, and in the
Sabbath, De resurrect. Chr. Orat. 1.
and in forbidding them some kind of meats; (...), For by the Sabbath he
informed them of a rest from sin. To cite more Fathers to this purpose were a
thing unnecessary, and indeed sensibile super sensum. This yet confirms us
further, that the Sabbath was intended for the Jews alone. For had God given
the Sabbath to all other People, as he did to them, it must have also been a
sign that the Lord had sanctified all People as he did the Jews.

There is another motive yet to be considered, Jews a Sabbath, and yet not tied
the Sabbath to one day of seven, or to the seventh precisely from the Worlds
Creation. Constitui potuisset, quod in die sabbati coleretur Deus, aut in die
Martis, Aut in altera die. God, says Tostatus, might have ordered it to have
his Sabbath on the Saturday, In Exodus 20. qu. 11.
or on the Tuesday, or any other day what ever, what any other of the week, and
no more than so: No, he might have appointed it, aut bis, aut semel tantum in
anno, aut in mense, once or twice a year, or every month, as he had listed. And
might not God as well exceed this number, as fall short thereof? Yes, say the
Protestant Doctors, that he might have done. He might have made each third, or
fourth, or fifth day a Sabbath, indeed as many as he pleased. In Exodus 20.
Si voluisset Deus absolute uti dominio suo, potuit plures dies imperare cultui
suo impendendos: So says Dr. Ryvet, one of the Professors of Leiden, and a
great Friend to the Antiquity of the Sabbath. What was the principal motive
then, why the seventh day way chosen for this purpose, and none but that?
(...), to keep God always in their minds; so says Justin Martyr. But why
should that be rather done by a seventh day Sabbath than by any other? Dial.
Cum Try: phone. Detsest. Paschal. hom. 6.
Saint Cyril answers to that point exceeding fully. The Jews, says he, became
infected with the Idolatries of Egypt, worshipped the Sun, and Moon, and Stars,
and the Host of Heaven; which seems to be insinuated in the fourth of Deuteronomy. v.
19. Therefore that they might understand the Heavens to be Gods workmanship,
eos opificem suum imitari jubet, he wills them that they imitate their
Creator; that resting on the Sabbath day, they might the better understand the
reason of the Festival. Which if they did, says he, in case they rested on
that day whereon God had rested, it was a plain confession that all things were
made by him, and consequently that there were no other Gods besides him. Et
haec una ratio sabbato indicatae quietis: Indeed the one and only reason that
is mentioned in the body of the Commandment, which reflects only on Gods rest
from all his work which he had made, and leaves that as the absolute and sole
occasion, why the seventh day was rather chosen for the Sabbath than the sixth
or eighth, or any other. Which being so, it is the more to be admired that
Philo being a learned Jew, or any learned Christian Writer, leaving the cause
expressed in the Law it self, should seek some secret reason for it out of the
nature of the day, or of the number. De Abrahamo.
First, Fhilo tells us that the Jews do call their seventh day by the name of
Sabbath, which signifies repose and rest. Not because they did rest that day
from their weekly labors, (...), but because seven is found to be, both in the
world and man himself, the most quiet number, most free from trouble, war, and
all manner of contention. A strange conceit to take beginning from a Jew;
Problem. loc. 5 5.
yet that that follows of Aretius is as strange as this. Who thinks that day
was therefore consecrated unto rest, even amongst the Gentiles, quod putarent
civilibus actionibus ineptum esse, fortasse propter frigus planetae,
contemplationibus vero idoneum: Because they thought that day, by reason of the
dullness of the Planet Saturn, more fit for contemplation than it was for
action. Some had, it seems, conceived so in the former times, whom thereupon
Tostatus censures in his Comment on the fifth of Deuteronomy. Qu. 3.
For where it was Gods purpose, as before we noted out of Cyril, to wean the
People from Idolatry and Superstition; to lay down such a reason for the
observation of the Sabbath, was to reduce them to the worship of those Stars
and Planets from which he did intend to wean them. I had almost omitted the
conceit of Zanchie, See n. 1.
before remembered, who thinks that God made choice of this day the rather;
because that on the same day he had brought his People out of Egypt. In case
the ground be true, that on this day the Lord wrought this deliverance for his
People Israel, then his conceit may probably be countenanced from the fifth of
Deuteronomy, where God recounting to his People, that with a mighty hand, and
an outstretched arm he had delivered them from Egypt; has thereupon commanded
them that they should keep the Sabbath day. Lay all that has been said
together and it will come in all to this, that as the Sabbath was not known
till Moses time; Annal. d. 7.
so being known, it was peculiar unto Israel only, Non nisi Mosaicae legis
temporibus in usu fuisse septimi diei cultum; nec postea nisi penes Hebraeos
perdurasse, as Torniellus does conclude it.

For that the Gentiles used to keep the seventh day sacred, Gentiles. The
seventh day of the month indeed they hallowed, and so they did the first and
fourth, as Hesiod tells us. Opera and dies.
(...). Not the first day, and the fourth, and seventh of every week, for then
they must have gone beyond the Jews; but as the Scholiast upon Hesiod, notes it
of every month, a novilunio exorsus laudat tres, the first, fourth, and
seventh. And lest it should be thought that the seventh day is to be counted
holier than the other two, because the attribute of (...) seems joined unto it;
the Scholiast takes away that scruple, a novilunio exorsus tres laudat, omnes
sacras dicens, septimam etiam ut Apollinis natalem celebrans; and tells us that
all three are accounted holy, and that the seventh was also celebrated as
Apollos birthday. For so it follows in the Poet, (...); from whence the
Flamines or Gentile Priests did use to call him, (...), i. e. the God born on
the seventh day. Dies Geniales l. 3. c. 18.
For further proof hereof, we find in Alexander ab Alexandro, that the first
day of evry month was consecrated to Apollo, the fourth to Mercury, the
seventh again unto Apollo, the eighth to Theseus. The like does Plutarch say of
Theseus, that the Athenians offered to him their greatest Sacrifice upon the
eighth day of October, because of his arrival that day from Crete; and that
they also honored him, (...), on the eighth day of the other months, because
he was derived from Neptune, to whom, on the eighth day of every month they did
offer sacrifice. To make the matter yet more sure, De Decalogo.
Philo has put this difference between the Gentiles and the Jews, that diverse
Cities of the Gentiles did solemnize the seventh day, (...) once a month,
beginning their account with the New Mood; (...), but that the Jews did keep
every seventh day constantly. It Is true that Philo tells us more than once or
twice, how that the Sabbath was become a general Festival; but that was rather
taken up in imitation of the Jess, than practiced out of any instinct or light
of nature, as we shall see hereafter in a place more proper. Besides which days
before remembered, the second day was consecrate to the bonus Genius, Hospin. de
orig. Fest. cap. 5.
the third and fifteenth to Minerva, the ninth unto the Sun, the last to Pluto,
and every twentieth day kept holy by the Epicures. Now as the Greeks did
consecrate the Newmoons and seventh day to Phoebus, the fourth of every month
to Mercury, and the eighth to Neptune, and sic de caeteris: So every ninth day
in the year was by the Romans anciently kept sacred unto Jupiter; the Flamines
or Priests upon that day offering a Ram unto him for a Sacrifice. Nundinas
Jovis ferias esse, ait Granius Licinius: Saturnal. l. 1. c. 16.
siquidem Flaminica omnibus nundinis [every ninth day] in regia Jovi arietem
solere immolare, as in Macrobius. So that we see the seventh day was no more in
honor than either the first, fourth, or eighth, and not so much as was the
ninth; this being as it were a weekly Festival, and that a monthly. A thing so
clear and evident, 2. Edit. p. 65.
that Dr. Bound could tell us that the memory of Weeks and Sabbaths was
altogether suppressed and buried amongst the Gentiles. And in the former page.
But how the memory of the seventh day was taken away amongst the Romans, Ex
veteri nundinarum instituto apparet, says Beroaldus. And Satan did altogether
take away from the Graecians the boly memory of the seventh day, by obtruding
on the wicked Rites of Superstition, which on the eighth day they did keep in
bonour of Neptune. So that besides other holy days, the one of them observed
the eighth day, and the other the ninth, and neither of them both the seventh
as the Church does now, and has done always from the beginning. It Is true,
Diogenes the Grammarian, Sueton. in Tiber. c. 32.
did hold his disputations constantly upon the Saturday or Sabbath; and when
Tiberius at an extraordinary time came to hear his exercises, in diem septimum
distulerat, the Pedant put him off until the saturday next following. A right
Diogenes indeed, and as rightly served. For coming to attend upon Tiberius,
being then made Emperor, he sent him word, ut post annum septimum rediret,
that he would have him come again the seventh year after. But then as true it
is, De illustrib. Grammat.
which the same Suetonius tells us of Antonius Gnipho, a Grammarian too, that
he taught Rhetoric every day; declamaret vero non nisi nundinis, but declaimed
only on the ninth. But then as true it is, which Juvenal has told us of the
Roman Rhetoricians, that they pronounced their Declamations on the sixth day
chiefly.

Nil salit Arcadico juveni, cujus mihi sexta, Sat.

Quaque die, miserum dirus caput Annibal implet.
As the Poet has it.

All days, it seems, alike to them; the first, fourth, sixth, eighth, ninth,
and indeed what not, as much in honor as the seventh; whether it were in civil
or in sacred matters.

I am not ignorant that many goodly Epithets are by some ancient Poets amongst
the Grecians appropriated to this day: which we find gathered up together,
Clem. Strom. l. 5. Eusebius. Praepar. l. 13. c. 12.
by Clemens Alexandrinus, and Eusebius; but before either of them, by one
Aristobulus a learned Jew, who lived about the time of Ptolomy Philometor King
of Egypt, both Hesiod and Homer, as they there are cited, give it the Title of
(...) or an holy day, and so it was esteemed amongst them, as before is shown:
but other days esteemed as holy. From Homer they produce two Verses, wherein
the Poet seems to be acquainted with the Worlds Creation, and the perfection of
it on the seventh day.

(...). (...)

(...).
On the seventh day all things were fully done,
On that we left the waves of Acheron.
The like are cited out of Linus, as related by Eusebius, from the collections
of Aristobulus before remembered: but are by Clemens fathered on Callimachus,
another of the old Greek Poets, who between them thus.

(...) (...)

(...).
(...) (...)

(...)
(...) (...)

(...)
Which put together may be thus Englished, in the main, though not verbatim.

On the seventh day all things were made complete.
The birthday of the World, most good, most great,
Seven brought forth all things in the starry Sky;
Keeping each year their courses constantly.
This Clemens, makes an argument that not the Jews only but the Gentiles also
knew that the seventh day had a privilege, yea, and was hallowed above other
days; on which the World, and all things in it were complete and finished. And
so we grant they did: but neither by the light of Nature, nor any observation
of that day amongst themselves, more than any other. Not by the light of
Nature. For Ariftobulus, from whom Clemens probably might take his hint, speaks
plainly, that the Poets had consulted with the holy Bible, and from thence
sucked this knowledge: (...), as that Author says of Hesiod and Homer. Which
well might be, Ap. Eusebius.
considering that Homer who was the oldest of them flourished about five
hundred years after Moses death; Callimachus who was the latest, above Seven
hundred years after Homers time. Nor did they speak it out of any observation
of that day, more than any other amongst themselves. The general practice of
the Gentiles, before related, has thoroughly as we hope, removed that scruple.
They that from these words can collect a Sabbath, had need of as good eyes as
Clemens, who out of Plato in his second de republ. Strom. l. 5.
conceives that he has found a sufficient warrant for the observing of the
Lords day, above all the rest: because it is there said by Plato, That such as
had for seven days solaced in the pleasant Meadows, were to depart upon the
eighth, and not return till four days after. As much a Lords day in the one, as
any Sabbath in the other. Indeed the Argument is weak, that some of those that
thought it of especial weight, have now deserted it, as too light and trivial.
Ryvet by name, who cites most of these Verses in his notes on Genesis, to prove
the Sabbath no less ancient than the Worlds Creation; does on the Decalogue,
think them utterly unable to conclude that point, nisi aliunde suffulciantur,
unless they be well backed with better Argumens, and Authorities out of other
Authors.

Nay, Gentiles were so far from sanctifying the Sabbath or seventh day,
themselves; that they derided those that kept it. The Circumcision of the Jews
was not more ridiculous amongst the Heathens, than their Sabbaths were; not
were they more extremely scoffed at for the one, than for the other, by all
sorts of Writers. Ap. Aug. de civit. Dei, l. 6. c. 11. Hist. l. 5.
Seneca lays it to their charge, that by occasion of their Sabbaths, septimam
fere aetatis suae partem vacando perdant, they spent the seventh part of their
lives in floth and idleness; and Tacitus, that not the seventh day, but the
seventh year also was as unprofitably wasted. Septimo quoque die otium
placuisse ferunt; dein blandiente intertia, septimum quoque annum ignaviae
datum. Moses, says he, had so appointed, because that after a long six days
march, the People became quietly settled on the seventh. Juvenal makes also the
same objection against the keeping of the Sabbath by the Jewish Nation. Sat. 14.


-- quod septima quaeque fuit lux
Ignava, and partem vitae non attigit ullam.
And Ovid does not only call them peregrina sabbata, as things with which the
Romans had but small, and that late acquaintance; but makes them a peculiar
mark of the Jewish Religion. Reme. amor. l. 1.


Quaque die redeunt, rebus minus apta gerendis, De Art l. 1.

Culta Palestino septima sacra viro.
The seventh day comes for business unfit:
Held sacred by the Jew, who halloweth it.
Where by the way Tostatus notes upon these words, In Exodus 20.
that sacra septima are here ascribed unto the Jews as their badge or
cognizance, which had been most improper, and indeed untrue, si gentes aliae
servarent sabbatum, if any other Nation, specially the Romans, had observed the
same. But to proceed, Persius hits them in the teeth with their recutita
sabbata: And Martial scornfully calls them Sabbatarians, Sat. 5. l. 4. ep. 4.
Ap. Josephum. Antiq. l. 12.1.
in an Epigram of his to Bassus, where reckoning up some things of an unsavory
smell, he reckons Sabbatariorum jejunia, amongst the principal. So
Agatharebides, who wrote the lives of Alexanders successors, accuses them of
an unspeakable superstition; in that (...), they suffered Ptolomy to take their
City of Jerusalem on a Sabbath day, rather than stand upon their guard. But
that of Apion, Joseph. adv. Apion. l. 2.
the great Clerk of Alexandria, is the most shameful and reproachful of all the
rest: Who, to despite the Jews the more, and lay the deeper stain upon their
Sabbaths, relates in his Egyptian story, that at their going out of Egypt,
having traveled for the space of six whole days, they became stricken with
certain inflammations in the privy parts, which the Egyptians call by the name
of Sabbo; (...), and for that cause they were compelled to rest on the seventh
day, which afterward the called the Sabbath. Than which, what greater calumny
could a malicious Sycophant invent against them? Doubtless, those men that
speak so despicably and reproachfully of the Jewish Sabbath, had never any of
their own: Nor did the Greeks and Latins, and Egyptians only out of the
plenty, or the redundance rather of their wit, deride and scoff the Sabbaths
celebrated by those of Jewry; Cap. 1. v. 7.
it was a scorn that had before been fastened on them, when wit was not so
plentiful as in later times. For so the Prophet Jeremiah in his Lamentations
made on the death of King Josiah. The adversaries saw her, and did mock at her
Sabbaths. The Jews must needs be singular in this observation. All Nations
else, both Grecian and Barbarian, had never so agreed together to deride them
for it.

Yet we deny not all this while, but that the fourth Commandment, Gentiles, but
practiced by them. For they had statos dies, some appointed times appropriated
to the worship of their several gods, as before was showed; their holy days,
and half-holy-days, accordding to that estimation which their gods had gotten
in the world. And this as well to comfort and refresh their spirits, which
otherwise had been spent and wasted with continual labor, as to do service to
those Deities which they chiefly honored. Dii genus bominum laboribus natura
pressum miserati, De leg. l. 2.
remissionem laborum statuerunt solennia festa; was the resolution once of
Plato. But this concludes not any thing that they kept the Sabbath, or that
they were obliged to keep it, by the law of nature. And where it is conceived
by some that the Gentiles by the light of nature had their Weeks, Purch. Pilgr.
l. 1. c. 4.
which is supposed to be an argument that they kept the Sabbath, a week being
only of seven days, and commonly so called both in Greek and Latin: We on the
other side affirm, that by this very rule, the Gentilos, many of them, if not
the most, could observe no Sabbath, because they did observe no weeks. For
first the Caldees and the Persians had no weeks at all, but to the several days
of each several month, appropriated a particular name of some King or other,
Emend. temp. l. 3.
as the Peruvians do at this present time, and nomina diebus mensis indunt, ut
prisci Persae, as Scaliger has noted of them. The Grecians also did the like
in the times of old, there being an old Attick Calendar to be seen in Scaliger,
wherein is no division of the month into weeks at all. Then for the Romans,
they divided their account into eighths and eighths, as the Jews did by sevens
and sevens; the one reflecting on their nundinae, Id. l. 4.
as the other did upon their Sabbath. Ogdoas Romanorum in tributione dierum
servabatur propter nundinas, ut habdomas apud Judaeos propter sabbatum. For
proof of which there are some ancient Roman Calendars to be seen as yet, one in
the aforesaid Sealiger, the other in the Roman Antiquities of John Rossinus;
wherein the days are noted from A. to H, as in our common Almanacks from A to
G. The Mexicans go a little further, (...)
and they have 13 days to the week, as the same Scaliger has observed of them.
Nay, even the Jews themselves were ignorant of this division of the year into
weeks, as tostatus thinks, In Levit. 23. qu. 3.
till Moses learnt it of the Lord in the fall of Mannah. Nor were the Greeks
and Romans destitute of this account, only whiles they were rude and untrained
People, as the Peruvians and the Mexicans at this present time; but when they
were in their greatest flourish for Arts and Empire. Hist. l. 36.
Dion affirms it for the ancient Grecians, that they knew it not, (...), for
ought he could learn; Natural. 7.
and Seneca more punctually, that first they learnt the motions of the Planets
of Eudoxus, who brought that knowledge out of Egypt, and consequently could not
know the week before. And for the Romans, though they were well enough
acquained with the Planets in their latter times; yet they divided not their
Calendar into weeks, as now they do, till near about the time of Dionysius
Exiguus, who lived about the year of Christ, 520. Nor had they then received it
in all probability, had they not long before admitted Christianity throughout
their Empire, and therewithal the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, where the
accempt by weeks was exceeding obvious. Therefore according to this rule, the
Chaldees, Persians, Greeks, and Romans, all the four great Monarchies did
observe no Sabbaths, because they did observe no weeks. Which said in this
place once for all, we resolve it thus; that as the Israelites kept no Sabbath
before the Law, so neither did the Gentiles when the Law was given, which
proves it one of Moses Ordinances, no prescript of nature.

CHAP. V. The Practice of the Jews in such observances as were annexed unto the
Sabbath.
1. Of some particular adjuncts affixed unto the Jewish Sabbath. 2. The Annual
Festivals called Sabbaths in the Book of God, and reckoned as a part of the
fourth Commandment. 3. The Annual Sabbaths no less solemnly observed and
celebrated than the weekly were, if not more solemnly. 4. Of the Parasceue or
Preparation to the Sabbath and the solemn Festivals. 5. All manner of work as
well forbidden on the Annual as the weekly Sabbaths. 6. What things were lawful
to be done on the Sabbath days. 7. Touching the prohibitions of not kindling
fire, and not dressing meat. 8. What moved the Gentiles generally to charge the
Jews with Fasting on the Sabbath day. 9. Touching this Prohibition, Let no man
go out of his place on the Sabbath day. 10. All lawful recreations, as Dancing,
Feasting, Man-like Exercises, allowed and practiced by the Jews upon their
Sabbaths.


I Showed you in the former Chapter the institution of the Sabbath, quid
nominis, or derivation of the word, which Philo and Josephus, and the seventy
do often render by (...), repose or rest: Sabbath is used in Scripture to
signify some selected time by God himself deputed unto rest and holiness, Most
specially and (...), it pints out unto us the seventh day, as that which was
first honored with the name of Sabbath, Exodus 16.25. and in the second place
those other Festivals which were by God prescribed to the house of Israel, and
are called Sabbaths also, as the others were. Of these, the one was weekly, and
the other Annual; the New Mons not being honored with this title in the Book
of God, though in heathen Authors. The weekly Sabbath was that day precisely,
whereon God rested from the works that he had made, which he commanded to be
kept for a day of rest unto the Jews, that so they might the better meditate on
the wondrous works that he had done every seventh day exactly, in a continual
revolution from time to time. Therefore, says Damaseen, De side Ortbod. l. 4.
c. 24.
when we have reckoned to seven days, (...), our computation of the time runs
round, and begins anew. These as in general, and (...), as before I said, they
were called Sabbaths; so were there some of them that had particular adjuncts
whereby to know them from the rest; whereof the one was constant, and the other
casual. The constant adjunct is that of (...), or sabbatum secundo primum, as
the Latin renders it; mention whereof is made in Saint Lukes Gospel. Our
English reads it, on the second Sabbath after the first. Cap. 6.1.
A place and passage that much exercised men's wits in the former times, and
brought forth many strange conceits; until at last, this and the (...)
sophistarum, Casaub. Exerc. 14. n. 1.
and super fluvios manare fontes, came to be reckoned in a Proverb as
preposterous things. Scaliger has of late untied the knot, and resolved it
thus, Emend. Temp. lib. 6.
that all the Weeks or Sabbaths from Pasch to Pentecost, did take their name
(...), from the second day of the Feast of Passover; that being the Epoche, or
point of time, from which the fifty days were to be accounted by the Law: and
that the first Week or Sabbath after the said second day, was called (...), the
second, (...), the third, (...). and so the rest. According to which reckoning,
the second Sabbath after the first, as we translate it, must be the first
Sabbath, (...), from the second day of the Passcover. The casual adjunct is,
that sometimes there was a Sabbath that was called (...), the great Sabbath; or
as it is in Saint John's Gospel, (...), magnus ille dies Sabbati, Cap. 19.31.
as the Latin has it. And is so called not for its own sake, for Casaubon
has rightly noted; Exerc. 16. n. 31.
nunquam eam appellationem Sabbato tributam reperiri propter ipsum: But because
then, as many other times it did, the Passover did either fall, or else was
celebrated on a Sabbath. Even as in other cases, and at other times, when any
of the greater and more solemn Festivals did fall upon the Sabbath day, they
used to call it, Epist. 110. l. 3.
Sabbatum Sabba torum, a Sabbath of Sabbaths, (...), as Isidore Pelusiotes
notes it.

For that the Annual Feasts were called Sabbaths too, is most apparent in the
Scriptures, Levit. 23. where both the Passover, the Feast of Trumpets, the
Feast of Expiation, and the Feast of Tabernacles are severally entitled by the
name of Sabbaths. The Fathers also note the same, (...), says Saint
Chrysostom; and (...), says Isidore in the place before remembered. Hom. in
Math. 39.
Even the New Mons amongst the Gentiles had the same name also, as may appear
by that of Horace, who calls them in his Satyrs, Tricesima Sabbata, L. 1. Sat.
9.
because they were continually celebrated every thirtieth day. The like they
did by all the rest, if Joseph Scaligers note be true, as I think it is; who
has affirmed expressly, Emend. Temp. lib. 3.
Omnem festivitatem Judaicam non solum Judaeos sed and Gentiles sabbatum
vocare. Nay, as the weekly Sabbaths, some of them had their proper adjuncts; so
had the annual. Saint Athanasius tells us of the Feast of Expiation, that it
was (...), De Sabbat. and Circumcis.
or the principal Sabbath, for so I take it is his meaning; which self same
attribute is given by Origin to the Feast of Trumpets. Clemens of Alexandria 6.
Stromat. In Number. 28. hom. 23.
brings in a difference of those Festivals out of a supposed work of Saint
Peter the Apostle; wherein, besides the New Mons and Passover, which are
there so named, they are distributed into (...), or the first Sabbath, the
Feast (...), so called, and the Great day. Casaubon for his part protests,
Exer. 14. n. 1.
ipsi obscurum esse quid sit sabbatum primum, that he was yet to seek what
should the meaning be of that first Sabbath. But Scaliger conceives, and not
improbably, that by this first Sabbath, Emend. Temp. Prolog. Edit. 2.
of (...), was meant the Feast of Trumpets, because it was caput anni, or the
beginning of the civil year; the same which Origin calls Sabbatum sabbatorum,
as before we noted. As for the Feast, (...), so named in Clemens, that he
conceives to be the Feast of Pentecost; and the great day in him remembered, the
Feast of Tabernacles; for the which last, he has authority in the Scriptures,
who tell of the Great day of this very Feast, Joh. 7.37. Not that the Feast of
Tabernacles was alone so called, but in a more especial manner: Contr. Marcian.
For there were other days so named besides the Sabbaths. Dies observatis,
says Tertullian, and sabbata ut opinor, and coenas puras, and jejunia, and
dies magnos. Where sabbata and dies magni, are distinguished plainly. Indeed it
stood with reason that these annual Sabbaths should have the honor also of
particular adjuncts as the weekly had, being all founded upon one and the same
Commandment. Philo affirms it for the Jews. De Decalog.
(...), etc. The fourth Commandment, says he, is of the Sabbath, and the
Festivals of Vows, of Sacrifices, forms of purifying, and other parts of divine
worship. Which is made good by Zanchie for the Christian Writers, who in his
work upon the Decalogue does resolve it thus. In Mandat. 4.
Sabbati nomine ad Judaeos quod attinebat, Deus intellexit non solum sabbatum
septem dierum, sed sabbata etiam annorum, item omnia festa, quae per Mosen
illis explicavit. It was the moral part of the fourth Commandment that some
time should be set apart for Gods public service; and in the body of that Law
it is determined of that time, that it should be one day in seven. Yet not
exclusively, that there should be no other time appointed, either by God or by
his Church, than the seventh day only. God therefore added other times, as to
him seemed best, the list whereof we may behold in the twenty-third of
Leviticus; and the Church too by Gods example, added also some, as namely the
Feast of Dedication, and that of Purim.

Now as the Annual Festivals ordained by God, Exodus 31.16. So for the
Passover, you shall observe it throughout your Generations by an Ordinance for
ever, Exodus 12.14. The like of Pentecost, it shall be a statute for ever
throughout your Generations, Levit. 23.21. So also for the Feast of Expiation,
Levit. 23.31. And for the Feast of Tabernacles, Levit. 24.41. Where note, that
by these words for ever, and throughout their Generations, it is not to be
understood that these Jewish Festivals were to be perpetual, for then they
would oblige us now as they did the Jews; but that they were to last as long as
the Republic of the Jews should stand, and the Mosaical Ordinances were to be
in force. De bello. l. 6. cap. 6.
Per generationes vestras, i. e. quam diu Respub. Judaica constaret, as
Tostatus notes upon this twenty-third of Leviticus. For the solemnity of these
Feasts, the presence of the High Priests was as necessary in the one as in the
other. The High Priests also (says Josephus) ascended with the Priests into
the Temple, (...), and yet not always, but only on the Sabbaths and New Mons,
(...), as also on those other Feasts and solemn Assemblies which yearly were to
be observed according unto the custom of the Country. And hitherto we find no
difference at all; but in the manner of the rest, there appears a little
between the weekly Sabbath and some of the Annual. For of the weekly Sabbath it
is said expressly, that thou shall do no manner of work; Levit. 23.7, 21, 25, 36.
as on the other side of the Passover, the Pentecost, the Feast of Trumpets,
and of Tabernacles, that they shall do no servile work: which being well
examined, will be found the same in sense, though not in sound. But then again
for sense and sound, it is expressly said of the Expiation, that therein thou
shall do no manner of work, as was affirmed before of the weekly Sabbath. So
that besides the seventh day Sabbath, there were seven Sabbaths in the year; in
six of which, viz. the first and seventh of Unleavened bread, the day of
Pentecost, the Feast of Trumpets, and the first and eighth day of the Feast of
Tabernacles, they were to do no servile works; and on the Expiation day, no
work at all. So that in this respect, the weekly Sabbath, and the day of
Expiation were directly equal, according to the very letter. In other things
the day of Expiation seems to have pre-eminence: First, that upon this day
only, the high Priest, omnibus pontificalibus indumentis indutus, attired in
his Pontificals, might go into the Sanctum sanctorum, or the holiest of all, to
make atonement for the People; whereof see Levit. 16. And secondly, in that
the sacrifices for this day were more and greater than those appointed by the
Lord for the weekly Sabbaths; which last is also true of the other Festivals.
For where the sacrifice appointed for the weekly Sabbath, consisted only of two
Lambs, over and above the daily sacrifice, with a meat offering and a
drink offering thereunto proportioned; on the New Mons, and all the Annual
Sabbaths before remembered the sacrifices were enlarged, nay, more than trebled,
as is expressed in the 28 and 29 of the book of Numbers. Nay, if it happened any
time, as sometimes it did, that any of these Festivals did fall upon the weekly
Sabbath, or that two of them, as the New Mons and the Feast of Trumpets fell
upon the same: the service of the weekly Sabbath lessened not at all, the
sacrifices destinate to the Annual Sabbath; but they were all performed in
their several turns. Ap. Ainsworth. in Number. 28.
The Text it self affirms as much in the two Chapters before specified; and for
the practice of it, that so it was, it is apparent to be seen in the Hebrew
Calendars. Only the difference was this, as Rabbi Maimony informs us, that the
addition of the Sabbath was first performed; and after, the addition of the
New Mood, and then the addition of the Good day, or other Festival. So that in
case the weekly Sabbath had a privilege above the Annual, in that the
Shewbread or the loaves of proposition were only set before the Lord on the
weekly Sabbaths: the Annual Sabbaths seem to have had amends all of them in the
multiplicity of their sacrifices, and three of them in the great solemnity and
concourse of people; all Israel being bound to appear before the Lord on those
three great Festivals, the Passover, the Pentecost, and the Feast of
Tabernacles. As for the penalty inflicted on the breakers of these solemn
Festivals, it is expressly said of the weekly Sabbath, that whosoever does any
work therein, shall be put to death, Exodus 31.15. And in the Verse before, that
whosoever does any work therein, that soul shall be cut off (or as the Chaldee
Paraphrase reads it, that man shall be destroyed) from amongst his People. Whic
if it signify the same, as by the Chaldee Paraphrase it seems to do; it is no
more than what is elsewhere said of the Expiation, for so says the Text. And
whatsoever soul it be that does any work in that same day, Levit. 23.30.
that soul will I destroy from amongst his People. But if the phrase be
different, as the Rabbis say, the difference is no more than this, that they
that break the weekly Sabbath, are to be put to death by the Civil Magistrate;
and they that work upon the Feast of Expiation shall be cut off by God by
untimely deaths. As for the other Annual Sabbaths, the rabbis have determined
thus, Ap. Ainsworth. in Levit. 23.7.
That whosoever does in any of them such works as are not necessary for food,
as if he build or pull down, or weave, and the like, he breaks a Commandment,
and transgresses against this prohibition, Ye shall not do any servile work;
and if he do, and there be Witnesses and evident proof, he is by law to be
beaten or scourged for it. So that we see, that whether we regard the
institution or continuance of these several Sabbaths, or the solemnities of the
same, either in reference to the Priests, the Sacrifices, and concourse of
People, or finally the punishment inflicted on the breakers of them; the
difference is so little, it is scarce remarkable, considering especially, that
if the weekly Sabbaths do gain in one point, they lose as often in another. For
the particulars we shall speak of them hereafter, as occasion is.

As for the time when they began their Sabbaths, and when they ended them, Lev.
23.27. yet so that it is ordered thus in the 31. It shall be unto you a Sabbath
of rest, and ye shall afflict your souls on the ninth day of the month, at
even. And then it follows, From even to even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath.
But in the Practice of the Jews, it was so in all, either because they took
those words for a general precept, or else because they commonly did account
their day from even to even. For where the Romans and Egyptians began the day
at midnight; ^mend. Temp. l. 1.
the Chaldees and the Persians with the rising Sun; and the Vmbri, an Italian
People, reckoned theirs from noon to noon; the Jews and the athenians took the
beginning of their day, ab occasu solis, from Sunsetting, as Scaliger and
diverse others have observed. Yet sure I am, Honorius Augustodunensis, De
imagine mundi, l. 2.
who lived four hundred years ago and upwards, places the Jews together with
the Persians and Chaldeans, as men that do begin their day at the Sunrising.
However in this case it is not to be thought that the Even was any part of the
Sabbath following, (for the additional sacrifices were offered only on the
Morning and the Evening of the several Sabbaths) but a (...), or preparation
thereunto; which preparation, if it were before the weekly Sabbath, it was
called (...); if before any of the Annual, it was called (...). In imitation of
the Gentiles, the Latin Writers call these Parasceve's or Evens of preparation
by the name of Coena pura, as Augustine notes upon the nineteenth of S. John,
because of some resemblance that was between them; but yet they had a
difference too. Exer. 16. n. 100.
For Casaubon has taught us this, that in the Coena pura amongst the Gentiles,
a part of the ceremony did consist in the choice of meats, where no such thing
occurs at all in these preparations of the Jews. Now these Parasceves, or
preparation days the Jews did afterward divide into these four parts. The first
was (...), a preparative, as it were, to the preparation which began in the
morning, and held on till noon. The second was (...), largely taken, from Noon
until the Evening-sacrifice of the day: The third, (...), or the approaching of
the Sabbath, which began after the Evening sacrifice, continued till Sunset,
and was properly called the (...), the fourth was the (...), or entrance of the
Sabbath, which lasted from Sunset unto the dawning of the day. They had
amongst them a tradition, or a custom rather, that on the whole day, from the
(...), till Sunset, they might not travel above twelve miles, lest coming home
too late, they might not have sufficient leisure to prepare things before the
Sabbath. Synag. Jud. c. 10.
The time was, as Buxdorfius tells us, quo cornu vel inflata tuba daretur
signum, when there was public warning given by sound of Trumpet, that every
man should cease from work, and make all things ready for the Sabbath; though
in these days the Clerk or Sexton goes about from door to door to give notice
of it. De Bello l. 5. c. 9.
The time was so indeed, so Josephus tells us, that in Jerusalem, one of the
Priests continually standing upon a Pillar, (...), made known upon the even
before by sound of Trumpet, which time the Sabbath did begin; and on the
Evening of the Sabbath, at which time it ended; that so the People might be
certified both at what time to rest from labor, and at what time they might
again apply their minds and hands unto it. Now what Josephus says of the
weekly Sabbath, the same was done, says Philo, in the New Mons also; (...),
which is much alike. Number. 10.10.
And consequently we may say the same of the Annual Sabbaths, in which the Sons
of Aaron were to blow the Trumpets, as well as in the New Mons or the weekly
Sabbaths. As for the works prohibited or permitted on these days of
preparation, whether before the weekly or the Anntal Sabbaths, I find little
difference. This I am sure of, that it was as much unlawful for the Judges to
sit on any Capital crimes the day before the Annual Sabbath as before the
weekly; and the reason was, because the morrow after, of which sort soever, was
though to be no fit day for Execution. Ap. Casaub. Exc. 1. n. 20.
Judices rerum Capitalium non judicant in parasceve Sabbati, aut in parasceve
diei festi, quia non debet id fieri; and reus occidi postridie non potest. So
says Rabbi Maimony. Of the ridiculous nicety of the modern Jews in these
Paraseeves, we shall speak hereafter.

To come unto the day it self, thou shall do no manner of work. What, no work
at all? How could they eat and drink, and put on their clothes? These are some
manner of works, yet done every Sabbath; yea, by the Pharisees themselves, In
Matthew. 12.
which were most strict observers of the weekly Sabbaths. Quis Pharisaeorum,
says Saint Hierom, in die sabbati non extendit manum, portans cibum, porrigens
calicem, and caetera quae victui sunt necessaria; yet all these were works. How
could they Circumcise, and offer Sacrifice, and set on the Shewbread on the
Sabbath? Surely all these are works too, some of them very troublesome, yet
commonly performed on the weekly Sabbaths; of which more anon. Therefore when
all is done, we must expound these words of ordinary and servile labors, such
as are toilsome in themselves, and aim at profit. In Mandat. 4.
Zanchie, I am sure, does expound them so. Nomen operis quod hic habet Moses,
non significat opus simplicitur, sed opus quod propter opes comparandas
suscipitur: Tale autem opus est vere servile. In Esa. 58.13.
Saint Hierom also expounds it, Lege preceptum est ne in sabbatis opus servile
faciamus, etc. We are commanded in the Law to do no servile works on the
Sabbath days. And on the fifth of Amos he affirms the same; jubet ne quid in eo
operis servilis fiat, etc. And so Tertullian; Nec dubium est eos opus servile
operatos, etc. in his second book against Marcion. If so, there is no
difference at all between the weekly and the Annual Sabbaths in this one
particular, because all servile works expressly are forbidden in them also, as
before we showed. But take it in the very words, no manner of work; and ask the
Hebrew Doctors what they mean thereby. They will then tell you first, there
must be no marketting, no not buying of Victuals; for which they cite the 13 of
Nehemiah, verse 16, 17. nor no Embalming of the Dead, in which they vouch Saint
Lukes Gospel, Chap. 27. v. 54, 56. This we acknowledge for a truth; but then we
say withal, that neither of these two were lawful on the Annual Sabbaths. For
when it happened any time, as sometimes it did, that a weekly Sabbath and an
Annual Sabbath came next days together, the Jews did commonly in their later
times put off the Annual Sabbath to a farther day. And this they did, as
themselves tell us, because of burials, and of meats which were fit for eating,
lest by deferring either the one or the other, the carcasses should putrify,
and the meats be spoiled. Ap. Casaub. Exerc. 10. n. 20.
Non facimus duo sahbata continua, propter olera, and propter mortuos, ut
Rabbini dictitant. Which need not be, in case they held it lawful either to
bury or to buy on the Annual Sabbaths. They tell us next that the Jews could
not travel on the weekly Sabbath, and this from Exodus 16.29. Whether that Text
were so intended, we shall see anon. But sure I am, that when the Jews began to
reckon it an unlawful matter to travel on the weekly Sabbath; they held it
altogether as unlawful to travel on the Annual Sabbath. Joseph. Antiq. l. 13.
c. 16.
Nic. Damascen reports ( as Josephus tells us) how that Antiochus the great
King of Syria erected a Trophee near the flood Lycus, and abode there awodays
at the request of Hyrcanus the King of Jewry, by reason of a solemn Feast at
that time, whereon it was not lawful for the Jews to travel. In which he was no
wise mistaken. For ( says Josephus) the Feast of Pentecost was that year the
morrow after the Sabbath ( for at that troublesome time the Pentecost was not
deferred) what then? It follows, (...), and unto us it is not lawful, either
upon our Sabbaths or our Feasts to journey any whither. They tell us also, that
it is not lawful to execute a Malefactor on the weekly Sabbath, although it be
commanded that he must be punished; nor do they do it on the Feasts or Annual
Sabbaths, as before we noted. As also that it is not lawful to Marry on the
Sabbath day, nor on the Even before the Sabbath, nor the morrow after, lest
they pollute the Sabbath by dressing meat for the Feast: and on the solemn
Festivals, or the Annual Sabbaths they were not suffered to be Married, lest
(say the Rabbis) the joy of the Festival be forgotten through the joy of the
Wedding. Ap. Ainsw. in Levit. 23.
The many other trifling matters which have been prohibited by the Jewish
Doctors, and are now practiced by that senseless and besotted People, shall
somewhere be presented to you toward the end of this first Book.

Again, Rabbi Simeon, Pet. Galatin. l. 11. c. 10.
propter puerum unius diei vivum, solvunt sabbatum; to save a Child alive we
may break the Sabbath. This Child being born, must needs be Circumcised on the
eighth day after, which is the Sabbath: May not the Ministers do their office?
yes, for the Rabbis have a maxim that Circumcisio pellit sabbatum. And what?
Does only Circumcision drive away the Sabbath? No, any common danger does it:
And then they change the phrase a little, and periculum mortis pellit sabbatum.
Nay more, the Priest that waits at the Altar, does he do no work upon the
Sabbath? Yes, more than on the other days, and for that too they have a maxim,
viz. qui observari jussit sabbatum, Ap. Casaub. Exer. 16. n. 20.
is profanari jussit sabbatum. We shall meet with some of these again
hereafter. Therefore we must expound these words, no manner of work, i.e. no
kind of servile work, as before we did; or else the weekly Sabbath and the
fourth Commandment must be a nose of wax, and a Lesbian rule, fit only to be
wrested and applied to whatsoever end and purpose it shall please the Rabbis.
More warily and more soundly have the Christian Doctors, yea, and the very
Heathens determined of it; who judge that all such corporal labors as tend
unto the moral part of the fourth command, which are Rest and Sanctity, are fit
and lawful to be done on the Sabbath day. That men should rest upon such times
as are designed and set apart for Gods public service, and leave their daily
labors till some other season, the Gentiles knew full well by the light of
nature. Mac^ob. Sat: l. 1. c. 16.
Therefore the Flamines were to take especial care ne feriis opus fieret, that
no work should be done on the solemn days, and to make it known by
Proclamation, ne quid tale ageretur, that no man should presume to do it. Which
done, if any one offended, he was forthwith mulcted; yet was not this enjoined
so strictly that no work was permitted in what case soever. All things which
did concern the Gods, and their public worship, vel ad urgentem vitae
utilitatem respicerent, or were important any way to man's life and welfare,
were accounted lawful. More punctually Scevola, being then chief Pontifex. Who
being demanded what was lawful to be done on the Holy Days, made answer, quod
praetermissum noceret, which would miscarry if it were left undone. He
therefore that did underprop a ruinous building, or raise the Cattle that was
fallen into the ditch, did not break the Holy Day in his opinion. No more did
he that washed his Sheep, si hoc remedii cause fieret, were it not done to
cleanse the Wool and make it ready for the Shearers, but only for the cure of
some sore or other; according unto that of Virgil, Balantumque gregem fluvio
mersare salubri. Georgie.
Thus far the Gentiles have resolved it, agreeably to the Law of nature; and so
far do the Christian Doctors, yea, and our Lord and Savior determine of it.
The corporal labors of the Priest on the Sabbath day, as far as it concerns
Gods service, were accounted lawful: The Priests in the Temple break the
Sabbath, and yet were blameless. So was the corporal labor of a man, either to
save his own life or preserve another: Christ justified his Disciples for
gathering Corn upon the Sabbath, being then an hungered, Matthew. 12. v. 1.3. and
restored many unto health on the Sabbath day, Matthew. 12.13. and in other
places. Finally, corporal labors to preserve Gods Creatures, as to draw the
Sheep out of the Pit, Matthew. 12.11. and consequently to save their Cattle from
the Thief, a ruinous house from being over-blown by tempest, their Corn and Hay
also from a sudden Inundation; these and the like to these were all judged
lawful on the Sabbath. And thus you see the practice of the Gentiles governed
by the light of nature, is every way conformable to our Saviors doctrine, and
the best Comment also on the fourth Commandment, as far as it contains the law
of natue.

For such particular Ordinances which have been severally affixed to the fourth
Commandment, Verse. 12.
is that Prohibition in the 35 of Exodus, viz. Ye shall kindle no fire
throughout your habitations on the Sabbath day. The Rabbis, some of them,
conceive that hereby is meant that no man must be beaten, or put to death upon
the Sabbath; and then it must be thus expounded, Ye shall kindle no fire, i. e.
to burn a man upon the Sabbath, who is condemned by the Law to that kind of
death; and consequently not to put him on that day unto any punishment at all.
Others of late refer that prohibition unto the building of the Tabernacle, in
that Chapter mentioned; and then the meaning will be this, that they should
make no fire on the Sabbath, no, though it were to hasten on the work of the
holy Tabernacle. Philo restrains it chiefly ^^to manual Trades, (...), such
whereby men do get their livings: And then it must be thus interpreted, Ye
shall not kindle any sire that is, to do any common ordinary and servile works,
like as do common Bakers, Smiths, and Brewers, De vit. Mos. l. 3.
by making it part of their usual trade. The later Rabbis, almost all, and
many Christian Writers also taking the hint from Vatablus and Tremelius it
their Annotations, refer it unto dressing of Meat, according to the latter
custom. Nay, generally the Jews in the latter times were more severe and rigid
in the exposition of that Text, Tostat. in Josua, c. q. 2.
and would allow no fire at all, except in sacred matters only. For whereas
Rabbi Aben Ezra had so expounded it, quod liceat ignem accendere ad
caiefaciendum siurgeret srigus, that it was lawful to make a fire wherewith to
warm ones self in the extremity of cold weather, though not to dress meat with
it for that days expense; the Rabbis generally would have proceeded against
him as an Heretic, and purposely writ a Book in contutation of him which they
called the Sabbath. How this interpretation was thus generally received, I
cannot say. But I am verily persuaded that it was not so in the beginning;
Exodus 16.23.
and that those words of Moses, quae coquenda sunt, hodie coquite, bake that
which ye will bake to day, and sees what ye will sees; which words are
commonly produced to justify and confirm this fancy, do prove quite contrary
to what some would have them. The Text and Context both make it plain and
manifest that the Jews baked their Mannah on the Sabbath day. The People on the
sixth day had gathered twice as much as they used to do, whereof the Rulers of
the Congregation acquainted Moses. And Moses said, to morrow is the rest of the
holy Sabbath unto the Lord; bake that which ye will bake to day, and sees what
ye will sees, and that which remains over, lay up to be kept until the
morning. i.e. As much as you conceive will be sufficient for this present day,
that bake or boil, according as you use to do; and for the rest, let it be laid
by to be baked or boiled to morrow, that you may have wherewith to feed you, on
the Sabbath day. That this interpretation is most true and proper, appears by
that which follows in the holy Scripture, Verse. 24.
viz. They laid it up as Moses bade, and it did not stink, neither was any worm
therein; as that which they had kept till morning, on some day before, Verse
20. This makes it evident that the Mannah was laid up unbaked; for otherwise
what wonder had it been at all, that it did neither breed worm, nor stink, had
it been baked the day before. Things of that nature so preserved, are far
enough from putrefying in so short a time. This, I am verily persuaded was the
practice then; and for this light unto that practice, I must ingenuously
confess my self obliged to Theophilus Braborn, the first that ever looked so
near into Moses meaning. Chap. 4.
And this most likely was the practice of the Jews in after times, even till
the Phartsees had almost made the words of God of no effect, by their
traditions; for then came in those many rigid Ordinances about this day, which
made the day and them ridiculous unto all the Heathens. Sure I am that the
Scriptures call it a day of gladness, for it was a Festival, and therefore
probable it is that they had good cheer. 2 Edit. p. 137.138.
And I am sure that Dr. Bound, the founder of these Sabbatarian fancies, though
he conceive that dressing meat upon the Sabbath, was by the words of Moses
utterly unlawful in the time of Mannah; yet he conceives withal, that that
Commandment was proper only unto the time of Mannah in the Wilderness, and so
to be restrained unto that time only. Therefore, by his confession, the Jews
for after times might as well dress their meat on the Sabbath day, as on any
other: notwithstanding this Injurction of not kindling fire. Indeed why not as
well dress meat, as serve it in: the attendance of the servant at his Masters
Table, being no less considerable on the Sabbath day, than of the Cooks about
the Kitchen: especially in those riotous and excessive Feasts, which the Jews
kept upon this day, however probably they might dress their meat on the day
before.

I say those riotons and excessive Feasts, which the Jews kept upon that day,
Augustine tells us of them they kept the Sabbath, only ad luxuriam and
ebrietatem; and that they rested only ad nugas and luxurias sitas; that they
consumed the day, languido and luxurioso otio; T^ast. 3. in Joh. De 10. chordis
c. 3. In Psalm 91. In Psalm 32. Sympos. Isiac. l. 4.
and finally did abuse the same, not only deliciis Judacis, but ad nequitiam,
even to sin and naughtiness. Put all together, and we have luxury, and
drunkenness, and sports and pleasures enough to manifest that they spared not
any Dainties to set forth their Sabbath, though on a Pharisaical prohibition
they forbear to dress their meats upon it. Nay, Plutarch lays it to their
charge, that they did feast it on their Sabbath, with no small excess, but of
Wine especially. Who thereupon conjectureth, that the name of Sabbath had its
original from the Orgies or Feasts of Bacchus; whose Priests used often to
ingeminate the word Sabbi, Sabbi, in their drunken Ceremonies. Which being so,
it is the more to be admired, that generally the Romans did upbraid this
peopled with their Sabbaths fast. Augustus having been at the Bathes, and
fasting there a long time together; Sueton. in Octav. c. 76.
gives notice of it to Tiberius, thus: ne Judaeus quidem tam diligenter
sabbatis Jejunium servat, that never any Jew had fasted more exactly on the
Sabbaths than he did that day. So Martial reckoning up some things of unsavory
smell, names amongst others, jejunia sabbatriorum; for by that name he did
contemptuously mean the Jews, as before I noted. And where the Romans in those
times, began, some of them, to incline to the Jewish Ceremonies, and were
observant of the Sabbath, as we shall see hereaster in a place more proper:
Persius objects against them this, labra monent taciti, Sat. 5.
recutitaque sabbata pallent. i.e. that being Romans as they were, they
muttered out their Prayers as the Jews accustomed, and by observing of the Fast
on the Jewish Sabbaths, grew lean and pale for very hunger. So says Petronius
Arbiter, that the Jews did celebrate their Sabbath, jejunia lege, by a legal
Fast: and Justin yet more generally, Hist. l. 36.
septimum diem more gentis sabbatum appellatum in omne aevum jejunio sacravit,
Moses, that Moses did ordain the Sabbath to be a fasting day for ever. That the
Jews fasted very often, sometimes twice a week, the Pharisee has told us in
Saint Lukes Gospel: and probably the jejunia sabbatariorum in the Poet Martial,
might reflect on this. But that they fasted on the Sabbath is a thing repugnant
both to the Scriptures, Fathers, and all good antiquity: except in one case
only, which was when their City was besieged, as Rabbi Moses Egyptius has
resolved it. Nay, if a man had fasted any time upon the Sabbath, they used to
punish him in his sort, ut sequenti etiam die jejunaret, Ap. Baron. A. 34. n.
156.
to make him fast the next day after. Yet on the other side, I cannot but
conceive that those before remembered, had some ground or reason, why they did
charge the Jews with the Sabbaths Fast: for to suppose them ignorant of the
Jewish custom, considering how thick they lived amongst them, even in Rome it
self, were a strange opinion. The rather since by Plutarch, who lived not long
after Sueton, if he lived not with him; the Jews are generally accused for too
much riot and excess upon that day. For my part, I conceive it thus. I find in
Nehemiah, that when the people were returned from the Captivity, Ezra the
Priest brought forth the Law before the Congregation, Cap. 8.2, 3.
and read it to them from the morning until midday: which done, they were
dismissed by Nehemiah to eat, and drink, and make great joy; which they did
accordingly. Verse 10, 12.
This was upon the first day of the Feast of Tabernacles, one of the solemn
Annual Sabbaths: and this they did for eight days together, Verse 18.
from the first day unto the last that the Feast continued. After when as the
Church was settled, and that the Law was read amongst them in their Synagogues
on the weekly Sabbaths, most probable it is, that they continued the same
custom; holding the Congregation from morn to noon: and that the Jews came
thither Fasting, (as generally men do now unto the Sacrament) the better to
prepare themselves and their attention for that holy Exercise. Sure I am that
Josephus tells us, In vit. sua.
that at midday they used to dismiss the Assemblies, that being the ordinary
hour for their repast: as also that Buxtorfius says of the modern Jews, that
ultra tempus meridianum jejunare non licet, Syn. Jud. c. 10.
it is not lawful for them to fast beyond the noontide on the Sabbath days.
Besides they which found so great fault with our Lords Disciples for eating a
few ears of Corn on the Sabbath day, are not unlikely, in my mind to have aimed
at this. For neither was the bodily labor of that nature, that it should any
ways offend them, in so high a measure: and the defense made by our Lord in
their behalf, being that of David's eating of the Shewbread, when he was an
hungered; is more direct and literal to justify his Disciples eating, than it
was their working. This abstinence of the Jews, that lived amongst them; the
Romans noted; and being good Trenchermen themselves at all times and seasons,
they used to hit them in the Teeth with their Sabbaths fasting. But herein I
submit my self to better judgments.

There was another Prohibiton given by God about the Sabbath, kindling fire, and
dressing meat upon the Sabbath: viz. Let no man go out of his place on the
seventh day. Which Prohibition, being a Bridle only unto the people, to keep
them in, from seeking after Mannah, as before they did, upon the Sabbath, was
afterward extended to restrain them also, either from taking any Journey, or
walking forth into the Fields, on the Sabbath days. Nay, so precise were some
amongst them, that they accounted it unlawful to stir hand or foot upon the
Sabbath: ne leviter quispiam se commoveat, In Isa. 58.13.
quod si fecerit, legis transgressor sit, as St. Hierom has it. Others more
charitably, chalked them out a way, how far they might adventure, and how far
they might not: though in this the Doctors were divided. Some made the Sabbath
days journey to be 2000 Cubits, (...). Ep. 151.
of whom Origin tells us: others restrained it to 2000 foot; of whom Hierom
speaks; and some again enlarged it unto six surlongs, which is three quarters
of a mile. For where Josephus has informed us that Mount Olivet was six
furlongs from Jerusalem; and where the Scriptures tell us, that they were
distant about a Sabbath days journey: we may perceive by that, how much a
Sabbath days journey was accounted then. But of these things we may have
opportunity to speak hereafter. In the mean time, if the Injunction be so
absolute and general, as they say it is, we may demand of these great Clerks,
as their Successors did of our Lord and Savior; by what authority they do
these things, and warrant that which is not warranted in the Text: if so the
Text be to be expounded. Certain I am that ab initio non fuit sic, from the
beginning was it neither so, nor so. The Scripture tells us, that when the
people were in the Wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks on the Sabbath
day. They found him, where? Not in the Camp; he was not so audacious as to
transgress the Law in the open view of all the people: knowing how great a
penalty was appointed for the Sabbath-breaker: but in some place far off,
wherein he might offend without fear or danger. Therefore the people were
permitted to walk forth, on the Sabbath day; and to walk further than 2000
soot, or 2000 Cubits: otherwise they had never found out this unlucky fellow.
And so says Philo, De vita Mosis. l. 3.
that they did. (...) etc. Some of the people going out into the Wilderness,
that they might find some quiet and retired place, in which to make their
Prayers to God; saw what they looked not for, that wretched and prohibited
spectacle. So that the people were not stinted in their goings on the Sabbath
day, nor now, nor in a long time after: as by the course of the ensuing story
will at large appear. Even in the time of Mannah, they did not think themselves
obliged not to stir abroad upon the Sabbath, or not to travail above such and
such a compass: in case they did it not, out of a mere dstrust in God, as
before they did, to gather Mannah, but either for their Meditation, or their
Recreation.

What said I for their Recreation? all manner of work; yet it permitted,
questionless, some manner of Pleasures. The Sabbaths rest had otherwise been
more toilsom, than the weekdays labor: and none had gained more by it, than
the Ox and Ass. Yea this Injunction last related, Let none go out of his place
on the seventh day, had been a greater bondage to that wretched people, than
all the drudgeries of Egypt. Tostatus tells us on that Text, non est
simpliciter intelligendum, etc. It is not so to be conceived, that on that day
the people might not stir abroad, or go out of their doors at all; but that
they might not go to labor, or traffic about any worldly businesses. Etenim
die sabbati ambulari possunt Hebraei ad solaciandum, etc. For the Jews lawfully
might walk forth on the Sabbath day, to recreate and refresh themselves, so it
be not in pursuit of profit. Cap. 10.
And this he says, on the confession of the Jews themselves, ut ipsi
communiter confitentur. Buxtorfius, in his Jewish Synagogue, informs us
further. Permissum est juvenibus ut tempore sabbati, currendo, spatiando,
saltando sese oblectent, etc. It is, says he, permitted, that their young men
may walk, and run, yea and Dance also on the Sabbath day, and leap and jump,
and use other manlike Exercises: in case they do it for the honor of the holy
Sabbath. This speaks he of the modern Jews, men as tenacious of their Sabbath,
and the rigours of it, as any of the Ancients were: save that the Essees and
the Pharisees had their private flings above the meaning of the Law. Of manly
Exercises on the Sabbath, we shall see more anon in the seventh Chapter. And as
for Dancing, that they used anciently to Dance upon the Sabbath, is a thing
unquestionable. Saint Augustine says, they used it, and rebukes them for it:
not that they danced upon the Sabbath, but that they spent and wasted the whole
day in dancing. There is, no question, an abuse even of lawful pleasures. And
this is that which he so often lays unto them. Melius tota die soderent, quam
tota die saltarent: In Psalm. 32.
better the men did dig all day, than dance all day. And for the Women, melius
eorum foeminae lanam facerent, quam illo die [and] in neomeniis saltarent:
Tract. 3. in Joh. 1.
better the Women spin, than waste all that day and the New Mons in dancing,
as they use to do. I have translated it all that day, agreeable unto the
Fathers words in another place; where it is said expressly in tota die. De december
chordis, c. 3.
Melius foeminae eorum die sabbati lanas facerent, quam tota die [and] in
neomeniis suis impudice saltarent. Where note, not dancing simply, but
lascivious dancing; and dancing all day long without respect to pious and
religious Duties; are by him disliked. Ignatius also says the same, Ad
Magnesianos.
where he exhorts the people not to observe the Sabbath in a Jewish fashion:
walking a limited space, and setting all their mind, (...), as they did in
dancing, and in capering. They used also on that day to make invitations,
Feasts, and assemblies of good neighborhood; to foster Brotherly love and
concord amongst one another: a thing, even by the Pharisees themselves both
allowed and practiced. Luke 14.1.
Saint Luke has given an instance of it, how Christ went into the house of a
chief Pharisee to eat Bread on the Sabbath day: In plainer terms the Pharisees
invited him that day to Dinner. We may assure our selves so famous a Professor
had not invited so great a Prophet; nor had our Savior Christ accepted of the
invitation: had they not both esteemed it a lawful matter. It seems it was a
common practice for friends to meet and feast together on the Sabbath. Finito
cultu Dei solebant amici convenire, Harmon. c. 119.
and inter se convivia agitare, as Chemnitius notes upon the place. Lastly,
they used upon this day, as to invite their Friends and Neighbors, so to make
them welcome: oynting their Heads with Oil to refresh their Bodies; and spending
store of Wine amongst them, to make glad their hearts. In which regard, whereas
all other marketting was unlawful on the Sabbath days; there never was
restraint of selling Wine: the Jews believed that therein they brake no
Commandment. Hebraei faciunt aliquid speciale in vino, In Exodus 12.
viz. quod cum in sabbato suo a caeteris venditionibus and emptionibus cessent,
solum vlnum vendunt; credentes se non solvere sabbatum, as Tostatus has it,
How they abused this lawful custom of Feasting with their Friends and
Neighbors on the Sabbath day, into foul riot and excess; we have seen already.
So having spoken of the weekly and the Annual Sabbaths, the difference and
agreement which was between them, both in the Institution, and the Observation:
as also of such several observances as were annexed unto the same; what things
the Jews accounted lawful to be done, and what unlawful, and how far they
declared the same in their constant practice: it is high time that we continue
on the story, ranking such special passages as occur hereafter, in their place
and order.

CHAP. VI. Touching the observation of the SABBATH, unto the time the people
were established in the Promised Land.
1. The Sabbath not kept constantly during the time the people wandered in the
Wilderness. 2. Of him that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day. 3. Wherein the
sanctifying of the Sabbath did consist, in the time of Moses. 4. The Law not
ordered to be read in the Congregation every Sabbath day. 5. The sack of
Hiericho and the destruction of that people was upon the Sabbath. 6. No
Sabbath, after this, without Circumcision; and how that Ceremony could consist
with the Sabbaths rest. 7. What moved the Jews, to prefer Circumcision before
the Sabbath. 8. The standing still of the Sun, at the prayers of Josuah, etc.
could not but make some alteration about the Sabbath. 9. What was the Priests
work on the Sabbath day; and whether it might stand with the Sabbaths rest. 10.
The scattering of the Levites over all the Tribes, had no relation unto the
reading of the Law on the Sabbaths-days.


WE left this people in the Wilderness, Jewish Doctors, and by the Christian.
Some have resolved it negatively, that it was not kept in all that time, which
was forty years: and others, that it was at some times omitted, according to
the stations or removes of Israel; or other great and weighty businesses, which
might intermit it. It is affirmed by Rabbi Solomon, that there was only one
Passover observed, whiles they continued in the Deserts: notwithstanding that
it was the principal solemnity of all the year. Et si illud fuit omissum, multo
fortius alia minus principalia. If that, says he, then by an argument a majore
ad minus, much rather were the lesser Festivals omitted also. More punctually
Rabbi Eleazar, Ap. Galation. l. 11. c. 10.
who on those words of Exodus, and the people rested the seventh day, Chap.
16.30, gives us to understand, that for the space of forty years, whilst they
were in the wilderness, non fecerunt nisi duntaxat primum sabbatum, they kept
no more than that first Sabbath. Chap. 5.25.
According unto that of the Prophet Amos, Have ye offered unto me sacrifices
and offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel? On which
authority, Aretius for the Christian Doctors does affirm the same: Probl. lo^.
55.
Sabbata per annos 40. non observavit in deserto populus Dei, Amos 5.25. The
argument may be yet enforced by one more particular, that Circumcision was
omitted for all that while, and yet it had precedence of the Sabbath, both in
the institution for the times before; and in the observation, for the times
that followed. If therefore neither Circumcision, nor the daily sacrifices, nor
the Feast of Passover, being the principal of the Annual Sabbaths, were
observed by them till they came to the Land of Canaan: why may not one conclude
the same of the weekly Sabbaths? Others conceive not so, directly; but that it
was omitted at some times, and on some occasions. Omitted at some times, as
when the people journied in the Wilderness many days together, In Exodus 12.
nulla requie aliquorum dierum habita, without rest or ceasing: and this the
Hebrew Doctors willingly confess, as Tostatus tells us. Omitted too on some
occasions, as when the Spies were sent to discover the Land, what was the
strength thereof, and what the riches; in which discovery they spent forty
days: it is not to be thought that they kept the Sabbath. It was a perilous
work that they went about, not to be discontinued and laid by so often, as
there were Sabbaths in that time. But not to stand upon conjectures, the Jewish
Doctors say expressly, Lib. 11. c. 10.
that they did not keep it. So Galatine reports from their own Records, that in
their latter exposition on the Book of Numbers, upon those words, send men that
they may search the land of Canaan; Chap. 13.2.
they thus resolve it, Nuncio praecepti licitum est, etc. A Messenger that goes
upon Command, may travail any day, at what time be will. And why? because he is
a Messenger upon Command. Nuncius autem praecepti excludit sabbatum. The phrase
is somewhat dark, but the meaning plain: that those which went upon that Errand,
did not keep the Sabbath. Certain it also is, that for all that time, no nor
for any part thereof, the people did not keep the Sabbath, completely as the
Law appointed. For where there were two things concurring to make up the
Sabbath, first, rest from labor, and secondly, the sacrifices destinate unto
the day: however they might rest some Sabbaths from their daily labors; yet
sacrifices they had none until they came into the Land of Canaan.

Now that they rested, Sabbath day, and perhaps did so, generally, in those
forty years, is manifest by that great and memorable Business, touching the man
that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath. The case is briefly this: the people
being in the Wilderness, Numb. 15. Verse 32. ad 37.
found a man gathering sticks on the Sabbath day, and brought him presently
unto Moses. Moses consulted with the Lord, and it was resolved that the
offender should be stoned to death, which was done accordingly. The Law before
had ordered it, that he who so offended should be put to death; but the
particular manner of his death was not known till now. The more remarkable is
this case, because it was the only time that we can hear of, that execution had
been done upon any one, according as the Law enacted: and thereupon the Fathers
have took some pains, to search into the reasons of so great severity. De vit.
Mos. l. 3.
Philo accuses him of a double crime, in one whereof he was the principal, and
an Accessory only in the other. For where it was before commanded, that there
should be no fire kindled on the Sabbath day: this party did not only labor on
the day of rest; but also labored in the gathering of such materials, (...),
which might administer fuel to prohibited fire. Saint Basil seems a little to
bemoan the man, De judicio Dei.
in that he smarted so for his first offense; not having otherwise offended
either God or Man: and makes the motive of his death, neither to consist in the
multitude of his sins, or the greatness of them, (...) but only in his
disobedience to the will of God. But we must have a more particular motive yet
than this. And first Rupertus tells us, per superbiam illud quod videbatur
exiguum commisit, In locum.
that he did sin presumptuously with an high hand against the Lord: and
therefore God decreed he should die the death: God not regarding either what or
how great it was, sed qua mente fecerat, but with what mind it was committed.
But this is more, I think, than Rupertus knew, being no searcher of the heart.
Rather I shall subscribe herein unto Saint Chrysostom. Who makes this Quaere
first, Hom. 39. in Matthew. 12.
seeing the Sabbath, as Christ says, was made for man, why was he put to death
that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath? And then returns this answer to his own
demand, (...), etc. because, in case God had permitted that the Law should have
been slighted in the first beginning, none would have kept it for the future.
Theodoret to that purpose also, ne author fieret leges transgrediendi, Qu. 31.
in Number.
lest other men encouraged by his example should have done the like: the
punishment of this one man, striking a terror unto all. No question but it
made the people far more observant of the Sabbath, than they would have been:
who were at first but backwards in the keeping of it, as is apparent by that
passage in the sixteenth of Exodus v. 27. And therefore stood the more in need,
not only of a watchword or Memento, even in the very front of the Law it self;
but of some sharper course to stir up their memory. Therefore this execution
was the more requisite at this instant, as well because the Jews by reason of
their long abode in a place of continual servile toil, could not be suddenly
drawn unto contrary offices without some strong impression of terror: as also
because nothing is more needful than with extremity to punish the first
transgressors of those Laws, that do require a more exact observation for the
times to come. What time this Tragedy was acted, is not known for certain. By
Torniellus it is placed in the year 2548. of the Worlds Creation; which was
some four years after the Law was given. More than this is not extant in the
Scripture touching the keeping of the Sabbath, all the life of Moses. What was
done after, we shall see in the Land of Promise.

In the mean time, It is most proper to this place, Sabbath did consist
especially: that we may know the better what we are to look for at the peoples
hands, when we bring them thither. Two things the Lord commanded in his holy
Scripture, that concern the Sabbath, the keeping holy of the same: one in
relation to the People; the other in reference to the Priest. In reference to
the People, he commanded only rest from labor, that they should do no manner
of work; and that is contained expressly in the Law it self. In reference to the
Priest, he commanded sacrifice, that on the Sabbath day, over and above the
daily sacrifice, there should be offered to the Lord two Lambs of an year old,
without blemish, one in the morning, and the other in the evening: Numb. 28.
as also to prepare first, and then place the Shewbread, being twelve loaves,
one for every Tribe, continually before the Lord every Sabbath day. These
several references so divided, the Priest might do his part, without the
People, and contrary the People do their part without the Priest. Of any
Sabbath duties, which were to be performed between them; wherein the Priest and
People were to join together: the Scriptures are directly silent. As for these
several Duties, that of the Priest, the Shewbread, and the sacrifice, was not
in practice till they came to the Land of Canaan: and then, though the Priest
offered for the People; yet he did not, with them. So that for forty years
together, all the life of Moses, the sanctifying of the Sabbath did consist
only, for ought we find, in a Bodily rest, a ceasing from the works of their
weekly labors: and afterward in that, and in the Sacrifices which the Priest
made for them. Which as they seem to be the greater of the two, so was there
nothing at all therein, in which the People were to do; no not so much, except
some few, as to be Spectators: the sacrifices being offered only in the
Tabernacle, as in the Temple after; when they had a Temple, the people being
scattered over all the Country in their Towns and Villages. Of any Reading of
the Law, or exposition of the same unto the People; or public form of Prayers
to be presented to the Lord, in the Congregation; we find no footstep now, nor
a long time after. None in the time of Moses, for he had hardly perfected the
Law before his death: the Book of Deuteronomy being dedicated by him, a very
little before God took him. None in a long time after, no not till Nehemiahs
days, as we shall see hereafter, in that place and time. The resting of the
people was the thing commanded, in imitation of Gods Rest when his Works were
finished, that as he rested from the works which he had created, so they might
also rest in memorial of it. But the employment of this Rest to particular
purposes either of Contemplation or Devotion; that is not declared unto us in
the Word of God: but left at large, either unto the liberty of the People, or
the Authority of the Church. Now what the people did, how they employed this
rest of theirs, that Philo tells us in his third Book of the life of Moses.
Moses, says he, ordained, that since the World was finished on the seventh
day, all of his Commonwealth following therein the course of Nature, should
spend the seventh day, (...), in Festival delights, resting therein from all
their works: yet not to spend it as some do in laughter, childish sports, or (
as the Romans did their time, of public Feastings) in beholding the activity
either of the Jester or common Dancers; but (...), and a little after, (...),
in the study of true Philosophy, and in the contemplation of the works of
Nature. And in another place, He did command, De Decalog.
says he, that as in other things, so in this also they should imitate the
Lord their God, working six days, and resting on the seventh, (...) and
spending it in meditation of the works of Nature, as before is said. And not so
only, but that upon that day they should consider of their actions in the week
before, if happily they had offended against the Law: (...) etc. that so they
might correct what was done amiss, and be the better armed to offend no more.
So in his Book de mundi opisicio, he affirms the same, that they employed that
day in divine Philosophy, (...), even for the bettering of their manners, and
reckoning with their Consciences. That thus the Jews did spend the day, or some
part thereof, is very probable; and we may take it well enough upon Philo's
word: but that they spent it thus, by the direction or command of Moses, is not
so easily proved, as it is affirmed; though for my part, I willingly durst
assent unto it. For be it Moses so appointed, yet this concerns only the
behavior of particular persons; and reflects nothing upon the public Duties,
in the Congregation.

It Is true that Philo tells us in a Book not extant, Moses also did ordain
these public meetings. Ap E^seb. Praepar. l. 8.
(...), What then did Moses order to be done on the Sabbath day? He did
appoint, says he, that we should meet all in some place together, and there
sit down with modesty and a general silence, (...), to hear the Law, that none
plead ignorance of the same. Which custom we continue still, harkning with
wonderful silence to the Law of God, unless perhaps we give some joyful
acclamation at the hearing of it: some of the Priests, if any present, or
otherwise some of the Elders, reading the Law, and then expounding it unto us,
till the night come on. Which done, the people are dismissed, full of divine
instruction, and true Piety. So he, or rather out of him, Eusebius. But here by
Philo's leave, we must pause a while. This was indeed the custom in our
Saviors time, and when Philo lived: and he was willing, as it seems, to fetch
the pedigree thereof as far as possibly he could. Annals. An. 2546. n. 10.
So Salianus tells him on the like occasion. Videtur Philo Judaeorum merem in
synagogis disserendi antiquitate donare voluisse, quem a Christo and Apostolis
observatum legimus. The same reply we make to Josephus also, who tells us of
their Lawmaker, that he appointed not, that they should only hear the Law once
or twice a year: Cont. Ap. 2. Deuteronomy. 6.7.
(...), but that once every week we should come together to hear the Laws, that
we might perfectly learn the same. Which thing, says he, all other Lawmakers
did omit. And so did Moses too, by Josephus leave, unless we make a day and a
year all one. For being now to take his farewell of that people, and having often
advised them in his Exhortation to meditate on the words that he had spoken,
even when they tarried in their houses, and walked by the way, when they rose
up, and when they went to bed: he called the Priests unto him, Verse 31.9.
Verse 10. Verse 11.
and gave the Law into their hands, and into the hands of all the Elders of
Israel. And he commanded them and said, At the end of every seven years, in the
solemnity of the year of Release, at the Feast of Tabernacles; when all Israel
is come to appear before the Lord their God, in the place that thou shall
choose, thou shall read this Law before Israel in their hearing: that they may
hear, and that they may learn and fear the Lord your God, and observe all the
words of this Law to do them. Verse 12.
This was the thing decreed by Moses; and had been needless, if not worse, in
case he had before provided that they should have the Law read openly unto them
every Sabbath day. So then, by Moses order, the Law was to be read publicly,
every seventh year only: in the year of Release, because then servants being
manumitted from their Bondage, and Debtours from their Creditours, all sorts of
men might hear the Law with the greater cheerfulness: and in the Feast of
Tabernacles, because it lasted longer than the other Festivals, and so it might
be read with the greater leisure, and heard with more attention: and then it
was but this Law too, the Book of Deuteronomy. This to be done only in the
place which the Lord shall choose to be the seat and receptacle of his holy
Tabernacle; not in inferior Towns; much less petty Villages: and yet this
thought sufficient to instruct the people in the true knowledge of Gods Law, and
keeping of his Testimonies. And indeed happy had they been, had they observed
this order and decree of Moses; and every seventh year read the Law as he
appointed: they had then questionless escaped many of those great afflictions,
which afterward God brought upon them for contempt thereof. That in the
aftertimes the Law was read unto them every Sabbath, in their several
Synagogues, is most clear and manifest: as by the testimony of Philo and
Josephus, before related; and by sufficient evidence from the holy Gospel. But
in these times, and after for a thousand years, there were no Synagogues, no
public Reading of the Law in the Congregation, excepting every seventh year
only, and that not often: Sure I am, not so often as it should have been. So
that in reference to the People, we have but one thing only to regard, as yet,
touching the keeping of the Sabbath, which is rest from labor, rest from all
manner of work, as the Law commanded: and how far this was kept, and how far
dispensed with, we shall see plainly by the story. The private meditations and
devotions of particular men, stand not upon record at all: and therefore we
must only judge by external actions.

This said and shown, we will pass over Jordan, with the house of Israel,
Nisan, forty days after the death of Moses Anno 2584. Josh. 4.19.
That day they pitched their Tents in Gilgal. And the first thing they did, was
to erect an Altar in memorial of it: that done to circumcise the people, who
all the time that they continued in the Wilderness, (as many as were born that
time) were uncircumcised. The 14th of the same month did they keep the
Passover: Josh. 5.10, 12.
and on the morrow after God did cease from raining Mannah; the people eating
of the fruits of the Land of Canaan. And here, the first Sabbath which they
kept, as I conjecture, was the day before the Siege of Hiericho: which Sabbath,
probably was that very day, Josh. 5.
whereon the Lord appeared to Joshuah; and gave him order how he should proceed
in that great Business. The morrow after, being the first day of the week, they
began to compass it, as the Lord commanded. The Priests some of them bearing
the Ark, Josh. 6.
some going before with Trumpets; and the residue of the people, some before
the Trumpeters, some behind the Ark. This did they once a day, for six days
together. But when the seventh day came, which was the Sabbath, they compassed
the Town about seven times, and the Priests blew the Trumpets, and the people
shouted, and they took the City: destroying in it young and old, man, woman,
and children. I said it was the Sabbath day, for so it is agreed on generally,
both by Jews and Christians. One of the seven days; be it which it will, must
needs be the Sabbath day; and be it which it will, there had been work enough
done on it: but the seventh day whereon they went about seven times, and
destroyed it finally, was indeed the Sabbath. For first the Jews expressly say
it, that the overthrow of Jericho fell upon the Sabbath; and that from thence
did come the saying, Qui sancificari jussit sabbatum, is profanari jussit
sabbatum. So R. Kimchi has resolved on the 6th of Joshuah. In Josh. 6. qu. 2.
The like Tostatus tells us, is affirmed by R. Solomon, who adds that both the
falling of the wall, and slaughter of that wicked people, was purposely
deferred, In honorem sabbati, to add the greater luster unto the Sabbath. l.
11. c. 10.
Galatine proves the same out of diverse Rabbis, this Solomon before remembered,
and R. Joses in the Book called Sedar Olem; and many of them joined together,
in their Beresith ketanna, or lesser exposition on the Book of Genesis: they
all agreeing upon this, Dies sabbati erat, cum fuit praelium in Hiericho; and
again, Non capta fuit Hiericho nisi in sabbato; That certainly both the Battle
and the Execution fell upon the Sabbath. So for the Christian Writers, Adv.
Marc. l. 2.
Tertullian says not only in the general, that one of those seven days was the
Sabbath day: but makes that day to be the Sabbath, wherein the Priests of God
did not only work, Sed and in ore gladii praedata sit civitas ab omni populo,
but all the people sacked the City, and put it to the sword, Nec dubium est eas
opus servile operatos, etc. Du. 61. ex. n. Test. 1. Exodus 20.
And certainly, says he, they did much servile work that day, when they
destroyed so great a City, by the Lords Commandment. Procopius Gazaeus does
affirm the same. Sabbato Jesus expugnavit and cepit Hiericho. Austin thus,
Primus Jesus nunc divino praecepto sabbatum non servavit, quo facto muri
Hiericho ultro ceciderunt. So lastly, Lyra on the place, who says, that dies
septimus, in quo capta Hiericho sabbatum erat: and yet they did not sin, says
he, because they did it on that day by Gods own appointment. this does indeed
excuse the parties, both from the guilt of sin, and from the penalty of the
Law: but then it shows withal, that this Commandment is of a different quality
from the other nine, and that it is no part of the Law of Nature. God never
has commanded any thing contrary to the Law of Nature, unless it were tentandi
causa, as in the case of Abraham and Isaac. As for the spoiling of the
Eygptians, that could be no Thest, considering the Egyptians owed them more,
than they lent unto them, in recompense of the service they had done them, in
the former times.

But was the Sabbath broken or neglected only on the Lords Commandment; Jewry,
it is not to be thought, but that each day was fruitful in the works of Nature:
Children born every Sabbath day, as well as others: and therefore to be
Circumcised on the same day also. And so they were continually, Sabbath by
Sabbath, Feast by Feast, not one day free in all the year from that Solemnity;
and this by no especial order and command from God, but merely to observe an
ancient custom. In case it was deferred some time, as sometimes it was, it was
not sure in Conscience to observe the Sabbath; but only on a tender care to
preserve the Infant, which was perchance infirm and weak, not able to abide the
torment. No question, but the Sabbath following the sack of Hiericho, was in
this kind broken: and so were all that followed after, In Job. 7.21.
Nullum enim Sabbatum praeteribat, quin multi in Judaea infantes'
circumciderentur. It is Calvin's note: broken, I say, For Circumcision. though a
Sacrament, was no such easy Ministry, but that it did require much labor,
and many hands to go through with it. ^^b. 2.
Buxdorfius thus describes it in his Synagoga. Tempore diei octavi matutino, ca
quae ad circumcisionem opus sunt tempestive parantur, etc. In the morning of
the eighth day all things were made ready. And first two seats are placed, or
else one so framed, that two may set apart in it; adorned wieh costly Carpets
answerable unto the quality of the party. Then comes the surety for the Child,
and places himself in the same seat, and near to him the Circumciser. Next
follows one bringing a great Torch, in which were lighted twelve Wax-candles,
to represent the twelves Tribes of Israel: after, two Boys, carrying two Cups
full of red-Wine, to wash the Circumcisers mouth when the work is done; another
bearing the Circumcisers Knife; a third a dish of sand, whereinto the foreskin
must be cast, being once cut off; a fourth, a dish of Oil wherein are linen
clouts to be applied unto the wound: some others, spices and strong Wines, to
refresh those that faint, if any should. All this is necessarily required as
preparations to the Act of Circumcision; nor is the Act less troublesome, than
the preparations make show of: which I would now describe, but that I am
persuaded I have said enough, to make it known how much ado was like to be used
about it. And though perhaps some of these Ceremonics were not used in this
present time, whereof we speak: yet they grew up, and became ordinary many of
them, before the Jewish Commonwealth was destroyed and ruinated. Hom. de
Semente.
(...). Where there is Circumcision, there must be Knifes, and Sponges to
receive the Blood, and such other necessaries, said Athanasius. And not such
other only as conclern the work, In Joh. l. 4. l. 50. Lib. 7.
but such as appertain also to the following Cure. Circumciditur and curatur
homo circumcisus in Sabbato, as St. Cyril notes it. Which argument our Savior
used in his own defense, viz, that he as well might make a man every whit whole
on the Sabbath day, as they, one part. Now that this Act of Circumcision was a
plain breaking of the Sabbath (besides the troublesomness of the work) is
affirmed by many of the Fathers. L. 1. Haeres. 30. n. 32.
By Epiphanius expressly, (...). If a Child was born upon the Sabbath, the
circumcision of that Child took away the Sabbath. And St. Chrysest^m speaks
more home than he, Hom. 49. in Joh.
(...). The Sabbath, says the Father, was broke many ways among the Jews; but
in no one thing more, than in Circumcision.

Now what should move the Jews to prefer Circumcision before the Sabbath, token
of the Covenant between the Lord of Heaven and the seed of Abraham, Genesis 17.17.
So was the Sabbath between God and the house of Israel, Exodus 31.17. Was
Circumcision a perpetual covenant with the seed of Abraham in their
generations? Genesis 17.7. So was the Sabbath to be kept throughout their
Generations for a perpetual Covenant also. Exodus 31.16. Was Circumcision so
exacted, that whosoever was not Circumcised, that soul should be cut off from
the People of God? Genesis 17.14. So God has said it of his Sabbath, that
whosoever breaks it or does any manner of work therein, that soul shall be cut
off from among the People, Exodus 31.14. In all these points there was a just
and plain equality between them; but had the Sabbath been a part of the Moral
Law, it must have infinitely gone before Circumcision. What then should move
the Jews to prefer the one before the other; but that conceiving both alike,
they thought it best to give precedence to the elder, and rather break the
Sabbath than put off Circumcision to a further day. Hence grew it into a common
maxim amongst that People, Circumcision pellit Sabbatum, that Circumcision
drives away the Sabbath; as before I noted. Nor could it be that they conceived
a greater or more strict necessity to be in Circumcision than in the Sabbath;
the penalty and danger as before we showed you, being alike in both: for in the
Wilderness, by the space of 40 years together, when in some fort they kept the
Sabbath, most certain that they Circumcised not one, not one of many hundred
thousands that were born in so long a time. Again, had God intended
Circumcision to have been so necessary, that there was no deferring of it for a
day or two; he either had not made the Sabbaths rest so exact and rigid, or
else out of that generul rule had made exception in this case. And on the other
side, had he intended that the Sabbaths resT should have been literally
observed, and that no manner of work should be done therein; he had not so
precisely limited Circumcision to the eighth day only, Just. Martyn. cont.
Tryph.
(...), yea though it fell upon the Sabbath, but would have respited the same
till another day. The Act of Circumcision was not restrained unto the eighth
day so precisely, but that it might be, as it was sometimes, deferred upon
occasion; as in the case of Moses Children, and the whole People in the
Wilderness, before remembered. Indeed it was not to be hastened and performed
before. Not out of any mystery in the number, which might adapt it for that
business, as some Rabbis thought, but because Children till that time are
hardly purged of that blood and slime which they bring with them into the
world. Levit. 22. v. 27.
Upon which ground the Lord appointed thus in the Law Levitical. When a
Bullock, or a Sheep, or a Goat is brought forth, it shall be seven days under
the dam; and from the eighth day, and thence-forth, it shall be accepted for an
offering to the Lord. This makes it manifest that the Jews thought the Sabbath
to be no part of the Morallaw, and therefore gave precedence to Circumcision as
the older ceremony: Not because it was of Moses, but of the Fathers; that is,
L. 4. in Joh. c. 49.
says Cyril on that place, because they thought not fit to lay aside an
ancient custom of their Ancestors for the Sabbaths sake. Quia non putabant
consuetudinem patrum propter honorem Sabbati contemnendam esse; as the Father
has it. Nay so far did they prize the one before the other, that by this
breaking of the Sabbath they were persuaded verily that they kept the Law.
Moses, says Christ our Savior, gave you Circumcision, and you on be Sabbath
day Circumcise a man, that the Law of Moses should not be broken. Job. 7.22.
It seems that Circumcision was much like Terminus and Juventus in the Toman
story, who would not stir nor give the place, not to Jove himself. More of this
point, see Chrysostom. hom. 49. in Job.

But to proceed, Josuab; when as the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven,
Jos. 10.13.
and hasted not to go down about a whole day, as the Text has it. Or as it is
in Ecclesiast. Cap. 46.4.
Did not the Sun go back by his means, and was not one day as long as two? The
like, to take them both together in this place, was that great miracle of mercy
showed to Hezekiah, 2 King 20.
by bringing of the shadow ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down in
the Dial of Ahaz. In each of these there was a signal alteration in the course
of nature, and the succession of time; so notable, that it were very difficult
to find out the seventh day precisely from the worlds Creation, or to proceed
in that account since the late giving of the Law. So that in this respect the
Jews must needs be at a loss in their calculation; and though they might
hereafter set apart one day in seven for rest and meditation, yet that this day
so set apart could be precisely the seventh day from the first Creation, is not
so easy to be proved. The Author of the Practice of Piety, as zealously as he
pleads for the morality of the Sabbath, confesses that in these regards the
Sabbath could not be observed precisely on the day appointed. And to speak
properly, says he, as we take a day for the distinction of time, called either
a day natural, consisting of 24 hours, or a day artificial, consisting of 12
hours from Sunrising to Sun setting: And withal, consider the Sun standing
still at noon, the space of an whole day in the time of Josuah; and the Sun
going back ten degrees (viz. five hours, which is almost half an artificial
day) in Hezekiahs time; the Jews themselves could not keep their Sabbath on
that precise and just distinction of time, called at the first the seventh day
from the Creation. If so, if they observed it not at the punctual time,
according as the Law commanded, it follows then on his conscssion, that from
the time of Josuah, till the destruction of the Temple, there was no Sabbath
kept by the Jews at all, because not on the day precisely, which the Law
appointed.

This miracle, Israel in the present slaughter of their Enemies; so could it
not but infinitely astonish all the Canaanites, and make them faint, and fly
before the Conquerors. In so much that in the compass of five years, as
Josephus tells us, there was not any lest to make head against them. So that
the Victory being assured, and many of the Tribes in vested in their new
possessions, it pleased the Congregation of Israel to come together at Shilo,
Jos. 18.1.
there to set up the Tabernacle of the Congregation. Anti ju. Jud. l. 5. c. 1.
And they made choice thereof, as Josephus says, because it seemed to be a
very convenient place, by reason of the beauty of the place. Rather because if
sorted best with Josuahs liking, who being of the Tribe of Ephraim, within
whose lot that City stood, was perhaps willing to confer that honor on it. But
whatsoever was the motive, here was the Tabernacle erected, and hitherto the
Tribes resorted; and finally here the legal Ceremonies were to take beginning:
God having told them many times, these and these things ye are to do, when ye
are come into the Land that I shall give you, viz. Levit. 48. and 23. Numb. 15.
Deuteronomy. 12. That Gilgal was the standing lamp, and that the Levites there laid
down the Tabernacle as in a place of strength and safety, is plain in
Scripture; but that they there erected it, or performed any legal Ministry
therein, has no such evidence. Though God had brought them then into the Land
of Promise, yet all this while they were unsettled. The Land was given after,
when they had possession. So that the next Sabbath which ensued on the removal
of the Tabernacle unto Shilo, was the first Sabbath which was celebrated with
its legal Ceremonies; and this was Anno Mundi 2589. In which, if we consider as
well the toylsomness as multiplicity of the Priestlike-offices, we shall soon
see, that though the People rested then, yet the Priest worked hardest. First,
for the Loaves of Proposition, Antiqu. Jud. l. 3. c. 10.
or the Shewbread, however Josephus tells us, that they were baked (...), the
day before the Sabbath; and probably in his time it might be so, 1 Chronicles. 9.
yet it is otherwise in the Scriptures, The Kohathites, says the Text, were
over the Shewbread, for to prepare it every Sabbath. These Loaves were twelve
in number, one for every Tribe, each of them two tenth deals, or half a peck,
so the Scriptures say; every Cake square, ten hand-breaths long, five square,
and seven fingers high; so the Rabbis teach us. The kneading, baking, and
disposing of these Cakes must require some labor. Athanas. bom. de semente.
(...), etc. Where there is baking, says the Father, then must be beating of
the Oven, and carrying in of faggots, and whatsoever work is necessary in the
Bakers trade. Then for the Sacrifices of the day, the labor of the Priest,
when it was left, was double what it was on the other days. (...), as
Chrysostom has rightly noted. The daily sacrifice was of two Lambs, Concio 1.
de lazaro.
the Supernumerary of the Sabbath was two more. If the New Mood fell on the
Sabbath, as it often did, there was besides these named already an offering of
two Bullocks, a Ram, seven Lambs; and if that New Mood were the Feast of
Trumpets also, as it sometimes was, there was a further offering of seven
Lambs, one Ram, one Bullock. And which is more, each of these had their several
Meat Offerings and Drink Offerings, Perfumes, and Frankincense, preportionable
to attend upon them. By that time all was done, so many Beasts killed, skinned,
washed, quartered, and made ready for the Altar; so many fires kindled, meat
and drink offerings in a readiness, and the sweet Odours fitted for the work in
hand; no question but the Priest had small cause to boast himself of his
Sabbaths rest, or to take joy in any thing but his larger fees, and that he had
discharged his duty. As for the People, though they might all partake of the
fruits hereof, yet none but those that dwelt in Shilo, or near unto it at the
least, could behold the sight, or note what pains the Priests took for them,
whilst they themselves sat still and stirred not. Had the Commandment been
moral, and every part thereof of the same condition, the Priests had never done
so many manners of work as that day they did. However, as it was, our blessed
Savior did account these works of theirs to be a public profanation of the
Sabbath day. Read ye not in the Law, says he, Math. 12.5.
how that upon the Sabbath days the Priests in the Temple do profane the
Sabbath? Yet he deelared withal that the Priests were blameless in that they
did it by direction from the God of Heaven. The Sabbath then was daily broken,
but the Priest excusable. For Fathers that affirm the same, see Justin Martyr.
dial. and qu. 27. ad Orthod. Epiphan. l. 1. haer. 19. n. 5. Hierom. in Psalm.
92. Athanas. de Sabb. and Circumcis. Aust in. Qu. ex N. Test. 61. Isidore
Pelusiot. Epl. 72. l. 1. and diverse others.

These were the Offices of the Priest on the Sabbath day, Constat in the
Scripture, no nor of any place as yet designed for the performance of such
other duties as some conceive to appertain unto the Levites: That they were
scattered and dispersed over all the Tribes is indeed most true. The Curse of
Jacob now was become' a blessing to them. Forty-eight Cities had they given
them for their inheritance (whereof thirteen were proper only to the Priests,)
besides their several sorts of Tithes, and what accrewed unto them from the
public sacrifices, to an infinite value. Yet was not this dispersion of the
Tribe of Levi, in reference to any Sabbath duties, that so they might the
better assist the People in the solemnities and sanctifying of that day. The
Scripture tells us no such matter. The reasons manifested in the word were
these two especially. First, that they might be near at hand to instruct the
People, Levit. 10.10, 11.
and teach them all the Statutes which the Lord had spoken by the hand of
Moses; as also to let them know the difference between the holy and unholy, the
unclean and clean. Many particular things there were in the Law Levitical,
touching pollutions, purifyings, and the like legal Ordinances which were not
necessary to be ordered by the Priests, above those that attended at the Altar,
and were resorted to in most difficult cases: Therefore both for the Peoples
ease, and that the Priests above might not be troubled every day in matters of
inferior moment the Priests and Levites were thus mingled amongst the Tribes.
A second reason was, that there might be as well some nursery to train up the
Levites, until they were of Age fit for the service of the Tabernacle; as also
some retirement, unto the which they might repair, when by the Law they were
dismissed from their attendance. The number of the Tribe of Levi, in the first
general muster of them from a month old and upwards, was 22000. just; out of
which number, all from 30 years of age to 50. being in all 8580 persons, were
taken to attend the public Ministry. The residue with their Wives and
Daughters were to be severally disposed of in the Cities allotted to them,
therein to rest themselves with their goods and cattle, and do those other
Offices above remembered. Which Offices as they were the works of every day, so
if the People came unto them upon the Sabbaths or New Mons, as they did on
both, to be instructed by them in particular cases of the Law, 2 King. 23.
no doubt but they informed them answerably unto their knowledge. But this was
but occasional only, no constant duty. Indeed it is conceived by Master Samuel
Purchase, on the authority of Cornelius Bertram, Pilg.
almost as modern as himself, That the forty-eight Cities of the Levites had
their fit places for Assemblies; and that thence the Synagogues had their
beginnings: Which were it so, it would be no good argument, that in those
places of Assemblies the Priests and Levites publicly did expound the Law unto
the People on the Sabbath days, as after in the Synagogues. For where those
Cities were but four in every Tribe, one with another, the People must needs
travel more than six furlongs, which was a Sabbath days journey of the largest
measure, as before we noted, or else that nice restriction was not then in use.
And were it that they took the pains to go up unto them, yet were not those few
Cities able to contain the multitudes. When Joab not long after this, did
muster Israel at the command of david, 2 Samuel 24.
he found no fewer than thirteen hundred thousand fighting men. Suppose we
then, that unto every one fighting man there were three old Men, Women and
Children, fit to hear the Law, as no doubt there were. Put these together, and
it will amount in all to two and fifty hundred thousand. Now out of these set
by four hundred thousand for Jerusalem, and the service there, and then there
will remain one hundred thousand just, which must owe suit and service every
Sabbath day to each several City of the Levites. Too vast a number to be
entertained in any of their Cities, and much less in their / synagogues, had
each house been one. So that we may resolve for certain that the dispersion of
the Levites over all the Tribes had no relation hitherto unto the reading of
the Law, or any public Sabbath duties.

CHAP. VII. Touching the keeping of the SABBATH, from the time of David to the
Maccabees.
1. Particular necessities must give place to the Law of Nature. 2. That David's
flight from Saul was upon the Sabbath. 3. What David did being King of Israel,
in ordering things about the Sabbath. 4. Elijahs flight upon the Sabbath, and
what else happened on the Sabbath in Elijah's time. 5. The limitation of a
Sabbath days journey, not known amongst the Jews when Elisha lived. 6. The Lord
become offended with the Jewish Sabbaths, and on what occasion. 7. The Sabbath
entertained by the Samaritans, and their strange niceties therein. 8. Whether
the Sabbaths were observed during the Captivity. 9. The special care of
Nehemiah to reform the Sabbath. 10. The weekly reading of the Law on the
Sabbath days, begun by Ezra. 11. No Synagogues nor weekly reading of the Law,
during the Government of the Kings. 12. The Scribes and Doctors of the Law
impose new rigours on the People about their Sabbaths.


THUS have we traced the Sabbath from the Mount to Silo, Ryvet. in Deca.
one whole day of seven, to be no part nor parcel of the law of Nature, for if
it were the law of Nature, it were not dispensable, no not in any exigent or
distress whatever. Nullum periculum suadet, ut quae ad legem naturalem direct
pertinent infringamus. No danger, says a modern Writer, is to occasion us to
break those bonds wherewith we are obliged by the law of Nature. Nor is this
only Protestant Divinity, Aquinas 1.2 ae. qu. 100. art. 9. Qu. ex N. Test. 61.
for that Praecepta decalogi omnino sint indispen sabilia, is a noted maxim of
the Schoolmen. And yet it is not only School Divinity, for the Fathers taught
it. It is a principle of Saint Austins, Illud quod omnino non licet semper non
licet; nec aliqua necessitate mitigatur, ut admissum non obsit: est enim semper
illicitum, quod legibus, quia criminosum est prohibetur. That, says the
Father, which is unlawful in it self, is unlawful always; nor is there any
exigent or extremity that can so excuse it, being done, but that it makes a man
obnixious unto Gods displeasure. For that is always to be reckoned an unlawful
thing, which is forbidden by the Law because simply evil. So that in case this
rule be true, as no doubt it is; and that the fourth Commandment prohibiting
all manner of work on the Sabbath day, as simply evil, be to be reckoned part
of the Moral Law: they that transgress this Law, in what case soever, are in
the self-same state with those, who to preserve their lives or fortunes,
renounce their Faith in God, and worship Idols: which no man ought to do, no
though it were to gain the World. For what will it profit a man to gain the
world, and to lose his soul?

But sure the Jews accounted not the Sabbath of so high a nature; David. The
residue of Josuah, and the Book of Judges, give us nothing of it. Nor have we
much in the whole story of the Kings: but what we have we shall present unto
you in due place and order. And first for David, we read in Scripture how he
stood in fear of Saul his Master, how in the Festival of the New Mood his place
was empty, 1 Samuel 20.
how Saul became offended at it, and publicly declared his malicious purpose,
which in his heart he had before conceived against him. On the next morning,
Jonathan takes his Bow and Arrows, goes forth a shooting, takes a Boy with him
to bring back his Arrows: and by a signal formerly agreed between them, gives
David notice that his Father did seek his life, David on this makes haste, and
came to Nob unto Abimelech the Priest; and being an hungry, desires some
sustenance at his hands. The Priest not having ought else in readiness, sets
the Shew-hread before him, which was not lawful for any man to eat, but the
Priest alone. Now if we ask the Fathers of the Christian Church, what day this
was, on which poor David fled from the face of Saul, they answer that it was
the Sabbath. Saint Athanasius doubtingly, with a peradventure, Hom. de. semente.
(...), most likely that it was the Sabbath. His reason makes the matter surer,
than his resolution. The Jews, says he, upbraid our Savior, that his
Disciples plucked the ears of Corn on the Sabbath day: to satisfy which doubt,
he tells them what was done by David, on a Sabbath also. (...), as that Father
has it. Saint Hierom tells us that the day whereon he fled away from Saul, was
both a Sabbath and New Mood; In Math. 12.
and ad sabbati solennitatem accedebant neomeniarum dies. Indeed the story
makes it plain, it could be no other. The Shewbread was changed every Sabbath,
in the morning early: that which was brought in new, not to be stirred off from
the Table till the Week was out: the other which was taken away, being
appropriated to the Priests, and to be eaten by them only. Being so stale
before, we may be easier think it lay not long upon their hands: and had not
David come, as he did, that morning; perhaps he had not found the Priest so
well provided, in the afternoon. Had David thought that breaking of the Sabbath
in what case soever, had been a sin against the eternal Law of Nature: he
would, no doubt, have hid himself that day in the Field by the stone. Ezel, as
he had done two days before; rather than so have run away, 1 Samuel 20. Verse
19.24.
as well from God, as from the King. Especially considering that on the Sabbath
day he might have lurked there with more safety, than before he did: none being
permitted, as some say, by the Law of God, to walk abroad that day, if occasion
were. Neither had David passed it over in so light a manner, had he done
contrary to the Law. That heart of his which smote him for his Murder and
Adultery, and for his numbering of the People would sure have taken some
impression, upon the breaking of the Sabbath; had he conceived that Law to be
like the rest. But David knew of no such matter: neither did Jonathan, as it
seems. For howsoever David's fact might be excused by reason of the imminent
peril; yet surely Jonathans walking forth with his Bow and Arrows, was of a
very different nature. Nor did he do it fearfully, and by way of stealth, as if
he were afraid to avow the action: but took his Page with him to bring back
his Arrows, and called aloud unto him to do thus and thus, according as he was
directed; as if it were his usual custom. Jonathan might have thought of some
other way to give advertisement unto David, of his Fathers anger: rather than
by a public breaking of the Sabbath, to provoke the Lord. But then, as may
from hence be gathered, shooting and such like manlike Exercises, were not
accounted things unlawful on the Sabbath day.

This act and flight of David's from the face of Saul, Torniellus computation,
Anno 2974: and forty six years after that, being 3020 of the Worlds Creation,
and the last year of David's life, he made a new division of the sons of Levi.
For where the Levites were appointed in the times before, to bear about the
Tabernacle, as occasion was: the Tabernacle now being fixed and settled in
Jerusalem, there was no further use of the Levites service, in that kind. 1 Chronicles. 23.4, 5.
Therefore King David thought it good to set them to some new employments; and
so he hid: some of them to assist the Priests, in the public Ministry; some
to be Overseers and Judges of the people, some to be Porters also in the house
of God, and finally, some others to be Singers to praise the Lord with
instruments that he had made, with Harps, with Viols and with Cymbals. Of these
the most considerable were the first and last. The first appointed to assist at
the daily Sacrifices: Verse 31.
as also at the Offering of all Burnt-offerings unto the Lord, in the Sabbaths,
in the months, and at the appointed times according to the number and according
to their custom continually before the Lord. Those were instructed in the songs
of the Lord. Cpap. 25.7.
The other were chiefly which were made for the Sabbath days, and the other
Festivals: and one he made himself, of his own enditing, entitled a Song or
Psalm for the Sabbath day. Psalm 92.
Calvin upon the 92 Psalm is of opinion, that he made many for that purpose; as
no doubt he did; and so he did for the Feasts also. Josephus tells us, Antiq.
Jud. l. 7. c. 10.
that he composed Odes and Hymns to the praise of God, as also that he made
diverse kinds of instruments, and that he taught the Levites to praise Gods Name
upon the Sabbath days, (...) and the other Festivals: as well upon the Annual,
as the weekly Sabbath. Where note, that in the distribution of the Levites into
several Offices, there was then no such Office thought of, as to be Readers of
the Law: which proves sufficiently that the Law was not yet read publicly unto
the people on the Sabbath day. Nor did he only appoint them their Songs and
Instruments, but so exact and punctual was he, that he prescribed what Habit
they should wear, in the discharging of their Ministry, in singing praises to
the Lord; which was a white linen Raiment, such as the Surplice, now in use,
in the Church of England. 2 Chronicles. 5.12, 13.
Also the Levites, says the Text, which were the singers, being arrayed in
white linen, having Cymbals and Psalteries and Harps, stood at the East end of
the Altar, etc. praising and thanking God, for his Grace and wercies. And this
he did not by commandment from above, or any warrant but his own as we find,
and that he thought it fit, and decent. David the Prophet of the Lord knew
well, what did belong to David the King of Israel, in ordering matters of the
Church, and settling things about the Sabbath. Nor can it be but worth the
notice, that the first King whom God raised up to be a nursing Father unto his
Church, should exercise his regal power in dictating what he would have done on
the Sabbath day, in reference to Gods public Worship. As if in him, the Lord
did mean to teach all others of the same condition, as no doubt he did, that it
pertains to them to vindicate the day of his public service, as well from
superstitious fancies, as profane contempts: and to take special order that
his name be glorified, as well in the performances of the Priests, as the
devotions of the people. This special care we shall find verified in
Constantine, the first Christian Emperor, of whom more hereaster in the next
Book, and third Chapter. Now what was there ordained by David, was afterward
confirmed by Solomon (whereof see 2 Chronicles. 8.14.) who as he built a Temple for
Gods public Worship; for the New Mons, and weekly Sabbaths, and the solemn
Feasts, as the Scripture tells us: so he, or some of his Sucessours, built a
fair feat within the Porch thereof, wherein the Kings did use to sit, both on
the Sabbath and the annual Festivals. The Scripture calls it tegmen sabbati,
the covert for the Sabbath; that is, says Rabbi Solomon, 2 Kings 16.
locus quidam in porticu templi gratiose coopertus, in quo Rex sedebat die
sabbati, and in magnis festivitatibus, as before was said. So that in this too,
both were equal.

From David pass we to Elijah, Elijah had made havoc of the Priests of Baal,
and Jezebel sent a message to him, that he should arm himself to expect the
like. The Prophet warned hereof, arose, and being encouraged by an Angel, 2
Kings 19.8.
he did eat and drink, and walked in the strength of that meat forty days and
forty nights, until he came to Horeb the Mount of God. What, walked he forty
days and as many nights without rest, or ceasing; So it is resolved on. Elijah
as we read in Damascen, De fide Orthod. l. 4. c. 24.
(...), disqueting himself non only by continual fasting, but by his traveling
on the Sabbath, even for the space of forty days, (...), did without question
break the Sabbath: yet God who made that Law was not at all offended with him,
but rather to reward his virtue, Andae qu. 122.8.15.4.
appeared to him in Mount Horeb. So Thomas Aquinas speaking of some men, in the
old Testament, qui transgredientes observantiam subbati, non peccabant, who did
transgress against the Sabbath, and yet did not sin; makes instance of Elijah,
and of his Journey: Wherein, says he, it must needs be granted, that be did
travel on the Sabbath. And where a question might be made, how possibly Elijab,
could spend forty days and forty nights in so small a Journey: Tostatus makes
reply, that he went not directly forwards, but wandered up and down, and from
place to place; ex timore and inquiectudine mentis, In locum.
partly for fear of being sound, and partly out of a disquieted and afflicted
mind. Now whiles Elijab was in exile, Benbadad King of Syria invaded Israel,
and encamped near Aphek; where Ahab also followed him, and sat down by him with
his Army. And, says the Text, they pitched one over against the other seven
days, 1 Kings 20.29.
and so it was that in the seventh day the Battle was joined, and the children
of Israel slew of the Syrians an bundred thousand footmen in one day. Ask
Zanchius what this seventh day was; and he will tell you plainly that it was
the Sabbath. 14 4 Mandat.
For showing us that any servile works may be done lawfully on the Sabbath, if
either Charity, or unavoidable necessity do so require: he brings this History
in, for the proof thereof. And then he adds, Illi die ipso sabbati, quia
necessitas postulabat, pugnam cum hostibus commiserunt, etc. The Israelites,
says he, fighting against their Enemies on the Sabbath day, necessity
enforcing them thereunto, prevailed against them with a great and mighty
slaughter, Neither is he only one that so conceived it. Peter Martyr says as
much, and collects from hence, Loci. Coml. l. 7.8. cl. 2.
die sabbati militaria munia obiisse eos, that military matters were performed
on the Sabbath day. This Field was sought, Anno Mundi 3135: and was eleven
years after Elijabs flight.

Proceed we to Elisha next. 2. Kings 4.
The Shunamite having received a Child at Elisha's hands, and finding that it
was deceased, called to her husband, and said, send with me I pray thee, one of
the young Men and one of the Asses, Verse 21.
for I will haste to the man of God, and come again. And he said, wherefore
will thou go to him to day? Verse 23.
It is neither New Mood, nor Sabbath day. Had it been either of the two, it
seems she might have gone and sought out the Prophet: and more than so, she
used to do it at those times, else what need the question? It was their custom,
as before we noted, to travel on the Sabbhath days, and the other Festivals, to
have some conference with the Levites, if occasion were; and to repair unto the
Prophets at the same times also, as well as any day whatever. In illis diebus
festivis Frequentius ibant ad prophetas ad audiendum verbum Dei, as Lyra has
it on the place. And this they did without regard unto that nicety of a
Sabbath Days Journey; which came not up till long after; sure I am was not now
in use. Elisha, at this time, was retired to Carmel, which from the Sbunamites
City was ten miles at lest; as is apparent both by Adrichomius Map of Issachar,
and all other Tables that I have met with. And so the limitation of 2000 foot,
or 2000 Cubits, or the six Furlongs, at the most, which some require to be
allotted for the uttermost travel on the Sabbath; is vanished suddenly into
nothing. Nay, it is evident by the story that the Journey was not very short;
the Woman calling to her servant to drive on, and go forwards, and not to slack
his riding unless she bid him: Which needed not, in case the Journey had not
been above six Furlongs. Neither New Mood nor Sabbath day; It seems the times
were both alike in this respect: the Prophets to be sought unto, and they to
publish and make known the will of God, as well at one time, as the other. In
Number. 28. qu. 29.
Quasi Sabbatum and Calendae aequalis essent solennitatis, as Tostatus has it.
If so, if the New Mons, in this respect, were as solemn as the weekly Sabbath:
no question but the Annual Sabbaths were as solemn also. And not in this
respect alone, but in many others. Markets prohibited in the New Mons, as in
the Sabbath; When will the New Mood be gone, that we may sell our Corn? in the
eighth of Amos; the Sacrifices more in these than in the other, of which last
we have spoken already. So when the Scriptures prophecy of those spiritual
Feasts, which should be celebrated by Gods Saints, in the times to come: they
specify the New Mons as particularly, as they do the Sabbaths. Esa. 66.23.
From one. New Mood to another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all
flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord. See the like Prophecy in
Ezech. Chapter 46. Verse 1.3. Upon which last St. Hierom tells us, Quod privilegium
habet dies septimus in habdomada, In Ezech. 46.
hoc haber privilegium mensis exordium, the New Mons and the Sabbath have the
like Prerogatives.

Nay, when the Jews began to set at naught the Lord, Egypt; when they began to
loath his Sabbaths, and profane his Festivals, as they did too often: the Lord
expostulates the matter with them, as well for one as for the other. When they
were weary of the New Mood, Amos 8.5.
and wished it gone, that they might sell Corn; and of the Sabbath, because it
went not fast enough away, that they might set forth Wheat to sale: the Lord
objects against them, both the one and the other, by his Prophet Amos; that
they preferred their profit, before his pleasure. Et Dei solennitates turpis
lucri gratia, in sua verterent compendia, In locum.
as Saint Hierom has it. When on the other side they did profane his
Sabbaths, and the holy Festivals with excess and surfeiting, carowsing Wine in
Bowls, Amos 6.
stretching themselves upon their Couches, and ointing of themselves with the
chief Ointments: the Lord made known unto them by his servant Isaiah, how much
he did dislike their courses. Chap. 1.14.
The New Mons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with; it
is iniquity even the solemn meeting. It seems they had exceedingly forgot
themselves, when now their very Festivals were become a sin. Nay, God goes
further yet, Chap. 1.14.
your New Mons and your appointed Feasts my soul hates, they are a trouble to
me. I am weary to bear them. Your New Mons, and your Feasts, says God, are
not mine. Non enim mea sunt quae geritis, they are no Feasts of mine, which you
so abuse. Servo. 12.
How so? Judaei enim neglectis spiritualibus negotiis quae pro animae salute
agenda Deus praeceperat; omnia legitima sabbati, ad ocium luxuriamque
contulere. So said Gaudentius Brixianus. They Jews, says he, neglecting those
spiritual Duties which God commanded on that day, abused the Sabbaths rest unto
ease and luxury. For whereas being free from temporal cares, Cwil in Amos 8.
they ought to have employed that day to spiritual ufes, and to have spent the
same in modesty and temperance, (...), and in the repetition and commemoration
of Gods holy Word; they on the other side did the contrary, (...), wasting the
day in gluttony, and drunkenness, and idle delicacies. How far Sr. Augustine,
charge them with the self-same crimes, we have seen before. Thus did the
house of Israel rebel against the Lord, and profane his Sabbaths. And
therefore God did threaten them by the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 2.11.
that he would canse their mirth to cease, their Feast days, their New Mons
and Sabbaths, and their solemn Festivals: that so they might be punished in the
want of that, which formerly they had abused.

And so indeed he did, Salmanassar the Assyrian, by whom they were led Captive
unto parts unknown, and never suffered to return. Those which were planted in
their places, as they desired in tract of time, to know the manner of the God
of the Land: so for the better means to attain that knowledge, they entertained
the Pentateuch, or five Books of Moses: and with them, the Sabbath. They were
beholden to the Lions which God sent amongst them. Otherwise they had never
know the Sabbath, nor the Lord who made it. Themselves acknowledge this in an
Epistle to Antiochus Epiphanes, when he made havoc of the Jews. The Epistle
thus. (...) etc. To King Antiochus Epiphancs, the mighty God, the suggestion of
the Sidonians that dwell at Sichem. Our Ancestors enforced by a continual
plague which destrayed their Country (this was the Lions before spoken of) and
induced by an ancient superstition, Joseph Antiq. lib. 12. c. 7.
(...), took up a custom to observe that day as holy, which the Jows call the
Sabbath. So that it seems by this Epistle that when the Assyrian sent back one
of the Priests of Israel, to teach this people what was the manner of the God
of the Land; that at that time they did receive the Sabbath also: which was
about the year of the Worlds Creation, Orig. (...) 4.
3315. The Priest so sent, is said to have been called Dosthai; and as the word
is mollified in the Greek, it is the same with Dofitheus: who as he taught
these new Samaritans, the observation of the Sabbath, so as some say, he
mingled with the same, some neat devices of his own. For whereas it is said in
the Book of Exodus, Let no man go out of his place on the Sabbath day: this
Dositheus, if at least this were he, keeping the letter of the Text, did affirm
and teach, that in what ever posture any man was found, (...), in the beginning
of the Sabbath; in the self-same he was to be, (...), even until the evening. I
say if this were he, as some say, because there was another Dositheus, a
Samaritan too, that lived more near unto the time of Origin, and is most like
to be the man. However, we may take it for a Samaritan device, as indeed it
was; though not so ancient as to take beginning with the first entertainment of
the Sabbath, in that place and people.

this transportation of the ten Tribes for their many sins, Judah to turn unto
the Lord and amend their lives, and observe his Sabbaths; his sabbata annorum,
Sabbaths of years as well as either his weekly or his yearly Sabbaths. The Jews
had been regardless of them all, and for neglect of all God resolved to punish
them. First, Chap. 13. v. 18.
for the weekly Sabbath that God avenged himself upon them for the breach
thereof, is evident by that one place of Nahemiah. Did not your Fathers thus,
says he, and our God brought this plague upon us, and upon our City? yet ye
increase the wrath upon Israel in breaking the Sabbath. Next for the Annual
Sabbaths, God threatened that he would deprive them of them, by his Prophet
Hosea, as before was said. And lastly, for his Sabbaths of years, they had been
long neglected and almost forgotten, if observed at all. Torniellus finds three
only keep in all the Scripture. Nor are more specified in particular, but sure
more were kept, the certain number of the which may easily be found by the
proportion of the punishment. God tells them that they should remain in
bondage, 1 Chrom. 36.21.
until the Land had enjoyed her Sabbaths; for so long as she lay desolate, she
kept Sabbath to fulfill threescore and ten years. So that as many years as they
were in bondage, so many Sabbaths of years they had neglected. Now from the
year 2593. which was the seventh year after their possession of the Land of
Canaan, unto the year 3450. which was the year of their Captivity, there passed
in all 857. years just, of which 122 were years Sabbatical. By which account it
is apparent that they had kept in all that time but fifty-two sabbatical years;
and for the seventy Sabbaths of years which they had neglected, God made
himself amends, by laying desolate the whole Country seventy years together,
till the Earth had enjoyed ber Sabbaths. Not that the Earth lay still all that
while, and was never tilled; for those that did remain behind, and inhabit
there, must have means to live, but that the tillage was so little, and the
crop so small, the People being few in numbers, that in comparison of former
times it might seem to rest. But whatsoever Sabbaths the carth enjoyed, the
People kept not much themselves. The solemn Feasts of Pentecost, the Passover,
and the Feast of Tabernacles, they could not celebrate at all, because they had
no Temple to repair unto; nor did they celebrate the New Mons and the weckly
Sabbath, as they ought to do. Non neomeniae non sabbati exercere laetitiam, In
Hos. 2.
nee emnes festivitates quas uno nomine comprehendit, as Saint Hierom has it.
For that they used to work on the Sabbath day, both in the Harvest and the
Vintage, during the Captivity, we have just reason to suspect, considering what
great difficulty Nehemiah found to redress those errors. So little had that
People profited in the School of Piety, that though they felt Gods heavy anger
for the breach thereof, yet could they hardly be induced to amend their follies.

But presently on their return from babylon, they reared up the Altar, Feast of
Tabernacles, and the burnt-offerings day by day, and afterward the continual
burntoffering, Ezra 3.4, 5.
both in the New Mons and the solemn Feast-days that had been consecrate unto
the Lord. This the first work that was endeavored by Zorobabel, and other
Rulers of the People, and it was somewhat that they went so far in the
Reformation, as to revive the Sabbaths and the public Festivals. I say the
Sabbaths amongst others, for so Josephus does express it. They Celebrated at
that time, says he, the feast of Tabernacles, according as their Lawmakers had
ordained; and afterward they offered oblations and continual Sacrifices,
observing their Sabbaths and all holy solemnities. Yet they observed them not
so truly, but that some evil customs which had crept amongst them, during the
Captivity, were as yet continued: Markets permitted on the Sabbath, and the
public Festivals; Burdens brought in and out; the Vintage no less followed on
those days than on any other. And so continued till the year 3610. which was
some ninety years after they were returned from Babel; what time they
celebrated that great Feast of Tabernacles, and Ezra publicly read the Law
before all the People. Upon which Act this good ensued, that both the Priests
and Princes, and many others of the People did enter covenant with the Lord,
that if the People of the Land brought ware, Nch. 10. v. 31.
or any Victuals to sell them on the Sabbath day, that we would not buy it of
them on the Sabbath, or on the holy days, and that we would leave the seventh
year free, and the exaction of every debt. Where still observe that they had no
less care of the annual Sabbaths, yea, of the Sabbaths of years than of the
weekly; and Marketting not more restrained on the weekly Sabbaths than on the
Annual. A Covenant not so well performed as it was agreed. For Nehemiah who was
principal on the Peoples part, being gone for Babylon, at his return found all
things contrary to what he looked for. I saw, says he, Chap. 13.15.
in Judah, them that trod Wine presses on the Sabbath, and that brought in
Sheafs, and which laded Asses also with Wine, Grapes, and Figgs, and brought
them into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day; and others, men of Tyrus that brought
Fish and all manner of Ware, Verse 16.
and sold it on the Sabbath unto the Children of Judah; a most strange
disorder. So general was the crime become, that the chief Rulers of the People
were most guilty of it. So that to rectify this misrule, Nehemiah was not only
forced to shut up the Gates upon the Even before the Sabbath, yea, and to keep
them shut all the Sabbath day, whereby the Merchants were compelled to rest
with their Commodities, without the Walls; but to use threatening words unto
them, that if from that time forwards they came with Merchandise on the
Sabbath, he would forbear no longer, but lay hands upon them. A course not more
severe than necessary, as the case then stood. Nor had those mischiefs been
redressed, being now countenanced by custom, and some chief men among the
People; had they not met a man both resolved and constant, one that both knew
his work, and had a will to see it finished. This reformation of the Sabbath,
or rather of those foul abuses which had of late defiled it, and even made it
despicable, is placed by Torniellus, An. 3629. which was above an hundred years
after the restitution of this people to their Native Country. So difficult a
thing it is to overcome an evil custom.

Things ordered thus, Sabbath day, than ever had been kept before. The rather
since about these times, began the reading of the Law in the Congregation. Not
every seventh year only, and on the Feast of Tabernacles, as before it was, or
should have been at the least, by the Law of Moses; but every sabbath day, and
each solemn meeting: not only in the Temple of Jerusalem, as it is used to be;
but in the Towns and principal places of each several Tribe. Ezra first set
this course on foot, a Priest by calling, one very skilful in the Laws of
Moses: who having taken great pains to seek out the Law, and other Oracles of
God; digested and disposed them into that form and method, in which we have
them at this present. Of this see Iren. l. 3.25. Tertullian de habitu mulierum,
Clem. Alexandr. l. 1. Strom. Chrysostom. hom. 8. ad Hebraeos, and diverse others.
This done, and all the people met together at the Feast of Tabernacles, Anno
3610, Nehem. 8.4.
which was some ninty years after the return from Babylon, as before was said:
he took that opportunity to make known the Law unto the people. For this cause
he provided a Pulpit of Wood, that so he might be heard the better: and round
about him stood the Priests, Verse 4.7. Verse 8. Verse 18.
and Levites, learned men; of purpose to expound the Text, and to give the
sense thereof, that so the people might the better understand the reading. And
this they did eight days together, from the first day until the last, when the
Feast was ended. Now in this Act of Ezra's, there was nothing common, nothing
according to the custom of the former times, neither in time, or place, or any
other circumstance. For the time, although it was the Feast of Tabernacles, yet
was it not the seventh year as Moses ordered it: that year, which was the first
of Nehemiahs coming unto Jerusalem, Neh. 8.1, 3.
not being the sabbatical year, but the third year after, as Torniellus does
compute it. Then for the place, it should have been performed in the Temple
only, as both by Moses Ordinance, and Josiahs practice, does at large appear:
but now they did it in the street before the Water-gates, as the Text informs
us. So for manner of the Reading, it was not only published, as it had been
formerly, but expounded also. An. 3610. n. 9.
Whereof, as of a thing never known before, this reason is laid down by
Torniellus, quod lingua Hebraica desierat jam vulgaris esse, Chaldaico seu
Syriaco idiomate in ejus locum surrogato, because the Hebrew tongue wherein the
Scriptures were first written, was now grown strange unto the people; the
Chaldee or the Syriack being generally received in the place thereof. And last
of all, for the continuance of this Exercise, it held out eight days, all the
whole time the Feast continued: whereas it was appointed by the Law of Moses,
that only the first and last days of the Feast of Tabernacles should be
esteemed and solemnized, as holy convocations to the Lord their God, Levit.
23.35. and 36. Here was a total alteration of the ancient custom; and a fair
overture to the Priests, who were then Rulers of the people to begin a new: a
fair instruction to them all, that reading of the Law of God was not confined
to place, or time; but that all times, and places were alike to his holy Word,
Every seventh day as fit for so good a Duty, as every seventh year was
accounted in the former times: the Villages and Towns as capable of the Word of
God, as was the great and glorious Temple of Jerusalem: and what prerogative
had the Feast of Tabernacles, but that the Word of God might be as necessary to
be heard on the other Festivals, as it was on that? The Law had first been
given them on a Sabbath day, and therefore might be read unto them every
Sabbath day. This might be pleaded in behalf of this alteration, and that great
change which followed after, in the weekly Sabbaths; whereon the Law of God was
not only read unto the people, such of them as inhabited over all Judaea; but
publicly made known unto them, in all the Provinces and Towns abroad, where
they had either Synagogues or habitations. God certainly had so disposed it, in
his heavenly Counsels, that so his holy Word might be more generally known
throughout the World; and a more easy way laid open, for the admittance and
receipt of the Messiah, whom he meant to send, that so Jerusalem and the
Temple, might by degrees be lesned in their reputation; and men might know that
neither of them was the only place, John 4.20.
where they ought to worship. This I am sure of, that by this breaking of the
custom, although an institute of Moses, the Law was read more frequently, than
in times of old: there being one other Reading of it, publicly and before the
people related in the thirteenth of Nehemiah, when it was neither Feast of
Tabernacles, nor sabbatical year, for ought we find in holy Scripture.
Therefore most like it is that it was the Sabbath, which, much about those
times, began to be ennobled with the constant reading of the Word in the
Congregation. First in Jerusalem, and after by degrees, in most places else,
as men could fit themselves with convenient Synagogues, Houses selected for
that purpose, to hear the Word of God, and observe the same. Of which times,
and of none before, those passages of Philo and Josephus before remembered,
Chap. 6. n. 4.
touching the weekly reading of the Law, and the behavior of the people in the
public places of Assembles; are to be understood and verified, as there we
noted.

For that there was no Synagogue nor weekly reading of the Law, David; and for
the proof thereof they produce these words, Psalm. 74.8.
they have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land: the supposition and
the proof are alike infirm. For not to quarrel the Translation, which is
directly different from the Greek, and vulgar Latin, and somewhat from the
former English: this Psalm, if writ by David, was not composed in reference to
any present misery which fefell the Church. There had been no such havoc made
thereof in all David's time, as is there complained of. Therefore if David writ
that Psalm, he writ it as inspired with the spirit of Prophecy, and in the
spirit of Prophecy did reflect on those wretched times, wherein Antiochus laid
waste the Church of God, and ransacked his inheritance. To those most probably
must it be referred: the miseries which are there bemoaned, not being so
exactly true in any other time of trouble, as it was in this, Magis probabilis
est conjectura, ad tempus Antiochi referri has querimonias, as Calvin notes it.
In Psalm. 74.
And secondly, there was no use of them before, because no reading of the Law
in the Congregation, of ordinary course, and on the Sabbath days. For had the
Law been read unto the people every Sabbath day, we either should have found
some Commandment for it, or some practice of it: but we meet with neither.
Rather we find strong arguments to persuade the contrary. We read it of
Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.7.
that in the third year of his reign he sent his Princes, Ben-hail, and
Obadiah, and Zechariah, and Nathaneel, and Micaiah, to teach in the Cities of
Judah. These were the principal in Commission, and unto them he joined nine
Levites and two Priests to bear them company; and to assist them. It follows,
And they taught in Judah, Verse 9.
and had the book of the Law of the Lord with them, and they went about
throughout all the Cities of Judah, and taught the people. And they taught in
Judah, and had the Book of the Law with them? This must needs be a needless
labor, in case the people had been taught every Sabbath day: or that the Book
of the Law had as then been extant, and extant must it be, if it had been read)
in every Town and Village over all Judaea. Therefore there was no Synagogue, no
reading of the Law every Sabbath day, in Jehosaphats time. But that which
follows of Josiah, is more full than this. 2 Kings 12.
That godly Prince intended to repair the Temple, and in pursuit of that
intendment, Hilkiah the Priest, to whom the ordering of the work had been
committed; found hidden an old Copy of the Law of God, which had been given
unto them by the hand of Moses. This Book is brought unto the King, and read
unto him, And when the King had heard the words of the Law, he rent his cloths.
And not so only, Verse 11. Chap. 23.1, 2.
but he gathered together all the Elders of Judah and Jerusalem, and read in
their ears all the words of the Book of the Covenant, which was found in the
house of the Lord. Had it been formerly the custom, to read the Law each
Sabbath unto all the people: it is not to be thought that this good King
Josiah, could possibly have been such a stranger to the Law of God; or that the
finding of the Book had been related for so strange an accident, when there was
scarce a Town in Judah, but was furnished with them. Or what need such a sudden
calling of all the Elders, and on an extraordinary time, to hear the Law; if
they had heard it every Sabbath, and that of ordinary course? Nay, so far were
they at this time, from having the Law read amongst them every weekly Sabbath,
that as it seems, it was not read amongst them in the sabbath of years, as
Moses had before appointed. For if it had been read unto them once in seven
years only; that virtuous Prince had not so soon forgotten the contents
thereof. Therefore there was no Synagogue, no weekly reading of the Law, in
Josiabs days. And if not then, and not before, then not at all till Ezras time.
The finding of the Book of God before remembered, is said to happen in the year
3412. of the Worlds Creation: not forty years before the people were led
Captives into Babylon; in which short space, the Princes being careless, and
the times distracted, there could be nothing done that concerned this business.
Now from this reading of the Law in the time of Ezra, unto the Council holden
in Jerusalem, there passed 490 years, or thereabouts. Acts 15.21.
Antiquity sufficient to give just cause to the Apostle, there to affirm that
Moses in old time in every City had them that preached him, being read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day. So that we may conclude for certain, that till
these times wherein we are, there was no reading of the Law unto the people on
the Sabbath days: and in these times, when it was taken up amongst them, it was
by Ecclesiastical institution only, no divine Authority.

But being taken up, Petrus Cunaeus does affirm, that howsoever the Law was
read amongst them in the former times, either in public or in private; De
repub. l. 2. ca. 17.
yet the bare Text was only read, without gloss or descant. Interpretatio
magistrorum, commentatio nulla. But in the second Temple, when there were no
Prophets, then did the Scribes and Doctors begin to comment, and make their
several expositions on the holy Text: Ex quo natae disputationes and sententiae
contrariae; from whence, says he, sprung up debates, and doubtful
disputations. Most probable it is, that from this liberty of interpretation,
sprung up diversity of judgments, from whence arose the several sects of
Pharisees, Essenes, and Sadduces, who by their difference of opinions did
distract the multitude, and condemn each other. Of whom, and what they taught
about the Sabbath, we shall see next Chapter. Nor is it to be doubted, but as
the reading of the Law, did make the people more observant of the Sabbath, than
they were before: so that libertas prophetandi, which they had amongst them,
occasioned many of those rigours, which were brought in after. The people had
before neglected the sabbatical years, Joseph. Ant. li. 11. ca. ult.
but now they carefully observed them. So carefully that when Alexander the
Great being in Jerusalem Anno 3721, commanded them to take some Boon, wherein
he might express his favor and love unto them: the High Priest answered for
them all, that they desired but leave to exercise the Ordinances of their
Forefathers, (...), and that each seventh year might be free from Tribute;
because their Lands lay then untilled. But then again, the liberty and variety
of Interpretation, bred no little mischief. For where in former times,
according to Gods own appointment, the Sabbath was conceived to be a day of
Rest, whereon both Man and Beast might refresh themselves, and be the more
enabled for their ordinary labors: by canvassing some Texts of Scripture, and
wringing blood from thence instead of comfort, they made the Sabbath such a
yoke, as was supportable. Nor were these weeds of doctrine very long in
growing. Within an hundred years, and less, after Nehemiah, the people were so
far from working on the Sabbath day; (as in his time we see they did, and
hardly could be weaned from so great a sin:) but thought it utterly unlawful to
take sword in hand, yea though it were to save their liberty, and defend
Religion. A folly, which their neighbor Ptolomy, Joseph. Ant. li 12. c. 1.
the great King of Egypt, made especial use of. For having notice of this
humor, as it was no better, he entered the City on the Sabbath day, under
pretense to offer sacrifice; and presently without resistance surprised the
same: the people, (...), not laying hand on any weapon, or doing any thing in
defense thereof; but sitting still, (...) in an idle slothfulness, suffered
themselves to be subdued by a Tyrant Conqueror. This happened Ann. M. 3730. And
many more such fruits of so bad a doctrine, did there happen afterward: to
which now we hasten.

CHAP. VIII. What does occur about the SABBATH from the Maccabees, to
destruction of the Temple.
1. The Jews refuse to fight in their own defense upon the Sabbath; and what
was ordered thereupon. 2. The Pharisees, about these times, had made the
Sabbath burdensome by their Traditions. it 3. Jerusalem twice taken by the
Romans, on the Sabbath day. 4. The Romans, many of them, Judaize, and take up
the Sabbath: as other Nations did by the Jews example. 5. Augustus Caesar very
gracious to the Jews, in matters that concerned their Sabbath. 6. What our
Redeemer taught, and did, to rectify the abuses of, and in the Sabbath. 7. The
final ruin of the Temple, and the Jewish Ceremonies on a Sabbath day. 8. The
Sabbath abrogated with the other Ceremonies. 9. Wherein consists the Christian
Sabbath, mentioned in the Scriptures and amongst the Fathers. 10. The idle and
ridiculous niceties of the modern Jews, in their Parasceves, and their Sabbaths
conclude the first Part./li


WE showed you in the former Chapter, Sabbath. The people hardly at the first
restrained from working when there was no need; and after easily induced to
abstain from fighting, though tending to the necessary defense both of their
liberty and Religion. Of so much swifter growth is superstition, than true
piety. Nor was this only for a fit, as easily laid aside, as taken up; but it
continued a long time, yea and was every day improved: it being judged, at
last, unlawful to defend themselves, in case they were assaulted on the Sabbath
day. Antiochus Epiphanes the great King of Syria, intending utterly to subvert
the Church and Commonwealth of Judah, did not alone defile the Sanctuary, 1
Mac. 1.
by shedding innocent blood therein: but absolutely prohibited the
Burnt-offerings and the Sacrifices, commanding also that they should profane
the Sabbaths, and the Festival days. So that the Sanctuary was laid waste, the
holy Days turned into mourning, and the Sabbath into a reproach, as the story
tells us: some of the people so far yielding through fear and faintness, that
they both offered unto Idols, and profaned the Sabbaths, as the King
commanded. But others, who preferred their Piety, before their fortunes, went
down into the Wilderness, and there hid themselves in Caves and other secret
places. Thither the Enemies pursued them, and finding where they were in
covert, assailed them on the Sabbath day, the Jews not making any the least
resistance, Joseph. ll. 1^. ca. 8.
no not so much as stopping up the mouths of the Caves, (...), as men resolved
not to offend against the honor of the Sabbath in what extremity soever. These
men were certainly more persuaded of the morality of the Sabbath, than David or
Elijah in the former times: and being so persuaded, thought it not fit to fly
or fight upon that day; no, though the supreme Law of Nature, which was the
saving of their lives did call them to it. Tantum religio potuit suadere
malorum, in the Poets language. But Mattathias, one of the Priests, a man that
durst as much as any in the cause of God, and had not been infected with those
dangerous fancies; taught those that were about him a more saving doctrine;
Assuring them that they were bound to fight upon the Sabbath, if they were
assaulted. For otherwise, if that they scrupulously observed the Law, in such
necessities: (...), they would be Enemies to themselves, and finally be
destroyed both they and their Religion. It was concluded thereupon, 2 Macc. 2.
that whosoever came to make Battle with them on the Sabbath day, they would
fight against him: and afterward it held for current, as Josephus tells us,
that if necessity required they made no scruple, (...), to fight against their
Enemies on the Sabbath day. Yet by Josephus leave, it held not long, as he
himself shall tell us in another place: what time, the purpose of this
resolution was perverted quite, by the nice vanities of those men, who took
upon them to declare the meaning of it. But howsoever it was with those of
Jewry, such of their Countrymen as dwelt abroad amongst other Nations made no
such scruple of the Sabbath, but that they were prepared, if occasion were, as
well to bid the Battle, as to expect it: as may appear by this short story,
which I shall here present in brief, leaving the Reader to Josephus for the
whole at large. Two Brethren, Asinaeus, and Auilaeus, born in Nearda, in the
territory of Babylon, began to fortify themselves, and commit great outrages:
which known, the Governor of Babylon prepares his Forces to suppress them.
Having drawn up his Army, he lies in Ambush near a Marsh: and the next day
which was the Sabbath, (wherein the Jews did use to rest from all manner of
work) making account that without stroke stricken, they would yield themselves,
he marched against them fair and softly, to come upon them unawares. But being
discovered by the scouts of Asinaeus, it was resolved amongst them to be far
more safe, valiantly to behave themselves in that necessity, yea though it were
a breaking of the very Law; than to submit themselves, and make proud the
Enemy. Whereupon all of them at once marched forth, and slaughtered a great
many of the Enemies; the residue being constrained to save themselves by a
speedy flight. The like did Anilaeus after; being provoked by Mithridates,
another Chieftain of those parts. This happened much about the year 3957. that
of the Maccabees before remembered, Anno 3887, or thereabouts. Happy it was
these Brethren lived not in Judaea; for had they done so there, the Scribes and
Pharisees would have taken an order with them, and cast them out of the
Synagogues, if not used them worse.

For by this time those Sects which before we spoke of, Josephus speaks not of
them till the time of Jonathan, who entered on the Government of the Jewish
Nation, Anno 3894. Questionless they were known and followed in the former
times; though probably not so much in credit, their dictates not so much
adored, as in the Ages that came after. Of those the Pharisees were of most
Authority, being most active in their courses, severe professors of the Law,
and such as by a seeming sanctity had gained exceedingly on the affections of
the common people. The Sadduces were of less repute, (though otherwise they had
their dependants) as men that questioned some of the common principles: denying
the Resurrection of the dead, the hope of immortality. As for the Essees or
Esseni, they were a kind of Monkish men, retired and private; of far more
honesty than the Pharisees, but of far less cunning: therefore their tendries
not so generally received, or hearkened after, as the others were. In matters
of the Sabbath they were strict alike; but with some difference in the points
wherein their strictness did consist. Joseph. de bello. li. 2.7.
In this the Essee seems to go beyond the Pharisee, that they not only did
abstain from dressing meat, and kindling fire upon the Sabbath, as probably the
others did: (...). But unto them it was unlawful to remove a dish or any other
Vessel out of the place, wherein they found it, yea or to go aside to ease
Nature. And on the other side, the Pharisee in the multiplicity of his Sabbath
speculations, went beyond the Essee: all which were thrust upon the people, as
prescribed by God, and grounded in his holy Law; the perfect keeping of the
which seemed their utmost industry. There is a dictate in the Scripture, that
No man go out of his place on the Sabbath day. Exodus 16.
This was impossible to be kept, according to the words and letter: therefore
there must be some device to expound this Text, and make the matter feasible.
Hereupon Achiba, Simeon, and Hillel, three principal Rabbis of these times,
found out a shift to satisfy the Text, and yet not bind the people to
impossible burdens. This was to limit out the Sabbaths journey, allowing them
2000 foot to stir up and down, for the ease and comfort of the Body: by which
devise they thought the matter well made up, the people happily contented, and
the Law observed. This was the refuge of the Jews, when afterward the
Christians pressed them with the not keeping of this Text, R. Achiba, Simeon,
and Hillel magistri nostri tradiderunt nobis, ut bis mill pedes ambularemus in
sabbato, as St. Hierom tells us. Ad Algesi^m.
But this being somewhat of the least, they afterward improved it to 2000
Cubits, then to three quarters of a mile, as before we noted: and this, with
this enlargement too, that in their Towns and Cities they might walk as much
and as far as they listed, though as big as Nineveh. This Rab. Hiliel above
named, lived in the year 3928. which was some fifteen years after Jonathans
death: and therefore to be reckoned of these times in the which we are. The
other two, for ought we know were his Coaetanei, and lived about the same times
also. So for the other Text, Thou shall not kindle fire on the Sabbath day,
this also must be literally understood: and then comparing this with that in
Exodus, Bake that which ye will bake to day; it needs must follow that no meat
must be made ready on the Sabbath. We showed before, that generally the people
did use to fast on the Sabbath day, till they came from Church, that so they
might be more attent unto the reading of the Law: this might suggest a
plausible pretense unto the Pharisee, to teach the people that they should
forbear from dressing meat, that so their servants also might be present, when
the Law was read. Hence came the saying used amongst them, Qui parat in
parasceve, vescetur in Sabbato; he that does cook it on the Eve, may eat upon
the Sabbath. There is a Text in Jeremy, expressly against bearing of burdens on
the Sabbath day. Chap. 17. v. 11.
This by the Christian Fathers is interpreted of the burden of sin. Custodit
animam suam qui non portat pondera peccatorum in die quietis, and sabbati, as
St. Hierom has it on the place. See the same Father also on the 58 of Esaias;
and Basil, on the first of the same Prophet. And certainly had Gods intent been
plain and peremptory, that whosoever did bear any burden on the Sabbath day,
should never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: our Savior never had commanded
the poor lame man, to take up his Bed upon the Sabbath. But for the Pharisees,
they have so dallied with the Text, that they have made both it and themselves
ridiculous. For finding it impossible that men should carry nothing at all
about them, to salve the matter they devised some nice absurdities. A man might
wear no nailed shoos on the Sabbath day, (...). l. 4.
because the nails would be a burden: (...). that which a man did carry on one
shoulder only was a burden to him; not what he carried upon both, as Origin
informs us of them. So where they found it in the Law, that thou shall do no
manner of work, they would have no work done, at all, no though it were to save
ones life: neither to heal the wounded, or to cure the sick, both which they
did object against Christ our Savior; nor finally to take sword in hand, for
the defense either of men's persons or their Country. And though their rigor
herein had been overruled by Mattathias, and that it was concluded lawful to
fight against their Enemies on the Sabbath day; yet they found out a way to
elude this order: teaching the people this, that they might fight that day
against their Enemies, if they were assaulted; but not molest them in their
preparations, for assault and battery. This is now made the meaning of the
former Law, and this cost them dear. As good no Law at all, as so bad a Comment.

For when that Pompey warred against them, and besieged their Temple, Had not
the Ordinance of the Country, as Josephus tells it, commanded us to keep the
Sabbath, and do no labor on that day: Antiq. Jud. l. 14. c. 8.
the Romans never had been able to have raised their Bulwarks. How so? (...).
Because the Law permits us to defend our selves, in case at any time we are
assailed, and urged to fight; but not to set upon them or disturb them, when
they have other work in hand. Which when the Romans found, says he, they
neither gave assault, or profer'd any skirmish on the Sabbath days, but built
their Towers and Bulwarks, and planted Engines thereupon: and the next day put
them in use against the Jews. It seems they were not well resolved on the
former point, whether they might defend themselves on the Sabbath day, Hist. l.
5 ^.
though they were assaulted. For on that day it was, that Pompey took the City,
and enslaved the people. So Dio tells us touching the use the Romans made of
that advantage; adds for the close of all, (...), that at the last they were
surprised upon the Saturday, not doing any thing in their own defense. Strabo
therein concurs with Dio, in making Saturday the day, Geogr. l. 16.
but takes it for a solemn Fast, (...), wherein it is not lawful to do any
work. And so it was a Fast indeed, but such a Fast as fell that time upon the
Sabbath. Josephus tells us only that the Temple was taken in the third month,
on a fasting day: which Casaubon conceives to be the seventh, Exerc. 16.108.
and Scaliger the seventeenth of the month called Tamuz; but both agree upon
it, that it was the Sabbath. Em. Temp. edit. 2. l. 3.
As for their fasting on that day, it was permitted in this case, and in this
case only, when as their City was besieged; as before we showed. Yet could not
this unfortunate rigor be any warning to the Jews; but needs they must offend
again in the self-same kind. For just upon the same day seven and twenty years,
the City was again brought under by Sosius and Herod, who had then besieged it:
in the same month, L. 14 c. 24. l. 49.
and on the same day, as Josephus tells it; (...), and on the day called
Saturday, as Dion has it. So fatal was it to the Jews, to perish in the folly
of their superstitions. The first of these two actions, is placed in Anno 3991.
therefore the last, being just 27 years after, must be 4018 of the Worlds
Creation, Augustus Caesar being then in the Triumvirate.

By means of these two Victories, Jews being tributary to the Romans, began to
find admittance into their Dominions, in many places of the which they began to
plant, and filled at last whole Townships with their numberous Families. Scarce
any City of good note in Syria, and the lesser Asia, wherein the Jews were not
considerable for their members; and in the which, they had not Synagogues for
their Devotions. So that the manner of their lives, and forms of their Religion
being once observed: the Roman people, many of them, became affected to the
rites of the Jewish worship, and amongst other Ceremonies, to the Sabbath also.
It was the custom of the Romans to incorporate all Religions into their own;
and worship those Gods whom before they conquered: Et quos post cladem
triumphatos colere coeperunt, in Minutius words. Therefore the marvail is the
less, that they were fond of something in the Jews Religion; though of all
others they most hated that, as most repugnant to their own. Yet many of them
out of wantonness, and a love to Novelties, began to stand upon the Sabbath;
some would be also circumcised; and abstain from Swines flesh; Javenal. Sat. 14.
others use Candlesticks and Tapers, as they saw the Jews. The Satyrist thus
scoffs them for it.

Quidam sortiti metuentem Sabbata patrem,
Nil praeter nubes and coeli numen adorant,
Nec distare putant humana carne suillam,
Qua pater abstinuit: mox and praeputia ponunt.
Some following him, the Sabbaths who devised,
Only the Clouds and Sky, for Gods adore;
Hating Swines flesh, as they did man's before
Cause he forbear it; and are circumcised.
Remember Persius taunteth them with their Sabbata recutita, as before we
noted. Now as the Poet did upbraid them with Circumcision, and forbearing
Swines flesh: so Seneca derides them for the Sabbaths, Epist. 95.
and their burning Tapers on the same, as a thing unnecessary; neither the Gods
being destitute of light, nor mortal men in love with smoke, Accendere aliquam
lucernam sabbatis praecipiamus, quoniam nec lumine dii egent, and ne homines
quidem delectantur fuligine. Nay some of them bewail the same, and wish their
Empire never had extended so far as Jewry, that so the Romans might not have
been acquainted with these superstitions of their Sabbaths.

O utinam nunquam Judaea subacta fuisset
Pompeii bellis, Rubilius.
Imperioque Titi.
Latius excisae gentis contagia serpunt,
Victoresque suos natio victa premit.
O would Judaea never had been won
By Pompeys Armies, or Vespasians Son,
Their superstition spreads it self so far,
That they give Laws unto the Conqueror.
Nor were the Sabbaths entertained only in Rome it self. Some, in almost all
places of their Empire, were that way inclined; as Seneca most rightly noted.
Eo usque sceleratissimae gentis consuetudo invaluit, ut per omnes jam terras
recepta sit, and victi victoribus leges dederunt. Cap. 11. De mund. opis.
Saint Augustine so reports him in his sixth Book de civitate. And this is
that, which Philo means when as he calls the Sabbath (...), the general
Festival of all people: when he sets up this challenge against all the World,
(...), etc. De vita Mos. ^. 2.
What man is there in all the World, who does not reverence this our holy
Sabbath, which brings rest and ease to all sorts of Men, Masters and
Servants, bond and free, yea, to the very brute beasts also. Not that they knew
the Sabbath by the light of Nature, or had observed the same in all Ages past;
but that they had admitted it in Philos time, as a Jewish ceremony. For let
Josephus be the Comment upon Philo's Text, and he will thus unfold his meaning.
The Laws, says he, established amongst us, have been imitated of all other
Nations: (...). L. 2. cont. Apiox.
Yea, and the common people did long since imitate our piety. Neither is there
any Nation Greek or Barbarous, to which our use of resting on the seventh day
has not spread it self: who also keep not Fasting days, and Lamps with lights;
and many of those Ordinances about Meats and Drinks, which are enjoined us by
the Law. So far Josephus.

These Romans, Sabbath; were many of them Proselytes, of the Jews, such as had
been admitted into that Religion: for it appears that they did also worship the
God of Heaven, and were Circumcised, and abstained from Swines flesh. Otherwise
we may well believe that of their own accord they had not bound themselves so
generally to observe the Sabbath, being no parts nor members of the Jewish
state: considering that such strangers as lived amongst them, not being
circumcised nor within the Covenant, were not obliged so to do. Tostatus tells
us of two sorts of strangers amongst the Jews. In Exodus 20. qu. 14.
The first, qui adveniebat de Gentilitate and convertebatur ad Judaismum, etc.
who being originally of the Gentiles had been converted to the Religion of the
Jews, and were Circumcised, and lived amongst them: and such were bound, says
he, to observe the Sabbath, and omnes observantias legis, and all other rites
of the Law of Moses. This is evident by that in the twelfth of Exodus, where it
is said, that every man servant bought with money, when he was circumcised
should eat the Passover: but that the foreigner and hired servant (conceive it
not being circumcised) might not eat thereof. The other sort of strangers, were
such as lived amongst them only for a certain time, to trade and traffic or
upon any other business of what sort soever. And they, says he, were not
obliged by the Commandment to keep the Sabbath, quia non poterant cogi ad
aliquam observantiam legalem, nisi vellent accipere circumcisionem: because
they could not be constrained to any legal Ordinance, except they would be
Circumcised, which was the door unto the rest. Finally, he resolves it thus,
that by the stranger within their gates, which by the Law were bonnd to observe
the Sabbath, were only meant such strangers, de gentilitate ad Judaismum
conversi, which had renouced their Gentilism, and embraced the Religion of the
Jews. And he resolved it so, no doubt, according to the practice of the Jews,
amongst whom he lived; and to the doctrine of their Rabbis, amongst whose
writings he was very conversant. Lyra himself a Jew, and therefore one who knew
their customs as well as any, does affirm as much, and tells us that the
stranger, in the Law intended, Gentilis est conversus ad ritum Judaeorum, is
such a stranger as had been converted to the Jewish Church. And this may yet
appear, in part, by the present practice of that people, who though themselves
milk not their Kine on the Sabbath day, permissium est and iis ut die Sabbatino
dicant Christiano, Buxdorf. Synagog. c. 11.
etc. Yet they may give a Christian leave to perform that Office; and then to
buy the milk of him for a toy, or trifle. Add here what formerly we noted of
their Servants. Chapter 3. n. 1.
Of whom we told you out of Rabbi Maimony, that if they were not circumcised or
baptized, they were as sojourning strangers, and may do work for themselves
openly on the Sabbath, as any of the Israelites might on a working day. By
which it seems that strangers, yea and servants too, in case they were not
Circumcised, or otherwise initiated into their Churches were not obliged to
keep the Sabbath. Which plainly shows that by the Jews themselves, the keeping
of the Sabbath was not taken for a moral Law; or to concern any but themselves,
and those of their Religion only. For had they took it for a part of the Law of
Nature, as universally to be observed as any other; they had not suffered it to
be broke amongst them, before their faces, and that without control of
censure: no more, than they would have permitted a sojourning stranger to
blaspheme their God, or publicly to set up Idolatry, or without punishment to
steal their goods, or destroy their persons. The rather since their Sabbath had
prevailed so far, as to be taken up with other parts of their Religion, in many
principal Cities of the Roman Empire: or otherwise by way of imitation, so much
in use among the Gentiles. And this I have the rather noted in this place and
time, because that in these times the Country of the Jews was most resorted to
by all sorts of strangers, and they themselves in favor with the Roman
Emperors.

Indeed these customs of the Jews did fly about the Roman Empire with a swifter
wing, by reason of that countenance which great Augustus Caesar did show both
to the men, Philo. leg. ad Caium.
and unto their Sabbath. First, for the men, he did not only suffer them to
enjoy the liberty of Conscience in their own Country, and there to have their
Synagogues and public places of Assembly, as before they had: but he permitted
them to inhabit a great part of Rome, and there to live according to their
Country Laws. (...); and yet, says he, he knew that they had their
Proseuchas, or Oratories; that they assembled in the same, especially on the
holy Sabbaths; and finally, that there they were instructed in their own
Religion. Then for the Sabbath, the Jews had anciently been accustomed, not to
appear in judgment either upon the Sabbath day, or the Eve before. Augustus
does confirm this privilege, bestows upon their Synagogues, the prerogative of
Sanctuary, Jos. Antiq. l. 16. c. 30.
enables them to live according to the Laws of their own Country; and finally
threatens severe punishment on those, which should presume to do any thing
against his Edict. The tenor of which Edict is as follows. Caesar Augustus
Pont. Max. Trib. Pleb. ita censet, Quoniam Judaeorum gens semper fida and grata
fuit populo Romans etc. placet mihi de communi Senatus sententia, eos propriis
uti legibus and ritibus, quibus utebantur tempore Hyrcani Pontificis Dei
maximi, and eorum fanis jus Asyli manner, etc. neque cogi ad praestanda
vadimonia sabbatis, aut pridie sabbatorum, post horam nonam in Parasceve. Quod
si quis contra decretum ausus fuerit, gravi poena mulctabitur. This Edict was
set forth Anno 4045. and after many of that kind were published in several
Provinces, by Mar. Agrippa, Provost General under Caesar: Phil. legate. ad Caium.
as also by Norbanus Flaceus, and Julius Antonius, Proconsuls at that time;
whereof see Josephus. Nay, when the Jews were grown so strict, that it was
thought unlawful either to give, or take an Alms on the Sabbath day: Augustus,
for his part, was willing not to break them of it; yet so to order and dispose
his Bounties, that they might be no losers by so fond a strictness. For whereas
he did use to distribute monthly a certain Donative, either in Money or in Corn;
this distribution sometimes happened on the Sabbath days, (...), as Philo has
it, whereon the Jews might neither give nor take, neither indeed do any thing
that did tend to sustenance. Therefore, says he, it was provided that their
proportion should be given them (...), on the next day after, that so they
might be made partakers of the public benefit. Not give nor take an Alms on
the Sabbath day? Their superstition sure was now very vehement: seeing it would
not suffer men to do the works of mercy, on the day of mercy. And therefore it
was more than time, they should be sent to School again, to learn this Lesson;
I will have mercy and not sacrifice.

And so indeed they were sent unto School to him, viz. to rectify those
dangerous Errors, which had been spread abroad in these latter times, about
the Sabbath. The service of the Sabbath, in the Congregation, he found full
enough. The custom was, to read a Section of the Law, out of the Pentateuch or
five Books of Moses; and after to illustrate, or confirm the same, out of some
parallel place amongst the Prophets. That ended, if occasion were, and that the
Rulers of the Synagogue did consent unto it, there was a word of Exhortation
made unto the people, Chap. 13.15.
conducing to obedience and the works of Piety. So far it is apparent by that
passage in the Acts of the Apostles touching Paul and Barnabas: that being at
Antioch in Pisidia, on the Sabbath day, after the reading of the Law and
Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and
brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation to speak unto the people, dicite,
say on. As for the Law (I note this only by the way) they had divided it into
54 Sections, which they read over in the two and fifty sabbaths: joining two of
the shortest, twice, together, that so it might be all read over within the
year; beginning on the Sabbath which next followed the Feast of Tabernacles,
ending on that which came before it. So far our Savior found no fault, but
rather countenanced and confirmed the custom, by his gracious presence, and
example. But in these rigid Vanities, and absurd Traditions, by which the
Scribes and Pharisees had abused the Sabbath, and made it of an ease to become
a drudgery: in those he thought it requisite to detect their follies, and ease
the people of that bondage, which they in their proud humors had imposed upon
them. The Pharisees had taught that it was unlawful on the sabbath day, either
to heal the impotent, or relieve the sick, or feed the hungry: but he confutes
them in them all, both by his Acts, and by his Disputations. Whatever he
maintained by Argument, he made good by Practice. Did they accuse his followers
of gathering Corn upon the Sabbath, being then an hungered? he lets them know
what David did in the same extremity. Their eating, or their gathering on the
Sabbath day, take you which you will, was not more blameable, nay not so
blameable by the Law; as David's eating of the Shewbread; which plainly was
not to be eaten by any, but the Priest alone. The Cures he did upon the
Sabbath, what were they more than which themselves did daily do, in laying
salves unto those Infants, whom on the Sabbath day they had Circumcised. His
bidding of the impotent man to take up his Bed, and get him gone, which seemed
so odious in their eyes; was it so great a toil, as to walk round the walls of
Hiericho, and bear the Ark upon their shoulders? or any greater burden to their
idle backs, than to lift up the Ox, and set him free out of that dangerous
Ditch, into the which the hasty Beast might fall as well upon the Sabbath, as
the other days? Should men take care of Oxen and not God of Man? Not so. The
Sabbath was not made for a lazy Idol, which all the Nations of the World should
fall down, and worship: but for the ease and comfort of the laboring man, that
he might have some time to refresh his spirits. Sabbatum propter hominem factum
est, The Sabbath, says our Savior, was made for man; man was not made to
serve the Sabbath. Nor had God so irrevocably spoke the word, touching the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, that he had left himself no power to repeal that
Law; in case he saw the purpose of the Law perverted: the Son of man, even he
that was the Son both of God and Man, being Lord also of the Sabbath. Nay it is
rightly marked by some, that Christ our Savior did more works of Charity on
the Sabbath day, than on all days else. Zanchius observes it out of Irenaeus.
In Mandat. 4.
Saepius multo Christum in die Sabbati praestitisse opera charitatis, quam in
aliis diebus; and his note is good. Not that there was some urgent and extreme
necessity; either the Cures to be performed that day, or the man to perish. For
if we look into the story of our Saviors actions, we find no such matter. It Is
true, that the Centurions son, and Peter's mother-in-law, were even sick to
death: and there might be some reason in it, why he should haste unto their
Cures on the Sabbath day. But on the other side, the man that had the withered
Hand, Matthew. 13. and the Woman with her flux of Blood eighteen years together,
Luke 13. he that was troubled with the Dropsy, Luke 14. and the poor wretch
which was afflicted with the Palsy, John 5. in none of these was found any
such necessity, but that the Cure might have been respited to another day. What
then? Shall it be thought our Savior came to destroy the Law? No. God forbid.
Himself has told us, that he came to fulfill it rather. He came to let them
understand the right meaning of it, that for the residue of time wherein it was
to be in force, they might no longer be misled by the Scribes and Pharisees,
and such blind guides as did abuse them. Thus have I briefly summed together,
what I find scattered in the Writings of the ancient Fathers: which who desires
to find at large, may look into Irenaeus, li. 4. ca. 19. and 20. Origin. in
Number. hom. 23. Tertul. li. 4. contr. Marcion. Athanas. hom. de Semente. p. 1061.
and 1072. edit. gr. lat. Victor. Antioch. cap. 3. in Marcum. Chrysostom. hom. 39.
in Matthew. 12. Epiphan. li. 1. haeres. 30. n. 33. Hierom, in Matthew. 12. Ambros.
in cap. 3. Luke li. 3. Augustine. cont. Faustum. li. 16. ca. 28. and lib. 19.
ca. 9. to descend no lower. With one of which last Fathers savings, Cont.
Adimant. ca. 2.
we conclude this list, Non ergo Dominus rescindit Scripturam Vet. Test. sed
cogit intelligi. Our Saviors purpose, says the Father, was not to take away
the Law, but to expound it.

Not then to take away the Law, it was to last a little longer. Consummatum
est, that the Law was abrogated. Nor might it seem so proper for him, to take
away one Sabbath from us, which was rest from labor; until he had provided us
of another, which was rest from sin. And to provide us such a Sabbath was to
cost him dearer, than words and arguments. He healed us by his Word before. Now
he must heal us by his stripes, or else no entrance into his Rest, the eternal
Sabbath. Besides the Temple stood as yet, and whiles that stood, or was in hope
to be rebuilt, there was no end to be expected of the legal Ceremonies. The
Sabbath, and the Temple did both end together; and which is more remarkable, on
a Sabbath day. The Jews were still sick of their old Disease, and would not
stir a foot on the Sabbath day, beyond their compass: no, though it were to
save their Temple, and in that their Sabbath, or whatsoever else was most dear
unto them. Nay they were more superstitious now, than they were before. For
whereas in the former times it had been thought unlawful, to take Arms and make
War on the Sabbath day, Joseph. de bello. li. 4. ca. 4.
unless they were assaulted and their lives in danger: now (...) it was
pronounced unlawful even to treat of peace. A fine contradiction. Agrippa laid
this home unto them, when first they entertained a rebellious purpose against
the Romans, Id. li. 2. c. 16.
(...), etc. If you observe the custom of the Sabbaths, and in them do nothing,
it will be no hard matter to bring you under: for so your Ancestors found in
their Wars with Pompey, who ever deferred works until that day, wherein his
Enemies were idle and made no resistance. (...), etc. If on the other side you
take Arms that day, then you transgress your Country laws, your selves; and so
I see no cause why you should rebel. Where note, Agrippa calls the Sabbath a
Custom, and their Country law; which makes it evident that they thought it not
any Law of Nature. Now what Agrippa said, did in fine fall out: the City being
taken on the Sabbath day, as Jos. Scaliger computes it; or the Parasceve of the
Sabbath, as Rab. Joses has determined, Most likely that it was on the Sabbath
day it self. For Dion speaking of this War, Lib. 66.
and of this taking of the City, conclude it thus. (...). Jerusalem, says he,
was taken on the Saturday, which the Jews most reverence till this day. Thus
fell the Temple of the Jews, and with it all the Ceremonies of the Law of
Moses. Demonst. l. 1. c. 6.
Since when, according as Eusebius tells us, (...), etc. It is not lawful for
that people, either to sacrifice according to the Law, or to build a Temple, or
erect an Altar, to consecrate their Priests, or anoint their Kings: (...), or
finally to hold their solemn Assemblies, or any of their Festivals ordained by
Moses.

For that the Sabbath was to end with other legal Ceremonies, Moses, and
secondly an institute peculiar to the Jewish Nation; both which we have already
proved: and therefore was to end with the Law of Moses, and the state of Jewry.
Fathers there be good store, which affirm as much: some of the which shall be
produced to express themselves, that we may see what they conceived of the
abrogation of the Sabbath. And first for Justin Martyr, it is his chief scope
and purpose in his Conference with Tyrpho; Dial. cum Trypbon.
to make it manifest and unquestionable, that as there was no use of
Circumcision before Abraham's time, not of the Sabbath until Moses, (...), so
neither is there any use of them at this present time: that as it took
beginning them, so it was now to have an end. Adv. Marc. l. 2.
Tertullian in his Argument against the Marcionites, draws out this conclusion,
Ad tempus and praesentis causae necessitatem convaluisse, non ad perpetui
temporis observationem; that God ordained the Sabbath upon special reasons, and
as the times did then require, Hom. de Sab. and circum.
not that it should continue always. St. Athanasius thus discourses: When God,
says he, had finished the first Creation, he did betake himself to rest,
(...), etc. and therefore those of that Creation did celebrate their Sabbath on
the seventh day. But the accomplishment of the New Creature has no end at all,
and therefore God still works, as the Gospel teaches. Hence it is, that we
keep no Sabbath, as the Ancients did, expecting an eternal Sabbath, which shall
have no end. That of St. Ambrose, Synagoga diem observat, Ecclesia
immertalitatem, comes most near to this. Epist. 72. l. 9.
But he that speaks most fully to this point, is the great St. Austin, what he
says, shall be delivered under three several Heads. First, that the Sabbath is
quite abrogated; Tempore gratiae revelatae, observatio illa Sabbati, quae unius
diei vacatione figurabatur, ablata est ab observatione fidelium: The keeping of
the Sabbath is taken utterly away in this time of Grace. De Genesis ad lit. l. 4.
c. 13. See the like, ad Bonifac. l. 3. Tom. 7. contr. Faust. Man. l. 6. c. 4.
Qu. ex N. Test. 69. Secondly, that the Sabbath was not kept in the Church of
Christ; In illis december praeceptis, excepta sabbati observatione, dicatur mihi
quid no non sit observandum a Christiano. de sp. and lit. c. 14. What is there
(says the Father) in all the Decalogue, except the keeping of the Sabbath,
which is not punctually to be observed of every Christian. More of the like
occurs de Genesi contr. Manich. l. 1. c. 22. contr. Adimant. ca. 2. Qu. in
Exodus l. 2. qu. 173. And thirdly, that it is not lawful for a Christian to
observe the Sabbath. Deiutil. crecendi. c. 3.
For speaking of the Law, how it was a Paedagogie to bring us unto the knowledge
of Christ, he adds, that in those Institutes and Ordinances, Quibus Christians
uti fas non est, quale est sabbatum, circumcisio, sacrificia, etc. which are
not lawful to be used by any Christian: such as are the Sabbath, Circumcision,
Sacrifices, and such other things; many great Mysteries were contained. And in
another place, Quisquis diem illum observat, sicut litera sonat, carnaliter
sapit. Sapere autem secundum carnem mors est. He that does literally keep the
Sabbath, favors of the flesh: De Sp. and lit. c. 14.
but to savor of the flesh is death: Therefore no Sabbath to be kept by the
sons of life.

No Sabbath to be kept at all? We affirm not so. Sabbath which the Prophet
Isaiah has commended to us. Blessed is the man that keeps the sabbath from
polluting it. Quid autem sabbatum est quod praecipit observandum, etc. What
Sabbath is it, says St. Hierom, that is here commanded? The following words,
says he, will inform us that, keeping our hands from doing evil. This is the
Sabbath here commanded, Si bona faciens quiescat a malis, if doing what is good
we do rest from sin. Nor was this his conceit alone; the later Writers so
expound it. The Prophet in this place, says Ryvet, thus prophecies of the
Church of Christ. Blessed is the man that keeps the sabbath from polluting
it, In Decalog.
and keeps his hands from doing any evil. Vbi custodire sabbatum in Ecclesia
Christiana, est custodire manus suas a malo. And in these words, says he, to
keep a Sabbath in a Christian Church, is only to preserve our hands from doing
evil. The like spiritual Sabbath does the man of God prescribe unto us, in the
58 Chapter of his Book. Verse 13.14.
If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my
holy day, and. not doing thine own way, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor
sheapking thine own words: then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I
will cause thee to ride upon the high plaes of the earth, etc. What says
Hierom unto this? It must be understood, says he, spiritually. Alioquin si
haec tantum prohibentur in sabbato, ergo in aliis sex diebus tribuitur nobis
libertas delinquendi. In locum.
For otherwise, if those things above remembered, are prohibited only on the
Sabbaths, then were it lawful for us on the other days, to follow our own
finful courses, speak our own idle words, and pursue our own voluptuous
pleasures; which were most foolish to imagine. And so says Ryvet too for the
modern Writers, In Decalog.
Repetuum ab omnibus operibus nostris vitiosis cessationem, etc. That
everlasting rest from all sinful works, which is begun in this life, here; and
finished in the life to come; is signified and represented by those words of
Isaiab, ca. 58. They therefore much mistake these Texts, and the meaning of
them, who grounding thereupon, forbid all manner of REcreations and lawful
pleasures, on their supposed Sabbath day; as being utterly prohibited by Gods
holy Prophet. The Jews did thus abuse this Scripture, Maymon. ap. Ains. in Ex.
20.
in the times before: and made it an unlawful matter, for any man to walk into
the Fields, or to see his Gardens on the Sabbath day; either to mark what
things they wanted, or how well they prospered: because this was to do his own
pleasure, and so forbidden by the Prophet. But those that understand the true
Christian Sabbath, apply them to a better purpose: as was showed before. And
for the Christian Sabbath, what it is, and in what things it does consist,
besides what has been said already, we shall add something more from the
ancient Fathers. If any man, Dial. cum Trypbon.
says Justin Martyr, that has been formerly a perjured person, a deceiver of
his Neighbor, an incontinent liver, repentshim of his sins, and amends his
life: (...), that man does keep a true and holy Sabbath to the Lord his God.
See to this purpose also, Clemens of Alexandria, Strom. l. 4. So Origin, Omnis
qui vivit in Christo semper in sabbatis vivit; That man, Tract. 19. in Math.
whose life is hid with Christ in God, keeps a daily Sabbath. See to that
purpose, Hom. 23. in Numbers. Macarius also tells us that the Sabbath given
from God by Moses, Hom. 35.
was a Type only and a shadow of that real Sabbth, (...), given by the Lord
unto the soul. More fully Chrysostom, (...), etc. What use, says he, is there
of a Sabbath to him whose Conscience is a continual feast, to him whose
conversation is in Heaven. For now we feast it every day, doing no manner of
wickedness, but keeping a spiritual rest, holding our hands from covet ousness,
our Bodies from uncleanness. What need we more? The Law of righteousness
contains ten Commandments. The first, to know one God; the second to abstain
from Idols; the third not to profane Gods Name; the fourth Sabbatum celebrare
spirituale, Hom. 29. in Math. 24.
to keep the true spiritual Sabbath, etc. So he that made the Opus imperfectum,
on Saint Matthews Gospel. Saint Augustine finally makes the fourth Commandment,
so far as it concerns us Christians to be no more than requies cordis, De
conven. 10; praec. and 10. plagarum.
and tranquillitas mentis quam facit bona conscientia, the quiet of the heart,
and the peace of mind, occasioned by a good Conscience. Of any other Sabbath to
be looked for now, the Fathers utterly are silent: and therefore we may well
resolve, there is no such thing.

Yet notwithstanding this, Jews still dote upon their Sabbath, and that more
sottishly, and with more superstition far than they ever did. A view whereof I
shall present, and so conclude the first part of this present Argument. And
first for the Parasceves or their Eves, Synag. Jud. c. 10.
Buxdorfius thus informs us of their vain behavior. Die Veneris singuli ungues
de digitis abscindunt, etc. On Friday in the afternoon they pare their Nails,
and whet their Knives, and lay their Holiday-cloaths in readiness for the
reception of Queen Sabbath, for so they call it: and after lay the Cloth, and
set on their Meat, that nothing be to be done upon the morrow. About the
evening goes the Sexton from door to door, commanding all the people to abstain
from work, and to make ready for the Sabbath. That done they take no work in
hand. Only the Women, when the Sun is near its setting, light up their
Sabbath-lamps in their dining rooms: and stretching out their hands toward
them, give them their Blessing and depart. To morrow they begin their Sabbath
very early, and for entrance thereunto, array themselves in their best Clothes,
and their richest Jewels: it being the conceit of Rabby Solomon, that the
Memento in the front of the fourth Commandment was placed there especially, to
put the Jews in mind of their Holiday Garments. Nay so precise they are in
these Preparations, and the following Rest, that if a Jew go forth on Friday,
and on the night falls short of home more than is lawful to be traveled on the
Sabbath day, there must he set him down, and there keep his Sabbath; though in
a Wood, or in the Field, or the Highway side; without all fear of wind or
weather, of Thieves or Robbers; without all care also of Meat and Drink.
Periculo latronum praedonumque omui, penuria item omni cibi potusque neglectis,
as that Author has it. For their behavior on the Sabbath, and the strange
niceties wherewith they abuse themselves, he describes it thus. Equus aut
asinus Domini ipsius stabulo exiens, Id. cap. 11.
froenum aut capistrum non aliud quicquam portabit, etc. An Horse may have a
Bridle or an Halter to lead, not a Saddle to load him: and he that leads him
must not let it hang so loose, that it may seem he rather carries the Bridle,
than leads the Horse. An Hen must not wear her Hose sowed about her Leg, They
may not milk their Kine, nor eat any of the milk though they have procured some
Christian to do that work, unless they buy it. A Tailor may not wear his Needle
sticking on his sleeve. The lame may use a staff, but the blind may not. They
may not burden themselves with Cloggs or Pattens, to keep their feet out of
the dirt: nor rub their Shoos, if foul, against the ground; but against a wall:
nor wipe their dirty Hands with a Cloth or Towel; but with a Cows or Horses
tail they may do it lawfully. A wounded Man may wear a Plaster on his sore,
that formerly was applied unto it: but if it fall off, he may not lay it on
anew, or bind up any wound that day, nor carry money in their Purses, or about
their Clothes. They may not carry a Fan or flap to drive away the Flies. If a
Flea bite, they may remove it, but not kill it; but a Lowse they may: yet Rabbi
Eliezer thinks one may as lawfully kill a Camel. They must not fling more Corn
unto their Poultry than will serve that day: lest it may grow by lying still,
and they be said to sow their Corn upon the Sabbath. To whistle a tune with
ones Mouth, or play it on an Instrument, is unlawful utterly: as also to knock
with the ring or hammer of a Door; or knock ones hand upon a Table, though it
be only to still a Child. So likewise, to draw Letters either in dust or ashes,
or on a wet Board is prohibited; but not to fancy them in the Air. With many
other infinite absurdities of the like poor nature; wherewith the Rabbis have
been pleased to afflict their Brethren, and make good sport to all the World,
which are not either Jews or Jewishly affected. Nay, to despite our Savior, as
Buxdorfius tells us, they have determined since, that it is unlawful to life
the Ox or Ass out of the Ditch; which in the strictest time of the Pharisaical
rigours, was accounted lawful. Indeed the marvel is the less, that they are so
uncharitable to poor Brute creatures; when as they take such little pity upon
themselves. Crantzius reports a story of a Jew of Magdeburg, who falling on a
Saturday into a Privy, would not be taken out, because it was the Sabbath day:
and that the Bishop gave command, that there he should continue on the Sunday
also, so that between both the poor Jew was poisoned with the very stink. The
like our Annals do relate of a Jew of Tewkesbury, whose story being cast into
three riming Verses, according to the Poetry of those times. I have here
presented and translated; Dialogue-wise, as they first made it.

Tend manus Solomon, ut te de stercore tollam.
Sabbata nostra colo, de stercore surgere nolo.
Sabbata nostra quidem, Solomon celebrabis ibidem.
Friend Solomon, thy Hands up-rear,
And from the Jakes I will thee bear.
Our Sabbath I so highly prize,
That from the place I will not rise.
Then Solomon, without more ado,
Our Sabbath thou shall keep there too.
For the continuance of their Sabbath, as they begin it early on the day
before; so they prolong it on the day till late at night. And this they do in
pity to the souls in Hell; who all the while the Sabbath lasts, have free
leave to play. For as they tell us silly wretches, upon the Eve before the
Sabbath, it is proclaimed in the Hall, that every one may go his way, and take
his pleasure: and when the Sabbath is concluded, they are recalled again to the
house of Torments. I am ashamed to meddle longer in these trifles, these Dreams
and dotages of infatuated men, given over to a reprobate sense. Nor had I stood
so long upon them, but that in this Anatomy of the Jewish follies, I might let
some amongst us see into what dangers they are falling. For there are some,
indeed too many, who taking his for granted, which they cannot prove, that the
Lords Day succeeds into the place and rights of the Jewish sabbath, and is to
be observed by virtue of the fourth Commandment: have trenched too near upon
the Rabbis, in binding men to nice and scrupulous observances; which neither
we nor our Forefathers were ever able to endure. But with what warrant they
have made a sabbath day, in the Christian Church, where there was never any
known in all times before; or upon what Authority they have presumed to lay
heavy Burdens upon the Consciences of poor men, which are free in Christ: we
shall the better see by tracing down the story from our Saviors time, unto the
times in which we live. But I will here sit down and rest, beseeching God, who
enabled me thus far, to guide me onwards to the end.

Tu qui principio medium, medio adjice finem.
THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH.

The Second BOOK.

From the first preaching of the Gospel to these present Times.

By PETER HEYLYN, D.D.

COLOSS. ii. 16, 17. Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of
an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the SABBATH Days: which are a shadow of
things to come, but the Body is of Christ.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, to be sold by C. Harper. 1681.

To the Christian Reader;
AND such I hope to meet with, in this Part especially; which treating of the
affairs of the Christian Church, cannot but be displeasing unto them, which are
not Christianly affected. Our former Book we destinated to the Jewish part of
this enquiry: wherein, though long it was before we found it, yet at the last
we found a Sabbath. A Sabbath which began with that state and Church, and ended
also when they were no longer to be called a Nation; but a dispersed and
scattered ruin of what once they were. In that which follows, our Enquiry
must be more diffused, of the same latitude with the Church; a Church not
limited and confined to some Tribes and Kindreds but generally spreading over
all the World. We may affirm it of the Gospel, what Florus sometimes said of
the state of Rome. Ita late per orbem terrarum arma circumtulit, ut qui res
ejus legunt, non unius populi, sed generis humani facta discunt. The history of
the Church, and of the World, are of like extent. So that the search herein, as
unto me it was more painful in the doing, so unto thee will it be more pleasing
being done; because of that variety which it will afford thee. And this Part we
have called the History of the Sabbath too: although the institution of the
Lords Day, and entertainment of the same in all times and Ages since that
institution, be the chief thing whereof it treats. For being it is said by
some that the Lords Day succeeded, by the Lords appointment, into the place and
rights of the Jewish Sabbath; so to be called, and so to be observed, as the
Sabbath was: this Book was wholly to be spent in the search thereof, whether in
all, or any Ages of the Church, either such doctrine had been preached, or such
practice pressed upon the Conscience of Gods people. And search indeed we did
with all care and diligence, to see if we could find a Sabbath, in any evidence
of Scripture, or writings of the holy Fathers, or Edicts of Emperors, or
Decrees of Councils: or finally in any of the public Acts and Monuments of the
Christian Church. But after several searches made upon the alias, and the
pluries, we still return, Non est inventus: and thereupon resolve in the Poets
language, Et quod non invenis usquam, esse putes nosquam; that which is no
where to be found, may very strongly be concluded not to be at all. Buxdorfius
in the 11th Chapter of his Synagoga Judaica, out of Antonius Margarita, tells
us of the Jews, quod die sabbatino, praeter animam consuetam, praediti sunt and
alia; that on the Sabbath day, they have an extraordinary soul infused into
them, which does enlarge their hearts, and rouse up their spirits, Ut Sabbatum
multo honorabilius peragere possint, that they may celebrate the Sabbath, with
the greater bonour. And though this sabbatarie soul, may by a Pythagorical
(...) seem to have transmigrated from the Jews, into the Bodies of some
Christians in these later days: yet I am apt to give my self good hopes, that
by presenting to their view, the constant practice of Gods Church in all times
before, and the consent of all Gods Churches at this present; they may be
dispossessed thereof without great difficulty. It is but anima superflua, is
Buxdorfius calls it; and may be better spared, than kept, because superfluous.
However I shall easily persuade my self, that by this general representation of
the estate and practice of the Church of Christ, I may confirm the wavering, in
a right persuasion; and assure such as are already well affected, by showing
them the perfect harmony and agreement, which is between this Church and the
purest times. It is our constant prayer to Almighty God, as well that he would
strengthen such as do stand, and confirm the weak, as to raise up those men
which are fallen into sin and error. As are our prayers, such should be also
our endeavors; as universal to all sorts of men, as charitable to them in
their several cases and distresses. Happy those men, who do aright discharge
their Duties, both in their prayers, and their performance. The blessing of our
labors we must leave to him, who is all in all: without whom all Paul's
planting, and Apollo's watering, will yield poor increase. In which of these
three states soever thou art, good Christian Reader, let me beseech thee kindly
to accept his pains; which for thy sake were undertaken: that so he might, in
some poor measure, be an instrument, to strengthen or confirm, or raise thee,
as thy case requires. This is the most that I desire, and less than this thou
could not do, did I not desire it. And so fare thee well.

THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I. That there is nothing found in Scripture, touching the keeping of the
Lords Day.
1. The Sabbath not intended for a perpetual Ordinance. 2. Preparatives unto
the dissolution of the Sabbath, by our Savior Christ. 3. The Lords day not
enjoined in the place thereof, either by Christ or his Apostles; but instituted
by the Authority of the Church. 4. Our Saviors Resurrection on the first day
of the week, and apparitions on the same, make it not a Sabbath. 5. The coming
down of the Holy Ghost upon the first day of the week, makes it not a Sabbath.
6. The first day of the week not made a Sabbath, more than others, by Saint
Peter, Saint Paul, or any other of the Apostles. 7. Saint Paul frequents the
Synagogue on the Jewish Sabbath, and upon what reasons. 8. What was concluded
against the Sabbath, in the Council holden in Jerusalem. 9. The preaching of
Saint Paul at Troas, upon the first day of the week, no argument, that then
that day was set apart by the Apostles for religious exercises. 10. Collections
on the first day of the week, 1 Cor. 16. conclude as little for that purpose.
11. Those places of Saint Paul, Galat. 4.10. Colos. 2.16. do prove invincibly
that there is no Sabbath to be looked for. 12. The first day of the week not
called the Lords day, until the end of this first Age; and what that title adds
unto it.


WE showed you in the former Book what did occur about the Sabbath, Jews
themselves, as if it had been any part of the Law of Nature; but sometimes
kept, and sometimes broken, either according as men's private businesses, or the
affairs of the republic would give way unto it. Never such conscience made
thereof, as of Adultery, Murder, Blasphemy, or Idolatry; no not when as the
Scribes and Pharisees had most made it burdensome: there being many casus
reservati, wherein they could dispense with the fourth Commandment, though not
with any of the other. Had they been all alike, equally natural and moral, as
it is conceived, they had been all alike observed, all alike immutable; no jot
or syllable of that Law which was ingraft by nature in the soul of man, being
to fall unto the ground, till Heaven and Earth shall pass away and decay
together; till the whole frame of Nature, Luke 16.17.
for preservation of the which the Law was given, be dissolved for ever. The
Abrogation of the Sabbath, which before we spoke of, shows plainly that it was
no part of the Moral Law, or Law of Nature; there being no Law natural, which
is not perpetual. Tertullian takes it for confessed, or at least makes it plain
and evident, Contr. Mare. l. 2.
Temporale fuisse mandatum quod quandoque cessaret, that it was only a
temporary constitution which was in time to have an end. And after him,
Procopius Gazaeus, in his notes on Exodus, e. 16.
lays down two several sorts of Laws, whereof some were to be perpetual, and
some were not; of which last sort were Circumcision and the Sabbath, Quae
duraverunt usque in adventum Christi, which lasted till our Saviors coming;
and he being come, went out insensibly of themselves. For as S. Ambrose rightly
tells us, In Col. 2.16.
Absent imperatore imago ejus habet autoritatem, praesente non habet, etc. What
time the Emperor is absent, we give some honor to his State, or
representation; but none at all, when he is present. And so, says he, the
Sabbaths and New Mons, and the other Festivals, before our Saviors coming,
had a time of honor, during the which they were observed; but he being present
once, they became neglected. But hereof we have spoke more fully in our former
Book.

Neglected, not at once, and upon the sudden, but leisurely and by degrees.
Moses; and there were some preparatives required before that Law of Moses was
to be repealed. These we shall easiliest discover, if we shall please to look
on our Saviors actions; who gave the first hint unto his Disciples for the
abolishing of the Sabbath amongst other ceremonies. It Is true, that he did
frequently repair unto the Synagogues on the Sabbath days; and on those days
did frequently both read and expound the Law unto the People. And he came to
Nazareth (says the Text) where be had been brought up, and as his custom was,
he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, Luke 4.16.
and stood up to read. It was his custom so to do, both when he lived a private
life, to frequent the Synagogue, that other men might do the like by his good
example; and after when he undertook the Ministry, to expound the Law unto
them there, that they might be the better by his good instructions. Yet did not
he conceive that teaching or expounding the Word of God was annexed only to the
Synagogue, or to the Sabbath. That most divine and heavenly Sermon which takes
up three whole Chapters of S. Matthew's Gospel, was questionless a weak days
work; and so were most of those delivered to us in S. John, as also that which
he did preach unto them from the Ship side, and diverse others. Nay the Text
tells us, that he went through every City and Village, Preaching and showing
the glad tidings of God. Luke 8.1.
Too great a task to be performed only on the Sabbath days; and therefore doubt
we not but that all days equally were taken up for so great a business. So when
he sent out his Apostles to Preach the Kingdom of God, he bound them not to
days and times, but left all at liberty, that they might take their best
advantages as occasion was, and lose no time in the advancing of their Masters
service. Now as in this, he seemed to give all days the like prerogative with
the Sabbath; so many other ways did he abate that estimation, which generally
the People had conceived of the Sabbath day. And howsoever the opinion which
the People generally had conceived thereof, was grounded as the times then
were, on superstition rather, than true sense of piety; yet that opinion once
abated, it was more easily prepared for a dissolution, and went away at last
with less noise and clamor. Particulars of this nature we will take along, as
they lie in order. His casting out the unclean spirit out of a man in the
Synagogue of Caperndum on the Sabbath day, his curing of Peter's Wives Mother,
and healing many which were sick of diverse diseases, on the self same day;
being all works of mavelous mercy, and effected only by his word, brought no
clamor with them. But when he cured the impotent man at the Pool of Bethesda,
and had commanded him to take up his Bed and walk, Joh. 5.
then did the Jews begin to Persecute him, and seek to slay him. And how did he
excuse the matter? My Father works bitherto, says he, and I also work: Hom.
23. in Numer.
Ostendens per hac in nullo seculi bujus Sabbato requiescere Deum, a
dispensationibus mundi, and provisionibus generis humani. Whereby, says
Origin, he let them understand that there was never any Sabbath wherein God
rested or left off from having a due care of mankind; and therefore neither
would he intermit such a weighty business in any reference to the Sabbath. Joh.
7.
Which answer, when it pleased them not, but that they sought their times to
kill him, he then remembers them how they upon the Sabbath used to Circumcise
a man, and that as lawfully he might do the one as they the other. This
precedent made his Disciples a little bolder than otherwise perhaps they would
have been, Pulling the ears of Corn, Matthew. 12.
and rubbing them with their hands, and eating them to satisfy and allay their
hunger; Li. 1. haeres. 30. n. 32.
which Epiphanius thinks they would not have done, though they were an hungered,
had they not found both by his doctrine and example, that the Sabbath did begin
to be in its declination. For which, when he and they were jointly questioned
by the Pharisees, he choaks them with the instances of what David did in the
same extremity, when he ate the Shewbread; and what the Priests did every
Sabbath when they slew the Sacrifices. In which it is to be considered, that in
these several defenses our Savior goes no higher than the legal Ceremonies,
the Sacrifice, the Shewbread, and the Circumcision. No argument or parallel
case drawn for his justification from the moral Law, or any such neglect
thereof on the like occasions. Which plainly shows, that he conceived the
Sabbath to be no part or member of the moral Law, Luke 6.6. Hom. de Semente.
but only to be ranked amongst the Mosaical Ordinances. It happened on another
Sabbath, that in the Synagogue he beheld a man with a withered hand, and called
him forth, and made him come into the midst, and stretch out his hand, and then
restored it. Hereupon Athanasius notes, (...), that Christ reserved his
greatest miracles for the Sabbath day; and that he bade the man stand forth, in
defiance as it were of all their malice and informing humor. His healing of
the Woman which had been crooked 18. years, and of the man that had the
Dropsy; one in the Synagogue, the other in the house of a principal Pharisee,
Joh. 9.
are proof sufficient that he feared not their accufations. But that great cure
he wrought on him that was born blind, is most remarkable to this purpose.
First in relation to our Savior, who had before healed others with his Word
alone; but here he spit upon the ground, and made clay thereof, and anointed
the eyes of the blind man with the clay: L. 1. Haeres. 30. n. 32.
(...), but to mould clay and make a Plaster was questionless a work, so says
Epiphanius. Next in relation to the Patient, whom he commanded to go into the
Pool of Siloam, and then wash himself; which certainly could not be done
without bodily labor. These words and actions of our Savior, at before we
said, gave the first hint to his Disciples for the abolishing of the Sabbath
amongst other Ceremonies, which were to have an end with our Saviors
sufferings; to be nailed with him to his Cross, and buried with him in his
Grave for ever. Now where it was objected in S. Austins time, why Christians
did not keep the Sabbath, since Christ affirms it of himself, that he came not
to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; Cont. Faust. l. 19. c. 9.
the Father thereto makes reply, that therefore they observed it not, Quia quod
ea figura profitebatur, jam Christus implevit, because our Savior had
fulfilled whatever was intended in that Law, by calling us to a spiritual rest
in his own great mercy. For as it is most truly said by Epiphanius, Lib. 1
haer. 30. n. 32.
(...), etc. He was the great and everlasting Sabbath, whereof the less (and
temporal) Sabbath was a type and figure which had continued till his coming: by
him commanded in the Law, in him destroyed, and yet by him fulfilled in the
holy Gospel. So Epiphanius.

Neither did he or his Disciples ordain another Sabbath in the place of this,
Athanasius, Hom. de Semente.
(...), we honor the Lords day for the Resurrection. So Maximus Taurinensis,
Dominicum diem ideo solennem esse, Hom. 3. de Pentecost.
quia in eo salvatur, velut sol oriens, discussis infernorum tenebris, luce
resurrectionis emicuerit: That the Lords day is therefore solemnly observed,
because thereon our Savior, like the rising Sun, dispelled the clouds of
hellish darkness by the light of his most glorious Resurrection. The like S.
Austin, Dies Dominicus Christianis resurrectione Domini declaratus est, ^p. 119.
and ex illo cepit habere fostivitatem suam. The Lords day was made known,
says he, unto us Christians by the Resurrection, and from that began to be
accounted holy. See the like, lib. 22. de Civit. Dei. c. 30. and sermon. 15. de
Verbis Apostoli. But then it is withal to be observed, that this was only done
on the authority of the Church, and not by any precept of our Lord and Savior,
or any one of his Apostles. And first, besides that there is no such precept
extant at all in holy Scripture, Socrates has affirmed it in the general,
(...), Li. 5. c. 22.
etc. that the designs of the Apostles were not to busy themselves in
prescribing Festival days, but to instruct the People in the ways of godliness.
Now lest it should be said that Socrates being a Novatian, was a professed Enemy
to all the orders of the Church; we have the same almost verbatim, in
Nicephorus, li. 12. cap. 32. of his Ecclesiastical History. De Sabb. and
Circumcis.
S. Athanasius says as much for the particular of the Lords day, that it was
taken up by a voluntary usage in the Church of God, without any commandment
from above, (...) etc. As, says the Father, it was commanded at the first that
the Sabbath day should be observed, in memory of the accomplishment of the
world, (...), so do we celebrate the Lords day as a memorial of the beginning
of a new Creation. Where note the difference here delivered by that Reverend
Prelate. Of the Jews Sabbath it is said, (...), that it was commanded to be
kept: but of the Lords day there is no Commandment, only a positive (...), an
honor voluntarily afforded it by consent of men. Therefore whereas we find it
in the Homily entitled De Semente, (...), that Christ transferred the Sabbath
to the Lords day; this must be understood, not as if done by his commandment,
but on his occasion: the Resurrection of our Lord upon that day, being the
principal motive which did induce his Church to make choice thereof for the
assemblies of the People. For otherwise it would plainly cross what formerly
had been said by Athanasius, in his (...); and not him only, but the whole
cloud of Witnesses, all the Catholic Fathers, in whom there is not any word
which reflects that way, but much in affirmation of the contrary. For besides
what is said before, and elsewhere shall be said in its proper place; The
Council held at Paris, An. 829. ascribes the keeping of the Lords Day at most
to Apostolical tradition, confirmed by the authority of the Church. For so the
Council, Cap. 50.
Christianorum religiosae devotionis, quae ut creditur Apostolorum traditione
immo Ecclesiae autoritate descendit, mos inolevit, ut Dominicum diem, ob
Dominicae resurrectionis memoriam, honorabiliter colat. And last of all
Tostatus puts this difference between the Festivals that were to be observed in
the Jewish Church, in novo nulla festivitas a Christo legislatore determinata
est, sed in Ecclesia Praelati ista statuunt; but in the new, there were no
Festivals at all prescribed by Christ, as being left unto the Prelates of the
Church, by them to be appointed, as occasion was. What others of the ancient
Writers, Cap. 24. v. 20.
and what the Protestant Divines have affirmed herein, we shall hereafter see
in their proper places. As for these words of our Redeemer in S. Matthews
Gospel, Pray that your flight be not in the Winter, neither on the Sabbath day;
they have indeed been much alleged to prove that Christ did intimate, at the
least, unto his Apostles and the rest, that there was a particular day by him
appointed, whereof he willed them to be careful; which being not the Jewish
Sabbath, must of necessity, as they think, be the Lords day. But certainly the
Fathers tell us no such matter, nay, they say the contrary; and make these
words a part of our Redeemers admonition to the Jews, not to the Apostles. In
Matthew. 24.
Saint Chrysostom has it so expressly. (...), etc. Behold, says he, how he
addresseth his discourse unto the Jews, and tells them of the evils which
should fall upon them; for neither were the Apostles bound to observe the
Sabbath, nor were they there when those Calamities fell upon the Jewish Nation.
Not in the Winter, nor on the Sabbath, and why so, says he? Because their
flight being so quick and sudden, (...), neither the Jews would dare to fly on
the Sabbath, [for such their superstition was in the later times] nor would the
Winter but be very troublesome in such distresses. In Matthew. 24.
Theophilact does affirm expressly, that this was spoken unto the Jews, and
spoken upon the self same reasons; adding withal, (...), that before any of
those miserles fell upon that Nation, the Apostles were all departed from out
Jerusalem. S. Hierom says as much as unto the time, that those Calamities
which by our Savior were foretold, were generally referred unto the Wars of
Titus and Vespasian; and that both in his Comment on S. Matthew's Gospel, and
his Epistle to Algasia. And for the thing that the Apostles and the rest of the
Disciples were all departed from Jerusalem before that heavy war began, is no
less evident in story. Qu. 4.
For the Apostles long before that time were either martyred or dispersed in
several places for the enlargement of the Gospel; not any of them resident in
Jerusalem after the Martyrdom of S. James, who was Bishop there. And for the
residue of the Disciples, they had forsook the Country also before the Wars,
being admonished so to do by an Heavenly Vision which warned them to withdraw
from thence and repair to Pella, beyond Jordan, Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 5.
as Eusebius tells us. So that these words of our Redeemer could not be spoke
as to the Apostles, and in them unto all the rest of the Disciples which should
follow after, but to the People of the Jews. To whom our Savior gave this
caution, not that he did not think it lawful for them to fly upon the Sabbath
day; but that as things then were, and as their consciences were entangled by
the Scribes and Pharisees, he found that they would count it a most grievous
misery to be put unto it. To return then unto our story, as the chief reason
why the Christians of the Primitive times did set apart this day to religious
uses, was because Christ that day did rise again from death to life for our
justification; so there was some Analogy or proportion, which this day seemed
to hold with the former Sabbath, which might more easily induce them to observe
the same. For as God rested on the Sabbath from all the works which he had done
in the Creation, so did the Son of God rest also on the day of his
Resurrection, from all the works which he had done in our Redemption. (...),
Orat. in sanct. Pascha.
as Gregory Nyssen notes it for us. Yet so that as the Father rested not on the
former Sabbath from the works of preservation, so neither does our Savior rest
at any time from perfecting this work of our redemption by a perpetual
application of the benefit and effects thereof. This was the cause, and these
the motives, which did induce the Church in some tract of time to solemnize the
day of Christ's Resurrection, as a weekly Festival, though not to keep it as a
Sabbath.

I say in tract of time, ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so in the
beginning. The very day it self was not so observed, though it was known to the
Apostles in the morning early, that the Lord was risen. We find not on the
news, that they came together for the performance of divine and religious
exercises, much less that they intended it for a Sabbath day; or that our
Savior came amongst them until late at night, as in likelihood he would have
done had any such performance been thought necessary, as was required unto the
making of a Sabbath. Nay, which is more, our blessed Savior on that day, and
two of the Disciples, whatsoever the others did, were otherwise employed than
in Sabbath duties. Luke 24.13.
For from Jerusalem to Emaus, whither the two Disciples went, was sixty
furlongs, which is seven miles and an half, and so much back again unto
Jerusalem, which is fifteen miles. And Christ who went the journey with them,
at least part thereof, and left them not until they came unto Emaus, was back
again that night, and put himself into the midst of the Apostles. Had he
intended it for a Sabbath day, doubtless he would have rather joined himself
with the Apostles, who as it is most likely, kept themselves together in
expectation of the issue, and so were most prepared and fitted to begin the new
Christian Sabbath, than with those men, who contrary to the nature of a
Sabbaths rest, were now engaged in a journey, and that for ought we know, about
worldly businesses. Nor may we think but that our Savior would have told them
of so great a fault as violating the new Christian Sabbath, even in the first
beginning of it, had any Sabbath been intended. As for the being of the eleven
in a place together, that could not have relation to any Sabbath duties, or
religious exercises, being none such were yet commanded; but only to those
cares and fears wherewith, poor men, they were distracted, which made them loath
to part asunder, till they were settled in their hopes, or otherwise resolved on
somewhat whereunto to trust. And where it is conceived by some that our most
blessed Savior showed himself oftener unto the Apostles upon the first day of
the week, than on any other; and therefore by his own appearings did sanctify
that day instead of the Jewish Sabbath; neither the premises are true, nor the
sequel necessary. The premises not true, for it is no where to be found that
he appeared oftener on the First day than any other of the week; Acts 1.3.
it being said in holy Scripture, that he was seen of them by the space of
forty days, as much on one, as on another. His first appearing after the night
following his Resurrection, which is particularly specified in the Book of God,
was when he showed himself to Thomas, who before was absent. That the Text
tells us, John 20.26.
was after eight days from the time before remembered; which some conceive to be
the eighth day after, or the next first day of the week, and thereupon conclude
that day to be most proper for the Congregations or public Meetings of the
Church. Diem octavum quo Christus Thomae apparuit, In Joh. l. 17. cap. 18.
Dominicum diem esse necesse est, as Saint Cyril has it, Jure igitur sanctae
congregationes die octavo in Ecclesia fiunt. But where the Greek Text reads it,
(...) post octo dies in the vulgar Latin, after eight days, according to our
English Bibles; that should be rather understood of the ninth or tenth, than
the eighth day after, and therefore could not be upon the first day of the
week, as it is imagined. Now as the premises are untrue, so the Conclusion is
unfirm. For if our Saviors apparition unto his Disciples, were of it self
sufficient to create a Sabbath, then must that day whereon Saint Peter went on
fishing, John 21.3.
be a Sabbath also, and so must holy Thursday too, it being most evident that
Christ appeared on those days unto his Apostles. So that as yet, from our
Redeemers Resurrection unto his Ascension, we find not any word or Item of a
new Christian Sabbath to be kept amongst them, or any evidence for the Lords
day in the four Evangelists, either in precept or in practice.

The first particular passage which does occur in holy Scripture, Peter
Preached his first Sermon unto the Jews, and Baptized such of them as believed,
there being added to the Church, that day, three thousand souls. This happened on
the Feast of Pentecost, which fell that year upon the Sunday, or first day of
the week, as elsewhere the Scripture calls it, but as it was a special and a
casual thing, so can it yield but little proof, if it yield us any, that the
Lords Day was then observed, or that the Holy Ghost did by selecting of that
day for his descent on the Apostles, intend to dignifie it for Sabbath. For
first it was a casual thing that Pentecost should fall that year upon the
Sunday. It was a moveable Feast as unto the day, such as did change and shift
it self according to the position of the Feast of Passover; the rule being
this, that on what day soever the second of the Passover did fall, upon that
also fell the great Feast of Pentecost. Emend. Temp. l. 2.
Nam (...) semper eadem est feria, quae (...), as Scaliger has rightly noted.
So that as often as the Passover did fall upon the Saturday or Sabbath, as
this year it did, then Pentecost fell upon the Sunday: But when the Passover
did chance to fall upon the Tuesday, the Pentecost fell that year upon the
Wednesday; and sic de caeteris. And if the rule be true, as I think it is, that
no sufficient argument can be drawn from a casual fact; and that the falling of
the Pentecost that year, upon the first day of the week, be merely casual, the
coming of the Holy Ghost upon that day, will be no argument nor authority to
state the first day of the week in the place and honor of the Jewish Sabbath.
There may be other reasons given, why God made choice of that time rather than
of any other: As first, because about that very time before, he had proclaimed
the Law upon Mount Sinai: And secondly, that so he might the better conntenance
and grace the Gospel in the sight of men, and add the more authority unto the
doctrine of the Apostles. The Feast of Pentecost was a great and famous
Festival, at which the Jews, all of them, were to come unto Jerusalem, there
to appear before the Lord; and amongst others, those which had their hands in
our Saviors blood. And therefore as S. Chrysostom notes it, did God send down
the Holy Ghost at that time of Pentecost; In Act. 2.
because those men that did consent to our Saviors death, might publicly
receive rebuke for that bloody act, and so bear record to the power of our
Saviors Gospel before all the World: (...), as that Father has it. So that
the thing being casual, as unto the day; and special, as unto the business then
by God intended, it will afford us little proof, as before I said, either that
the Lords Day was, as then, observed, or that the Holy Ghost did select that
day for so great a work, to dignifie it for a Sabbath.

As for Saint Peter's Preaching upon that day, and the Baptizing of so many as
were converted to the faith upon the same, it might have been some proof, that
now at least, Lord added daily to the Church such as should be saved; and
therefore without doubt, Acts 2.47.
the means of their salvation were daily ministered unto them; and in the fifth
Chapter of the Acts, daily in the Temple, and in every house they ceased not to
teach and preach Jesus Christ. Acts 8.
So for particulars, when Philip did Baptize the Eunuch, either he did it on a
working day, as we now distinguish them, and not upon the first day of the
week; and so it was no Lords day duty: or else it was not held unlawful to take
a journey on that day, as some think it is. Saint Peter's Preaching to
Cornelius, and his Baptizing of that house was a weekdays work, as may be
gathered from Saint Hierom. That Father tells us that the day whereon the
vision appeared to Peter, was probably the Sabbath, Advers. Jovinian. l. 2.
or the Lords Day, as we call it now; fieri potuit ut vel sabbatum esset vel
dies Dominicus, as the Father has it: and choose you which you will, we shall
find little in it for a Christian Sabbath. In case it was on the Sabbath, then
Peter did not keep the Lords day holy, as he should have done in case that day
was then selected for Gods worship: for the Text tells us that the next day he
did begin his journey to Cornelius house. Acts 10.24.
In case it was upon the Lords day, as we call it now, then neither did Saint
Peter sanctify that day in the Congregation, as he ought to do, had that day
then been made the Sabbath, and his conversion of Cornelius being three days
after, must of necessity be done on the Wednesday following. So that we find no
Lords day Sabbath, either of S. Peter's keeping, or of S. Philips; or else the
preaching of the Word, and the administering the Sacraments were not affixed at
all unto the first day of the week, as the peculiar marks and characers
thereof. So for Saint Paul, the Doctor of the Gentiles, who labored more
abundantly than the other Apostles, besides what shall be said particularly in
the following section, it may appear in general that he observed no
Lords-day-sabbath, but taught on all days, traveled on all days, and wrought
according to his Trade upon all days too, when he had no employment in the
Congregation. That he did teach on all days, is not to be questioned by any
that considers how great a work he had to do, and how little time. That he did
travel upon all days, is no less notorious to all that look upon his life,
which was still in motion. And howsoever, he might rest sometimes on the Lords
day, as questionless he did on others, as often as upon that day he Preached
the Gospel; yet when he was a Prisoner in the hands of the Roman Soldiers,
there is no doubt but that he traveled as they did Lords days and Sabbaths, In
Dominieam 17. post. Trinit.
all days equally, many days together. Of this see what Saint Luke has written
in the last Chapters of the Acts. Lastly, for working at his Trade (which was
Tent-making) on the Lords day, as well as others, Conradus Dietericus proves ^t
out of Hierom, that when he had none unto whom to preach in the Congregation,
he followed on the Lords day the works of his Occupation. Hieronymus colligit
ex Act. 18. verse. 3. and 4. quod die etiam Dominica, quando, quibus in publico
conventu concionaretur, non habebat, manibus suis laboravit. So Dietericus
speaking of our Apostle. Now what is proved of these Apostles, and of S. Philip
the Evangelist, may be affirmed of all the rest, whose lives and actions are
not left upon record in holy Scripture. Their Ministry being the same, and
their work as great, no question but their liberty was correspondent, and that
they took all times to be alike in the advancing of the business which they
went about, and cherished all occasions presented to them on what day soever.
What further may be said hereof, in reference to Saint John, who lived longest
of them, and saw the Church established, and her public meetings in some
order, we shall see hereafter in his own place and time. Mean while we may
conclude for certain, that in the planting of the Church he used all days
equally, kept none more holy than another; and after, when the Church was
settled, however he might keep this holy, and honor it for the use which was
made thereof, yet he kept other days so used, as holy, but never any like a
Sabbath.

Proceed we next unto Saint Paul, Preached in the Synagogues that Jesus was the
Christ. Acts 9.20.
If in the Synagogues, most likely that it was on the Jewish Sabbath, the
Synagogues being destinate especially to the Sabbath days. So after he was
called to the public Ministry, he came to Antiochia, Acts 13.14.
and went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and there Preached the Word.
What was the issue of his Sermon? That the Text informs us, And when the Jews
were gone out of the Synagogue, the Gentiles besought that these words might be
Preached again the next Sabbath. Paul assented thereunto, and the next Sabbath
day, as the Text tells us, came almost the whole City together to hear the Word
of God. It seems the Lords day was not grown as yet into any credit, especially
not into the repute of the Jewish Sabbath; for if it had, Saint Paul might
easily have told these Gentiles, (that is, such Gentiles as had been converted
to the Jewish Church) that the next day would be a more convenient time, and
indeed opus diei in die suo, the doctrine of the Resurrection on the day
thereof. This happened in the forty sixth year of Christ's Nativity; some twelve
years after his Passion and Resurrection: and often, after this, did the
Apostle show himself in the Jewish Synagogues, on the Sabbath days; which I
shall speak of here together, that so we may go on unto the rest of this
Discourse, with less interruption. And first it was upon the Sabbath, that he
did preach to the Philippians, and baptized Lydia with her household. Acts 16.
Amongst the Thessalonians, he reasoned three sabbath days together out of the
Scriptures, Acts 17. At Corinth every sabbath day, with the Jews and Greeks,
Acts 18. besides those many Texts of Scripture, when it is said of him that he
went into the Synagogues, and therefore probably that it was upon the Sabbath,
as before we said. Not that Saint Paul was so affected to the Sabbath, as to
prefer that day before any other: but that he found the people at those times
assembled, and so might preach the Word, with the greater profit. Saint
Chrysostom, for the Ancients have resolved it so; In Acts 13.14.
(...), as the Father has it. So Calvin, for the modern Writers, makes this
the special cause of St. Paul's resort unto the places of Assembly, on the
Sabbath day, quod profecium aliquem sperabat; In Acts 16.13.
because in such concourse of people, he hoped the Word of God would find the
better entertainment. Any thing rather to be thought, than that S. Paul, who
had withstood so stoutly those false Apostles, who would have Circumcision and
the Law observed; when there was nothing publicly determined of it: would,
after the decision of so great a Council, wherein the Law of Moses was for ever
abrogated, eieither himself observe the Sabbath, for the sabbaths sake; or by
his own example teach the Gentiles how to Judaize, which he so blamed in St.
Peter. The sabbath with the legal Ceremonies did receive their doom, as they
related to the Gentiles, in that great Council holden in Jerusalem: which
though it was not until after he had preached at Antiochia, on the sabbath day,
yet was it certainly before he had done the like, either at Philippos,
Thessalonica, or at Corinth.

For the occasion of that Council, it was briefly this. Cerinthus; a sellow of
a turbulent and unquiet spirit, and a most eager Enemy of all those Counsels,
whereof himself was not the Author. This man had first begun a faction against
St. Peter, for going to Cornelius, and preaching life eternal unto the
Gentiles: and finding ill success in that, goes down to Antiochia, and there
begins another against Saint Paul. This Epiphanius tells us of him, (...), Lib.
1. har. 28. n. 1.
etc. (...). The like Philaster does affirm, Seditionem sub Apostolis
commovisse, De haeres. in Cerintho.
that he had raised a faction against the Apostles, which was not to be crushed
but by an Apostolical and general Council. This man and those that came down
with him, were so enamoured on the Ceremonies and Rites of Moses, that though
they entertained the Gospel, yet they were loath to leave the Law: and therefore
did resolve, it seems, to make a mixture out of both. Hence taught they, that
except all men were circumcised after the manner of Moses, they could not be
saved. Where note, Acts 15.1.
that though they spoke only of Circumcision, yet they intended all the Law;
sabbaths and other legal Ordinances of what sort soever. Docuit Cerinthus
observationem legis Mosaicae necessariam esse, circumcisionem, and sabbata
observanda, as Philaster has it. The like says Calvin on the place, Sola
quidem circumcisio hic nominatur, sed ex contextu facile patet, eos de tota
lege movisse controversiam. The like Lorinus also amongst the Jesuits; Nomine
circumcisionis reliqua lex tota intelligitur. Indeed the Text affirms as much,
where it is said in terms express, that they did hold it needful to circumeise
the people, Acts 15.5.
and to command them to keep the Law of Moses; whereof the Sabbath was a part.
For the decision of this point, and the appeasing of those Controversies which
did thence arise, it pleased the Church directed by the Holy Ghost, to
determine thus; that such amongst the Gentiles as were converted to the faith,
should not at all be burdened with the Law of Moses; but only should observe
some necessary things, viz. that they abstain from things offered unto Idols,
and from blood, and that which is strangled, and from fornication. And here it
is to be observed, that the Decree or Canon of this Council did only reach unto
the Gentiles: as is apparent out of the Proeme to the Decretal, which is
directed to the Brethren which are of the Gentiles; and from the 21. Chapter of
the Acts, where it is said, that as concerning the Gentiles which believe, we
have written and determined, that they observe no such thing, as the Law of
Moses. So that for all that was determined in this Council, those of the Jews
which had embraced the says of Christ, were not prohibited, as yet, to observe
the Sabbath, and other parts of Moses Law, Acts 16.3.
as before they did: in which regard, St. Paul caused Timothy to be
circumcised, because he would not scandalize and offend the Jews. The Jews were
very much affected to their ancient Ceremonies: In Acts 21.23.
and Calvin rightly has affirmed, Correctionem, ut difficilis erat, ita
subitam esse non potuisse, that a full reformation of that zeal of theirs, as
it was full of difficulty, so could it not be done upon the sudden. Council.
Tom. 1. Bin.
Therefore it pleased the Apostles, as it is conceived in their fourth Council
holden at Jerusalem, mention whereof is made in the 21. of the Acts, to make
it lawful for the Jews to retain Circumcision and such legal Rites, together
with the faith in Christ: Quamdiu templum and sacrificia legis in Jerusalem
stabant, as long as the Jewish Temple, and the legal sacrifices in Jerusalem,
should continue standing. Not that the faith of Christ was not sufficient of it
self, for their salvation: Sed ut matter Synagoga paulatim cum honor
sepeliretur, but that the Synagogue might be laid to sleep, with the greater
honor. But this, if so it was, was for no long time. For when the third
Council holden in Jerusalem against Cerinthus and his party, was held in Anno
51. and this which now we speak of, Anno 58. the final ruin of the Temple was
in 72. So that there was but one and twenty years in the largest reckoning,
wherein the Christian Jews were suffered to observe their Sabbath: and yet not
(as before they did) as if it were a necessary Duty; but as a thing indifferent
only. But that time come, the Temple finally destroyed, and the legal
Ceremonies therein buried: it was accounted afterward both dangerous and
heretical, to observe the Sabbath; or mingle any of the Jewish leaven, with the
Bread of life. St. Hierom roundly so proclaims it, caeremonias Judaeorum and
perniciosas and pestiferas esse Christianis: that all the Ceremonies of the
Jews, whereof before he named the Sabbath to be one, were dangerous, yea and
deadly too, to a Christian man; Sive ex Judaeis esset, five ex Gentibus,
whether he were originally of the Jews, or Gentiles. To which Saint Austin
gives allowance, Ego hanc vocem tuam omnino confirmo, in his reply unto St.
Hicrom. That it was also deemed heretical, to celebrate a sabbath in the
Christian Church, we shall see hereafter.

In the mean time, Lords day, and of the Duties then performed: whereof we can
find nothing yet, by that name at least. The Scripture tells us somewhat, that
St. Paul did at Troas, upon the first day of the week: which happening much
about this time, comes in this place to be considered. The passage in the Text
stands thus: Acts 20.7.
Upon the first day of the week when the Disciples came together to break
bread, Paul preached unto them ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his
speech until midnight. Take notice here, that Paul had tarried there seven
days, before this happened. Now in this Text there are two things to be
considered; first what was done upon that day; and secondly what day it was,
that is there remembered. First for the action, it is said to be breaking of
bread: which some conclude, to be administering the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: and Paul's Discourse which followed on it, In locum.
to be a Sermon. But sure I am Saint Chrysostom tells us plainly otherwise: who
relates it thus, (...), etc. Their meeting at that time, says he, was not
especially to receive instruction from Saint Paul, but to eat bread with him:
and there, upon occasion given, he discoursed unto them. See, says the Father,
how they all made bold with Saint Paul's Table, as it had been common to them
all: and as it seems to me, says he, Paul sitting at the Table did discourse
thus with them. Therefore it seems by him, that as the meeting was at an
ordinary supper; so the Discourse there happening was no Sermon properly, but
an occasional Dispute. Lyra affirms the same, and does gloss it thus. They came
together to break bread, i. e. says he, Pro refectione corporali, for the
refection and support of their Bodies only: and being there, Paul preached unto
them, or as the Greek and Latin have it, he disputed with them; prius e^s
reficiens pane verbi divini, refreshing of them first with the Bread of life.
This also seems to be the meaning of the Church of England, who in the margin
of the Bible, Canon 80.
allowed by Canon, does refer us unto the second of the Acts, verse 46. where
it is said of the Disciples, that they did break their bread from house to
house, and eat their meat together with joy and singleness of heart: which
plainly must be meant of ordinary and common meats, Calvin not only so affirms
it, but censures those who take it for the holy Supper. Nam quod hic fractionem
panis nonnulli interpretantur sacram coenam, In Acts 2.
alienum mihi videtur a mente Lucae, etc. as he there discourses. Then for the
time, our English reads it upon the first day of the week, agreeably unto to
the exposition of most ancient Writers, and the vulgar Latin, which here as in
the four Evangelists, does call the first day of the week, una Sabbati. Yet
since the Greek phrase is not so perspicuous but that it may admit of a various
exposition, Erasmus renders it by uno die sabbatorum, and quodam die
sabbatorum; that is, upon a certain Sabbath: and so does Calvin too, and
Pelican, and Gualter, all of them noted Men, in their translations of that
Text. Nor do they only so translate it, but frame their Expositions also unto
that Translation; and make the day there mentioned, to be the Sabbath. Calvin
takes notice of both readings. Vel proximum sabbato diem intelligit, In locum.
vel unum quodpiam sabbatum, but approves the last, Quod dies ille ad habendum
conventum aptior fucrit, because the Sabbath day was then most used, for the
like Assemblies. Gualter does so conceive it also, that they assembled at this
time on the Sabbath day, Qui propter veterem morem haud dubie tune temperis
celebrior habebatur, Hom. 131.
as that which questionless was then of most repute, and name amongst them. So
that the matter is not clear, as unto the day, if they may judge it. But take it
for the first day of the week, as the English reads it: yet does St. Austin put
a scruple, which may perhaps disturb the whole expectation: though otherwise he
be of opinion, that the breaking of the Bread there mentioned, might have some
reference or resemblance to the Lords Supper. Now this is that which St. Austin
tells us. Ep. 86.
Aut post peractum diem Sabbati, noctis initio fuerunt congregati, quae utique
nox ad diem Dominicum, h. e. ad unum Sabbati pertinebat, etc. Either, says he,
they were assembled on the beginning of the night, which did immediately follow
the Sabbath day, and was to be accounted as a part of the Lords day, or first
day of the week, and breaking Bread that night, as it is broken in the
Sacrament of the Lords Body, continued his discourse till midnight, Ut
lucescente proficisceretur Dominico die, that so he might begin his Journey,
with the first dawning of the Lords day, which was then at hand. Or if they did
not meet till the day it self, since it is there expressed that he preached
unto them being to depart upon the morrow; we have the reason why he continued
his Discourse so long, viz. because he was to leave them, Et eos sufficienter
instruere cupiebat, and he desired to lesson them sufficiently, before he left
them. So far St. Austin. Choose which of these you will, and there will be but
little found for sanctifying the Lords day, by St. Paul, at Troas. For if this
meeting were upon Saturday night; then made S. Paul no scruple of traveling
upon the Sunday: or if it were on the Sunday, and that the breaking Bread there
mentioned were the celebration of the Sacrament, (which yet St. Augustine says
not in terms express, but with a sicut) yet neither that, nor the Discourse or
Sermon which was joined unto it were otherwise than occasional only, by reason
of St. Paul's departure on the morrow after. Therefore no Sabbath, or
established day of public meeting to be hence collected.

This action of St. Paul, at Troas, is placed by our Chronologers in Anno 57.
Corinthians: wherein amongst many other things, he gives them this direction,
touching Collections for the poorer Brethren at Jerusalem. Concerning the
gathering for the Saints, C. 16. v. 1.
says he, as I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, so do ye also. And
how was that? Every first day of the week let every one of you set aside, by
himself, and lay up as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when
I come. This some have made a principal argument, to prove the Institution of
the Lords day to be Apostolical: and Apostolical though should we grant it, yet
certainly it never can be proved so, from this Text of Scripture. For what has
this to do with a Lords day Duty, or how may it appear from hence, that the
Lords day was ordered by the Apostles to be weekly celebrated, instead of the
now antiquated Jewish Sabbath? being an intimation only of St. Paul's desire, to
the particular Churches of the Galatians and Corinthians, what he would have
them do in a particular and present case. Agabus had signified by the Spirit,
that there should be a great dearth over all the World: Acts 11.28, 29.
and thereupon the Antiochians purposed to send relief unto the Brethren which
dwelt in Judaea. It is not to be thought that they made this Collection, on the
Sunday only; but sent their common bounties to them when and as often as they
pleased. Collections for the poor, in themselves considered, are no Lords day
Duties; no Duties proper to the day: and therefore are not here appointed to be
made in the Congregation, but every man is ordered to lay up somewhat by
himself, as it were in store, that when it came to a sull round sum, it might
be sent away unto Jerusalem: which being but a particular case, and such a
case as was to end with the occasion; can be no general rule for a perpetuity.
For might it not fall out, in time, that there might be no poor, nay, no Saints
at all, in all Jerusalem; as when the Town was razed by Adrian, or after
peopled by the Saracens? Surely if not before, yet then this Duty was to cease,
and no Collection to be made by those of Corinth: and consequently no Lords day
to be kept amongst them, because no Collection; in case Collections for the
Saints, as some do gather from this place, were a sufficient argument to prove
the Lords day instituted by divine Authority. But let us take the Text with
such observations, as have been made upon it by the Fathers. In locum.
Upon the first day of the week, i. e. as generally they conceive it, on the
Lords day. And why on that? Chrysostom gives this reason of it, that so the
very day might prompt them to be bountiful to their poor Brethren, as being
that day whereon they had received such inestimable bounties at the hands of
God, in the resurrection of our Savior. (...): as that Father has it. What to
be dene on that day? Unusquisque apud se reponat, Let every man lay by himself,
says the Apostle, (...). He says not, says St. Chrysostom, let every man
bring it to the Church: And why? (...) for fear lest some might be ashamed at
the smallness of their offering: but let them lay it by, says be, and add unto
it week by week, that at my coming it may grow to a fit proportion. That there
be no gathering when I come, but that the money may be ready to be sent away,
immediately upon my coming: and being thus raised up by little and little, they
might not be so sensible thereos, In locum.
as if upon his coming to them, it were to be collected all at once, and upon
the sudden. Vt paulatim reservantes non una bora gravari se putent, as St.
Hierom has it. Now as it is most clear, that this makes nothing for the Lords
day, or the translation of the Sabbath thereunto, by any Apostolical Precept:
so is it not so clear, that this was done upon the first day of the week, but
that some learned men have made doubt thereof. Calvin upon the place, takes
notice how St. Chrysostom expounds the (...) of the Apostle, by primo sabbati,
the first day of the week, as the English reads it: but likes it not, Cui ego
non assentior, as his phrase is, conceiving rather this to be the meaning of
St. Paul, that on some sabbath day or other, until his coming, every man should
lay up somewhat toward the Collection. And in the second of his Institutes, he
affirms expressly, Cap. 8. n. 33.
that the day destinate by St. Paul to these Collections, was the Sabbath day,
The like do Victorinus, Strigelius, Hunnius, and Aretius, Protestant Writers
all, note upon the place. Singulis sabbatis, says Strigelius; per singula
sabbata, so Aretius; diebus sabbatorum, says Egidius Hunnius: all rendering
(...), on the Sabbath days. More largely yet, Hemingius, who in his Comment on
the place, takes it indefinitely for any day in the week, so they fixed on one.
Vult enim ut quilibet certum diem, in septimana, constituat, in quo apud se
seponat, quod irrogaturus est in pauperes. Take which you will, either of the
Fathers, or the Moderns, and we shall find no Lords Day instituted by any
Apostolical Mandate, no Sabbath set on foot by them upon the first day of the
week, as some would have it: much less that any such Ordinance should be hence
collected, out of these words of the Apostle.

Indeed it is not probable, Sabbath would crect a new. This had not been to
abrogate the Ceremony, but to change the day: whereas he labored, what he
could to beat down all the difference of days and times, which had been
formerly observed. In his Epistle to the Galatians, written in Anno 59, Cap. 4.
v. 10.
he lays it home unto their charge, that they observed days and months, and
times, and years; and seems a little to bewail his own misfortune, and if he
had bestowed his labor in vain amongst them. I know it is conceived by some,
that St. Paul spoke it of the observation of those days and times, that had
been used among the Gentiles; and so had no relation to the Jewish Sabbath, or
any difference of times observed amongst them. Saint Ambrose so conceived it,
and so did St. Augustine. Dies observant, In locum.
qui dicunt crastino non est proficiscendum, etc. They observe days, who say, I
will not go abroad to morrow, or begin any work upon such a day, because of
some unfortunate aspect, as St. Ambrose has it, from whom it seems, Saint
Augustine learnt it, who in his 119 Epistle directly falls upon the very same
expression, Eos inculpat qui dicunt, non proficiscor quia posterus dies est,
aut quia luna sic fertur; vel proficiscar ut prospere cedat, quia ita se babet
positio syderum, etc. The like conceit he has in his Encheiridion, ad
Laurentium, cap. 79. But whatsoever St. Ambrose did, St. Augustine lived, I am
sure to correct his error: observing very rightly that his former doctrine
could not consist with St. Paul's purpose in that place, which was to beat down
that esteem which the Jews had amongst them of the Mosaical Ordinances, their
New moons and Sabbaths. I shall report the place at large for the better
clearing of the point. Vulgatissi^nus est Gentilium error, ut vel in agendis
rebus, vel expectandis eventabus vitae ac negotiorum suorum ab Astrologis and
Chaldeis notatos dies observent. This was the ground whereon he built his
former error. Then follows the correction of it, Fortasse tamen non opus
est, ut baec de Gentilium errore intelligamus, ne intentionem causae (mark
that) quam ab exordio susceptam ad finem usque perducit, subito in alind temere
detorquere velle vide imur; sed de his potius de quibus cavendis eum agere per
totam Epistolam apparet. Nam and Judaei serviliter observant dies and menses
and annos and tempora, in carnali observatione sabbati, and neomeniae, etc. But
yet perhaps, says he, it is not necessary that we should understand this of
the Gentiles lest so we vary from the scope and purpose of the Apostle; but
rather of those men, of the avoiding of whose Doctrines he seems to treat in
all this Epistle, which were the Jews: who in their carnal keeping of New Mons
and Sabbaths, did observe days and years, and times, as he here objecteth.
Compare this with Saint Hieroms Preface to the Galatians, and then the matter
will be clear; Cap. 8. n. 33.
that St. Paul meant not this of any Heathenish, but of the Jewish observation
of days and times. So in the Epistle to the Colossians, writ in the sixtieth
year after Christ's Nativity, he lays it positively down, that the Sabbath was
now abrogated with the other Ceremonies, which were to vanish at Christ's
coming. Let no man judge you, Colos. 1.16.
says the Apostle, in meat and drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the
New moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to come: but the
body is of Christ. In which the Sabbath is well matched with meats and drinks,
new mons and holy days, which were all temporary Ordinances, and to go off the
stage at our Saviors entrance. Now whereas some, that would be thought great
sticklers for the Sabbath, conceive that this was spoken, not of the weekly
moral Sabbath, as they call it, which must be perpetual, but of the annual
ceremonial Sabbaths, which they acknowledge to be abrogated; this new device
directly crosses the whole current of the Ancient Fathers who do apply this
Text to the weekly Sabbath. It is sufficient in this point to note the places.
The Reader may peruse them, as leisore is, and look on Epiphan, lib. 1. haeres.
33. n. 11. Ambrose upon this place Hieroms Epistle ad Algas^qu. 10. Chrysostom.
hom. 13. in Hebr. 7. August. cont. Judaeos cap. 2. and cont. Faust. Manich. l.
16. c. 28. Praesat in Gala. Apocal. 10.
I end this list with that of Hierom, Nulius Apostoli sermo est vel per
Epistolam vel praesentis, in quo non laboret docere antiquae legis onera
deposita, and omnia illa quae in typis and imaginibus paaecessere, i. e. atium
Sabbati, circumcisionis injuriam, Kalendarum, and trium per annum solennitatum
reaursns, etc. gratia Evangeln subrepente, cess^sse. There is (says he) no
Sermon of the Apostles either delivered by Epistle, or by word of mouth,
wherein he labors not to prove that all the burdens of the Law are now laid
away; that all those things which were before in types and figures, namely the
Sabbath, Circumcision, the New moons, and the three solemn Festivals, did cease
upon the Preaching of the Gospel.

And cease it did upon the Preaching of the Gospel, insensibly and by degrees,
Eastern parts of Greece and Asia, where the Provincial Jews were somewhat thick
dispersed; and being a great accession to the Gospel, could not so suddenly
forsake their ancient customs. Yet so, that the first day of the week began to
grow into some credit toward the ending of this Age; especially after the
final desolation of Jerusalem and the Temple, which happened Anno 72. of Christ's
Nativity. So that the religious observation of this day beginning in the Age of
the Apostles, no doubt but with their approbation and authority, and since
continuing in the same respect for so many Ages, may be very well accounted
amongst those Apostolical traditions, which have been universally received in
the Church of God. For being it was the day which our Redeemer honored with
his Resurrection, it easily might attain unto that esteem, as to be honored by
the Christians with the public meetings; that so they might with greater
comfort preserve and cherish the memorial of so great a mercy; in reference
unto which, the Worlds Creation seemed not so considerable. By reason of which
work wrought on it, it came in time to be entitled, (...), the Lords day;
Apotal. 10.
which attribute is first found in the Revelation, writ by Saint John about the
94th. year of our Saviors Birth. So long it was before we find the Church took
notice of it by a proper name. For I persuade my self, that had that day been
destinate, at that time, to religious duties, or honored with the name of the
Lords day, when Paul Preached at Troas, or writ to the Corinthians, which as
before we showed was in the fifty-seventh, neither Saint Luke, nor the Apostle
had so passed it over, and called it only the first day of the week, as they
both have done. And when it had this Attribute affixed unto it, it only was
(...), as before we said, by reason of our Saviors Resurrection performed upon
it; and that the Congregation might not be assembled as well on them, as on the
other. For first it was not called the Lords Day exclusively, but by way of
eminency, in reference to the Resurrection only, all other days being the Lords
as well as this. In Psalm. 23.
Prima sabbati significat diem Dominicum, quo Dominus resurrexit, and
resurgendo isti seculo subvenit, mundumque ipso die creavit qui ob excellentiam
tanti miraculi proprie dies Dominica appellatur, i. e. dies Domini; quamvis
omnes sunt Domini. So Bruno Herbipolensis has resolved it. And next, it was
not so designed for the public meetings of the Church, as if they might not be
assembled as well on every day, as this. For as Saint Hierom has determined,
In Gal. 4.
omnes dies aequales sunt, nee per parasceven tantum Christum crucifigi, and
die Dominica resurgere, sed semper sanctum resurrectionis esse diem, and semper
eum carne vesci Dominica, etc. All days are equal in themselves, as the Father
tells us. Christ was not Crucified on the Friday only, nor did he rise only
upon the Lords day; but that we may make every day the holy day of his
Resurrection; and every day eat his blessed Body in the Sacrament. When
therefore certain days were publicly assigned by Godly men for the Assemblies
of the Church, this was done only for their sakes, qui magis (seculo vacant
quam Deo, who had more mind unto the World than to him that made it, and
therefore either could not, or rather would not, everyday assemble in the
Church of God. Upon which ground, as they made choice of this, (even in the Age
of the Apostles) for one, because our Savior rose that day from amongst the
dead; so chose they Friday for another, by reason of our Saviors passion, and
Wednesday, on the which he had been betrayed; the Saturday, or ancient Sabbath
being meanwhile retained in the Eastern Churches. Nay, in the primitive times,
excepting in the heat of persecution, they met together every day for the
receiving of the Sacrament; that being fortified with that viaticum, they might
with greater courage encounter death if they chanced to meet him. So that the
greatest honor, which in this Age was given the first day of the week, or
Sunday, is that about the close thereof they did begin to honor it with the
name or title of the Lords day, and made it one of those set days, whereon the
People met together for religious exercises. Which their religious exercises,
when they were performed, or if the times were such, that their Assemblies were
prohibited, and so none were performed at all; it was not held unlawful to
apply themselves unto their ordinary labors, as we shall see anon in the
following Ages. For whereas some have gathered from this Text of the
Revelation, from S. John's being in the spirit on the Lords day, as the phrase
there is; that the Lords day is wholly to be spent in spiritual exercises: that
their conceit might probably have had some show of likelihood, had it been said
by the Apostle, that he had been in the spirit every Lords day. But being, as
it is, a particular case, it can make no rule, unless it be that every man on
the Lords day should have Dreams and Visions, and be inspired that day with the
spirit of Prophecy; no more than if it had been told us upon what day Saint
Paul had been rapt up into the third Heaven, every man should upon that day
expect the like Celestial raptures. Add here, how it is thought by some,
^^omarus de ^ abbat. c. 6.
that the Lords day here mentioned is not to be interpreted of the first day of
the week, as we use to take it; but of the day of his last coming, of the day
of judgment, wherein all flesh shall come together to receive their sentence;
which being called the Lords day too, in holy Scripture (that so the spirit may
be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5.5.) S. John might see it, being rapt
in spirit, as if come already. But touching this, we will not meddle; let them
that own it, look unto it: the rather since S. John has generally been
expounded in the other sense by Aretas and Andreas Caesariensis upon the place,
by Bid, de rat. temp. c. 6. and by the suffrage of the Church the best
expositor of Gods Word; wherein this day, has constantly since the time of
that Apostle, been honored with that name above other days. Which day, how it
was afterward observed, and how far different it was thought from a Sabbath
day, the prosecution of this story will make clear and evident.

CHAP. II. In what estate the Lords day stood, from the death of the Apostles,
to the reign of Constantine.
1. Touching the orders settled by the Apostles for the Congregation. 2. The
Lords day and the Saturday, both Festivals, and both alike observed in the
East, in Ignatius time. 3. The Saturday not without great difficulty, made a
Fasting day. 4. The Controversy about keeping Easter; and how much it
conduces to the present business. 5. The Feast of Easter not affixed to the
Lords day, without much opposition of the Eastern Churches. 6. What Justin
Martyr and Dionysius of Corinth have left us of the Lords day; Clements of
Alexandria his dislike thereof. 7. Upon what grounds the Christians of the
former times used to pray standing, on the Lords day, and the time of Penteco
st. 8. What is recorded by Tertullian of the Lords day, and the Assemblies of
the Church. 9. Origin, as his Master Clemens had done before, dislikes set days
for the Assembly. 10. S. Cyprian what he tells us of the Lords day; and of the
reading of the Scriptures in S. Cyprians time. 11. Of other holy days,
established in these three first Ages; and that they were observed as solemnly
as the Lords day was. 12. The name of Sunday often used for the Lords day by
the primitive Christians; but the Sabbath never.


WE she wed you in the former Chapter, Moses; the other rising by degrees from
the ruins of it, not by Authority divine, for ought appears, but by Authority
of the Church. As for the duties of that day, they were most likely such as
formerly had been used in the Jewish Synagogues; reading the Law and Prophets
openly to the Congregation, and afterward expounding part thereof, as occasion
was; calling upon the Lord their God for the continuance of his mercies, and
singing Psalms and Hymns unto him, as by way of thankfulness. These the
Apostles found in the Jewish Church, and well approving of the same, as they
could not otherwise, commended them unto the care of the Disciples; by them to
be observed as often as they met together, on what day soever. First for the
reading of the Law, In Jos. hom. 15.
Origin says expressly that it was ordered so by the Apostles, Judaicarum
historiarum libri traditi sunt ab Apostolis legendi in Ecclesiis, as he there
informs us. To this was joined in tract of time the reading of the holy Gospel,
and other Evangelical writings; it being ordered by S. Peter, that S. Marks
Gospel should be read in the Congregation, HIst. l. 2.15. 1 These. ca. ult. v.
17.
as Eusebius tells us; and by S. Paul, that his Epistle to the Thessalonians
should be read unto all the holy Brethren; and also, that to the Colossians, to
be read in the Church of the Laodiceans; as that from Laodicea, in the Church
of the Colossians. By which example, Ca. ult. v. 16.
not only all the writings of the Apostles, but many of the writings of
Apostolical men were publicly read unto the People; and for that purpose one
appointed to exercise the ministry of a Reader in the Congregation. So ancient
is the reading of the Scriptures in the Church of God. To this by way of
comment or application was added as we find by S. Paul's directions, the use of
Prophecy or Preaching, 1 Cor. 14. v. 3.
interpretation of the Scriptures to edifying, and to exhortation, and to
comfort: This exercise to be performed with the head uncovered, as well the
Preacher as the hearer, 1 Cor. 11.4.
Every man Praying or Prophesying with his head covered, dishonors his head,
as the Apostle has informed us. Where we have public Prayers also for the
Congregation; the Priest to offer to the Lord the prayers and supplications of
the People, and they to say Amen unto those prayers which the Priest made for
them. These to contein in them all things necessary for the Church of God,
which are the subject of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, 1 Timothy 2.
and giving of thanks; and to extend to all men also, especially unto Kings,
and such as be in Authority, that under them we may be godly and quietly
governed, leading a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For the
performance of which last duties, with the greater comfort, it was disposed
that Psalms and Hymns should be intermingled with the rest of the public
service; which comprehending whatsoever is most excellent in the Book of God,
and being so many notable forms of praise and prayer, were cheerfully and
unanimously to be sung amongst them. 1 Cor. 14.26.
And thereupon S. Paul reprehended those of Corinth, in that they joined not
with the Assembly, but had their Psalms unto themselves. Whereby it seems that
they had left the true use of Psalms, which being so many acclamations,
exultations, and holy provocations, to give God the glory, were to be sung
together by the whole Assembly; their singing at that time being little more
than a melodious kind of pronuntiation, such as is commonly now used in singing
of the ordinary Psalms and Prayers in Cathedral Churches. And so it stood, till
in the entrance of this Age, Ignatius Bishop of Antiochia, one who was
conversant with the Apostles, brought in the use of singing alternatim, course
by course, according as it still continues in our public Quires, where one
side answers to another; some show whereof is left in Parochial Churches, in
which the Minister and the People answer one another in their several turns.
Hist. li. 6. c. 8.
To him does Socrates refer it, and withal affirms that he first learnt it of
the Angels, whom in a vision he had heard to sing the praise of God after such
a manner: (...), as that Author has it. Hist. l. 2. c. 24.
And where Theodoret does refer it to Flavianus and Diodorus Priests of
Antiochia, during the busilings of the Arian Heretics, In Damaso.
and Platina unto Damasus Pope of Rome: Theodoret is to be interpreted of the
restitution of this custom, having been left off, and Platina of the bringing
of it into the Western Churches. For that it was in use in Ignatius time, (who
suffered in the time of Trajan) and therefore probably begun by him, as is said
by Socrates, is evident by that which Pliny signified to the self same Trajan;
where he informs him of the Christians, Quod soliti essent stato die ante lucem
convenire, carmenque Christo, tanquam Deo, dicere, secum invicem, etc. Their
greatest crime, said he, was this, that at a certain day, (but what that day
was, that he tells not) they did meet together before daylight, and there sing
hymns to Christ, as unto a God, one with another in their courses; and after
bind themselves together by a common Sacrament, not unto any wicked or unjust
attempt, but to live orderly without committing Robbery, Theft, Adultery, or
the like offenses.

Now for the day there meant by Pliny, Saturday or Sunday, if it were not both;
both of them being in those times, and in those parts where Pliny lived, in
especial honor, as may be gathered from Ignatius, who at that time flourished.
For demonstration of the which, we must first take notice, how that the world
as then was very full of dangerous fancies, and heretical dotages, whereby the
Church was much disquieted, and Gods worship hindered. The Ebionites, they stood
hard for the Jewish Sabbath, and would by all means have it celebrated, as it
had been formerly; observing yet the Lords day, as the Christians did, in
honor of the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior. (...), as Eusebius tells.
Hist. l. 3. c.x. 3.
The like says Epiphanius of them, l. 1. Haeres. 30. n. 2. And on the other
side there was a sort of Heretics in the Eastern parts, (whereof see Irenaeus
li. 1. ca. 20.21, 22, 23, 24, and 25.) who thought that this world being
corruptible, could not be made but by a very evil Author. Therefore as the Jews
did by the festival solemnity of their Sabbath, rejoice in God that created the
world, as in the Author of all goodness; so they in hatred of the maker of the
world, sorrowed and wept, and fasted on that day, as being the birthday of all
evil. And whereas Christian men of sound belief did solemnize the Sunday in a
joyful memory of Christ's Resurrection: So likewise at that self same time, such
Heretics as denied the Resurrection did contrary to them that held it, and
fasted when the rest rejoiced. For the expressing of which two last Heresies,
Ignat.
it was, that he affirmed with such zeal and earnestness, (...). If any one did
fast either upon the Lords day or the Sabbath, except one Sabbath in the year
(which was Easter Eve) he was a murderer of Christ. So he in his Epistle ad
Philippenses. Cax. 65.
The Canons attributed to the Apostles, take notice of the misdemeanor, though
they condemn it not with so high a censure; it being in them only ordered, that
if a Clergyman offended in that kind, he should be degraded, (...), if any of
the Laity, they should be excommunicated. Which makes me marvel by the way,
that those which take such pains to justify Ignatius, as Baronius does in Ann.
57. of his grand Annals, should yet condemn this Canon of imposture, which is
not so severe as Ignatius is, only because it speaks against the Saturdays
fast. Whereof consult the Annals, Ann. 102. Now as Ignatius labors here to
advance the Sabbath, in opposition of those Heretics before remembered, making
it equally a festival with the Lords day: so being to deal with those, which
too much magnified the Sabbath, and thought the Christians bound unto it, as
the Jews had been; he bends himself another way, and resolves it thus. (...)
etc. Let us not keep the Sabbath in a Jewish manner, in sloth and idleness, for
it is written, that he that will not labor shall not eat, and in the sweat of
thy brows shall thou eat thy bread. But let us keep it after a spiritual
fashion, not in bodily ease, but in the study of the Law: not eating meat dressed
yesterday, or drinking lukewarm drinks, or walking out a limited space, or
settling our delights, as they did, on dancing; but in the contemplation of the
works of God. (...), etc. And after we have so kept the Sabbath, let every one
that loves Christ, keep the Lords day Festival, the Resurrection day, the
Queen and Empress of all days; in which our life was raised again, and death
was overcome by our Lord and Savior. So that we see, that he would have both
days observed: the Sabbath first, though not as would the Ebionites, in a
Jewish sort; and after that the Lords day, which he so much magnifieth, the
better to abate that high esteem, which some had cast upon the Sabbath.
Agreeable unto this we find that in the Constitutions of the Apostles, for by
that name they pass, though not made by them, both days are ordered to be kept
Holy, one in memorial of the Creation, the other of the Resurrection. (...).
See the like l. 8. c. 33. Of which more hereafter.

And so it was observed in the Eastern parts, Sabbath day, could not so easily
be persuaded from it. But in the Western Churches, in the which the Jews were
not so considerable, and where those Heretics before remembered, had been
hardly heard of, it was plainly otherwise: that day not only not being honored
with their public meetings, but destinate to a settled or a constant fast. Some
which have looked more nearly into the reasons of this difference, conceive
that they appointed this day for fasting, in memory of Saint Peter's conflict
with Simon Magus, which being to be done on a Sunday following, the Church of
Rome ordained a solemn fast on the day before, the better to obtain Gods
blessing in so great a business: which falling out as they desired, they kept
it for a fasting day for ever after. Saint Austin so relates it, as a general
and received opinion, but then he adds, Quod eam esse falsam perhibeant
plerique Romani; That very many of the Romans did take it only for a fable. As
for St. Austin, he conceives the reason of it, to be the several uses which men
made of our Saviors resting in the grave, the whole Sabbath day. For thence it
came to pass, says he, that some, especially the Eastern people, Ad requiem
significandam mallent relaxare jejunium, to signify and denote that rest, did
not use to fast; where on the other side, those of the Church of Rome and some
Western Churches, kept it always fasting. Propter humilitatem mortis Domini, by
reason that our Lord, that day, lay buried in the sleep of Death. But as the
Father comes not home unto the reason of this usage, in the Eastern Countries;
so in my mind, Pope Innocent gives a likelier reason for the contrary custom,
in the Western. Council. Tom. 1.
For in a Decretal by him made touching the keeping of this Fast, he gives this
reason of it unto Decentius Eugubinus who desired it of him; because that day
and the day before, were spent by the Apostles in grief and heaviness. Nam
constat Apostolos biduo isto and in moerore fuisse, and propter metum Judaeorum
se occuluisse, as his words there are. The like says Platina, that Innocentius
did ordain the Saturday or Sabbath to be always fasted, Quod tali die Christus
in sepulchro jacuisset, and quod discipuli ejus jejunassent, In Innocent.
Because our Savior lay in the grave that day, and it was fasted by his
Disciples. Not that it was not fasted before Innocents time, as some vainly
think: but that being formerly an arbitrary practice only, it was by him
intended for a binding Law. Now as the African and the Western Churches were
severally devoted either to the Church of Rome, or other Churches in the East:
so did they follow in this matter, of the Sabbaths fast, the practice of those
parts, to which they did most adhere. Millain though near to Rome, followed the
practice of the East: which shows how little power the Popes then had even
within Italy it self. Paulinus tells us also of St. Ambrose, that he did never
use to dine, nisi die sabbati and Dominico, etc. but on the Sabbath, the Lords
day, In vita Ambros.
and on the Anniversaries of the Saints and Martyrs. Yet so, that when he was
at Rome, he used to do as they there did, submitting to the Orders of the
Church in the which he was. Whence that so celebrated speeeh of his, Cum hic
sum, non jejuno sabbato; cum Romae sum jejuno sabbato: at Rome he did; at
Millain he did not fast the Sabbath. Nay, which is more, Epist. ^6.
Saint Augustine tells us, that many times in Africa, one and the self-same
Church, at least the several Churches in the self-same Province, had some that
dined upon the Sabbath; and some that fasted. And in this difference it stood a
long time together, till in the end the Roman Church obtained the cause, and
Saturday became a Fast, almost through all the parts of the Western World. I
say the Western World, and of that alone: The Eastern Churches being so far
from altering their ancient custom, that in the sixth Council of
Constantinople, Anno 692, they did admonish those of Rome to forbear fasting on
that day, upon pain of Censures. Which I have noted here, in its proper place,
that we might know the better how the matter stood between the Lords day and
the Sabbath; how hard a thing it was for one to get the mastery of the other:
both days being in themselves indifferent for sacred uses; and holding by no
other Tenure, than by the courtesy of the Church.

Much of this kind was that great conflict between the East and Western
Churches, about keeping Easter: Lords Day, or neglect thereof. The Passover of
the Jews, was changed in the Apostles times, to the Feast of Easter: the
anniversary memorial of our Saviors Resurrection: and not changed only in
their times, but by their Authority. Certain it is that they observed it, for
Polycarpus kept it, (...), both with Saint John, and with the rest of the
Apostles, as Irenaeus tells us in Eusebius's History. Lib. 5. c. 26.
The like Polycarpus affirms of Saint Philip also; whereof see Eusebius. l. 5. c.
14. Nor was the difference which arose in the times succeeding, about the
Festival it self; but for the time, wherein it was to be observed. The Eastern
Churches following the custom of Jerusalem, kept it directly at the same time
the Jews did their Passover: and at Jerusalem they so kept it (the Bishops
there for fifteen several successions, being of the Circumcision) the better to
content the Jews, their Brethren, and to win upon them. But in the Churches of
the West, they did not celebrate this Feast decima quarta lunae, upon what day
soever it was, as the others did; but on some Sunday following after: partly in
honor of the day; and partly to express some difference, between Jews and
Christians. A thing of great importance in the present case. For the Christians
of the East reflected not upon the Sunday in the Annual return of so great a
Feast; but kept it on the fourteenth day of the month, be it what it will: it
may be very strongly gathered, that they regarded not the Lords Day so highly,
which was the weekly memory of the Resurrection, as to prefer that day before
any other, in their public meetings. And thereupon Baronius pleads it very
well, that certainly Saint John was not the Author of the contrary practice,
Annal. An. 15 9.
as some gave it out. Nam quaenam potuit esse ratio, etc. For what, says he,
might be the reason, why in the Revelation, he should make mention of the Lords
Day, as a day of note, and of good credit in the Church, had it not got that
name in reference to the Resurrection. And if it were thought fit by the
Apostles, to celebrate the weekly memory thereof, upon the Sunday: then to what
purpose should they keep the Anniversary, on another day? And so far
questionless we may join issue with the Cardinal, that either Sunday is not
meant in the Revelation; or else Saint John was not the Author of keeping
Easter, with the Jews, on what day soever. Rather we may conceive that Saint
John gave way unto the current of the times, which in those places, as is said,
were much intent upon the customs of the Jews: most of the Christians of those
parts, being Jews originally.

For the composing of this difference, Rome bestirred themselves; and so did
many others also. And first Pope Pius published a Declaration, Com. Tom. 1.
Pascha domini die dominica, annuis solennitatibus celebrandum esse, In Chronic.
that Easter was to be solemnized on the Lords day only. And here, although I
take the words of the letter decretory; yet I rely rather upon Eusebius for the
authority of the fact, than on the Decretal it self, which is neither for the
substance probable, and the date stark false; not to be trusted; there being no
such Consuls, it is Crabbes own note, as are there set down. But the Authority
of Pope Pius did not reach so far as the Asian Churches: and therefore it
produced an effect accordingly. This was 159. and seven years after,
Polycarpus, Bishop of Smyrna, a Reverend and an holy man, Eusebius. hist. l. 4. c.
13.
made away to Rome; (...), then to confer with Anicetus, then the Roman
Prelate, about this business. And though one could not woo the other to desert
the cause; yet they communicated together, and so parted Friends. But when that
Blastus afterward had made it necessary, which before was arbitrary; and
taught it to be utterly unlawful, to hold this Feast at any other time, than
the Jewish Passover, becoming so the Author of the Quarto-decimani, as they
used to call them: then did both Eleutherius publish a Decree, that it was only
to be kept upon the Sunday; and Irenaeus, though otherwise a peaceable man,
writ a Discourse entitled, De schismate contra Blastum, now not extant. A
little before this time (this happened Anno 180.) the controversy had took place
in Laodicea; (...), L. 4. c. 25.
as Eusebius has it: which moved Melito Bishop of Sardis, a man of special
eminence, to write two Books de Pascbate, and one de die Dominico, (...). But
to what side he took, it is hard to say. Were those Discourses extant, as they
both are lost, we might, no doubt, find much that would conduce to our present
business. Two years before the close of this second Century, Pope Victor,
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23.24.
presuming probably on his name, sends abroad his Mandate, touching the keeping
of this Feast, on the Lords day only: against the which, when as Polycrates and
other Asian Prelates had set out their Manifests, he presently without more
ado, declares them all for excommunicate. But when this rather hindered, than
advanced the cause, the Asian Bishops cared little for those Bruta fulmina; and
Irenaeus, who held the same side with him, having persuaded him to milder
courses: he went another way to work, by practicing with the Prelates of
several Churches, to end the matter in particular Councils. Of these there was
one held at Osroena, another by Bachyllus Bishop of Corinth, a third in Gaul by
Irenaeus, a fourth in Pontus, a fifth in Rome, a sixth in Palestine by
Theophilus Bishop of Caesaria; the Canons of all which were extant in Eusebius
time: and in all which it was concluded for the Sunday. By means of these
Syndical determinations, the Asian Prelates by degrees let fall their rigor;
and yielded to the stronger and the surer side. Yet waveringly and with some
relapses, till the great Council of Nice, backed with the Authority of as great
an Emperor, settled it better than before: none but some scattered
Schismatics, now and then appearing, that durst oppose the resolution of the
that famous Synod. So that you see, that whether you look upon the day
appointed for the Jewish sabbath, or on the day appointed for the Jewish
Passover; the Lords day found it no small matter to obtain the victory. And
when it had prevailed so far, that both the Feast of Easter was restrained unto
it; and that it had the honor of the Public Meetings of the Congregation: yet
was not this, I mean this last, exclusively of all other days; the former
Sabbath, the fourth and sixth days of the week, having some share therein for a
long time after, as we shall see more plainly in the following Centuries.

But first to make an end of this: Justin Martyr, who then lived in Rome, does
thus relate, (...), Apolog. 2.
etc. Upon the Sunday all of us assemble in the Congregation: as being that
first day wherein God separating the light and darkness, did create the World;
and Jesus Christ our Savior rose again from the dead. This for the day; then
for the service of the day, he describes it thus. Upon the day called Sunday,
all that abide within the Cities or about the Fields, do meet together in some
place, where the Records of the Apostles, and writing of the Prophets, as much
as is appointed, are read unto us. The Reader having done, the Priest or
Prelate ministers a word of Exhortation, that we do imitate those good things
which are there repeated. Then standing up together, we send up our prayers
unto the Lord; which ended, there is delivered unto every one of us, Bread, and
Wine with Water. After all this the Priest or Prelate offers up our Prayers and
Thanksgiving as much as in him is, to God; and all the people say Amen: those
of the richer sort, (...), every man as he would himself, contributing
something toward the relief of the poorer Brethren; which after the Priest or
Prelate was disposed amongst them. A Form of service not much different from
that in the Church of England, save that we make the entrance unto our Liturgy,
with some preparatory prayers. The rest consisting as we know, of Psalms, and
several Readings of the Scriptures, out of the Old Testament and the New, the
Epistles and the holy Gospel: that done, the Homily or Sermon follows, they
offer twice next, then Prayers and after that the Sacrament, and then Prayers
again; the people being finally dismissed with a Benediction. The second
testimony of these times is that of Dionysius, Bishop of Corinth, who lived
about 175, some nine years after Justin Martyr wrote his last Apology: who in
an Epistle unto Soter Pope of Rome, does relate it thus. (...), Eusebius. l. 4. c.
22.
etc. To day, says he, we kept holy the Lords day, wherein we read the Epistle
which you writ unto us, which we do always read for our instruction, as also
the first Epistle writ by Clemens. Where note, that not the Scriptures only
were in those times read publicly in the Congregation, but the Epistles and
discourses of such Learned men as had been eminent for place and piety; as in
the aftertimes on defect of Sermons, it was the custom of the Church to read
the Homilies of the Fathers for their edification. Conciliorum Tom. 2.
Concerning which it was ordained in a Council at Vaux, Anno 444. that if the
Priest were sick, or otherwise infirm, so that he could not preach himself, the
Deacons should rehearse some Homily of the holy Fathers. Si presbyter, aliqua
infirmitate prohibente, per seipsum non potuerit praedicare, sanctorum Patrum
homiliae a Diaconibus recitentur; so the Council ordered it. The third and last
Writer of this Century, which gives us any thing of the Lords day, Strom. l. 7.
is Clemens Alexandrinus, (he flourished in the year 190.) who though he fetch
the pedigree of the Lords day, even as far as Plato, which before we noted; yet
he seems well enough contented that the Lords day should not be observed at
all. (...), We ought (says he) to honor and to reverence him, whom we are
verily persuaded to be the Word, our Savior, and our Captain; and in him the
Father: (...), not in selected times, as some do amongst us, but always during
our whole lives, and on all occasions. The Royal Prophet tells us that he
preaised God seven times a day. Whence he that understands himself, stands not
upon determinate places, or appointed Temples, (...), much less on any
Festivals, or days assigned; but in all places honors God, though he be alone.
And a little after, (...), etc. making our whole lives a continual Festival,
and knowing God to be every where, we praise him sometimes in the fields, and
sometimes sailing on the Seas, and finally in all the times of our life
whatever. So in another place of the self-same Book, (...), etc. He that does
lead his life according to the Ordinances of the Gospel, (...), then keeps the
Lords day, when he casts away every evil thought, and doing things with
knowledge and understanding, does glorify the Lord in his Resurrection. By
which it seems, that whatsoever estimation the Lords day had attained unto at
Rome and Corinth, yet either it was not so much esteemed at Alexandria, or else
this Clemens did not think so rightly of it as he should have done.

Now in the place of Justin Martyr before remembered, Sundays service they did
use to stand, during the time they made their Prayers unto the Lord: (...), as
his words there are. Such was the custom of this time, and a long time after;
that though they kneeled on other days, yet on the Lords day they prayed always
standing. Yet not upon the Lords day only, but every day from Easter unto
Pentecost. The reason is thus given by him who made the Responsions ascribed to
Justin; That so, says he, we might take notice, as of our fall by sin, so of
our restitution by the grace of Christ. Resp. ad qu. 105.
Six days we pray upon our knees, and that is in token of our fall: (...), etc.
But on the Lords day we bow not the knee in token of the Resurrection, by which
according to the Grace of Christ, we are set free from sin and the powers of
death. The like (says he) is to be said of the days of Pentecost, which custom
as he tells us, and cites Irenaeus for his Author, did take beginning even in
the times of the Apostles. Rather we may conceive that they used this Ceremony
to testify their faith in the Refurrection of our Lord and Savior, which many
Heretics of those times did publicly gainsay, as before we noted, and shall
speak more thereof hereafter. But whatsoever was the reason, it continued long,
and was confirmed particularly by the great Synod of Nice, what time some
People had begun to neglect this custom. The Synod therefore thus determined,
(...), etc. that forasmuch as some did use to kneel on the Lords day, Can. 20.
and the time of Pentecost, that all things, in all places might be done with
an uniformity, it pleased the holy Synod to decree it thus: (...), that men
should stand at those times when they made their prayers. For Fathers which
avow this custom, consult Tertullian, lib. de corona mil. S. Basil. l. de Sp.
S. c. 27. S. Hierom. adv. Luciferian. S. Austin. Epist. 118. S. Hilaries
Praefat. in Psalm. Ambros. Sermon. 62. and diverse others. What time this custom
was laid by, I can hardly say; but sure I am it was not laid aside in a long
time after, not till the time of Pope Alexander the third, who lived about the
year 1160. Decret. l. 2. tit. 9. c. 2.
For in a Decretal of his, confirmatory of the former custom, it was prohibited
to kneel on the times remembered, Nisi aliquis ex devotioned id velit facere in
secreto, unless some out of pure devotion did it secretly. Which dispensation
probably occasioned the neglect thereof in the times succeeding; the rather
since those Heretics who formerly had denied the resurrection were now quite
exterminated. This circumstance we have considered the more at large, as being
the most especial difference whereby the Sundays service was distinguished from
the weekdays worship in these present times whereof we write. And yet the
difference was not such, that it was proper to the Lords day only; but, if it
were a badge of honor, communicated unto more than forty other days: Of which
more anon. But being it was an Ecclesiastical and occasional custom, the Church
which first ordained it, let it fall again by the same Authority.

In the third Century, the first we meet with is Tertullian, Dies solis,
Sunday, as commonly we now call it; and says, that they did dedicate the same
unto mirth and gladness, not to devotion altogether: Diem solis laetitiae
indulgemus, Cap. 16.
in his Apologetick. The same name is used by Justin Martyr in the passages
before remembered; partly because being to write to an Heathen Magistrate, it
had not been so proper to call it by the name of the Lords day, which name they
knew not; and partly that delivering the form and substance of their service
done upon that day, they might the better quit themselves from being
worshippers of the Sun, as the Gentiles thought. For by their meetings on this
day for religious exercises, in greater numbers than on others, in Africa and
the West especially; and by their use of turning, toward the East, when they
made their prayers, the world was sometimes so persuaded. Inde suspicio, quod
innotuerit nos ad Orientis regionem precari, as he there informed us. Whereby
we may perceive of what great antiquity that custom is, which is retained in
the Church of England, of bowing, kneeling, and adoring toward the Eastern
parts. The second name by which Tertullian calls this day, is the eighth day
simply; Ethnicis semel annuus dies quisquis festus est, tibi octavo quoque die.
The third is, De Idolat. c. 14. De corona mil. c. 3.
Dies Dominicus, or the Lords day, which is frequent in him, as, Die Dominico
jejunium nefas ducimus, we hold it utterly unlawful to fast the Lords day, of
which more hereafter. For their performances in their public meetings he
describes them thus. Coimus in coetum and congregationem, etc. We come together
into the Assembly or Congregation to our Common prayers, that being banded as
it were in a troop or Army, Apol. c. 39.
we may besiege God with our Petitions. To him such violence is exceeding
grateful. It follows, Cogimur ad sacrarum lit. commemorationem, etc. We meet
to hear the holy Scriptures rehearsed unto us, that so according to the quality
of the times, we may either be premonished or corrected by them. Questionless
by these holy speeches our faith is nourished, our hopes erected, our assurance
settled; and notwithstanding by inculcating the same, we are the better
established in our obedience to Gods precepts. A little after, Praesident
probati quique seniores, etc. Now at these g eneral meetings some Priests or
Elders do preside, which have attained unto that honor, not by money, but by
the good report that they have gotten in the Church. And if there be a Poormans
Box, every one cast in somewhat menstrua die, at least once a month, according
as they would, and as they were able. Thus he describes the form of their
public meetings; but that such meetings were then used amongst them on the
Sunday only, that he does not say. Nor can we learn by him, or by Justin
Martyr, who describes them also, either how long those meetings lasted, or
whether they assembled more than once a day, or what they did after the
meetings were dissolved. But sure it is, that their Assemblies held no longer
than our Morning service; that they met only before noon: for Justin says,
that when they met they used to receive the Sacrament; and that the service
being done, every man went again to his daily labors. Of all these I shall
speak hereafter. Only I note it out of Beza, that hitherto the People used to
forbear their labors, In Cant. Sol. hom. 30.
but while they were assembled in the Congregation; there being no such duty
enjoined amongst them, neither in the times of the Apostles, nor after, many
years, nor till the Emperors had embraced the Gospel, and therewith published
their Edicts to enforce men to it. But take his words at large for the more
assurance. Vt autem Christiani eo die a suis quotidianis laboribus abstinerent,
praeter id temporis quod in coetu ponebatur, id neque illis Apostolicis
temporibus mandatum, neque prius fuit observatum, quam id a Christianis
Imperatoribus, ne quis a rerum sacrarum meditatione abstraheretur, and quidem
non it a praecise observatum. Which makes it manifest that the Lords day was
not taken for a Sabbath day in these three first Ages. But for Tertullian,
where I left, note that I rendered seniores, by Priests or Elders, because I
think his meaning was to render the Greek Presbyter by the Latin senior. For
that he should there mean Lay Elders, as some men would have it, is a thing
impossible, considering that he tells us in another place, that they received
the Sacrament at the hands of those that did preside in the Assemblies. De
coron. milit. c. 3.
Eucharistiae Sacramentum non de aliorum manu, quam de Praesidentium sumimus;
and therefore sure they must be Priests that so presided.

Proceed we next to Origin, Clemens in the Schools of Alexandria, became of his
opinions too in many things; and amongst others in dislike of those selected
Festivals which by the Church were set apart for Gods public service. In Genesis
hom. 10. Cont. Cells. l. 8.
Dicite mihi vos qui festis tantum diebus ad Eccles. convenitis, coeteri dies
non sunt festi, non sunt dies Domini? Judaeorum est dies certos and raros
observare solennes, etc. Christiani omni die carnes agni comedunt, i. e. carnes
verbi Dei quotidie sumunt. Tell me (says he) you that frequent the Church on
the feast days only, are not all days Festival? are not all the Lords? It
appertains unto the Jews to observe days and Festivals: The Christians every
day eat the flesh of the Lamb, Cent. 2. c. 6.
i. e. they ever day do hear the word of God. And in another place, (...), etc.
He truly keeps the Festivals that performs his duty, praying continually, and
offering every day the unbloody sacrifice in his Prayers to God. Which
whosoever does, and is upright in thought, word, and deed, adhereing always
unto God our natural Lord, (...). Every day is to him a Lords day. It seems
too, that he had his desire in part; it being noted by the Magdeburgians, that
every day there were Assemblies in Alexandria, where he lived, for hearing of
the Word of God. Et de collectis quotidie celebratis in quibus praedicatum sit
verbum Dei, Hom. 9. in Isa. significare videtur, as they note it from him.
Indeed the Proem to his several Homilies seem to intimate, that if they met not
every day to hear his Lectures, they met very often. But being a Learned man,
and one that had a good conceit of his own abilities, he grew offended that
there was not as great resort of People every day to hear him, as upon the
Festivals. Of Sunday thee is little doubt, but that it was observed amongst
them; and so was Saturday also, as we shall see hereafter out of Athanasius.
Hist. l. 5. c. 21.
Of Wednesday and Friday it is positively said by Socrates, that on them both
the Scriptures were read openly, and afterward expounded by the Doctors of the
Church; and all things done appointed by the public Liturgy, save that they
did not use to receive the Sacrament. (...), And this (says he) was the old
use in Alexandria, which he confirms by the practice of Origin, who was
accustomed, as he tells us, to preach upon these days to the Congregation.
Tertullian too takes special notice of these two days, whereof consult him in
his Book adv. Psychicos.

About the middle of this Century did Saint Cyprian live, African; and he has
left us somewhat, although not much, which concerns this business. Aurelius,
one of excellent parts, Lib. 2. Epist. 5.
was made a Reader in the Church, I think of Carthage; which being very welcome
news to the common People, Saint Cyprian makes it known unto them, and withal
lets them understand that Sunday was the day appointed for him to begin his
Ministry. Et quoniam semper gaudium properat, nec mora far potest laetitia,
dominico legit. So that as Sunday was a day which they used to meet on; so
reading of the Scripture was a special part of the Sundays exercise. Not as an
exercise to spend the time, when one does wait for another coming, till the
Assembly be complete, and that without or choice or stint appointed by
determinate order; as is now used both in the French and Belgic Churches; for
what need such an eminent man, as Aurelius was, be taken out with so much
expectation to exercise the Clerks or the Sextons duty. But it was used amongst
them then as a chief portion of the service which they did to God, in
hearkening reverently unto his voice: It being so ordered in the Church,
Preface to the Common Prayer.
that the whole Bible, or the greatest part thereof should be read over once a
year. And this, that so the Ministers of the Congregation, by often reading and
meditation of Gods Word, be stirred up to godliness themselves, and be the more
able to exhort others by wholesome doctrine, and to confute them that were
Adversaries to the truth; as that the People by daily hearing of the
Scriptures, should profit more and more in the knowledge of God, and be the
more inflamed with the love of his true Religion. Now for the duties of the
people on this day, in the Congregation, as they used formerly to hear the
Word, and receive the Sacraments, D^eru. l. 5. c. 7.
and to pour forth their souls to God in affectionate prayers: So much about
these times, viz. in Ann. 237. it had been appointed by Pope Fabian, that every
man and woman should on the Lords day bring a quantity of bread and wine first
to be offered on the Altar, and then distributed in the Sacrament. A thing that
had been done before, as of common course; but now exacted as a duty: for the
neglect whereof Saint Cyprian chides with a rich Widow of his time, who
neither brought her offering, nor otherwise gave any thing to the Poor-mans
Box, and therefore did not keep the Lords day as she should have done. De
pietat. and Eleemos.
Locuples and dives dominicum celebrare te credis, quae Corbonam omnino non
respicis, quae in Dominicum (here he means the Church) sine sacrificio venis,
quae partem de sacrificio, quod pauper obtulit, sumis. In after times this
custom went away by little and little; instead of which it was appointed by the
Church, and retained in ours, that Bread and Wine for the Communion shall be
provided by the Churchwardens at the charge of the Parish. I should now leave
Saint Cyprian here, V. l. 3. Epi. 8.
but that I am to tell you first that he conceives the Lords day to have been
prefigured in the eighth day, destinate to Circumcision. Which being but a
private opinion of his own, I rather shall refer the Reader unto the place,
than repeat the words. And this is all this Age affords me in the present
search.

For other Holy Days instituted by the Church, Sunday which came every week,
Origin names the Good Friday, as we call it now, the Parasceve, as he calls it
there; Cont. Cells. l. 8.
the Feast of Easter and of Pentecost. Of Easter we have spoken already. For
Pentecost or Whitsontide, as it began with the Apostles, so it continues till
this present, but not in that solemnity which before it had. For anciently not
that day only, which we call Whitsunday, or Pentecost, (...), but all the fifty
days, from Easter forwards, were accounted holy, and solemnized with no less
observation than the Sundays were; no kneeling on the one, nor upon the other;
no fasting on the one, nor upon the other. Of which days, that of the
Ascension, or Holy-Thursday being one, became in little time to be more highly
reckoned of than all the rest, as we shall prove hereafter out of S. Austin.
But for these 50 days aforesaid, Tertullian tells us of them thus, De Coron.
milit. ca. 3.
Die Dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare: Eadem
immunitate a die Paschae in Pentecosten gaudemus, which makes both alike. Which
words, if any think too short to reach the point, he tells us in another place
that all the Festivals of the Gentiles contained not so many days as did that
one. Excerpe singulas solennitates nationum, and in ordinem texe, De Ido. l. c.
14.
Pentecosten implere non poterunt. The like he has also in his Book adv.
Psychicos: The like Saint Hierom. ad Lucinum; the like Saint Ambrose, or
Maximus Taurinens. which of the two soever it was that made those Sermons,
Sermon. 60.61. In which last it is said expressly of those fifty days, that every
one of them was instar Dominicae, and qualis est Dominica, in all respects
nothing inferior to the Lords day. And in the Comment on Saint Luke (which
questionless was writ by Ambrose) cap. 17. l. 8. it is said expressly, Et sunt
omnes dies tanquam Dominica, That every day of all the fifty was to be reckoned
of no otherwise, in that regard especially, than the Sunday was. Some footsteps
of this custom yet remain amongst us, in that we fast not either on S. Marks
Eve, or on the Eve of Philip and Jacob, happening within the time. The fast of
the Rogation week was after instituted on a particular and extraordinary
occasion. Now as these Festivals of Easter, and of Whitsontide, were instituted
in the first Age or Century, and with them those two days attendant, which we
still retain: whereof see Austin de Civit. Dei, li. 22. ca. 8. and Nyssen in
his first Hom. de Paschate, where Easter is expressly called (...), or the
three-days-feast: So was the Feast of Christ's Nativity ordained or instituted
in the second, that of his Incarnation in the third. For this we have an Homily
of Gregory surnamed Thaumaturgus, who lived in An. 230. entitled De
annunciatione B. Virginis, as we call it now. But being it is questionable
among the Learned whether that Homily be his or not, there is an Homily of
Athanasius on the self same argument (he lived in the beginning of the
following Century) whereof there is no question to be made at all. That of the
Lords Nativity began if not before, in the second Age. Theophilus Caesariens.
who lived about the times of Commodus and Severus the Roman Emperors, makes
mention of it, and fixes it upon the 25 of December. as we now observe it.
Natalem Domini, quocunque die 8. Calend. Januar. venerit, celebrare debemus, as
his own words are. And after, in the time of Maximinus, which was one of the
last great Persecutors, Nicephorus tells us that In ipso natalis Dominici die,
l. 7. c. 6.
Christianos Nicomediae festivitatem celebrantes, succenso templo concremavit;
even in the very day of the Lords Nativity, he caused the Christians to be
burnt at Nicomedia, whilst they were solemnizing this great Feast within their
Temple, I say this Great Feast, and I call it so on the Authority of Beda,
Orat. de Philogon.
who reckons Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, for majora solennia, as they
still are counted. But before Bid it was so thought over all the Church:
Chrysostom calls it, (...), the Mother or Metropolis of all other Feasts. See
Binius Conc. T. 1.
And before him Pope Fabian, whom but now we spoke of, ordained that all
Laymen should communicate at least thrice a year, which was these three
Festivals. Etsi non frequentius, saltemter in Anno Laici homines communicent,
etc. in Pascha and Pentecoste, and Natali Domini. So quickly had the Annual got
the better of the weekly Festivals. According to which ancient Canon, the
Church of England has appointed that every man communicate at least thrice a
year; of which times, Easter to be one.

Before we end this Chapter, Jews in honor of their Sabbath, used to refer
times to that, distinguishing their days by Prima Sabbati, Secunda Sabbati, and
so until they came to the Sabbath it self: As on the other side the Gentiles
following the motions of the Planets, gave to each day the name of that
particular Planet, by which the first hour of the day was governed, as their
Astrologers had taught them. Now the Apostles being Jews, retained the custom
of the Jews; and for that reason called that day on which our Savior rose,
(...), una sabbati, the first day of the week, as our English reads it. The
Fathers, many of them followed their example. Saint Austin thereupon calls
Thursday by the name of quintum sabbati, Epist. 118. and so does venerable
Beda, hist. lib. 4. c. 25. Saint Hierom, Tuesday, tertium sabbati, in Epitaph.
Paulae: Tertullian Friday, by the old name, parasceve, l. 4. advers. Marcion.
Saturday they called generally the Sabbath; and Sunday, sometimes dies solis,
De invent. rerum l. 5, 6.
and is sometimes Dominicus. Pope Silvester, as Polydore Virgil is of opinion,
vanorum deorum memoriam abhorrens, hating the name and memory of the
Gentile-Gods, gave order that the days should be called by the name of Feriae,
and the distinction to be made by Prima feria, secunda feria, etc. the Sabbath
and the Lords day holding their names and places, as before they did. Hence
that of Honorius Augustodunensis; Hebraei nominant dies suos, De imagine mundi,
cap. 28.
una vel prima sabbati, etc. Pagani sic, dies Solis, Lunae, etc. Christiani
vero sic dies nominant, viz. Dies Dominicus, feria prima, etc. Sabbatum. But by
their leaves, this is no universal rule; the Writers of the Christian Church
not tying up their hands so strictly as not to give the days what names they
pleased: Save that the Saturday is called amongst them by no other name than
that which formerly it had, the Sabbath. So that when ever, for a thousand
years and upwards, we meet with sabbatum, in any Writer, of what name soever it
must be understood of no day but Saturday. As for the other day, the day of the
Resurrection, all the Evangelists, and Saint Paul, take notice of no other name
than of the first day of the Week. Saint John, and after him Ignatius, call it
(...), the Lords day. But then again, Justin Martyr for the second Century does
in two several passages call it no otherwise than (...), Sunday, as then the
Gentiles called it, and we call it now: And so Tertullian for the third, who
uses both, and calls it sometimes diem solis, and sometimes Dominicum; as
before was said. Which questionless neither of them would have done, on what
respect soever, had it been either contrary to the Word of God, or scandalous
unto his Church. So for the after Ages, in the Edicts of Constantine,
Valentinian, Valens, Gratian, Honorius, Arcadius, Theodosius, Christian Princes
all, it has no other name than Sunday, or dies solis; and many fair years
after them, the Synod held at Dingulofinum in the lower Bavaria, Anno 772.
calls it plainly Sunday; Festo die solis prophanis negotiis abstineto; of which
more hereafter. And Aventine, for the latter Writers, who lived not till the
Age last past, speaking of the battle fought near Cambray, between Charles
Martel and Hilpericus, King of France, says that it happened on the thirteenth
of the Calends of April, Hist. l. 3.
quae tum dies solis ante Paschalia erat, being the Sunday before Easter. They
therefore are more nice than wise, who out of a desire to have all things new,
would have new names for every day, or call them as sometimes they were, the
first day of the week, the second day of the week, and sic de coeteris; and all
for fear lest it be thought that we do still adore those Gods whom the Gentiles
worshipped. Cont. Faust. l. 19. c. 5.
Saint Augustine, as it seems, had met with some this way affected, and thus
disputes the case with Faustus Manichaeus. Deorum suorum nomina gentes
imposuerunt diebus istis, etc. The Gentiles, says the Father, gave unto every
day of the week, the name of one or other of their Gods: and so they did also
unto every month. If then we keep the name of March, and not think of Mars; Why
may we not, says he, preserve the name of Saturday; and not think of Saturn. I
add, why may we not then keep the name of Sunday, and not think of Phoebus, or
Apollo, or by what other name soever the old Poets call him. This though it
satisfied the Manichees, will not perhaps now satisfy some curious men, who do
as much dislike the names of months, as of the days. To others I presume it may
give some reason, why we retain the name of Sunday, not only in our common
speech, but in the Canons of the Church, and our Acts of Parliament: as being
used indifferently by so many eminent persons in the Primitive Church, as also
in an open Synod, as before was thewn; from thence transmitted by our Fathers
unto their posterity. Better by far, and far less danger to be feared, in
calling it the Sunday, as the Gentiles did; and as our Ancestors have done
before us: than calling it the Sabbath, as too many do, and on less authority;
nay, contrary indeed to all Antiquity, and Scripture.

CHAP. III. That in the fourth Age from the time of Constantine to Saint Austin
the Lords day was not taken for a Sabbath day.
1. The Lords day first established by the Emperor Constantine. 2. What
Labors were permitted, and what restrained on the Lords day, by this Emperors
Edict. 3. Of other Holy days, and Saints days, instituted in the time of
Constantine. 4. That weekly other days, particularly the Wednesday and the
Friday, were in this Age, and those before appointed for the meetings of the
Congregation. 5. The Saturday as highly honored in the Eastern Churches, as
the Lords day was. 6. The Fathers of the Eastern Churches, cry down the Jewish
Sabbath, though they held the Saturday. 7. The Lords day not spent wholly in
Religious Exercises; and what was done with that part of it, which was left at
large. 8. The Lords day, in this Age, a day of Feasting; and that it has been
always deemed Heretical, to hold Fasts thereon. 9. Of Recreation on the Lords
day: and of what kind those Dancings were, against the which the Fathers
inveigh so sharply. 10. Other Imperial Edicts about the keeping of the Lords
day, and the other Holy Days. 11. The Orders, at this time in use, on the Lords
day, and other days, of public meeting, in the Congregation. 12. The infinite
differences between the Lords day, and the Sabbath.


HItherto have we spoken of the Lords day, Esater. In that which follows, we
shall find both Emperors and Councils very frequent, in ordering things about
this day, and the service of it. And first we have the Emperor Constantine,
who being the first Christian Prince that publicly professed the Gospel; was the
first also that made any Law about the keeping of the Lords day or Sunday. De
vit. Constable. lib. 4. c. 18.
Of him Eusebius tells us, that thinking that the chiefest and most proper day,
for the devotion of his Subjects, he presently declared his pleasure, (...),
that every one who lived in the Roman Empire, should take their ease, or rest,
in that day weekly, which is entitled to our Savior. Now where the Soldiers
in his Camp were partly Christians, and partly the Gentiles: it was permitted
unto them who professed the Gospel, upon the Sunday, so he calls it, freely to
go unto the Churches, and there offer up their Prayers to Almighty God. But
such as had continued still in their ancient Errors, were ordered to assemble
in the open Fields, upon those days and on a signal given, to make their
prayers unto the Lord, after a form by him prescribed. The Form being in the
Latin Tongue, was this that follows. Te solum Deum agnoscimus, te regem
prositemur, te adjutorem invocamus, per te victorias consecuti sumus, Cap. 20.
per te hosts superavimus, a te and praesentem felicitatem consecuntos
fatemur, and futuram adepturos speramus: tui omnes supplices sumus, a te
petimus, ut Constantinum Imperatorem nostrum una cum piis ejus liberis, quam
diutissime nobis salvum and victorem conserves. In English thus. We do
acknowledge thee to be the only God, we confess thee to be the King, we call
upon thee as our helper and defender: by thee alone it is that we have got the
Victory, and subdued our Enemies, to thee as we refer all our present
happiness, so from thee also do we expect our future. Thee therefore we
beseech, that thou would please to keep in all health and safety, our noble
Emperor Constantine, with his hopeful Progeny. Nor was this only to be done in
the Fields of Rome, in patentibus suburbiorum campis, as the Edict ran: but
after by another Proclamation he did command the same over all the Provinces of
the Empire. Cap. 23.
(...), as Eusebius has it. So natural a power it is in a Christian Prince to
order things about Religion; that he not only took upon him to command the day,
but also to prescribe the scrvice; to those I mean who had no public Liturgy,
or set Form of Prayer.

Nor did he only take upon him to command or appoint the day, Gentiles: but to
decree what works should be allowed upon it, and what intermitted. In former
times, though the Lords day had got the credit, as to be honored with the
public meetings of the Congregation; yet was it not so strictly kept, no not
in time of divine service, but that the public Magistrates, Judges and other
Ministers of State, were to attend those great Employments they were called
unto, without relation to this day, or cessation on it, and so did other men
that had less employments, and those not so necessary. These things this pious
Emperor taking into consideration, and finding no necessity, but that his
Judges and other public Ministers might attend Gods service on that day; at
least not be a means to keep others from it: and knowing that such as dwelt in
Cities had sufficient leisure to frequent the Church, and that Artificers
without any public discommodity, might for that time forbear their ordinary
labors: he ordered and appointed, that all of them, in their several places
should this day lay aside their own Business, to attend the Lords. But then
withal considering, that such as followed Husbandry, could not so well neglect
the times of Seed and Harvest, but that they were to take advantage of the
fairest and most seasonable weather, as God pleased to send it; he left it free
to them to follow their affairs on what day soever: left otherwise they might
lose those blessings, which God in his great bounty had bestowed upon them.
This mentioned in the very Edict he set forth about it. First for his Judges,
Citizens or inhabitants of the greater Towns, L. Omnes cap. de feriis.
and all Artificers therein dwelling. Omnes Judices, urbanaeque plebes, and
cunctarum artium officia, venerabili die Solis quiescant. Next for the people
of the Country, Rure tamen positi, libere licenterque agrorum culture
inserviant, quoniam frequenter evenit, ut non aptius alio die, frumenta sulcis,
vinea scrobibus mandentur. And then the reason of this follows, Ne occasion
momenti, pereat commoditas coelesti provisione concessa. This Edict did bear
date, in the Nones of March, Anno 321, being the 11. year of that Princes
Empire: and long it did not stand, till he himself was fain to explain his
meaning in the first part of it. Fr whereas he intended only to restrain
Lawsuits, and contentious pleadings, as being unfit for such a day: his Judges
and like Officers finding a general restraint in the Law or Edict, durst not
engage themselves in the cognizance of any civil Cause whatever; no not so much
as in the Manumission of a Bondslave. This coming to the Emperors notice, who
was a friend of Liberty, and could not but well understand, how acceptable a
thing it was to God, that works of charity and mercy should not be restrained
on any days: it pleased him to send out a second Edict, in the July following,
directed to Elpidius, who was then Praefectus Praetorio, as I take it; wherein
he authorized his Ministers to perform that Office, any thing in the former
Law, unto the contrary notwithstanding. For so it runs, Ibid.
Sicut indignissimum videbatur diem Solis venerationis suae celebrem,
altercantibus jurgiis and noxis partium contentionibus occupari; ita gratum est
and jucundum eo die, quae sunt maxim votiva, compleri. Atque ideo emancipandi
and manumittendi, die festo, cuncti licentiam habeant, and super his rebus Acta
non prohibeantur. So that not only Husbandry was permitted, in small Towns and
Villages; but Manumission being a mere civil Act and of no small Ceremony was
by him suffered and allowed in the greater Cities. The first great work done by
the first great Christian Prince, was to declare his royal pleasure about this
Day; what things he thought most proper to permit, and what to disallow upon
it, teaching all other Kings and Princes which have since succeeded, what they
should also do on the same occasion.

Nor did this pious Prince confirm and regulate the Lords day only: Eusebius.
hist. l. 4. c. 14.
The Church of Smyrna (and that is the highest we need go) testifies in an
Epistle writ ad Philomelienses, that they did celebrate the day, wherein their
Reverend Bishop Polycarp did suffer Martyrdom with joy and gladness, and an
holy Convocation. This was in Anno 170, or thereabouts. And in the following
Age, Saint Cyprian taking notice of such men as were imprisoned for the
testimony of a good Conscience, appointed that the days of their decease should
be precisely noted, that so their memories might be celebrated with the holy
Martyrs. Ep. 8. l. 3.
Denique and dies little quibus excedunt, annotate, ut commemorationes little
inter memorias martyrum celebrare possimus, as there he has it. But hitherto
they were only bare memorials, (for more they durst not do in those times of
trouble) their sufferings only signified to the Congregation: and that they did
unto this end, that by exhibiting to the people their infinite indurances for
the truth and testimony of Religion, they also might be nourished in an equal
constancy. After, when as the Church was in perfect peace, it pleased the
Emperor Constantine to signify to all his Deputies and Lieutenants in the
Roman Empire, Eusebius. l. 4. cap. 23.
that they should have a care to see those the memorials of the Martyrs duly
honored; and solemnize Times or Festivals to be appointed in the Churches, to
that end and purpose, (...). And though these Festivals and Saints days became
not forthwith common over all the World; but were observed in those parts
chiefly, wherein the memory of the Saint or Martyr, was in most esteem; in
which respect Saint Hierom calls them, In Gal. 4.
tempora in honor Martyrum pro diversa regionum varietate constituta: yet in a
little Tract of time, such of them as had been most eminent, as the Apostles
and Evangelists, were universally received and celebrated, even as now they
are; as they are now observed in the Church of England; De Martyr. l. 8.
and this I say upon the credit and authority of Theodoret. Who, though he
gives another reason and original of these Institutions, informs us of these
Festivals that they were modestae, castae, temperantia plenae, performed with
modesty, chastity and sobriety: not as the Festivals of the Gentiles were, in
excess and riot. And not so only, but he affirms this of them, divinis canticis
personandis, sacrisque sermonibus audiendis intentae, that they were solemnized
with spiritual Hymns, and religious Sermons: and that the people used to empty
out their souls to God in fervent and affectionate Prayers, non sine lacrymis
and suspiriis, even with sighs and tears. As for Theodores, he lived and
flourished in the year 420. and speaks of these Festivals (St. Peter and St.
Thomas, and St. Paul, with others which he names particularly) as things which
had been settled and established a long time before: and therefore could not be
much after the time of Constantine, who died not till the year 341, or
thereabouts. As for the eighth Book de Martyrib. Where this passage is, it is
the 12. of those entitled de curandis Graec. affect. And howsoever some
exception has been made against them, as that they were not his, whose names
they carry: yet find I no just proof thereof amongst our Critics.

Now as the Emperor Constantine did add the Annual Festivals of the Saints
unto those other Anniversary Feasts, Friday weekly; the Wednesday standing on
the same Basis, as before it did, which was the custom of the Church. De vit.
Constable. l. 4. c. 18.
Eusebius having told us of this Emperors Edict about the honoring of the
Sunday; adds, that he also made the like about the Friday: (...), as that
Author has it. Sozomen adds, that he enjoined also the like Rest upon it, the
like cessation both from Judicature, and all other Businesses: and after gives
this reason of it. (...). Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
He honored the one, says he, as being the day of our Redeemers Resurrection,
the other, as the day of our Saviors Passion. So for the practice of the
Church in the following times, that they used other days besides the Sundays,
is evident by many passages of Cyril of Jerusalem, where he makes mention of
the Sermon preached the day before, (...) in his own Language; Catech. orat. 7.
and (...), the morrow after the Lords day, Cat. 14. and (...), Catech. Mystag.
2. The like is very frequent in Saint Ambrose also. Hesterno die de font
disputavimus, De Sacram, lib. 3. cap. 1. Hesternus noster sermo ad sancti
altaris sacramentum deductus est. lib. 5. cap. 1. and in other places. The like
in Chrysostom as in many other places; too many to be pointed at in this place
and time; so in his 18. Hom. on the 3d of Genesis (...), etc. But this perhaps was
only in respect of Lectures, or Expositions of the Scriptures, such as were
often used in the greater Cities, where there was much people, and but little
business: for I conceive not that they met every day in these times to receive
the Sacraments. Epl. 289.
Of Wednesday and of Friday, it is plain they did, (not to say any thing of the
Saturday till the next Section.) Saint Basil names them all together. (...),
etc. It is, says he, a profitable and pious thing, every day to communicate
and to participate of the blessed Body and Blood of Christ our Savior; he
having told us in plain terms, that Whosoever eats his flesh, and drinks
his blood, has eternal life. We notwithstanding do communicate but four times
weekly, (...), viz. on the Lords day, the Wednesday, the Friday and the
Saturday, unless on any other days the memory of some Martyr be perhaps
observed. Expos. fid. Cath. 21.22.
Epiphanius goes a little farther, andn he deriveth the Wednesdays and the
Fridays Service even from the Apostles, ranking them in the same Antiquity, and
grounding them upon the same Authority, that he does the Sunday. (...). Only it
seems the difference was, that whereas formerly it had been the custom not to
administer the Sacrament on these two days, (being both of them fasting-days,
and so accounted long before) until toward Evening: It had been changed of
late and they did celebrate in the Mornings (...), as on the Lords day was
accustomed. Whether the meeting on these days were of such Antiquity as
Epiphanius says they were, I will not meddle. Certain it is that they were
very ancient in the Church of God; as may appear by that of Origin and
Tertullian before remembered. So that if we consider either the preaching of the
Word, the ministration of the Sacraments, or the public Prayers: the Sunday in
the Eastern Churches had no great prerogative above other days, especially
above the Wednesday and Friday, save that the meetings were more solemn, and
the concourse of people greater than at other times, as it is most likely. The
footsteps of this ancient custom are yet to be observed in this Church of
England, by which it is appointed that on Wednesdays and Fridays weekly, Can.
15.
though they be not holy days, the Minister at the accustomed hours of Service
shall resort to Church, and say the Letany prescribed in the Book of
Common Prayer.

As for the Saturday, Eastern Church, little inferior to the Lords day, if not
plainly equal: not as a Sabbath, think not so; but as a day designed unto
sacred meetings. The Constitutions of the Apostles, said to be writ by Clemens,
one of Saint Peter's first successors in the Church of Rome, appoint both days
to be observed as solemn Festivals; both of them to be days of rest: that so
the servant might have time to repair unto the Church, Lib. 8. c. 33.
for this Edification. (...). So the Constitution. Not that they should devote
them wholly unto rest from labor; but only those set times of both, which were
appointed for the meetings of the Congregation: Yet this had an exception too,
the Saturday before Easter day, Lib. 1. cap. 19.
whereupon Christ rested in the Grave, being exempt from these Assemblies, and
destinated only unto grief and fasting. And though these Constitutions in all
likelihood were not writ by Clemens, there being many things therein, which
could not be in use of a long time after: yet ancient sure they were, as being
mentioned in Epiphanius; De Scrip. Ecc. in Clemente.
and as the Cardinal confesses, a Graecis veteribus magni factos, much made of
by the ancient Grecians, though not of such authority in the Church of Rome.
How their authority in this point is countenanced by Ignatius, we have seen
already; and we shall see the same more fully, throughout all this Age. Can. 16.
And first, beginning with the Synod held in Laodicea, a Town of Phrygia, Anno
314. there passed a Canon, (...), touching the reading of the Gospels, with the
other Scriptures upon the Saturday, or Sabbath; Canon 49.
that in the time of Lent there should be no oblation made (...), but on the
Saturday and the Lords day only; neither that any Festival should be then
observed in memory of any Martyrs, Canon 51.
but that their names only should be commemorated, (...), upon the Lords day
and the Sabbaths. Nor was this only the particular will of those two and thirty
Prelates that there assembled; it was the practice too of the Alexandrians. S.
Athanasius Patriarch there, affirms that they assembled on the Sabbath days,
not that they were infected any whit with Judaism, which was far from them;
Homil de Semente.
but that they came together on the Sabbath day to worship Jesus Christ, the
Lord of the Sabbath. (...), as the Father has it. So for the Church of
Millain, which as before I said, in some certain things followed the Churches
of the East; it seems the Saturday was held in a fair esteem, and joined
together with the Sunday. Crastino die and Sabbato, De Sacrament. Lib. 4. cap.
6.
and dominice, de orationis ordine dicemus, as S. Ambrose has it. And probably
his often mention of hesternus dies remembered in the former Section, may have
relation to the joint observance of these two days; and so may that which is
reported then out of S. Chrysostom and S. Cyril, Eastern Doctors both. Hist.
Eccles. Lib. 6. cap. 8.
Sure I am Socrates counts both days for weekly Festivals, (...), that on them
both the Congregation used to be assembled, and the whole Liturgy performed.
Which plainly shows, that in the practice of those Churches they were both
regarded, both alike observed. Gregory Nyssen speaks more home and unto the
purpose. Some of the People had neglected to come unto the Church upon the
Saturday; and on the Sunday he thus chides and rebukes them for it. (...), etc.
With what face (says the Father) will thou look upon the lords day, De
Castigatione.
which have dishonored the Sabbath, know thou not that these days are
Sisters, and that whoever does despise the one, does affront the other? Sisters
indeed, and so accounted in those Churches, not only in regard of the public
meetings, but in this also, that they were both exempt from the Lenten Fast: of
which, more anon. In the mean time, we may remember how Saturday is by S. Basil
made one of those four times, whereon the Christians of those parts did
assemble weekly to receive the Sacrament, as before we noted. And finally it is
said by Epiphanius, that howsoever it was not so in the Isle of Cyprus, which
it seems held more correspondence with the Church of Rome than those of Asia;
Expos. fidei Cathol. 24.
yet in some places, (...), they used to celebrate the holy Sacrament, and hold
their public meetings on the Sabbath day: So as the difference was but this,
that whereas in the Eastern and Western Churches several days were in
commission for Gods public service; the Lords day, in both places, was of the
Quorum, and therefore had the greater worship, because more business.

They held their public Meetings on the Sabbath Day, Laodicea before
remembered, though it ascribe much to this day, in reference to the
Congregations then held upon it; yet it condemns the Jewish observations of the
same. (...), etc. It is not fit for Christians, says the 29. Canon to Judaize,
and do no manner of work on the Sabbath days, but to pursue their ordinary
labors on it. Conceive it so far forth, as they were no impediment to the
public Meetings then appointed. And in the close of all, (...), If any should
be found so to play the Jews, let them be Anathema. So Athanasius, though he
defend the public Meetings on this day, stands strongly notwithstanding for
the abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath. Not on the by, but in a whole discourse,
writ and continued especially for that end and purpose, entitled De Sabbato
and circumcisione. One might conjecture by the title, by coupling of these two
together, what his meaning was; that he contrived them both to be of the same
condition. And in his homily De semente, he tells us of the New Mons and
Sabbaths, that they were Ushers unto Christ, and to be in Authority till the
Master came. (...). The Master being come, the Usher grew out of all
employment, the Sun once risen, v.p. 1. chap. 8.
the Lamp was darkened. To other of the Fathers which have said as much, and
whereof we have spoken in a place more proper: add Nazianz. Orat. 43. S. Cyril
of Jerusalem, Cat. 4. and Epiphanius in the confutation of those several
Heretics that held the Sabbath for a necessary part of Gods public worship,
and to be now observed, as before it was. Of which kind, over and above the
Ebionites and Cerinthians, which before we spoke of, were the Nazarai, in the
second Century, who, as this Epiphanius tell us, differed both from the Jew and
Christian. First, from the Jew, in that they did believe in Christ, next from
the Christian, (...), in that they still retain the Law, as Circumcision, and
the Sabbath, and such things as those. And these I have the rather noted in
this place and time, as being, Cont. Cresconium l. 8.
so Saint Austin tells us, the Ancestors or Original of the Symmachiani, who
held out till this very Age, and stood as much for Sabbaths and legal
ceremonies as their founders did; whereof consult S. Ambroses preface to the
Galatians. Now as these Nazarens or Symmachiani had made a mixed Religion of Jew
and Christian; Nazianz. Orat. 19.
so did another sort of Heretics in these present times contrive a miscellany
of the Jew and Gentile: Idols and Sacrifices they would not have, and yet they
worshipped the Fire and Candle. (...), etc. The Sabbath also they much
reverenced, and stood upon the difference of unclean and clean, yet by no means
would be induced to like of Circumcision. These they called Hypsistarij, or
rather so those doughty fellows pleased to call themselves. Add here that it
was counted one of the great dotages of Appollinaris, and afterward of all his
sect, viz. that after the last Resurrection every thing should be done again,
Basil. ep. 74.
according to the former Law: (...), etc. That we should be circumcised and
observe the Sabbath, and abstein from meats, and offer Sacrifice, and finally
of Christians become Jews again. Than which says Basil, who reports it, what
can be more absurd, or more repugnant to the Gospel? By which it is most plain
and certain, that though the Christians of the East retained the Saturday for a
day of public meeting; yet they did never mean it to be a Sabbath, reckoning
them all for Heretics that so observed it.

Next let us look upon the Sunday, Eliberis (a Town of Spain) in the beginning
of this Age, it was thus decreed. Can. 21.
Si quis in civitate positus, per tres dominicas ecclesiam non accesserit,
tanto tempore abstineat, ut correptus esse videatur. If any Inhabitant of the
Cities absent himself from Church three Lords days together, let him be kept as
long from the holy Sacrament that he may seem corrected for it. Where note, Si
quis in civitate positus, the Canon reaches unto such only as dwelt in Cities
near the Church, and had no great business, those of the Country being left
unto their Husbandry, and the like affairs, no otherwise than in the Emperors
Edict, which came after this. And in the Council of Laodicea, not long after,
Can. 29.
which clearly gave the Lords day place before the Sabbath, it is commanded
that the Christians should not Judaize on the Sabbath day, but that they should
prefer the Lords day before it, and rest thereon from labor, if at least they
could, but as Christians still. The Canon is imperfect as it stands in the
Greek Text of Binius edition; no sense to be collected from it. But the
translation of Dionysius Exiguus, which he acknowledges to be more near the
Greek than the other two, makes the meaning up. Diem dominicum praeferentes
ociari oportet, si modo possint. And this agreeably both unto Zonaras the
Balsamon, who do so expound it, and saw no doubt the truest and most perfect
copies. Thus then says Zonaras: It is appointed by this Canon that none
abstain from labor on the Sabbath Day, which plainly was a Jewish custom, In
Canon. Conc. Laod.
and an anathema laid on those who offend herein. (...), etc. but they are
willed to rest from labor on the Lords day, in honor of the Resurrection of
our Lord and Savior. But here we must observe that the Canon adds, (...), in
case they may. For by the civil Law it is precisely ordered, that every man
shall rest that day, (...), the Hindes and Husbandmen excepted. His reason is
the very same, with that expressed before in the Emperors Edict. (...), etc.
For unto them it is permitted to work and travel on that day, because perhaps
if they neglect it, they may not find another day so fit and serviceable for
their occasions. The like says Balsamon, and more; but him we will reserve for
the 12th. Ad Eusto chium.
Century, at what time he lived. S. Hierom long time after this, tells us of
his Egyptian Monks, diebus dominicis orationi tantum and lectionibus vacare,
that they designed the Lords day wholly unto prayer and reading of the holy
Scriptures, and that they did the like upon other days, completis opusculis,
when their task was finished. This plainly shows that it was otherwise with the
common people. For what need Hierom have observed it, as a thing notable in his
Monks, and peculiar to them; that they spent all the Lords day in religious
exercises, had other men so done as well as they. But Hierom tells us more than
this of Paula, a most devout and pious woman, who lived in Bethlehem,
accompanied with many Virgins and poor Widows, in manner of a Nunnery. Of whom
he says that every Lords day they repaired to the Church of God: Et inde
pariter revertentes instabant operi distributo, and vel sibi vel coeteris
vestimenta faciebant, and after their return from thence they set themselves
unto their tasks, which was the making garments for themselves or others: A
thing which questionless to good a Woman had not done, and much less ordered it
to be done by others; had it been then accounted an unlawful Act. And finally
S. Chrysostom, though in his popupular discourses he seem to intimate to the
People, that God from the beginning did one day in every week to his public
worship, Hom. 10. in Genesis and that he calls upon them often, (...), to
destinate that one day, and that day wholly unto those employments, as Hom. 5.
in Mat. 1. Sa. Hom. 3. in Joh. 3.
yet he confesses at the last, that after the dismission of the Congregation
every man might apply himself to his lawful business. Only he seems offended
with them, that they went presently to the works of their Vocations as soon as
they came out of the Church of God, and did not meditate on the Word delivered
to them. Therefore he wooeth them unto this, that presently upon their coming
home they would take the Bible into their hands and recapitulate with their
Wives and Children that which had been delivered from the Word of God: (...),
and afterward to go about their worldly businesses. As for the time appointed
to these public exercises it seems not to be very long. Chrysostom in the
place before remembered, Hom. 5. in Matthew. 1.
says that it was (...), a very small portion of the day: Origin more
precisely has laid it out, and limited the same, ad unam aut duas horas ex die
integro, but to an hour or two at most, no great space of time. In Numer. Hom.
2.
Nor indeed could they hold them long, the Sermons being most times exceeding
shorts, as may appear by those of the ancient Fathers, which are still extant
in our hands, and the Liturgy not so full as now it is.

Let it then go for granted, honest pleasures on the remainder of that day; to
feast it with his Friends and Neighbors, to Dance, or sport, or to be merry in
a civil manner? There is a little question of it; for Feasting, first we must
take notice, how execrable a thing it was always held, to fast the Sunday:
though some now place a great part of their Piety in their fond abstinence on
that day. In this respect Tertullian tells us touching the Christians of his
time, De Corona mil., c. 3.
that they did hold it an impiety to fast the Lords day: die dominico jejunium
nefas esse ducimus, as before we noted. Such an impiety that the very
Montanists, though otherwise frequent in their Fasts, did yet except this day
and the former Sabbath, out of their austerities: as the same Author does
inform us adv. Psychicos. Cap. 15.
What was Ignatius's censure of the Sundays Fast, we have seen already. In the
declining of the third Age arose the Manichees, and they revived the former
dotage. Dominica jejunare non possumus, quia Manichaeos ob istius diei jejunia,
merito damnamus. We fast not on the Lords day, says St. Ambrose, but rather do
condemn the Manichees for fasting on it; Now what this Father said, he made
good by practice. Baronius tells us out of Paulinus, that he did never dine but
on the Saturday, the Sunday, or the memorial of some Martyr: Annals. Anno 374.
and that upon those days he did not only cherish and relieve the poor, sed and
viri clarissimi exciperentur, but entertained great Persons, men of special
eminence. Vincentius Deputy of Gaul, and Count Arbogastis, are there said by
name to have been often at his Table upon those days before remembered: and
doubt we not, but they had all things fit for such eminent Persons. The like
has been affirmed by St. Austin also: Epl. 86.
Die dominica jejunare scandalum est magnum, etc. It is a great offense or
scandal to fast upon the Lords day, in these times especially, since the most
damnable Heresy of the Manichees came into the World: who have imposed it on
their followers, as the Law of God, and thereby made the Lords day fast the
more abominable. Now for an instance of his Entertainments also upon this day,
see l. 22. de civitate dei, c. 8. This probably occasioned Pope Meltiades, who
lived in the beginning of this present Century, to publish a Decree, Ne
dominica, neve feria quinta jejunaretur, that no man should presume to fast
upon the Sunday, or the Thursday. Not on the Sunday, as the day of the
Resurrection, to cry down the Manichees: nor on the Thursday, as a day of
special credit amongst the Gentiles, Anno 319.
the better to comply with them in those perilous times. After arose up one
Eutactus (for so I rather choose to call him with the learned Cardinal, than
yield to Socrates, who falsely does impute these follies unto Eustathius:) and
he would fast the Sunday too; Conc. Tom. 1. Can. 18.
but on another ground, on pretense of abstinence. A folly presently condemned
in a Provincial Synod held at Gangra of Paphlagonia; wherein it was determined
thus, (...), if any fasted on the Lords day on pretense of abstinence, he
should be Anathema. Next sprung up one Aerius, no good Sundays man, but one
that went not on so good a ground, as Eutactus did. He stood, good man, upon
his Christian liberty, and needs must fast upon the Lords day, only because the
Church had determined otherwise. Of him St. De haeres. c. 53.
Austin tells us in the general, that he cried down all settled and appointed
Fasts, and taught his followers this, that every man might fast as he saw
occasion; ne videatur sub lege, lest else he should be thought to be under the
Law. More punctually Epiphanius tells us, Haeres. 75. n. 3.
that to express this liberty, they used to fast upon the Sunday, and feast it
(as some do if late) upon the Wednesday and the Friday, ancient fasting days.
(...) as the Author has it. Add, that St. Austin tells us of this Aerius, that
amongst other of his Heresies, he taught this for one, Presbyterum ab Episcopo
nulla differentia discerni debere, that there should be no difference between
Priests and Bishops; A pregnant evidence, that those who set themselves against
the Hier^rchy of the Church are the most likely men of all to overthrow all
Orders, in the Civil state. Now as the Manichees did use to fast the Sunday, so
we they therein imitated by the Priscillianists, Manichaeorum simillimos, the
very pictures of the Manichees, as St. Epl. 86.
Austin calls them, save that these last did use to fast on the Christmas
also, and therein went beyond their pattern. And this they did, as Pope Leo
tells us, quia Christum dominum in vera hominis natura natum esse non credunt,
Epl. 93. c. 4.
because they would not be persuaded that Christ the Lord had taken upon him
our humane Nature. To meet with these proud Sectaries, for such they were,
there was a Council called at Saragosa, Caesarea Augusta the Latins call it:
wherein the Fathers censured, and anathematized all such as fasted on the Lords
day, causa temporis, aut persuasionis, aut superstitionis; whether it were in
reference unto any time, Con. Tom. 1. Can. 2.
or mispersuasion, or superstition. In reference unto any times, this seems to
make the Sunday fast unlawful in the time of Lent, and so it was accounted
without all question. For this look Epiphanius Expos. fid. Cathol. Number. 22. S.
Ambr. de Elia and jejunio, cap. 10. S. Hierom epl. ad Lucinum. S. Chrysostom
Hom. 11. in Genesis 2. In two of which fourfathers, Chrysostom and Ambrose, the
Saturday is excepted also. S. Austin Epl. 86. Council. Agathens. Can. 12.
Aurelianens. 4. Can. 2. Humberti Resp. ad libellum Nicetae, and last of all
Rupertus, who lived in the beginning of the 12. De divinis Offic. l. 4. c. 9.
Century, to descend no lower; who withal tells us, that from the first Sunday
in Lent unto Easter day, are 42 days just, whereof the Church fasteth only the
36. it being prohibited by the Canon to fast upon the day of the Resurrection.
Ut igitur nostri solennitas jejunii dominico magis coaptetur exemplo, quatuor
dies qui hanc dominicam praecedunt, superadditi sunt. Therefore, says he, that
the solemnity of our fast might come more near the Lords Example; the four days
which occur between Shrovetuesday and the first Sunday in Lent, were added to
make up the number. But to come back unto the times where before we left,
partly in detestation of the Heretics before remembered, but principally in
honor of the Resurrection, the Council held at Carthage, Anno 398. Can. 64.
did decree it thus. Qui die dominico studiose jejunat, non credatur
Catholicus, that he which of set purpose did fast the Sunday, should be held no
Catholic.

For honest Recreations next, Can. 88.
For so it was adjudged in the Council of Carthage, before remembered, Qui die
solenni, praetermisse Ecclesiae solenni conventu, ad spectacula vadit,
exconnnunicetur. He that upon a solemn day shall leave the service of the
Church, to go unto the common shows, be he excommunicate: where by the way,
this Canon reaches unto those also who are offenders in this kind, as well on
any of the other Festivals, and solemn Days, as upon the Sunday: and therefore
both alike considerable in the present business. But hereof, and the spectacula
here prohibited, we shall have better opportunity to speak in the following
Age. And here it is to be observed, that as St. Chrysostom before confessed it
to be lawful for a man to look unto his worldly business, on the Lords day,
after the Congregation was dismissed: so here the Fathers seem to dispense, who
went unto the common shows, being worldly pleasures, though otherwise of no
good name, as before we said, in case they did not pretermit Gods public
service. There fore we safely may conclude, that they conceived it not unlawful
for any man to follow his honest pleasures, such as were harmless in themselves
and of good report, after the breaking up of the Congregation. Of this sort
questionless, were shooting, and all manly Exercises, walking abroad, or riding
forth to take the Air, civil Discourse, good company, and ingenuous mirth: by
any of which the spirits may be quickened, and the body strengthened. Whether
that Dancing was allowed is a thing more questionable; and probably as the
dancings were in the former times, it might not be suffered: nay, which is
more, it had been infinite scandal to the Church, if they had permitted it. For
we may please to know, that in the dancings used of old, throughout the
principal Cities of the Roman Empire, there was much impurity and immodesty;
such as was not to be beheld by a Christian eye. Sometimes they danced stark
naked, Orat. in Pis. Art. 3. in verrem.
and that not privately alone, but in public Feasts. This Cicero objects
against Lucius Piso, quod in convivie saltaret nudus; the same he also casts in
the Teeth of Verres: and Dejotarus was accused of the like immodesty, whereof
perhaps he was not guilty. As for the Women they had armed themselves with the
like strange impudency, and though they danced not naked in the open streets,
yet would be hired to attend naked at public Feasts, and after prostitute
themselves unto those Guests, for entertainment of the which, they were thither
brought, whereof see Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 12. and Sueton. in Tiberio, cap.
42.43. And for their dancings in the public, they studied all those cunning
and provoking Arts, by which they might entice young men to wantonness, and
inflame their lusts; using lascivious gestures, and mingling with their Dances
most immodest Songs: nay, which is more than this, sometimes of purpose laying
open to the eye and view of the Spectator, those parts which womanhood and
common honesty would not have uncovered. Saint Ambrose so describes them, and
from him we take it. An quicquam est tam pronum ad libidines, De virginib. lib.
3.
quam inconditis motibus, ea quae natura abscondit, vel disciplina nudavit,
membrorum operta nudare, ludere oculis, rotare cervicem, comam spargere? And in
another place he is more particular, Mulieres in plateis inverecundos sub
conspectu adolescentulorum intemperantium choros ducunt, jactantes comam,
trahentes tunicas, scissae amictus, nudae lacertos, plaudentes manibus, De Elia
and jtjunio. c. 18.
personantes vocibus, saltantes pedibus, irritantes in se juvenum libidines
motu histrionico, petulanti oculo, dedecoroso ludibrio. The Women, says the
Father, even in the sight of wanton and lascivious youths, dance immodest
Dances, tossing about their hair, drawing aside their coats that so they might
lay open what should not be seen; their garments open in many places for that
purpose also, their Arms quite bare: clapping their Hands, capering with their
Feet, chanting obscene and filthy Songs (for afterward he speaks de obscoenis
cantibus) finally stirring up the lusts of ungoverned men, by those uncomely
motions, wanton looks, and shameful Spectacles. Saint Basil in his Tract de
luxu and ebrietate, describes them much after the same manner; whereof see that
Father. Yet think not that all Women were so lewdly given, or so immodest in
their dancings: but only common Women which most used those Arts to increase
their custom, Athen. Dipnos. l. 12. c. 13. Iuvenal. Sat. 6. and 11.
such as were mustered up by Strato King of the Sidonians, to attend his
Banquetings; or such loose Trulls as Messalina, and others mentioned in the
Poet, who practiced those lascivious dances, to inflame their Paramours. Now to
these common public dancings, the people in the Roman Empire had been much
accustomed, especially in their height of Fortune, wherein they were extremely
riotous and luxurious. And unto these too many innocent souls both young Men
and women, in the first Ages of the Church used to repair sometimes for their
Recreation, only to look upon the Sport: and seeing those uncomely gestures,
and uncivil sights, went back sometimes possessed with unchaste desires and
loose affections, which might perhaps break out at last in dishonest actions.
This made the Fathers of this Age, and of some that followed, inveigh, as
generally against all dancings, as most unlawful in themselves; so more
particularly, against the Sport it self, and beholding of the same, upon those
days which were appointed to Gods worship. And to these kind of dancings and to
none but these, must we refer those declamations which are so frequent in their
writings, whether in reference to the thing, or unto the times. Two only in
this Century, have spoken of Dancing as it reflects upon the day: St.
Chrysostom, and Ephrem Syrus. St. Chrysostom though last in time shall be first
in place, De Eleemos. Orat. 2. T. 6.
(...), etc. Therefore, says he, we ought to solemnize, this day with
spiritual honor, not making riotous Feasts thereon, swimming in Wine, (...)
drinking to drunkenness, or in wanton dancings; but in relieving of our poor
and distressed Brethren. Where note that I have rendered (...), not simply,
dancing, but wanton dancing, according to the nature of the word, which
signifies such dancings, as was mixed with Songs, Stephan. in (...).
according to the fashion at this time in use, (...), choros agito, salto,
tripudio, proprie cum canty, as in the Lexicon: and for the quality of the
Songs, which in those times they used in dancing, that is shown before, so that
not dancing, simply, but immodest dancing, such as was then in use, is by him
prohibited. And to that purpose Ephrem Syrus, Sermon. de dieb. Festis.
if the work be his; Festivitates dominicas honorare contendite, etc. Endeavor
carnestly, says he, to honor the Lords day, not in a worldly sort, but after
a spiritual manner, not as the Gentiles keep their Feasts, but as Christians
should. Amongst which customs of the Gentiles that are there forbidden, one and
the principal is this, non choreas ducamus, that we use no Dances, that is, no
such immodest and unseemly dancings, as were most practiced by the Gentiles,
and could not stand with that discreet behavior which pertained to Christians.
This evident by that which Saint Ambrase tells us, De Elia and jejunios, c. 18.
Notum est omnibus, nugaces and turpes saltariones ab Episcopis solere
compesci: It is well known, sa th he, how carefully the Bishops do restrain all
toying, light, and beastly kind of Dances. So that in case the dancings be not
toying light, nor beastly, as were the Dances of the Gentiles whom they
reprehended; neither the Fathers did intend them, nor the Rulers of the Church
restrain them.

For the Imperial Constitutions of this present Age, Constantine, before
remembered; save that the Emperor Gratian, Cod. Theod.
Valentinian and Theodosius, who were all partners in the Empire, set out an
Edict to prohibit all public shows upon the Sunday. Nullus die Solis
spectaculum praebeat, nec divinam venerationem, confecta solennitate,
confundat. Such was the Letter of the Law: which being afterward enlarged by
Theodosius the younger, who lived in the next Century, we shall meet with
there. The other Edicts which concern the business that is now in hand, were
only explanations and additions, unto that of Constantine: one in relation to
the matter, the other in reference to the time. Cod. Theodos.
First in relation to the matter, whereas all Judges were restrained by the Law
of Constantine, from sitting on that day, in the open Court, there was a
clause, now added touching Arbitrators, that none should arbitrate any
litigious Cause, or take cognizance of any pecuniary Business on the Sunday:
Debitum publicum, privatumve nullus efflagitet: nec apud ipsos quidem arbitros,
vel in judiciis flagitatos, vel sponte delecios, ulla sit agnitio jurgiorum: a
penalty being inflicted upon them that transgressed herein. Cod. Theodos. l. 8.
tit. 8.
This published by the same three Emperors, Honorius and Evodius, being that
year Consuls, which was in Anno 384, as the former was. Afterward Valentinian
and Valens Emperors were pleased to add, neminem Christianum ab exactoribus
conveniri volumus; that they would have no Christians brought upon that day,
before the Officers of the Exchequer. In reference to the time, it was thought
good by Valentinian, Theodosius and Arcadius, all three Emperors together, to
make some other Festivals capable of the same exemption. For whereas formerly
all the time of Harvest and of Autumn, was exempt from pleadings; as that the
Calends of January or the New years-day, as now we call it, had anciently been
honored with the same immunity: these added thereunto, the days on which the
two great Cities of Rome and Constantinople had been built; Cod. Theodos. l. 2.
tit. 8.
the seven days before Easter day and the seven that followed; together with
every Sunday in its course; yea and the Birth-days of themselves, with those on
which each of them had begun his Empire: Sanctos quoque Paschae dies qui
septeno vel praecedunt numero vel sequuntur in eadem observatione numeramus:
necnon and dies Solis (so they call it all) qui repetito inter se calculo
revolvuntur. Parem necesse est haberi reverentiam etiam nostris diebus, qui vel
lucis auspicia, vel imperii ortus protulere. Dated VII. Id. Aug. Timasius and
Promotus Consuls, which was 389. So that in this regard, the sacred Day had no
more privilege than the Civil, but were all alike; the Emperors day as much
respected as the Lords.

Now as the Days were thus established, white, and the significancy thereof to
denote that Holiness wherewith the Priests of God ought to be apparelled; such
as the Surplices now in use in the Church of England. Witness St. Hierom for
the West, In Ez^ch. 44.
that in the ministration they used a different habit from that of ordinary
times: Religio divina alterum habitum habet in ministerio, alterum in usu
vitaque communi: So for the gencral he informs us. For the particular next in a
reply unto Pelagius, Adv. Pelag. lib. 1.
who it seems disliked it, He asks him what offense it could be to God, that
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or those of any other inferior order, in
administratione sacrificiorum candida vest processerint, did in the
ministration of the Eucharist bestir themselves in a white Vesture. And so St.
Chrysostom for the East, telling the Priest of Antioch, now how high a Calling
the Lord had called them; and how great power they had to repel unworthy men
from the Lords Table: adds, That they were to reckon that for their Crown and
glory, and not that they were privileged to go about the Church in a white
garment. (...). Hom. 83. in Math. 26.
Nor did the Priest only thus avow his calling. The people wanted not some
outward signs and Ceremonies, wherewith to honor their Redeemer; and testify
unto the World that they were his servants: and that by bowing of the knee,
which in those parts and times was the greatest sign, both of humility and
subjection. Bowing the knee, in honor of their Savior, at the name of Jesus;
and reverently kneeling on their knees, when they received the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. Saint Ambrose tells us of the first, Cap. 9.
in his sixth Book de opere Hexaemeri, where speaking of the office of each
several member, he makes the bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus, the
proper duty of that part. Flexibile genu quo prae caeteris domini mitigatur
offensa, etc. The knee says he, is flexible, by which especially the anger of
the Lord is mitigated, his displeasure pacified, and his grace obtained. Hoc
enim patris summi ergo filium donum est ut in nomine JESU omne genu curvetur.
For this, says he, did the most mighty Father give as a special gift to his
only son, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow. This makes the
matter plain enough, we need go no further, yet somewhat to this purpose may be
seen also in St. Hierom in his Comment on the 46. of Esaias; For Kneeling or
adoring at the instant of receiving the holy Sacrament, the same St. Ambrose on
those words, De Sp. Sto. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Adore his footstool, does expound it thus. Per scabellum terra intelligitur,
per terram autem caro Christi, quam hodie quoque in mysteriis adoramus. By the
footstool here, we are to understand the Earth, and by the Earth the flesh of
Christ, which we adore in the holy Mysteries: which plainly shows what was the
custom of these times. Hom. 3. in Ephess.
And so St. Chrysostom tells his Audience, that the great King has made ready
his Table, [(...)] the Angels ministering at the same, the King himself in
presence, why then stand they still? In case they are provided of a wedding
garment, why do they not fall down, and then communicate, (...). Adora and
communica as the Latin renders it. Where that the word adoration seem a little
strange, we may take notice that it is so used by Bishop Jewel. The Sacrament,
says he, in that sort i.e. in respect of that which they signify, Desenc.
Art. 8.
and not in respect of that which they are in themselves, are the flesh of
Christ and are so understood, and believed and adored. And in another place of
the same 8. Article, Nor do we only adore Christ, as very God; but we do also
worship and reverence the Sacrament, and holy Mysteries of Christ's Body: yet so
that we adore them not with godly honor, as we do Christ himself: So more
hereof in Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, Catech 5. where adora. is expressly
mentioned: and for the close of all, that which is told us by Saint Austin, how
in his time the Gentiles charged it on the Christians, that they did worship
Ceres and Bacchus; which was occasioned questionless by reason of their
kneeling or adoring, when they received the Bread and Wine in the holy
Sacrament. Cont. Faust. Manich. lib. 20. cap. 13.
Not that this use of kneeling or adoring, was not more ancient in the Church,
for such a custom may be gathered both out of Origin and Tertullian, in the Age
before: but that this Age affords us the most clear and perfect evidence, for
the proof thereof. So for the Music used in the Congregation, it grew more
exquisite in these times, than it had been formerly: that which before was only
a melodious kind of pronunciation, being now ordered into a more exact and
artificial Harmony. This change was principally occasioned by a Canon of the
Council of Laodicea, in the first entrance of this Age. For where before it was
permitted unto all promiscuously to sing in the Church, it was observed that in
such dissonancy of Voices, and most of them unskilful in the notes of Music,
there was no small jarring and unpleasant sounds. This Council thereupon
ordained, Conc. Laodic. Can. 15.
(...), etc. (...), that none should sing hereafter in the Congregation, but
such as were Canonically appointed to it, and skilful in it. By means whereof
before the shutting up of this fourth. Century the Music of the Church, became
very perfect and harmonious; suavi and artificiosa voce cantata, Confess. l.
10. cap. 33.
as St. Austin tells us. So perfect and harmonious, that it did work
exceedingly on the affections of the Hearers, and did movere animos ardentius
in flammam pietatis, inflame their minds with a more lively flame of Piety;
taking them Prisoners by the ears, and so conducting them unto the glories of
Gods Kingdom. Ibid.
Saint Austin attributes a great cause of Conversion, to the power thereof,
calling to mind those frequent tears quas fudi ad cantus Ecclesiae tuae, which
had been drawn from him by this sacred Music; by which his soul was humbled,
and his affections raised to an height of godliness. The like he also tells us,
in his ninth Book of Confessions, and sixth Chapter. Nor doubt we but it did
produce the same effect on diverse others; who coming to the Churches, as he
then did, to be partakers of the Music returned prepared in mind, and well
disposed in their intentions, to be converted unto God. Now that the Church
might be frequented at the times appointed, and so all secret Conventicles
stopped, in these divided times wherein so many Heresies did domineer; and that
the itching ears of men might not persuade them to such Churches where God had
not placed them, so to discourage their own proper Minister: it pleased the
Fathers in the Council of Saragossa, Anno 368. ^an. 2.
or thereabouts, to decree it thus. First, Ne latibulis cubiculorum and montium
habitent qui in suspicionibus perseverent; that none who were suspected (of
Priscillianism, which was the humor that then reigned) should lurk in secret
corners, either in Houses or in Hills; but follow the example and direction of
the Priests of God. And secondly, ad alienas villas agendorum conventuum causa,
non conveniant; that none should go to other places, under pretense of joining
there to the Assembly, but keep themselves unto their own. Which prudent
Constitutions, upon the self-same pious grounds are still preserved amongst us
in the Church of England.

Thus do we see upon what grounds the Lords day stands; rest from Labors and
restraint from Business upon that day, received its greatest strength from the
supreme Magistrate, as long as he retained that Power which to him belonged, as
after from the Canons and decrees of Councils, the Decretals of Popes, and
Orders of particular Prelates, when the sole managing of Ecclesiastical affairs
was committed to them. I hope it was not so with the former Sabbath, which
neither took original from custom, that people being not so forward to give God
a day; nor required any countenance or authority from the Kings of Israel to
confirm and ratify it. The Lord had spoken the word, that he would have one
day in seven, precisely the seventh day from the Worlds Creation, to be a day
of rest unto all his people: which said, there was no more to do, but gladly to
submit and obey his pleasure; nec quicquam reliquum erat praeter obsequii
gloriam, in the greatest Prince. And this done all at once, not by degrees, by
little and little, as he could see the people affected to it, or as he found it
fittest for them; like a probation Law made to continue till the next Session,
and then on further liking, to hold good for ever; but by a plain and
peremptory Order that it should be so, without further trial. But thus it was
not done in our present Business. The Lords day had no such command that it
should be sanctified, but was left plainly to Gods people, to pitch on this, or
any other, for the public use. And being taken up amongst them, and made a day
of meeting in the Congregation for religious Exercises; yet for 300 years there
was neither Law to bind them to it, nor any rest from labor or from worldly
businesses required upon it. And when it seemed good unto Christian Princes,
the nursing Fathers of Gods Church, to lay restraints upon their people, yet at
the first they were not general: but only thus, that certain men in cetrain
places should lay aside their ordinary and daily works, to attend Gods service
in the Church; those whose employments were most toilsome, and most repugnant
to the true nature of a Sabbath, being allowed to follow and pursue their
labors, because most necessary to the Commonwealth. And in following times,
when as the Prince and Prelate, in their several places, endeavored to
restrain them from that also, which formerly they had permitted, and
interdicted almost all kind of bodily labor upon that day; it was not brought
about without much struggling, and on opposition of the People: more than a
thousand years being past, after Christ's Ascension, before the Lords day had
attained that state in which now it stands, as will appear at full in the
following story. And being brought unto that state, wherein now it stands, it
does not stand so firmly, and on such sure grounds, but that those powers which
raised it up, may take it lower if they please, yea, take it quite away, as
unto the time, and settle it on any other day, as to them seems best, which is
the doctrine of some Schoolmen, and diverse Protestant Writers of great name
and credit in the world: A power which no man will presume to say was ever
challenged by the Jews over the Sabbath. Besides, all things are plainly
contrary in these two days, as to the purpose and intent of the Institution.
For in the Sabbath, that which was principally aimed at, was rest from labor,
that neither they, nor any that belonged unto them, should do any manner of
work upon that day, but sit still and rest themselves. Their meditating on Gods
Word, or on his goodness, manifested in the worlds Creation, was to that an
accessory; and as for reading of the Law in the Congregation, that was not
taken up in more than a 1000. years after the Law was given; and being taken
up, came in by Ecclesiastical Ordinance only, no Divine Authority. But in the
Institution of the Lords day, that which was principally aimed at, was the
performance of religious and Christian duties, hearing the Word, receiving of
the Sacraments, praising the Lord for all his mercies, and praying to him
jointly with the Congregation for the continuance of the same rest and
cessation from the works of labor, came not in till afterward; and then but
as an accessory to the former duties, and that not settled and established in
1000 years, as before was said; when all the proper and peculiar duties of the
day had been at their perfection a long time before. So that if we regard
either Institution, or the Authority by which they were so instituted; the end
and purpose at the which they principally aimed, or the proceedings in the
settling and confirming of them; the difference will be found so great, that of
the Lords day no man can affirm in sense and reason, that it is a Sabbath, or
so to be observed, as the Sabbath was.

CHAP. IV. The great improvement of the Lords day in the fifth and sixth Ages,
make it not a Sabbath.
1. In what estate the Lords day stood in S. Austius time. 2. Stage Plays, and
public shows prohibited on the Lords day, and the other holy days by Imperial
Edicts. 3. The base and beastly nature of the Stage Plays at those times in
use. 4. The barbarous and bloody quality of the Spectacula, or shows at this
time prohibited. 5. Neither all civil business, nor all kind of pleasure
restrained on the Lords day by the Emperor Leo, as some give it out. The so
much cited Canon of the Council of Mascon proves no Lords day Sabbath. 6. The
French and Spaniards in the sixth Age begin to Judaize about the Lords day, and
of restraint of Husbandry on that day, in that Age first thought of. 7. The so
much cited Canon of the Council of Mascon proves no Lords day Sabbath. 8. Of
public honors done in these Ages to the Lords day by Prince and Prelate. 9.
No Evening Service on the Lords day, till these present Ages. 10. Of public
Orders now established for the better regulating of the Lords day-meetings. 11.
The Lords day not more reckoned of than the greater Festivals; and of the other
holydays in these Ages instituted. 12. All business and recreation not by Law
prohibited, are in themselves as lawful on the Lords day as on any other.


WE are now come unto the times wherein the Church began to settle, Gentilism,
and mastered those stiff Heresies of the Arians, Macedonians, and such others
as descended from them: Unto those times wherein the troubles which before
distracted her peace and quiet, being well appeased, all things began to grow
together in a perfect harmony; what time the faithful being united, better than
before in points of judgment, became more uniform in matters of devotion, and
in that uniformity did agree together, to give the Lords day all the honor of
an holy Festival. Yet was not this done all at once, but by degrees; the fifth
and sixth Centuries being well-nigh spent before it came unto that height which
has since continued. The Emperors and the Prelates in these times had the
same affections, both earnest to advance this day above all others, and to the
Edicts of the one, and Ecclesiastical constitutions of the other, it stands
indebted for many of those privileges and exemptions which it still enjoys.
But by degrees, as now I said, and not all at once: For in S. Austin's time,
who lived in the beginning of this fifth Century, it was no otherwise with the
Lords day than as it was before in the former Age, accounted one of those set
days, and probably the principal, which was designed and set apart for Gods
public worship. Amongst the writings of that Father, which are his
unquestionably, we find not much that does conduce to our present business; but
what we find we shall communicate with as much brevity as we can. Epi. 86.
Decivitat. l. 22. c. 8.
The Sundays fast he does abominate as a public scandal. Quis deum non
offendit, si velit cum scandalo totius ecclesiae, die dominico jejunare? The
exercise of the day he describes in brief in this form that follows. Venit
Pascha atque ipso die dominico mane, frequens populus praesens erat. Facto
silentio, divinarum Scripturarum lecta sunt solennia, etc. Easter was come, and
on the Lords day in the morning the people had assembled themselves together.
All being silent and attent, those lessons out of holy Scripture which were
appointed for the time, were read unto them, when we were come unto that part
of the public service which was allotted for the Sermon, I spoke unto them
what was proper for the present Festival, and most agreeable to the time.
Service being done, I took the man along to dinner, (a man he means that had
recovered very strangely in the Church that morning) who told us all the story
of those sad Calamities which had befallen him. This is not much, but in this
little there are two things worth our observation. First, that the Sermon in
those times was not accounted either the only, or the principal part of Gods
public service, but only had a place in the common Liturgy; which place was
probably the same, which it still retains, post Scripturarum solennia, after
the reading of the Gospel. Next that it was not thought unlawful in this
Fathers time to talk of secular and humane affairs upon this day, as some now
imagine; or to call friends or strangers to our Table, as it is supposed: S.
Austin being one of so strict a life, that he would rather have put off the
invitation and the story both to another day, had he so conceived it. Nor does
the Father speak of Sunday, as if it were the only Festival that was to be
observed of a Christian man. Cont. Adimant. c. 16.
Other Festivities there were which he tell us of. First generally, Nos quoque
and dominicum diem, and Pascha, soleuniter celebramus, and quaslibet alias
Christianas dierum festivitates. The Lords day, Easter, and all other Christian
Festivals were alike to him: Epi. 118.
And he enumerates some particulars too, the Resurrection, Passion, and
Ascension of our Lord and Savior, together with the coming of the Holy Ghost,
which constantly were celebrated, anniversaria solennitate. Not that there were
no other Festivals then observed in the Christian Church, but that those four
were reckoned to be Apostolical, and had been generally received in all Ages
past. As for the Sacrament, it was not tied to any day, but was administered
indifferently upon all alike, except it were in some few places where it had
been restrained to this day alone. Alij quotidie communicant corperi and
sanguini dominico, alij certis diebus accipiunt: alibi Sabbato tantum and
dominico, alibi tantum dominico, as he then informs us. As for those works
ascribed unto him, which either are not his, or at least are questionable; they
inform us thus: The tract de rectitudine Cathol. conversationis, advises us to
be attent and silent all the time of Divine Service, not telling tales, nor
falling into jarrs and quarrels, as being to answer such of us as offend
therein, for a double fault: Dum nec ipse verbum Dei audit, nec alios audire
permittit, as neither hearkening to the Word of God our selves, nor permitting
others. In the 251. Sermon, inscribed De tempore, we are commanded to lay aside
all worldly businesses, in solennitatibus sanctorum, and maxim in dominicis
diebus, upon the Festivals of the Saints, but the Lords day specially, that we
may be the readier for divine employments: Where note, that whosoever made the
Sermon, it was his purpose that on the Saints days men were to forbear all
worldly businesses; and not upon the Lords day only, though on that especially.
And in the same it is affirmed, that the Lords day was instituted by the
Doctors of the Church, Apostles, and Apostolical men, the honors of the Jewish
Sabbath being by them transferred unto it. Sancti ecclesiae Doctores omnem
Judaici Sabbatismi gloriam in illam transfer decreverunt. It seems some used
to hunt on the Lords day then, for there it is prohibited as a devilish
exercise: Nullus [in die dominico] in venatione se occeupet, and diabolico
mancipetur officio, with command enough. Nay in the 244. of those de tempore,
it is enjoined above all things, with an ante omnia, that no man meddle with
his Wife, either upon the Lords day, or the other holy days. Ante omnia quoties
dies dominicus, aut aliae festivitates veniunt, uxorem suam nullus agnoscat;
which I the rather note, though not worth the noting, that those who are
possessed with so poor a fancy (and some such there be) would please to be as
careful of the Holy Days as of the Sundays, being alike expressed in the
Prohibition: One may conjecture easily, both by the style, and by the state of
things then being in the Christian Church, that neither of these Sermons (not
to say any thing of the rest which concern us not) could be writ by Austin the
latter, every thing therein considered, by no man of Wisdom.

I say as things then were in the Christian Church, Austins. It had been too
much rashness to prohibit hunting, being in it self a lawful sport; when such
as in themselves were extremely evil, and an occasion of much sin, were not yet
put down. The Cirque and Theater were frequented hitherto, as well upon the
Lords day as on any other; and they were first to be removed before it could be
seasonable to inhibit a lawful pleasure. Somewhat to this effect was done in
the Age before; the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, having made
a Law that no man should exhibit any public show upon the Sunday, as before we
noted. But this prevailed not at the first. And thereupon the Fathers of the
Council of Carthage, in the first year of this fifth Century, did then and
there decree by public order, to make Petition to the Emperor then being: Vt
spectacula theatrorum, coeterorumque ludorum die dominiea, vel cateris
religionis Christianae diebus solennibus, amoveantur, etc. Their suit was
double, first that the Shows exhibited on the Theaters, and other places then
used, might no more be suffered on the Lords day, or any other Festival of the
Christian Church, especially on the Octaves of the Feast of Easter, what time
the People used to go in greater numbers unto the Cirque or Shew-place than the
House of God. Then that for other days, no man might be compelled to repair
unto them (as they had been formerly) as being absolutely repugnant unto Gods
Commandments; but that all people should be left at liberty to go or not to go,
as they would themselves. Nee oportere quenquam christianorum ad hac spectacula
cogi, etc. Sed uti oportet homo in libera voluntate subsistat, sibi divinitus
concessa: so the Canon. The Emperor Theodosius thereupon Enacted, that on the
Lords day, on the Feast of Christ's Nativity, and after to the Epiphany, or
Twelfth-day, as we call it commonly; as also on the Feast of Easter, and from
thence to Whitsontide, the Cirques and Theaters in all places should be shut
up; that so all faithful Christian People might wholly bend themselves to the
service of God. Dominice qui totius septimanae primus est dies, Cod. Theodos.
and Natale atque Epiphaniorum Christi, Paschae etiam and Quinquagesima diebus,
etc. Omni theatorum atque Circensium voluptate per universas urbes earundem
populis denegata, totae Christianorum and fideliune mentes dei eultibus
eccupentur. So far the letter of the law which was Enacted at Constantinople,
the first of February, Anno 425. Theodosius the second time, and Valentinian
being that year Consuls. Where still observe how equally the principal
Festivities, and the Lords day were matched together; that being held unlawful
for the one, which was conceived so of the other. And so it stood until the
Emperor Leo, by two several Edicts advanced the Lords day higher than before
it was, and made it singular above other Festivals, as in some other things, of
which more anon; so in this particular. For in an Edict by him sent unto
Amasius, at that time Captain of his Guard, or Prafectus praetorio, he enacts
it thus. First generally, Dies festos, Cod. l. 3. tit. 12. de seriis.
dies altissimae majestati dedicatos, nullis volumus voluptatibus occupari;
that he would have holy days, which had been dedicated to the supreme Majesty,
not to be taken up with pleasures. What would he have no pleasures used at all
on the holy days? No, he says not so, but only that they should not wholly be
taken up with sports and pleasures, no time being spared for pious and
religious duties; nor does he bar all pleasures on the Sunday neither, as we
shall see anon in the Law it self, but only base, obscene, and voluptuous
pleasures. Then more particularly for the Lords day thus, in reference to the
point in hand, that neither Theater, nor Cirque-sight, nor Combatings with Wild
Beasts should be used thereon; and if the Birth day or Inauguration of the
Emperor fell upon the same, that the Solemnities thereof should be referred to
another day; no less a penalty than loss of dignity, and confiscation of
estate, being laid on them that should offend against his pleasure. But for the
better satisfaction, take so much of the Law it self as concerns this business.
Nihil eadem die vendicet scena theatralis, aut Circense certamen, aut ferarum
lachrymosa spectacula: Etiam, si in nostrum ortum aut natalem celebranda
solennitas inciderit, differatur. Amissionem militiae, proscriptionemque
patrimonii sustinebit, si quis unquam spectaculis hoc die interesse,
[praesumpserit.] Given at Constantinople, Martian and Zeno being Consuls, 469.
of our Saviors Birth.

Now for the things prohibited in these several Edicts, Spectacula, wherein Men
with Beasts, and sometimes Men with Men did use to fight together in the Cirque
or Shew-place: 1. That we may know the better what these Princes aimed at, and
what the Fathers mean in their frequent invectives against Plays and Shows. And
first for that which first is named, the Scene or Stage Play, though they arose
from poor beginnings, yet they attained at last to an infinite impudence, such
as no modest eye could endure to see, or ear to hear. The whole contexture of
the Poems, wanton and lascivious, the speeches most extremely sordid and
obscene, the action such as did not so much personate, as perform all base kind
of Vices. Their Women, as their parts were framed, did many times act naked on
the open Stage, and sometimes did perform the last Acts of Lust, even in the
sight of all Spectators; than which what greater scorn could be given to
nature, what more immodest spectacle could be represented to the eye of Heaven.
De theatro lib. 1.
This Caesar Bullinger assures us, and withal makes it the chief cause why both
profane and sacred Authors did cry down the Stage, as being a place of such
uncleanness: Authors omnes tum sacri tum profani, spurcitiem scenae exagitant,
non modo quod fabulae obscenae in scena agerentur sed etiam quod motus
gestusque essent impudici, atque adeo prostibula ipsa in scenam saepe venirent,
and scena prostarent. So he: Nor has he done them wrong, or delivered any
thing without good authority. Lactantius and Tertullian have affirmed as much,
and from them he had it; moulding up into one relation what they had severally
reported. First for their, Women, acting naked, De falls. rel. l. 1. c. 20.
Lactantius says, that so it was in all their plays, devoted to the memory of
their Goddess Flora. Exuuntur vestibus populo flagitante meretrices, quae tunc
mimorum funguntur officio, etc. The Whores, which used to act those parts, (for
who else would do it) were by the people importuned to put off their Clothes,
which they did accordingly; and being naked personated, as the Mimicks used all
shameless and immodest gestures, till the most impudent eye amongst them was
glutted with so foul a spectacle. Then for the other filthiness, De spectaculis
cap. 17.
Tertullian tells us, that the common Prostitutes, such as received the filths
of all the Town, like the common-sewers, performed those beastly acts on the
public stage, and which was yet more shameful, in the sight and presence of
the self-same Sex. Ipsa etiam prostibula, publicae libidinis hostiae, in scena
proferuntur, plus misera in praesentia foeminarum, De gubern. Dei. l. 6.
as that Author has it. And sure there must be in them some extreme
impurities, when Salvian a godly Bishop of this Age, has told us of them, that
such they were, Vt ea non solum dicere, sed etiam recordari, aliquis sine
pollutione non possit: that none could speak, no not so much as think of them,
without some infection. Such, that whereas all other crimes, of what kind
soever, Murder, Adultery, and Theft, and Sacriledg, and others of that heinous
nature, might without any breach of Modesty, be accused and censured: Solae
impuritates theatrorum sunt, quae honest non possunt vel accusari, the
baseness of the Theaters was so transcendent, that no man could accuse them,
but must put off Modesty. No marvel therefore if the Fathers both of this and
the former Ages, used to declame so much against them, and to cry them down; at
least to wean the people from them: as being the bane of Chastity, the
shipwreck of the Soul, the Devils Temples, the scandal of the World, and the
shame of Nature. No marvel if the Council held in Carthage, in the Age before,
or any of the Christian Writers of these present times, Salvian and Chrysostom,
and the rest, so highly censured those, who left the Church and public service
of the Lord, to go to those impure delights, and unmanlike spectacles; for that
the Fathers in the same place assembled, in this present Century, agreed so
well together to petition the Emperors then being, to redress this mischief;
or lastly that the Emperors of these times, sent out their Edicts, to prohibit
such unchristian sports.

As wicked, nature: those worthily abominated for their filthy baseness; and
these as much to be detested for their inhumanity. It was the custom of the
great ones in the State of Rome, to court the favor of the people, by
entertaining them with several shows; which in the end became repleat with all
kind of cruelty; which fashion afterward was retained among the Emperors, the
better to content the vulgar; and keep them in a good opinion of the present
change. Sometimes they entertained their humors by presenting them with diverse
sorts of crucl and outlandish beasts; which being brought into the place
appointed, were chased and hunted up and down, by such as were condemned to
die, or otherwise would adventure for reward and hire: In which it happened many
times, that many a man was made a prey unto Bears and Lions, and other beasts
of the like fierce and cruel nature: and therefore in the Emperors Law before
recited, are justly called ferarum lacrymosa spectacula; a most proper
Epithet. Sometimes again they would present them with a show of Fencers, not
such as played at Cudgels, or with Swords rebated, only to show their
activeness, and teach men how to use their Weapons: but such as in good earnest
were to fight it out and not give over till the Victory was made good by Death.
And these I take to be Cirque fights, or the Circense certamen, principally in
the Law prohibited. De spectac.
Tertullian tells us of the first, ferarum voluptati satis non fieri, nisi and
feris humana corpora dissiparentur; that they conceived the Beasts had not
sport enough, unless they tore in pieces the wretched bodies of poor men. And
to the other, we may well apply the words of Cyprian, Quid potest inhumanius,
quid acerbius dici? Epl. 2. li. 2.
disciplina est ut perimere quis possit gloria quod peremit. What, says the
Father, can be told that is more cruel, more inhumane. Murder is grown into an
Art, and they that kill most, have the greatest honor. And so indeed they had,
there being Rewards designed for them, that came off with victory: liberty, if
they had been Bondmen; if freemen, sometimes money, and sometimes a garland of
Palm Tree, which being wound about with certain woollen Ribbands called
Lemnisci, De spectac. cap. 28.
had generally the name of Palmae Lemniscatae. With this Tertullian does
upbraid the Roman people, that whereas sometimes they would cry out to have a
notable Murderer cast unto the Lions: Iidem gladiatori atroci rudem petunt, and
pileum praemium conferunt, the self-same men would have some cruel
swash-buckler or Gladiator, rewarded with a Rod and Cap, the signs of freedom.
These barbarous and bloody sights, being so far different from the spirit of
meekness, which was the badge and proper cognizance of a Christian; were
therefore bitterly inveighed against by the ancient Writers, the Reverend
Fathers of the Church: and such as harkened not to their Exhortations, esteemed
as men given over to a reprobate sense; such as had cast away their livery, and
forsook their Master. The nature of these sights, and the opinion had of those
that did frequent them, we cannot better show than by the story of Alipius, as
St. Austin tells it; and is briefly this, Quidam amici ejus, and condiscipuli,
etc. Confession. lib. 6. c. 8.
Some friends of his meeting him as he came from Dinner, with a familiar kind
of violence, forced him against his will to go with them into the Amphitheater
(for there these sports were sometimes held) crudelium and funestorum ludorum
diebus, upon a day designed to these cruel pastimes. He told them by the way,
that though they haled his body with them, yet should his eyes and soul be free
from these bloody spectacles, cum talia aversaretur and detestaretur, which of
himself he so detested. But thither he went and took his place, and presently
closed his eyes that he might not see those dismal sights, which were before
him. When as the fight waxed hot, and omnia fervebant immanissimis
voluptatibus, and all were taken up with those unmerciful delights, upon a
sudden shout, occasioned in the fight, he let loose his eyes to see what it
meant: Et percussus est graviori vulnere in anima, quam ille in corpore,
ceciditque miserabilius, quam ille, quo cadente factus est clamor. By means
whereof, he became smitten with a greater wound in his soul, than the poor
fellow in his body; and fell more miserably by far, than he, upon whose death
the said noise was raised. How so? Ut enim vidit illum sanguinem, immanitatem
simul ebibit, etc. For presently as soon, as he beheld the blood, he sucked in
cruelty, and drew in the furies of the place, being delighted with the
wickedness of the sport, and made drunk as it were with those bloody
spectacles. Such Plays and shows as these, were not unlawful to be seen on the
Lords day only, but on all days else. And such and none but such, were the
plays and shows, against the which the Fathers do inveigh with so much
bitterness; which as they were unworthy of a Christian eye, so as Religion did
prevail, they began to vanish; and finally were put down, I mean these last, by
Theodoricus King of the Goths, in Italy. Our plays and theirs, our shows and
theirs, yea and our dancings too compared with theirs, Annals, Anno 469.
are no more of kin than Alexander the Coppersmith was with Alexander the Great
King of Macedon. Nay, if Baronius tells us true, as I think he does, these
Plays and Cirquefights were not prohibited by the Emperor Leo, because he
thought them not as lawful to be performed upon the Lords day as on any other,
but for a more particular reason. He had a purpose to avenge himself of Asper
and Ardaburius, two great and powerful men that had conspired against his
safety; and for the execution of that purpose, made choice of such a time, when
the Circensian sports were to be exhibited. Which therefore he prohibited at
this time, to be presented on the Sunday, because, though his revenge was just,
yet the effusion of so much Christian blood on that sacred day, might be a
blemish to Religion. Ne licet justa esset ultio, tamen diem sacrum ignominia
videri posset labefactasse. So far the Cardinal.

A second thing which this Emperor did in the advancing of the Lords day,
Civil, and legal businesses. It was before appointed by the Emperor
Constantine, that Judges should not set that day in the open Court; the
Emperors Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius added thereunto that none should
arbitrate in any brawling and litigious cause upon the same. Cod. l. 2. de fer.
lex. 2.
And whereas Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius had privileged other days as
well as Sunday, from the suits of Court, which days are formerly remembered in
their proper place: The Emperor Thedosius the younger, was pleased to add the
Feast of Christ's Nativity, and so to the Epiphany, or Twelfth-tide, as we use
to call it, together with seven days before, and seven days after: [Diem
natalis domini, and epiphaniae septem qui praecedunt, and septem qui sequuntur]
making this Festival with the rest before remembered, in this case equal with
the Sunday, where by the way, we may observe of what antiquity the feast of
Epiphany is to be accounted, as having got unto such an height in this
Emperors time, (he entered on the Empire, Anno 408) as to be privileged in the
self-same manner, as Christmas was. And not in this respect alone, in respect
of pleadings, but in a following Law of his, Anno 425. he declared his
pleasure, that this day, with the other principal Feasts, as before we noted,
was not to be profaned, as it had been formerly, by the Cirques and Theaters.
For the antiquity thereof more might be said, were not this sufficient. Only I
add, that in the Eastern Churches from the times of old, they used to lengthen
out the Feast of Christmas for 12 days together, not ending the solemnities of
the same till the Epiphany was gone over; from whence in likelihood that custom
came at last to these Western parts: Nativitatem domini Epiphaniae
continuantes, duas illas festivitates unam faciunt. Hist. l. 7. c. 32.
So Otho Frisingensis tells us of them. But to proceed, it seems that either
these Edicts were not well observed, or else the Ministers of the Courts used
to meet together for dispatch of business on that day, though the Judges did
not. Therefore it seemed good to this Emperor Leo in the year and day above
recited, to declare his pleasure thereupon in this form that follows. Dies
festos, Cod. Justin. l. 3. tit. 12.
dies altissimae majestati dedicatos, etc. It is our will that the Holy Days
being dedicated to the most High God, should not be spent, or wholly taken up
in pleasures, or otherwise profaned with vexatious suits. Particularly for the
Lords day, that it be exempt from Executions, Citations, entering into Bonds,
Apparances, Pleadings, and such like; that Cryers be not heard upon it, and
such as go to Law, lay aside their Actions, taking truce a while, to see if
they can otherwise compose their differences. For so it passes in the Edict.
Dominicum itaque ita semper honorabilem decernimus and venerandum, ut a cunctis
executionibus excusetur. Nulla quenquam urgeat admonitio, nulla fidei-jussionis
flagitetur exactio, taceat apparitio, advocatio delitescat, sit idem dies a
cognitionibus alienus, praeconis horrida vox sileat, respirent a controversiis
litigantis, and habeant foederis intervallum, etc. I have the rather here laid
down the Law it self, that we may see how punctual the good Emperor was in
silencing those troublesome suits, and all preparatives or appurtenances
thereunto; that so men might with quieter minds repair unto the place of Gods
public service; yet was not the Edict so strict, that neither any kind of
Pleasures were allowed upon that day, as may be thought by the beginning of the
Law, nor any kind of secular and civil business to be done upon it. The
Emperor Constantine allowed of manumission, and so did Theodosius too. Cod. l.
2. de. fer. lex. 2.
Die dominico emancipare and manumittere licet, reliquae causae vel lites
quiescant, so the latter Emperor: Nor do we find but that this Emperor Leo
well allowed thereof; sure we are that he well allowed of other civil
businesses, when he appointed in this very Edict that such as went to Law might
meet together on this day to compose their differences, to show their
evidences, and compare their writings. And sure I am that he prohibited not all
kind of pleasures, but only such as were of an obscene and unworthy nature. For
so it follows in the Law: First in relation unto businesses, ad sese simul
veniant adversarij non timentes, pacta conserant, transactiones loquantur. Next
in relation unto pleasures, Nec tame^n hujus religiosae d^ei ^cia relaxantes,
obscenis quemquam patimur voluptatibus detineri; where note not simply
voluptates, but obseenae voluptates, not pleasures, but obscene and filthy
pleasures are by him prohibited, such as the Scena theatralis therein after
mentioned; not civil business of all sorts, but brangling and litigious
businesses are by him forbidden, as the Law makes evident. Collectar.
And thus must Theodorus Lector be interpreted, who tells us of this Emperor
Leo, how he ordained (...), that the Lords day should be kept holy by all sorts
of People, that it should be a non-lee day, a day of rest and ease unto them,
which is no otherwise to be understood, than as the Law it self intended;
however the words of Theodorus seem to be more general? Nor was it long before
this Edict, or the matter of it had found good entertainment in the Christian
world; the rather since those Churches which lay further off, and were not
under the command of the Roman Emperor, taking perhaps their hint from hence,
had made a Canon to that purpose. For in a Council held in Aragon, Anno 516.
being some 47 years after Leos Edict, it was decreed that neither Bishop,
Priest, or any other of the Clergy (the Clergy at that time were possessed of
some seats of judicature) should pronounce sentence in any cause, which should
that day be brought before them. Nullus Episcoporum aut presbyterorum vel
Clericorum, Can. 4.
propositum cujuscunque causae negotium, die dominico audeat judicare. This was
in Anno 516. as before I said, the second year of Amalaricus King of the Goths
in Spain.

Nor stayed they here. The People of this sixth Age wherein now we are, Judaize
a little, in the imposing of so strict a rest upon this day; especially in the
Western Churches which naturally are more inclined to Superstition than the
Eastern Nations. Wherein they had so far proceeded, that it was held at last
unlawful to travel on the Lords day with Wains or Horses, to dress Meat, or
make clean the House, or meddle with any manner of Domestic businesses. The
third Council held at Orleans, Anno 540. does inform us so; and plainly
thereupon determined, Can. 27.
that since these prohibitions abovesaid, Ad Judaicam magis quam ad Christianam
observantiam pertinere probantur, did savor far more of the Jew than of the
Christian; Die dominico quod ante licuit, licere, that therefore whatsoever had
formerly been lawful on that day, should be lawful still: Yet so that it was
thought convenient that men should rest that day from Husbandry, and the
Vintage, from Sowing, Reaping, Hedging, and such servile works; quo facilius ad
ecclesiam venientes, orationis gratia vacent, that so they might have better
leisure to go unto the Church, and there say their Prayers. This was the first
restraint which hitherto we have observed, whereby the Husbandman was
restrained from the Plough and Vintage, or any work that did concern him. And
this was yielded, as it seems, to give them some content at least, which aimed
at greater and more slavish prohibitions than those here allowed of; and would
not otherwise be satisfied than by grant of this: Nay so far had this
superstition, or superstitious conceit about this day prevailed amongst the
Goths in Spain, a sad and melancholic People, mingled and married with the
Jews, who then therein dwelt: that in their dotage on this day, they went
before the Jews their Neighbors; the Sabbath not so rigorously observed by
one, as was the Lords day by the other. The Romans in this Age had utterly
defeated the Vandals and their power in Africa; becoming so bad Neighbors to
the Goths themselves. To stop them in those prosperous courses, Theude the
Gothish King, Anno 543. makes over into Africa with a complete Army. The Armies
near together, and occasion fair, the Romans on a Sunday set upon them, and put
them all unto the sword; the Goths, as formerly the Jews, never so much as
laying hand upon their Weapons, or doing any thing at all in their own defense,
only in reverence to the day. The general History of Spain so relates the
story, although more at large. A superstition of so sudden and so quick a
growth, that whereas till this present Age, we cannot find that any manner of
Husbandry or Country labors were forbidden as upon this day, it was now
thought unlawful on the same to take a sword in hand for ones own defense.
Better such Doctrines had been crushed, and such Teachers silenced in the first
beginnings, than that their Jewish speculations should in fine produce such sad
and miserable effects. Nor was Spain only thus infected where the Jews now
lived; the French we see began to be so inclined. Not only in prohibiting
things lawful, which before we specified, and to the course whereof the Council
held at Orleans gave so wise a check, but by imputing such Calamities as had
fallen amongst them, to the neglect or ill observance of this day. A flash of
Lightning, or some other fire from Heaven, as it was conceived, had on the
Lords day made great spoil of men and houses in the City of Limoges. This
Gregory of Tours, who lived about the end of this sixth Century, pronounces to
have fallen upon them, ob diei dominici injuriam, because some of them used to
work upon the Sunday. But how could he tell that, or who made him acquainted
with Gods secret counsels? Had Gregory been Bishop of Limoges, as he was of
Tours, it may be Limoges might have escaped so fierce a censure, and only Tours
have suffered in it. For presently he adds, in Turonico vero nonnulli ab hoc
igne, sed non die dominico, adusti sunt: that even in Tours it self, many had
perished by the self same fire; but being it fell not on the Sunday, as it did
at Limoges, therefore that misery fell on them for some other reason. Indeed he
tells us of this day, that being it was the day whereon God made the light, and
after was the witness of our Saviors resurrection: Ideo omni fide a
Christianis observari debet, ne fiat in eo omne opus publicum; therefore it was
to be observed of every Christian, no manner of public business to be done
upon it. A piece of new Divinity, and never heard of till this Age, nor in any
afterward.

Not heard of till this Age, Gunthram, King of the Burgundians, Conc.
Matisonens. 11. Can. 1.
Anno 588. there was a Council called at Mascon, a Town situate in the Duchy of
Burgundy, as we now distinguish it; wherein were present Priscus, Evantius,
Praetextatus, and many other reverend and learned Prelates. They taking into
consideration how much the Lords day was of late neglected; for remedy thereof
ordained, that it should be observed more carefully for the times to come:
Which Canon I shall therefore set down at large, because it has been often
produced as a principal ground of those precise observances which some amongst
us have endeavored to force upon the consciences of weak and ignorant men. It
is as follows, Videmus populum Christianum temerario more diem dominicum
contemptui tradere, etc. It is observed that Christian people do very rashly
slight and neglect the Lords day, giving themselves thereon, as on other days,
to continual labors, etc. Therefore let every Christian, in case be carry not
that name in vain, give ear to our instruction, knowing that we have care that
you should do well, as well as power to bridle you, that you do not ill. It
follows, Custodite diem dominicum qui nos denuo peperit, etc. Keep the Lords
day, the day of our new birth, whereon we were delivered from the snares of
sin. Let no man meddle in litigious Controversies, or deal in Actions or
Lawsuits, or put himself at all upon such an exigent, that needs he must
prepare his Oxen for their daily work, but exercise your selves in Hymns, and
singing Praises unto God, being intent thereon both in mind and body. If any
have a Church at hand, let him to unto it, and there pour forth his soul in
tears and prayers, his eyes and hands being all that day lifted up to God. It
is the everlasting day of rest, insinuated to us under the shadow of the
seventh day, or Sabbath, in the Law and the Prophets; and therefore it is very
meet that we should celebrate this day with one accord, whereon we have been
made what at first we were not. Let us then offer unto God our free and
voluntary service, by those great goodness we are freed from the Goal of
error: not that the Lord exacts it of us, that we should celebrate this day in
a corporal abstinence, or rest from labor; who only looks that we do yield
obedience to his holy will, by which contemning earthly things, he may conduct
us to the heavens of his infinite mercy. However, if any man shall set at
naught this our exhortation, be he assured that God shall punish him as he has
deserved, and that he shall be also subject unto the censures of the Church. In
case he be a Lawyer, he shall lose his cause; if that he be an Husbandman or
Servant, he shall be corporally punished for it; but if a Clergyman or Monk,
he shall be six months separated from the Congregation. Add here, that two
years after this, being the second year of the second Clotaire King of France,
there was a Synod holden at Auxerre, a Town of Champagne ( concilium
Antisiodorense in the Latin Writers) wherein in it was decreed as in this of
Mascon, Non licet die dominico boves jungere, vel alia opera exercere; no man
should be suffered to yoke his Oxen, or do any manner of work upon the Sunday.
This is the Canon so much urged, (I mean that of Mascon) to prove that we must
spend the Lords day wholly in religious exercises; and that there is no part
thereof which is to be employed unto other uses. But there are many things to
be considered before we yield unto this Canon, or the authority thereof; some
of them being of that nature, that those who most insist upon it, must be fain
to traverse. For first it was contrived of purpose with so great a strictness,
to meet the better with those men which so extremely had neglected that sacred
day. A stick that bends too much one way, cannot be brought to any straightness
till it be bent as much the other. This Synod secondly, was Provincial only,
and therefore can oblige none other, but those for whom it was intended, or
such who after did submit unto it, by taking it into their Canon. Nor will some
part thereof be approved by them who most stand upon it; none being bound
hereby to repair to Church, to magnify the name of God in the Congregation,
but such as have some Church at hand; and what will then become of those that
have a mile, two, three, or more to their Parish Churches, and no Chapel
neither? they are permitted by the Canon to abide at home. As for Religious
duties here are none expressed, as proper for the Congregation, but Psalms and
Hymns, and singing Praise unto the Lord, and pouring forth our souls unto him
in tears and prayers; and then what shall we do for Preaching, for Preaching of
the Word which we so much call for. Besides, King Gunthram, on whose Authority
this Council met, in his Confirmatory Letters does extend this Canon as well
unto the other Holy Days as unto the Sunday; commanding all his Subjects,
Vigore hujus decreti and definitionis generalis, by virtue of his present
mandate, that on the Lords day, vel in quibuscunque alijs solennitatibus, and
all solemn Festivals whatsoever, they should abstain from every kind of bodily
labor, save what belonged to dressing meat. But that which needs must most
afflict them, is that the Council does profess this abstinence from bodily
labor which is there decreed, to be no Ordinance of the Lords, that he
exacteth no such duty from us; and that it is an Ecclesiastical exhortation
only, and no more but so. And if no more but so, it were too great an
undertaking, to bring all Nations of the World to yield unto the prescript of a
private and particular Canon, made only for a private and particular cause; and
if no more but so, it concludes no Sabbath.

Yet notwithstanding these restraints from work and labor, Honorius and
Theodosius, at that time Emperors, Anno 412. that they should be permitted,
omnibus diebus dominicus, every Lords day to walk abroad, with a guard upon
them; as well to crave the charity of well disposed persons, as to repair unto
the Bathes for the refreshing of their bodies. Nor did he only so command it,
but set a mulct of 20 pound in gold on all such public ministers as should
disobey, the Bishops of the Church being trusted to see it done. Where note,
that going to the Bathes on the Lords day was not thought unlawful, though it
required, no question, corporal labors; for had it been so thought, as some
thought it afterward, the Prelates of the Church would not have taken it upon
them to see the Emperors will fulfilled, and the Law obeyed. A second honor
affixt in these Ages to the Lords day, is that it was conceived the most proper
day for giving holy Orders in the Church of God; and a Law made by Leo then
Pope of Rome, and generally since taken up in the Western Church, that they
should be conferred upon no day else. There had been some regard of Sunday in
the times before; and so much Leo does acknowledge. Quod ergo a patribus
nostris propensiore cura novimus servatum esse, a vobis quoque volumus
custodiri, ut non passim diebus omnibus sacerdotalis ordinatio celebretur. Ept.
Decret. 81:
But that which was before a voluntary act, is by him made necessary; and a Law
given to all the Churches under his obedience, Vt his qui consecrandi sunt,
nunquam benedictiones nisi in die resurrectionis dominicae tribuantur, that
Ordinations should be celebrated on the Lords day only. And certainly he gives
good reason why it should be so, except in extraordinary and emergent cases,
wherein the Law admits of a dispensation. For on that day, says he, The holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles, and thereby gave us as it were this
celestial rule, that on that day alone we should confer spiritual orders, in
quo collata sunt omnia dona gratiarum, in which the Lord conferred upon his
Church all spiritual graces. Nay, that this business might be done with the
more solemnity and preparation, it was appointed that those men who were to be
invested with holy Orders, should continue fasting from the Eve before; that
spending all that time in prayer, and humbling of themselves before the Lord,
they might be better fitted to receive his Graces. For much about these times
the service of the Lords day was enlarged and multiplied; the Evenings of the
day being honored with religious meetings, as the Mornings formerly: Yea, and
the Eves before were reckoned as a part or parcel of the Lords day following;
Cui a vespere sabbati initium constat ascribi, as the same Decretal informs us.
The 251. Sermon de tempore; ascribed unto St. Austin does affirm as much; but
we are not sure that it is his. Note that this Leo entered on the Chair of Rome,
Anno 440. of our Saviors birth, and did continue in the same full 20 years;
within which space of time he set out this decretal, but in what year
particularly, that I cannot find.

I say that now the Evenings of the Lords day began to have the honor of
religious Meetings: ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so from the beginning.
Nor hd it been so now, but that almost all sorts of people were restrained from
works; as well by the Imperial Edicts, as by the constitutions of particular
Churches; by means whereof the afternoon was left at large, to be disposed of
for the best increase of Christian Piety. Nor probably had the Church conceived
it necessary, had not the admiration which was then generally had of the
Monastic kind of life, facilitated the way unto it. For whereas they had bound
themselves to set hours of prayer, Epitaphium Panlae matr.
Mane hora tertia, sexta, nona, vespere, noctis medio, at three of the clock in
the Morning, at six, at nine, and after in the Evening, and at midnight, as St.
Hierom tells us: the people generally became much affected with their strict
Devotions; and seemed not unwilling to conform unto them, as far at least, as
might consist with their Vocations: upon this willingness of the people, the
service of the Church became more frequent than before; and was performed
thrice every day in the greater Churches, where there were many Priests and
Deacons to attend the same: namely, at six, and nine, before Noon; and at some
time appointed in the Evening, for the afternoon; accordingly as now we use it
in our Cathedral and Collegiate Churches. But in inferior Towns and petty
Villages, where possibly the people could not every day attend so often; it was
conceived sufficient that they should have the Morning and the Evening prayer
sung or said unto them, that such as would, might come to Church for their
devotions: and so it is by the appointment of the Rubric in our Common Prayer
book. Only the Sundays and the Holy days were to be honored with two several
meetings, in the Morning: the one, at six of the clock, which simply was the
morning service; the other, at nine, for the administration of the holy
Sacrament, and Preaching of the Word to the Congregation. This did occasion the
distinction of the first and second Service, as we call them still: though now
by reason of the peoples sloth, and backwardness in coming to the Church of
God, they are in most places joined together. So whereas those of the Monastic
life, did use to solemnize the Eve or Vigils of the Lords day, and of other
Festivals; with the peculiar and preparatory service, to the day it self: that
profitable and pious custom, began about these times, to be taken up, and
generally received in the Christian Church. Of this there is much mention to be
found in Cassian; as Institut. lib. 2. cap. 18. l. 3. c. 9. Collat. 21. c. 20.
and in other places. This gave the hint to Leo, and St. Austin if he made the
Sermon, to make the Eve before, a part or parcel of the day; because some part
of the Divine Offices of the day, were begun upon it. And hence it is, that in
these Ages, and in those that followed (but in none before) we meet with the
distinction of matutinae and vespertinae precationes, Mattins and Evensong, as
we call it: the Canons of the Church about these times, beginning to oblige men
to the one, as well as formerly to the other. The Council held in Arragon,
Conc. Tartaconens. Can. 7.
hereupon ordained, Vt omnis clerus die Sabbati ad vesperam paratus sit, etc.
That all the Clergy be in readiness on the Saturday vespers, that so they may
be prepared with the more solemnity, to celebrate the Lords day in the
Congregation. And not so only, sed ut diebus omnibus vesperas and matutinas
celebrent, but that they diligently say the morning and the evening service,
every day continually. So for the mattins on the Sunday, Gregory of Tours
informs us of them. Motum est signum ad matutinas, Erat enim dies dominica; how
the Bell rung to mattins for it was a Sunday. I have translated it the Bell,
according to the custom of these Ages, whereof now we write; wherein the use of
Bells was first taken up, for gathering of the people to the house of God:
there being mention in the Life and History of St. Loup or Lupus, Baron. Ann.
Anno 614.
(who lived in the fifth Century) of a great Bell that hung in the Church of
Sens in France, whereof he was Bishop, ad convocandum populum for calling of
the congregation. Afterward they were rung on the holy day Eves, to give the
people notice of the Feast at hand, and to advertise them, that it was time to
leave off their businesses. Solebant vesperi, initia feriarum campanis
praenunciare; so he that wrote the life of Codegundut.

Well then, the Bells are rung, and all the people met together: Collections
for the poor, had been sometimes used on this day before: but now about these
times, the Offertory began to be an ordinary part of Gods public Worship. Pope
Leo seems to intimate it, in his fifth Sermon de collectis; Et quia die
dominico proxima futura est collectio, vos omnes voluntariae devotioni
praeparare, etc. and gives them warning of it, that they may be ready. For our
behavior in the Church, it was first ordered by St. Paul, that all things be
done reverently, (...), because of the Angels: according to which ground and
warrant, it was appointed in these Ages, that every man should stand up, at the
reading of the Gospel, and the Gloria Patri; that none depart the Church till
the service ended. Pope Anastasius who lived in the beginning of the fifth Age,
is said to have decreed the one. Dum S. S. Epl. Decret. 1 ap. Bin.
Evangelia in Ecclesia recitantur, sacerdotes and caeteri omnes praesentes, non
sedentes sed venerabiliter curvi, in conspectu sancti Evangclii stantes,
dominica verba attente audiant, and fideliter adorent. The Priests, and all
else present are enjoined to stand (their Bodies bowed a little in sign of
reverence) during the reading of the Gospel; but by no means to hear it
sitting: adding some joyful acclamation at the end thereof, such as is that of
Glory be to thee O Lord. So for the Gloria Patri, that form of giving to the
Lord the Glory which belongs unto him; we find in Cassian, that they used to
stand upon their feet at the doing of it: In clausula Psalmi; Institut. lib. 2:
c. 8.
omnes astantes pronunciant magno clamore, Gloria Patri, etc. that gesture
being thought most natural and most proper for it. No constitution needed to
enjoin those Duties, which natural discretion of it self, could dictate. As for
the last, it seemed the people in those parts, used to depart the Church, some
of them, before the Service ended, and the blessing given: for otherwise there
had been no Canon to command the contrary. Ex malis moribus bonae nascuntur
leges, the old saying is. And out of this ill custom did arise a Law, made in a
Synod held in a Town of Gallia Narbonensis, the 22 of the Reign of Alaricus
King of the Visi-Gothes, or Western-Gothes Anno 506. Conc. Agathens: Can. 47.
that on the Lords day all Lay People should be present at the public Liturgy;
and none depart before the Blessing. Missas die dominico secularibus audire
speciali ordine praecipimus: ita ut egredi ante benedictionem sacerdotis
populus non praesumat: So the Canon has it. According unto which it is
provided in the Canons of the Church of England, Can. 19.
that none depart out of the Church during the time of Service and Sermon,
without some reasonable or urgent cause. The Benediction given, and the
Assembly broken up, the people might go home no doubt; and being there make
merry with their Friends and Neighbors: such as came either to them of their
own accord, or otherwise had been invited. Gregory of Tours informs us of a
certain Presbyter, that thrust himself into the Bishopric of the Arverni,
immediately upon the death of Sidonius Apollinaris, who died about the year
487: and that to gain the peoples favor, on the next Lords day after, Jussit
cunctos cives praeparato epulo invitari, Hist. l. 31.
he had invited all the principal Citizens to a solemn Feast. Whatever might be
said of him, that made the invitation, no doubt but there were many pious and
religious men, that accepted of it. Of Recreations after Dinner until Evening
prayers; and after Evening prayer till the time of Supper: there is no question
to be made but all were practiced, which were not prohibited. Nam quod non
prohibetur, permissum est, as Tertullian. Of this more anon.

Thus have we brought the Lords day to the highest pitch; rest from worldly
business, and to the full performance of religious Duties. Whatever was done
afterward in pursuit hereof, consisted specially in beating down the
opposition of the common people, who were not easily induced to lay by their
business: next in a descant as it were on the former plain-song; the adding of
particular restrictions, as occasion was which were before contained, though
not plainly specified, both in the Edicts of the former Emperors, and
Constitutions of the Churches before remembered. Yet all this while we find not
any one who did observe it as Sabbath, or which taught others so to do: not
any, who affirmed that any manner of work was unlawful on it, further than as
it was prohibited by the Prince, or Prelate; that so the people might assemble
with their greater comfort: not any one, who preached or published, that any
pastime, sport; or recreation of an honest name, such as were lawful on the
other days, were not fit for this. And thereupon we may resolve, as well of
lawful business as of lawful pleasures: that such as have not been forbidden by
supreme Authority, whether in Proclamations of the Prince, or Constitutions of
the Church, or Acts of Parliament, or any such like Declaration of those higher
Powers, to which the Lord has made us subject; are to be counted lawful still.
It matters not, in case we find it not recorded in particular terms, that we
may lawfully apply our selves to some kind of business, or recreate our selves
in every kind of honest pleasure, at those particular hours and times, which
are left at large, and have not been designed to Gods public service. All that
we are to look for, is to see how far we are restrained from labor, or from
recreations on the Holy days; and what Authority it is, that has so restrained
us; that we may come to know our duty, and conform unto it. The Canons of
particular Churches have no power to do it, further than they have been
admitted, into the Church wherein we live: for then being made a part of her
Canon also, they have power to bind us to observance. As little power there is
to be allowed unto the Declarations and Edicts of particular Princes, but in
their own dominions only, Kings are Gods Deputies on the Earth, but in those
places only, where the Lord has set them; their power no greater than their
Empire: and though they may command in their own Estates, yet is it extra
sphaeram activitatis, to prescribe Laws to Nations. not subject to them. A King
of France can make no Law, to bind us in England. Much less must we ascribe,
unto the dictates and directions of particular men, which being themselves
subject unto public Order, are to be hearkened to no further, than by their
life and doctrine they do preach obedience, unto the public Ordinances under
which they live. For were it otherwise, every private man, of name and credit,
would play the Tyrant with the liberty of his Christian Brethren; and nothing
should be lawful, but what he allowed of: especially if the pretense be fair
and specious, such as the keeping of a Sabbath to the Lord our God; the holding
of an holy convocation to the King of Heaven. Example we had of it lately in
the Goths of Spain, and that strange bondage, into which some pragmatick and
popular man had brought the French, had not the Council held at Orleans gave a
check unto it. And with examples of this kind, must we begin the story of the
following Ages.

CHAP. V. That in the next six hundred years from Pope Gregory forwards, the
Lords day was not reckoned of, as of a Sabbath.
1. Pope Gregory's care to set the Lords day free from Jewish rigours, at that
time obtruded on the Church. 2. Strange fancies taken up by some about the
Lords day, in these darker Ages. 3. Scriptures and Miracles in these times
found out, to justify the keeping of the Lords day holy. 4. That in the
judgment of the most learned in these six Ages, the Lords day has no other
ground, than the Authority of the Church. 5. With how much difficulty the
people of these times were barred from following their Husbandry and Law-days,
on the Lords day. 6. Husbandry not restrained on the Lords day in the Eastern
parts, until the time of Leo Philosophus. 7. Markets and Handierafts restrained
with no less opposition, than the Plough and Pleading. 8. Several casus
reservati in the Laws themselves wherein men were permitted to attend those
businesses on the Lords day, which the laws restrained. 9. Of diverse great and
public actions done in these Ages: on the Lords day. 10. Dancing, and other
sports no otherwise prohibited on the Lords day, than as they were an hindrance
to Gods public Service. 11. The other Holy days as much esteemed of, and
observed as the Lords day was. 12. The public hallowing of the Lords day, and
the other Holy days in these present Ages. 13. No Sabbath all these Ages heard
of, either on Saturday or Sunday; and how it stood with Saturday in the Eastern
Churches.


WE are now come to the declining Ages of the Church after the first 600 years
were fully ended, and in the entrance on the seventh, Rome with two dangerous
fancies; one, that it was not lawful to do any manner of work upon the
Saturday, or the old Sabbath, ita ut die Sabbati aliquid operari prohiberent;
the other, ut dominicorum die nullus debeat larari, that no man ought to bathe
himself on the Lords day, or their new Sabbath. With such a race of Christened
Jews, or Judaizing Christians was the Church then troubled. Against these
dangerous Doctrines did Pope Gregory write his Letter to the Roman Citizens;
stiling the first no other than the Preachers of Antichrist: Epl. 3. l. 11.
one of whose properties it shall be, that he will have the Sabbath and the
Lords day both so kept, as that no manner of work shall be done on either; qui
veniens, diem Sabbatum atque dominicum, ab omni faciet opere custodire, as the
Father has it. Where note, that to compel or teach the people, that they must
do no manner of work on the Lords day, is a mark of Antichrist. And why should
Antichrist keep both days in so strict a manner? Because, says he, he will
persuade the people that he shall die and rise again; therefore he means to
have the Lords day in especial honor; and he will keep the Sabbath too, that
so he may the better allure the Jews to adhere unto him. Against the other he
thus reasons. Et si quidem pro luxuria, and voluptate, quis lavari appetit,
hoc fieri nec reliquo quolibet die concedimus, etc. If any man desires to bathe
himself, only out of a luxurious and voluptuous purpose (observe this well)
this we conceive, not to be lawful upon any day: but if he do it only, for the
necessary refreshing of his body, then neither is it fit it should be forbidden
upon the Sunday. For if it be a sin to bathe, or wash all the body on the Lords
day; then must it be a sin, to wash the face upon that day: if it be lawful to
be done in any part, why then, necessity requiring, is it unlawful for the
whole. It seems then by St. Gregory's doctrine, that in hot weather, one may
lawfully go into the water, on the Lords day, and there wade or swim, either to
wash or cool his body, as well as upon any other. Note also here, that not the
quality of the day, but the condition of the thing is to be considered, in the
denominating of a lawful or unlawful Act: that things unlawful in themselves,
or tending to unlawful ends are unfit for all days; and that whatever thing is
fit for any day, is, of it self, as fit for Sunday. Finally he concludes with
this, Dominicorum vero die a labor terreno cessandum est, etc. We ought to
rest indeed on the Lords day from earthly labors, and by all means to abide in
prayers; that if by humane negligence, any thing has escaped in the six former
days, it may be expiated by our prayers on the day of the Resurrection. This
was the salve, by him applied to those dangerous sores, and such effect it
wrought upon them, that for the present, and long after we find not any that
prohibited working on the Saturday. But at the last, it seems some did; who
thereupon were censured and condemned by another Gregory, of that name the
seventh. Damnavit docentes, non licere die Sabbati operas facere; as the Law
informs us, De consecratione distinct. 3. cap. Pervenit. But this was not till
Anno 1074. or after, almost 500 years after the times where now we are. As for
the other fancy, that of not going to the Bathes on the Lords day, it seems he
crushed that too, as for that particular: though otherwise, the like conceits
did break out again, as men began to entertain strange thoughts, and
superstitious doctrines, about this day; especially in these declining Ages of
the Church, wherein so many errors both in faith and manners, did in fine
defile it, that it was black indeed, but with little comeliness. The Church, as
in too many things, not proper to this place and purpose, it did incroach upon
the Jew; much of the ceremonies and Priestly habit in these times established
being thence derived: so is it not to be admired, if in some things, particular
both Men and Synods began to Judaize, a little, in our present business; making
the Lords day no less rigidly to be observed, than the Jewish Sabbath, if it
were not more.

For in the following Age, and in the latter end thereof, Friuli, by the
command of Pepin then King of France; a Town now in the Territory of the State
of Venice. The principal motive of that meeting, was to confirm the doctrine of
the holy Trinity, and the incarnation of the Word; which in those times had
been disputed. The President thereof, Paulinus, Patriarch of Aquilegia: Anno
791. of our Redemption. There, in relation to this day, it was thus decreed.
Diem dominicum inchoante noctis initio, i.e. vespere Sabbati, quando signum
insonuerit, etc. We constitute and appoint that all Christian men (that is to
say, all Christian men who lived within the Canons reach) should with all
reverence and devotion honor the Lords day, beginning on the Evening of the
day before, at the first ringing of the Bell; and that they do abstain therein,
especially from all kind of sin, as also from all carnal acts, Etiam a propriis
conjugibus, even from the company of their Wives, and all earthly labors; and
that they go unto the Church devoutly, laying aside all suits of Law, that so
they may in love and charity praise Gods name together. You may remember that
some such device as this was fathered formerly on Saint Austin, but with little
reason. Such trim conceits as these had not then been thought of. And though it
be affirmed in the preamble to these constitutions, nec novas regulas
instituimus, nee supervacuas rerum adinventiones inbianter sectamur; that they
did neither make new rules, or follow vain and needless fancies: Sed sacris
paternerum Can^num recensitis soliis, etc. But that they took example by the
ancient Canons; yet look who will into all Canons of the Church for the times
before, and he shall find no such example. For my part, I should rather think
that it was put into the Canon in succeeding times, by some misadventure; that
some observing a restraint, ab omni opere carnali, of all carnal acts, might,
as by way of question, write in the Margin, etian a proprtir conjugibus, from
whence, by ignorance, or negligence of the Collectors, it might be put into the
Text. e if it were so passed at first, and if it chance that any be so minded,
(and some such there be) as to conceive the Canon to be pure and prous; and the
intent thereof not to be neglected: They are to be advertised that the
Holy Days must be observed in the self same manner. It was determined so before
by the false Saint Austin. And somewhat to this purpose says this Synod now,
that all the greater Festivals must with all reverence be observed and
honored; and that such Holy Days as by the Priests were bidden in the
Congregation, Omnibus modis sunt custodienda, were by all ways and means to be
kept amongst them; that is, by all those ways and means which in the said Canon
were before remembered. In this the Christian plainly out-went the Jew; amongst
whose many superstitions there is none such found. Ap. Ainsw. in Ex. 20.10.
It Is tree indeed, the Jews accounted it unlawful to marry on the Sabbath Day or
on the Evening of the Sabbath, or on the first day of the week; lest (say the
Rabbis) they should pollute the Sabbath by dressing Meat. Conformably
whereunto, Can. 17.
it was decreed in a Synod held in Aken, or Aquisgranum, Anno 833. nec nuptias
pro reverentia tantae solennitatis celebrari visum est, that in a reverence to
the Lords day, it should no more be lawful to Marry, or be Married upon the
same. The Jews, as formerly we showed, have now by order from their Rabbis,
restrained themselves on their Sabbath day from knocking with their hands upon
a table to still a child; from making figures in the air, or drawing letters in
the ground, or in dust and ashes, and such like niceties. And some such
teachers, Olaus King of Norway, had no question met with, Anno 1028. For being
taken up one Sunday in some serious thoughts, and having in his hands a small
walking stick, he took his knife and whitled it, as men do sometimes, when as
their minds are troubled, or intent on business. And when it had been told him,
as by way of jest, how he had trespassed therein against the Sabbath, he
gathered the small chips together, put them upon his hand, and set fire unto
them: Vt in se ulcisceretur, Matropol. l. 4. t. 8.
quod contra divinum praeceptum incautus admisisset; that so, says Crantzius,
he might avenge that on himself, which unawares he had committed against Gods
Commandment. Crantzius, it seems, did well enough approve the solly; for in the
entrance on this story, he reckons this inter alia virtutum suarum praeconia,
amongst the monuments of his piety, and sets it up as an especial instance of
that Princes sanctity. Lastly, whereas the modern Jews are of opinion, that all
the while their Sabbath lasts, the souls in Hell have liberty to range abroad,
and are released of all their torments: P^i. ad Domivicum. c. 5.
So, lest in any superstitious fancy they should have pre-eminence, it was
delivered of the souls in Purgatory, by Petrus Damiani, who lived in Anno 1056.
Dominico die refrigerium poenarum habuisse, that every Lords day they were
manumitted from their pains, and fluttered up and down the lake Avernus, in the
shape of Birds.

Indeed the marvel is the less, Jewish fancies should in those times begin to
show themselves in the Christian Church; considering that now some had begun to
think that the Lords day was founded on the fourth Commandment; and all
observances of the same, grounded upon the Law of God. As long as it was taken
only for an Ecclesiastical Institution, and had no other ground upon which to
stand, than the Authority of the Church, we find not any of these rigours
annexed unto it. But being once conceived to have its warrant from the
Scripture, the Scripture presently was ransacked, and whatsoever did concern
the old Jewish Sabbath was applied thereto. It had been ordered formerly that
men should be restrained on the Lords day from some kind of labors, that so
they might assemble in the greater number; the Princes and the Prelates both
conceiving it convenient that it should be so. But in these Ages there were
Texts produced, to make it necessary. Thus Clotaire, King of France, grounded
his Edict of restraint from servile labors on this day, from the holy
Scripture: quia hoc lex prohibet, and sacra Scriptura in omnibus contradicit,
because the Law forbids it, and the holy Scripture contradicts it. And Charles
the Great builds also on the self same ground, Statuimus secundum quod in lege
dominus praecepit, etc. We do ordain according as the Lord commands us, that on
the Lords day none presume to do any servile business. Thus finally the
Emperor Leo Philosophus in a constitution to that purpose, of which more
hereafter, declares that he did so determine, secundum quod Sp. Sancto ab
ipsoque institutis Apostolis placuit, according to the dictate of the Holy
Ghost, and the Apostles by him tutored. So also when the Fathers of the Church
had thought it requisite, that men should cease from labor on the Saturday in
the afternoon, that they might be the better fitted for their devotions the
next day, some would not rest till they had found a Scripture for it.
Observemus diem dominicum fratres, sicut antiquis praeceptum est de Sabbato,
etc. Let us observe the Lords day, as it is commanded, from even to even shall
ye celebrate your Sabbath. The 251. Sermon inscribed de tempore, has resolved
it so. And lastly, that we go no further, the superstitious act of the good
King Olaus, burning his hand, as formerly was related, was then conceived to be
a very just revenge upon himself, because he had offended, although unaware,
contra divinum praeceptum, against Gods Commandment. Nor were these rigorous
fancies left to the naked world, but they had miracles to confirm them. It is
reported by Vincentius and Antoninus, that Anstregisilus, one that had probably
preached such doctrine, restored a Miller by his power, whose hand had cleaved
unto his Hatchet, as he was mending of his Mill on the Lords day, for now you
must take notice that in the times in which they lived, grinding had been
prohibited on the Lords day, by the Canon Laws. As also how Sulpitius had
caused a poor man's hand to wither, only for cleaving wood on the Lords day (no
great crime assuredly, save that some parallel must be found for him that
gathered sticks on the former Sabbath) and after on his special goodness made
him whole again. Of these, the first was made Archbishop of Burges, Anno. 627.
Sulpitius being Successor unto him in his See, and as it seems too in his power
of working miracles. Such miracles as these, they who list to credit, shall
find another of them in Gregorius Turonensis, Miracul. l. 1. c. 6. And some we
shall hereafter meet with when we come to England, forged purposely, as no
doubt these were, to countenance some new device about the keeping of this day,
there being no new Gospel Preached, but must have miracles to attend it, for
the greater state.

But howsoever it come to pass, that those four Princes, especially Leo,
Charles the Great, who had as learned men about him, as the times then bred,
were thus persuaded of this day, that all restraints from work and labor on
the same, were to be found expressly in the Word of God; yet was the Church and
the most Learned men therein of another mind. Nor is it utterly impossible, but
that those Princes might make use of some pretense or ground of Scripture, the
better to incline the People to yield obedience unto those restraints which
were laid upon them. First for the Church, and men of special eminence in the
same for place and learning, there is no question to be made, but they were
otherwise persuaded. Isidore, Archbishop of Sevil, who goes highest, De
Eccles. Offic. l. 1.29.
makes it an Apostolical Sanction only, on divine commandment; a day designed
by the Apostles for religious exercises, in honor of our Saviors Resurrection
on that day performed. Diem dominicum Apostoli ideo religiosa solennitate
sanxerunt, quia in eo redemptor noster a mortuis resurrexit. And adds, that it
was therefore called the Lords day, to this end and purpose, that resting in
the same from all earthly acts, and the temptations of the world, we might
intend Gods holy worship; giving this day due honor for the hope of the
resurrection, which we have therein. The same verbatim is repeated by Beda,
lib. de Offic. and by Rabanus Maurus lib. de institut. Cleric. l. 2. c. 24. and
finally by Alcuinus de divin. Offic. cap. 24. which plainly shows that all
those took it only from an Apostolical usage, an observation that grew up by
custom, rather than upon commandment. Sure I am that Alcuinus, one of principal
credit with Charles the Great, who lived about the end of the eighth Century,
as did this Isidore, in the beginning of the seventh, says clearly, that the
observation of the former Sabbath had been translated very fitly to the Lords
day, by the custom and consent of Christian people. For speaking how the
Sabbath was accounted holy in the former times, and that the Jews resting
thereon, from all manner of work, did only give themselves to meditation and to
fasting; Homil. 18. post. Penta.
he adds, cujus observationem mos Christianus ad diem dominicum competentius
transtulit. Where plainly mos Christianus does imply no precept, no order or
command from the Apostles, that it should be so, and much less any precept in
the Old Testament, which should still oblige. And sure I am, Rabanus Maurus
speaks only as by way of exhortation, and not armed with any warrant from the
Apostles, or other argument from Scripture: Homil. in ai^b. dom.
Where he advises us, a vespera diei Sabbati usque ad vesperam diei dominici,
sequestrati a rurali opere and omni negotio, solo divino cultui vacemus: Where
no man will presume to say, that either rest from Husbandry, and such other
business, or the beginning of the Lords day on the Eve before, were introduced
by any precept of the Apostles; considering how long it was, before either of
them had been used in the Christian Church. And so Hesychius, Bishop of
Jerusalem, who flourished at the self same time with Isidore, speaks of it
only as a custom, or a matter of fact, In Levit. lib. 2. cap. 5.
descending by tradition from the Apostles. Apostolorum sequentes traditionem,
diem dominicum conventibus divinis sequestramus; which was the most that he
could say, for the original thereof, indeed who could more. And as for Isidore
himself, whom the others followed, Etymolog. l. 6. c. 18.
it is clear that they esteemed the Lords day for no other than a common
Holiday; by far inferior unto Ester. Pascha festivitatum omnium prima est. Then
follows Pentecost, Epiphany, Palm Sunday, Maunday-thursday, and in the last
place, Dies dominicus, the Lords day. Which questionless he had not placed in
so low a room, had he conceived it instituted by any precept, or injunction of
those blessed Spirits. So in a Council held at Paris, Anno 829. it was
determined positively, that keeping of the Lords day had no other ground than
custom only; and that this custom did descend ex Apostolorum traditione, immo
ecclesiae autoritate, at most from Apostolical tradition, but indeed rather
from the Authority of holy Church. And whereas Courts of Law, or Law days, had
formerly been prohibited on this day, that so men might in peace and concord go
to Church together: the several Councils, that of Friburg, Anno 895. and that
of Erpford, Anno 932. though then the times were at the darkest; ascribe it not
to any Law or Text of Scripture, but only to the anient Canons. Secundum
sanctorum statuta patrum, says the first, Can. 26. Secundum Canonicam
institutionem, says the second, Cap. 2. And howsoever some have said that
Alexander Pope of Rome, of that name the third, refers the keeping of the Lords
day to divine commandment; yet they that look upon him well, can find no such
matter. He says indeed that both the Old and New Testament depute the seventh
day unto rest, but for the keeping of it holy, both that and other days
appointed for Gods public service, ecclesia decreverit observanda; that he
ascribes alone to the Churches order. Decret. l. 2. tit. 9. de feriis. cap. 3.
The like may be affirmed also of restraint from labout, that it is grounded
only on the Authority of the Church, and Christian Princes; however in some
regal and imperial Edicts there be some show or color added from the Law of
God.

I say some show or color added from the Law of God. Mascon, and that in
Auxerre, both before remembered, expressly had prohibited all works of Husbandry
on this day; the former having added for enforcing of it, not only
Ecclesiastical censures, but corporal and civil punishments. But yet this was
not found enough to wean the people from their works, their ordinary labors
used before, upon that day, and it is no marvel. The Jews were hardly brought
unto it, though they had heard God thundering from the holy mountain, that they
should do no manner of work upon their Sabbath: It being added thereunto, that
whosoever should offend therein, the should die the death. And certainly it was
very long before either Prince or Prelate, or both joined together, with all
their power and policy could prevail upon them; either to lay aside their
labors, or forbear their Law days, as may appear by many several Edicts of
Emperors, decrees of Popes, Can. 18.
and Canons of particular Councils, which have successively been made in
restraint thereof. The Synod of Chalons, Anno 662. wherein were 44. Bishops,
and amongst them S. Owen, Archbishop of Roman, concluded as had been before,
[non nova condentes sed vetera renovantes] that on the Lords day no man should
presume to Sow or Plough, or Reap, vel quicquid ad ruris culturam pertinet, or
deal in any thing that belonged to Husbandry; and this on pain of
Ecclesiastical censure and correction. But when this did no good, Clothaire the
third of France, (for he I think it was who set out that Law) beginning with
the Word of God, and ending with a threat of severe chastisement, does command
the same. Die dominico nemo servilia opera praesumat facere, Ltg. Aleman. tit.
39. ap. Brisson.
quia hoc lex prohibet, and sacra Scriptura in omnibus contradicit, as before
was said. If any do offend herein, in case he be a Bondman, let him be soundly
hastinadoed; in case a Freeman, let him be thrice admonished of it; if he
offend again, the third part of his patrimony was to be confiscated: and
finally if that prevailed not, he was to be convented before the Governor, and
made a Bondslave. So for the Realm of Germany, a Council held at Dingulofinum,
in the lower Bavaria, Anno 772. did determine thus. Festo die Solis, ocio
divino intentus, prophanis negotiis abstineto; Upon the Sunday (so they call
it) let every man abstain from profane employments, and be intent upon Gods
worship: If any man shall work his Cart this day, or busy himself in any such
like work, jumenta ejus publica sunto, his Teem shall presently be forseited to
the public use: And if stubbornly they persist to provoke Gods anger, be they
sold for Bondmen. Hist. l. 3. Ap. Brisson. ut supra.
So Aventine reports the Canon. And somewhat like to this was ordered by
Theodorius King of the Bavarians, viz. Si quis die dominico, etc. If any man
upon the Lords day shall yoke his Oxen, and drive forth his wain, dextrum bovem
perdat, his right hand Ox shall be forthwith forfeit; if he make Hay or carry
it in; if he now Corn or carry it in, let him be once or twice admonished; and
if he amend not thereupon, let him receive no less than 50 stripes: Yet
notwithstanding all this care, when Charles the Great, being King of France,
had mastered Germany, which was 789. or thereabouts, there had been little
reformation in this point amongst them. Therefore that Prince first published
his own Regal Edict, grounding himself secundum quod in lege praecepit dominus,
upon the prescript of Gods Law, and there commands that all men do abstain from
the works of Husbandry. Which Edict, since it speaks of more particulars at
that time prohibited, we will speak more thereof anon. That not prevailing, as
it seems, he caused five several Synods to be assembled at one time, Anno 813.
at Mentz, at Rhemes, at Tours, at Chalons, and Arles; in all of which, it was
concluded against the Husbandman, and many others more, as we shall see in the
next Section. And yet we find some grudging still of the old disease, as is
apparent by a Synod held at Rome, Anno 826. under Eugenius the second, chap.
30. another in the same place, Anno 853. under Leo the fourth, Can. 30. the
like in that of Compeigne held by Alexander the third, what time he lived an
exile in the Realm of France. So for restraint of Law days, or Courts of
judgment, those chiefly that determined of men's lives; it was not brought about
in these Western parts without great difficulty. Witness, besides the several
Imperial Edicts before remembered, Conc. Mogunt. Anno. 813. Can. 37. Rhemens.
Can. 35. Turonens. Can. 40. Arelatens. Can. 16. being four of those Councils
which were called by Charles, as before was said; as also that of Aken, Anno
836. Can. 20. And though it was determined in the Roman Synod, under Leo the
fourth, that no suspected person should receive judgment on that day; a clause
being added in the Can^^; legibus infirmari judicium eo die depromptum, that
all Acts sped upon that day, were void in Law: yet more than 300 years after it
was so resolved of, was Alexander the third in Council of Compeigne before
remembered, enforced particularly to revive it, and then and there to set it
down, Ne aliquis ad mortem vel ad poenam judicetur, that no man should upon
that day be doomed to death, or otherwise condemned unto bodily punishment. So
difficult a thing it was to wean the People from their labors, and other civil
business, unto which they had been accustomed; there being nothing to enforce
or induce them to it but humane authority.

On the same reason as it seems, Leo Philosophus, Emperor of Constantinople,
Western Churches he purposed to restrain the works of Husbandry, on that day;
which till his time had been permitted. The Emperor Constantine had ordained,
as before was shown, that all Artificers, and such as dwelt in Cities, should
on the Sunday leave their trades; but by the same Edict gave license to the
Husbandman to pursue his business, as well upon that day as on any other. But
contrary this Leo, surnamed Philosophus (he began his Reign, Ann 886.)
grounding himself, for so he tells us, on the Authority of the Holy Ghost, and
of the Apostles; (but where he sound that warrant from the Holy Ghost, and from
the holy Apostles, that he tells us not) restrained the Husbandman from his
work, as well as men of other callings. Nicephorus mistakes the man, and
attributes it to the former Leo, whom before we spoke of in our fourth Chapter.
Eccl. hist. c. 22.
Quo tempore primus etiam Leo constitutione lata, ut dies dominicus ab omnibus
absque labor omni, per ocium transigeretur, festusque and venerabilis esset,
quemadmodum and divis Apostolis visum est, praecepit. Where the last clause
with the substance of the Edict, make the matter plain, that he mistook the
man, though he hit the busineses: the former Leo, using no such motive in all
his Edict. Constit. 54.
But take it from the Emperor himself, who having told us first that the Lords
day was to be honored with rest from labor; adds next, that he had seen a Law
(he means that of Constantine) quae non omnes simul operari prohibendos
nonnullosque uti operentur indulgendum censuit; which having not restrained all
works, but permitted some, did upon no sufficient reason dishonor that so
sacred day. Then follows. Statuimus nos etiam, quod Sp. Sancto ab ipsoque
institutis Apostolis placuit, ut omnes in die sacro, etc. a labor vacent.
Neque Agricolae, etc. It is our will, says he, according to the true meaning
of the Holy Ghost, and of the Apostles by him directed, that on that sacred
day, whereon we were restored unto our integrity, all men should rest
themselves and surcease from labor; neither the Husbandmen nor others, putting
their hand that day to prohibited work. For if the Jews did so much reverence
their Sabbath, which only was a shadow of ours, are not we which inhabit light
and the truth of grace, obliged to honor that day which the Lord has
honored, and has therein delivered us, both from dishonor and from death?
Are not we bound to keep it singularly and inviolably sufficiently contented
with a liberal grant of all the rest; and not encroaching on that one which God
has chosen for his service? Nay, were it not a retchless slighting and
contempt of all Religion, to make that day common, and think that we may do
thereon as we do on others? So far this Emperor determins of it first, and
disputes it afterward. I only note it for the close, that it was near 900
years from our Saviors birth, if not quite so much, before restraint of
Husbandry on this day had been first thought of in the East; and probably being
thus restrained, did find no more obedience there than it had done before in
the Western parts.

As great a difficulty did it prove to restrain other things in these times
projected, although they carried it at the last. Constantine had before
commanded that all Artificers in the Cities should surcease from labor on the
Lords day, as well as those whom he employed in his seats of justice; and
questionless he found obedience answerable to his expectation. But when the
Western parts became a prey to new Kings and Nations, and that those Kings and
Nations had admitted the Laws of Christ; yet did they not conceive it necessary
to submit themselves to the Laws of Constantine, and therefore followed their
employments, as before they did. And so it stood until the time of Charles the
Great, who in the year 789. published his regal Edict in this form that
follows. In Legib. Aquif granens.
Statuimus, secundum quod and in lege dominus praecepit, etc. We do ordain,
according as it is commanded in the Law of God, that no man do any servile work
on the Lords day. This in the general had been before commanded by his Father
Pepin, in the Council holden in Friuli, but he now explicates himself in these
particulars. That is to say, that neither men employ themselves in works of
Husbandry, in dressing of their Vines, ploughing their Lands, making their Hay,
fencing their grounds, grubbing of felling Tre^^ working in Mines, building of
Houses, planting their Gardens, nor that they plead that day, or go forth on
hunting;and that it be not lawful for the Women to weave, or dress cloth, to
make Garments, or Needle work, to card their Wool, beat Hemp, wash Clothes in
public, or sheer Sheep; but that they come unto the Church to divine service,
and magnify the Lord their God for those good things which on that day he has
done for them. After considering with himself that Fairs and Markets on this
day were an especial means to keep men from Church, he set out his Imperial
Edict, de nundinis non concedendis, as my Author tells me. Nor did he trust so
far to his own Edict, as not to strengthen it, (as the times then were) by the
Authority of the Church, and therefore caused those five Councils before
remembered, to be Assembled at one time; in four of which it was determined
against all servile works and Law days, as also ut mercatus in iis minime sit,
Council. Mogunt. Can. 37. ne mercata excerceant, Remens. can. 35. and so in
those of Tours, 40. and Arles 16. That of Chalons, which was the fifth, did
only intimate, that whereas the Lords day had been much neglected, the better
keeping of the same was to be established authentica constitutione, Can. 50.
by some Authentical constitution of the Emperor himself. But whatsoever care
this Emperor took to see his will performed, and the Lords day sanctified, it
seems his Successor Ludovicus, was remiss enough; which being found, as found
it was, the People fell again to their former labors, Ploughing and
Marketting, and Law-days, as before they did. The Council held at Paris,
Council. Parisiens. l. 1. c. 50.
Anno 829. which was but sixteen years after the holding of the aforesaid
Synods, much complains thereof; and withal adds, that many of the Prelates
assembled there, knew both by same and by their own proper knowledge, quosdam
in hoc dit ruralia opera e^cercentes, fulmine interemptos, that certain men
following their Husbandry on that day, had been killed with lightning, and
others with a strange convulsion of their joints, had miserably perished:
whereby say they, it is apparent, that God was very much offended, with their
so great neglect of that Holy day. Rather with their so great neglect of their
Superiors, in that, nor declaration of their King, nor constitution of the
Church, could work so far upon them, as to gain obedience; in things conducing
to Gods service. Had working on that day, been so much offensive in the sight
of God, likely it is, we might have heard of some such judgments, in the times
before: but being not prohibited, it was not unlawful. Now being made unlawful,
because prohibited, God smote them for their frequent workings, at times which
were designed to another use; not in relation to the day, but their
disobedience. Therefore the Council did advise that first of all the Priests
and Prelates, then that Kings, Princes, and all faithful people, would do their
best endeavor for the restoring of that day to its ancient luster; which had
so foully been neglected. Next they addressed themselves particularly to
Lodowick and Lotharius then the Roman Emperors, ut cunctis metum incutiant,
that by some sharp injunction, they would strike a terror into all their
Subjects, that for the times to come none should presume to Plough, or hold
Law-days, or Market, as of late was used. This probably occasioned the said two
Emperors 852. to call a Synod at Rome, under Leo the fourth: Syn. Romans Can. 30.
where it was ordered more precisely, than in former times, ut die dominico
nullus audeat mercationes, nec in cibariis rebus, aut quaelibet opera rustica
facere, that no man should from thenceforth dare to make any Markets on the
Lords day, no not for things that were to eat; neither to do any kind of work
that belonged to Husbandry. Which Canon being made at Rome, confirmed at
Compeigne, and afterward incorporated, as it was, into the body of the Canon
Law (whereof see Decretal. l. 2. tit. 9. de feriis cap. 2.) became to be
admitted, without further question, in most parts of Christendom; especially
when the Popes had attained their height, and brought all Christian Princes to
be at their devotion. For then the people, who before had most opposed it,
might have justly said. Behold two Kings stood not before him, how then shall
we stand? 2 Kings 10.
Out of which consternation all men pre?sently obeyed. Tradesmen of all sorts
being brought to lay by their Labors: and amongst those, the Miller, though
his work was easiest, and least of all required his presence. Nec aliquis a
vespera diei Sabbati, usque ad vesperam diei dominicae, ad molendina aquarum
vel ad aliqua alia molere audeat. So was it ordered in the Council of Angeirs,
(of which see Bochellus) Anno 1282: wherein the Barber also was forbidden to
use his Trade.

Yet were not those restraints so strict, as that there was no liberty to be
allowed of, Constitutions of the Church, yea and the decretals of the Popes
many reservations, whereby the people might have liberty to enjoy themselves:
They had been else in worse condition, than the Jews before. In the Edict of
Charles the Great before remembered, though otherwise precise enough, there were
three several kinds of carriages, allowed and licensed o the Lords day, i.e.
Hortalia carra, vel victualia, vel si forte necesse erit corpus cujuslibet
ducere ad sepulchrum; that is to say, carriage of gardening Ware, and carts of
Victuals, and such as are to carry a dead corpse to burial. So Theodulphus
Aurelianensis who lived about the year 836. having first ut it down for a
positive Rule, that the Lords day ought with such care to be observed, ut
praeter orationes and missarum solennia, Epl. ap. Bibl. Patr.
and ea quae ad vescendum pertinent, nil aliud fiat; that besides Prayer, and
hearing Mass, and such things as belong to Food, there is directly nothing that
may be done: admits of an exception, or a reservation, Nam si necessita^ fuerit
navigandi vel itinerandi, licentia datur. For if (says he) there be a
necessary occasion either of setting Sail, or going a Journey, this may be
allowed of: in case they permit not Mass and Prayers. This I find extant as a
Canon of the 6. General Council holden in Constantinople: but since both this
and all the rest of the same stamp, (there are nine in all) are thought not to
belong of right unto it, I have chosen rather to rafer it to this Theodulphus,
though a private man, amongst whose works I find it in the great Bibliotheca
Patrum. Tom. 9. Thus in a Synod held at Coy, within the Realm and Diocese of
Oviedo, Anno 1050. it was decreed, that all men should repair to Church on the
Lords day, and there hear Mattins, Mass, and other the canonical hours; as
also, Opus servile non exerceant, nec sectentur itinera, that they should do no
servile work, Tit. 6.
nor take any Journey. Yet with exceptions four or five, namely unless it were
for Devotions sake, or to bury the Dead, or to visit the Sick; or finally pro
secreto regis, Saracenorum impetu, on special business of the Kings, or to make
head against the Saracens. The King was much beholden to them that they would
take such care of his State Affairs: more than some Princes might be now, in
case their business were at the disposing of particular men. So had it been
decreed by several Emperors, yea and by several Councils too: which for the
East pars was confirmed by Emanuel Comneus the Eastern Emperiour, Anno 1174.
(...), that all access to the Tribunal should be quite shut up; that none of
those who sat in Judgment should sit on any Cause that day. Yet this not
absolutely, but (...), etc. unless the King shall please on any new emergent
cause, as many times business comes unlooked for, to appoint it otherwise. Thus
also for the works of labor, fishing had been resirained on the Lords day, as
toilsom Act, and on he other Holy days, as well as that: yet did it please Pope
Alexander the third, (he entered on the Chair of Rome, Decretal. l. 2. tit 9. c
3.
Anno 1160.) to order by his decretal, that on the Lords day and the rest, it
might be lawful unto those who dwelt upon the Coast, Si halecia terrae
inclinarint, eorum captioni, ingruente necessitate, intendere; to set
themselves unto their fishing, in case the Herring came within their reach, and
the time was seasonable. Provided that they sent a convenient portion, unto the
Churches round about them, and unto the poor. Nay even the works of Handicrafts
were in some sort suffered. For whereas in the Council of Laodicea, it was
determined, that men should rest on the Lords day, (...), from all their handy
work, and repair to Church. Balsamon tells us in his Glass, In Can. 29. council.
Laod.
that so it was resolved amongst them, (...), not absolutely; but (...), if
with convenience they could. For still, says he, (he lived in Anno 1191) in
case men labor on that day, (...), either because of want or any other
necessity they are held excusable. Lastly, Chronic. Adit^i.
whereas Pope Gregory the ninth had on the Sundays and the Holy days commanded
ut homines and jumenta omnia quiescant, that there should be a general
restraint from labor both of man and beast: there was a refervation also, nisi
urgens necessitas instet, vel nisi pauperibus, vel Ecclesiae, gratis fiat;
unless on great necessity, or some good Office to be done unto the poor, or to
the Church.

Nor were there reservations and exceptions only in point of business and
nothing found in point of practice; Aventine Hist. l. 3.
And first we read of a great Battle fought on Palm Sunday, An. 718. between
Charles Martel, Grand master of the Household of the King of France, and
Hilpericus the King himself; wherein the Victory fell to Charles: and yet we
read not there of any great necessity, nay of none at all, but that they might
on both sides have deferred the Battle, had they conceived it any sin to fight
that day. Upon the Sunday before Lent, Anno 835. Ludovick the Emperor ^urnamed
Pius, or the godly, together with his Prelates and others, Baron.
which had been present with him at the Assembly held at Theonville, went on
his Journey unto Mets: nor do we find that it did derogate at all from his Name
and Piety. Upon the Sunday after Whitsontide, Anno 844. Ludowick Son unto
Lotharius the Emperor made his solemn entrance into Rome: the Roman Citizens
attending him with their Flaggs and Ensigns; the Pope and Clergy staying his
coming in St. Peter's Church there to entertain him. Upon a Sunday, Anno 1014.
Ditmarus Hist. l. 7. Otho Frising. hist. l. 6. c. 29.
Henry the Emperor duodecim senatoribus vallatus, environed with twelve of the
Roman Senators, came to St. Peter's Church, and there was crowned, together
with his Wife, by the Pope then being. On Easter day, in ipsa die paschalis
solennitatis, Anno 1027. Conrade the Emperor was solemnly inaugurated by Pope
John; Canutus King of England, and Rodalph King of the Burgundians, being then
both present: and the next Sunday after began his Journey toward Germany. Upon
Palm Sunday, Anno 1084. Wibert Archbishop of Ravenna was solemnly inthronized
in the Chair of Rome: ^^spergen. Chronicon.
and the next Sunday after being Easter day, Henry the third Imperiali
dignitate sublimatus est, was crowned Emperor. On Passion Sunday, Anno 1148.
Lewis the King of France afterward Canonized for a Saint, made his first entry
into Jerusalem with all his Army; and yet we read not any where that it was
laid in Bar against him, to put by his Sainting; as possibly it might be now,
were it yet to do: What should I speak of Councils on this day assembled, as
that of Chartres, Anno 1146. for the recovery of the Holy land; of Tours, on
Trinity Sunday as we call it now, Anno 1164. against Octavian the Pseudo-Pope;
that of Ferrara, upon Passion Sunday, Anno 1177. against Frederick the
Emperor; or that of Paris, Anno 1226. summoned by Stephen then Bishop there,
on the fourth Sunday in Lent, for the condemning of certain dangerous and
erroneous positions, at that time on foot. I have the rather instanced in these
particulars, partly because they happened about these times, when Prince and
Prelate were most intent in laying more and more restraints upon their people,
for the more honor of this day: and partly because being all of them public
actions, and such as moved not forwards but by diverse wheels; they did require
a greater number of people to attend them. And howsoever Councils in themselves
be of an Ecclesiastical nature; and that the crowning of a King in the act it
self, be mixed of sacred and of civil: yet in the Train and great attendance
that belongs unto them, the Pomp the Triumphs, and concourse of so many people
they are merely secular. And secular although they were, yet we may well
persuade our selves, that neither Actor or Spectator, thought themselves
guilty, any wise of offering any the least wrong to the Lords day: though those
Solemnities no question might without any prejudice have been put off to
another time. No more did those who did attend the Princes before remembered in
their magnificent Entries into Rome and Metz: or the other military entrance
into Jerusalem: which were mere secular Acts, and had not any the least
mixture, either of Ecclesiastical or Sacred Nature.

For Recreations in these times, there is no question to be made, Lords day,
which were accounted lawful upon other days;and had not been prohibited by
Authority: and we find none prohibited but dancing only. Not that all kind of
dancing was by Law restrained: but either the abuse thereof at times
unseasonable, when men should have been present in the Church of God; or else
immodest shameless dancings, such as were those, against the which the Fathers
did inveigh so sharply in the Primitive times. In reference to the first,
Damascen tells us of some men, who only wished for the LOrds day,
Parallellorum. lib. 3. cap. 47.
ut ab opera feriati vitiis operam dent, that being quitted from their labors,
they might enjoy the better their sinful pleasures. For look into the streets
(says he) upon other days, and there is no man to be found, die dominico
egredere, atque alios cithara canentes, alios applaudentes, and saltantes, etc.
But look abroad on the Lords day, and you shall find some singing to the Harp,
others applauding of the Music; some Dancing, others jeering of their
Neighbors, alios denique luctantes reperies, and some also wrestling. It
follows, Praeco ad Ecclesiam vocat? omnes segnitie torpent, and moras
nectunt: cithara aut tuba personuit? omnes tanquam alis instructi currunt. Does
the Clark call unto the Church? they have a feaver-lurdane, and they cannot
stir: does the Harp of Trumpet call them to their Pastimes? they fly, as they
had wings to help them. They that can find in this a prohibition either of
Music, Dancing, public sports, or manlike Exercises, such as wrestling is on
the Lords day; must certainly have better eyes than Lynceus, and more wit than
Oedipus. Plainly they prove the contrary to what some alledg them: and show
most clearly, that the Recreations there remembered, were allowed of publicly;
otherwise none durst use them, as we see they did, in the open streets. Only
the Father seems offended, that they preferred their Pastimes before their
Prayers; that they made little or no haste to Church, and ran upon the spur to
their Recreations: that where Gods public Service was to be first considered,
in the Lords day, and after, on spare times men's private pleasures; these had
quite changed the course of Nature, and loved the Lords day more for pleasure
than for Devotion. This is the most that can be made, from this place of
Damascen; and this makes more for dancing, and such Recreations, than it does
against them, in case they be not used at unfitting hours. Much of this nature,
is the Canon produced by some, to condemn dancing on the Lords day, as unlawful
utterly: which being looked into, condemns alone immodest and unseemly
dancings, such as no Canon could allow of upon any day of what name soever. A
Canon made by Pope Eugenius in a Synod held at Rome, Anno 826. what time both
Prince and Prelates did agree together to raise the Lords day to as high a
pitch as they fairly might. Now in this Synod, there were made three Canons
which concern this day: the first prohibitive of business and the works of
labor; the second against process, in causes criminal; the third, ne nulieres
festis diebus vanis ludis vacent; that Women do not give themselves on the Holy
days, unto wanton sports: and is as follows. Sunt quidam, and maxim
mulieres, qui festis and sacris diebus, etc. Certain there are, but chiefly
Women, which on the Holy days, Can. 35.
and Festivals of the blessed Martyrs, upon the which they ought to rest, have
no great list to come to Church, as they ought to do: sed balando, and turpia
verba decantando, etc. but to spend the time in Dancing, and in shameless
Songs, leading and holding cut their Dances as the Pagans used, and in that
manners, come to the Congregation. These, if they come unto the Church, with
few sins about them, return back with more: and therefore are to be admonished
by the Parish Priest, that they must only come to Church to say their prayers;
such as do otherwise, destroying not themselves alone, but their Neighbors
also. Now in this Canon there are these three things to be considered: First
that these Women used not to come unto the Church with that sobriety and
gravity which was fitting, as they ought to do: but dancing, singing, sporting,
as the Pagans used, when they repaired unto their Temples: secondly, that these
dancings were accompanied with immodest Songs, and therefore as unfit for any
day, as they were for Sunday: and thirdly, that these kind of dancings were not
prohibited on the Lords day only, but on all the Holy days. Such also was the
Canon of the third Council of Tolledo, Decret. pars 3. de consecrat. distinct.
3.
An. 589. which afterward became a part of the Canon Law;though by he
oversight of the Collector, it is there said to be the fourth: and this will
make as little to the purpose, as the other did. It is this that follows,
Irreligiosa consuetudo est, quam vulgus per sanctorum solennitates and
festivitates agere consuevit. Populi qui divina officia debent attendere,
saltationibus turpibus invigilant, cantica non solum mala canentes, sed etiam
religiosorum officiis perstrepunt. Hoc enim ut ab omni Hispania [the Decret
reads ab omnibus provinciis] depellatur, sacerdotum ac judicum a sancto
Concilio curae commit titur There is an irreligious custom taken up by the
common people, that on the Festivals of the Saints, those which should be
attent on Divine Service, give themselves wholly to lascivious and shameless
dances: and do not only sing unseemly Songs, but disturb the Service of the
Church. Which mischief that it may be soon removed out of all the Country, the
Council leave it to the care of the Priests and Judges. Such dances and
employed to so bad a purpose, there is none could tolerate; and yet this
generally was upon the Holy days, Saints days I mean, as well as Sundays:
whereby we see the Church had no less care of one, than of the other.

And so indeed it had, Holy days, as we now distinguish them, being in most
points, equal to the Sunday; and in some superior. Leo the Emperiour by his
Edict shut up the Theater, and the Cirque or shew-place on the Lords day. The
like is willed expressly, in the sixth general Council holden at Constantinople,
Can. 66.
Anno 692. for the whole Easter week. Nequaquam ergo his diebus, equorum
cursus, vel aliquod publicum fiat spectacum; so the Canon has it. The Emperor
Charles, restrained the Husbandman and the Tradesman, from following their
usual work on the Lords day. The Council of Melun does the same, for the said
Easter week, and in more particulars: it being ordered by that Synod, that men
forbear, Can. 77.
during the time above remembered, ab omni opere rurali, fabrili, carpentario,
gynaecaeo, caementario, pictorio, venatorio, forensi, mercatorio, audientiali,
ac sacramentis exigendis; from Husbandry, the craft of Smiths and Carpenters,
from Needlework, Cementing, Painting, Hunting, Pleadings, Merchandise, casting
of Accounts, and from taking Oaths. That Benedictines had but three mess of
Pottage upon other days: die vero dominico and in praecipuis festivitatibus,
but on the Lords day and the principal Festivals, a fourth was added; as says
Theodomare the Abbot in an Epistle to Charles the Great. Lawsuits and Courts
of Judgment were to be laid aside, and quite shut up on the Lords day,; as many
Emperors and Councils had determined severally. The Council held at Friburg,
Anno 895. did resolve the samne of Holy days or Saints days, and the time of
Lent. Nullusomnino secularis diebus dominicis, vel Sanctorum in Festis, Conc.
Frib^riens. Can. 26.
seu Quadragesimae, aut jejuniorum, placitum habere, sed nec populum illo
praesumat coercere, as the Canon goes. The very same with that of the Council
of Erford, Anno 932. cap. 2. But what need private and particular Synods be
produced, as witnesses herein, when we have Emperors, Popes, and Patriarchs,
that affirm the same. Ap. Balsam. tit. 7. cap. 1.
To take them in the order in which they lived. Photius the Patriarch of
Constantinople, Anno 858. thus reckons up the Festivals of especial note,
viz. Seven days before Easter, and seven days after Christmas, Epiphanie,
(...), the Feasts of the Apostles, and the Lords day. And then he adds, (...),
that on those days, they neither suffer public shows, nor Courts of Justice.
Emanuel Comnenus next, Ap. Balsam.
Emperor of Constantinople, Anno 1174. (...), etc. We do ordain, says he,
that these days following be exempt from labor, viz. the Nativity of the
Virgin Mary, Holy-rood day, and so he reckons all the rest in those parts
observed) together with all the Sundays in the year; and that in them there be
not any access to the seats of judgment. Lib. 2 tit. (...) feriis cap. 5.
The like Pope Gregory the ninth, Anno 1228. determines in the Decretal, where
numbering up the Holy Days he concludes at last, that neither any process hold,
nor sentence be in force, pronounced on any of those days, though both parts
mutually should consent upon it. Consentientibus etiam partibus, nec processus
habitus teneat, nec sententia quam contingit diebus hujusmodi promulgari. So
the Law resolves it. Now lest the feast of Whitsontide might not have some
respect as well as Easter, it was determined in the Council held at Engelheim,
Anno 948. that Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, in the Whitsun-week; Cap. 6.
non minus quam dies dominicus solenniter honorentur. should no less solemnly
be observed than the Lords day was. So when that Otho Bishop of Bamberg had
planted the faith of Christ in Pomerania, and was to give account thereof to
the Pope then being, Urspergens. Chronic.
he certifieth him by his Letters, Anno 1124. that having Christened them, and
built them Churches, he left them three injunctions for their Christian
carriage. First that they eat no flesh on Fridays: Secondly, that they rest the
Lords day ab omni opere malo, from every evil work, repairing to the Church for
religious duties: And thirdly, Sanctorum solennitates cum vigiliis omni
diligentia observent, that they keep carefully the Saints days, with the Eves
attendant. So that in all these outward matters we find fair equality, save
that in one respect the principal Festivals had pre-eminence above the Sunday:
For whereas Fishermen were permitted by the Decretal of Pope Alexander the
third, as before was said, diebus dominicis and aliis festis, on the Lords day
and other Holy Days, to fish for Herring, in some cases; there was a special
exception of the greater Festivals, praeterquam in majoribus anni
solennitatibus, as the other was. But not to deal in generals only, Isidore
Archbishop of Sevil in the beginning of the seventh Century, making a
Catalogue of the principal Festivals, begins his list with Easter, and ends it
with the Lords day, as before we noted, in the fifth Section of this Chapter.
Now lest it should be thought that in sacred matters and points of substance
the other Holy Days we not as much regarded as the Lords day was: The Council
held at Mentz, Anno 813. did appoint it thus, that it the Bishop were infirm,
or not at home, Non desit tamen diebus dominicis, and festivitatibus, qui
verbum Dei praedicet juxta quod populus intelligat; yet there should still be
some to preach Gods Word unto the People, according unto their capacities, both
on the Lords day and the other Festivals. Indeed why should not both be
observed alike, the Saints days being dedicated unto God as the Lords day is,
and standing both of them on the same authority; on the authority of the Church
for the particular Institution; on the authority of Gods Law for the general
Warrant. It was commanded by the Lord, and written in the heart of man by the
pen of nature, that certain times should be appointed for Gods public
worship;the choicing of the times was left to the Churches power, and she
designed the Saints days as she did the Lords; both his, and both allotted to
his service only. This made Saint Bernard ground them all, the Lords day and
the other Holy Days on the fourth Commandment, the third in the Account of the
Church of Rome. Sermon. 3. Super Salve reg.
Spirituale obsequium Deo praebetur in observantia sanctarum solennitatum, unde
tertium praeceptum contexitur. Observa diem Sabbati, i. e. in sacris feriis te
exerce. So S. Bernard in his third Sermon, Super salve Regina.

The Lords days, and the Holy Days, or Saints days being of so near a kin,
Constantinople, appointed that those to whom the care of the Church was
trusted, should on all days, (...), especially on the Lords day, instruct the
Clergy and the People out of the holy Scripture in the ways of Godliness. I say
the Clergy and the People; for in these times the Revenue of the Church being
great, and the offerings liberal, there were besides the Parish Priest, who had
Cure of souls, many assisting Ministers of inferior Orders, which lived upon
Gods holy Altar. Somewhat to this purpose of Preaching every Sunday, yea, and
Saints days too in the Congregation, we have seen before, established in the
Council at Mentz, Anno 813. So for receiving of the Sacrament, whereas some
would that it should be administered every day, singulis in anno diebus, as
Bertram has it, lib de corp. and sangu. Christi: Rabanus Maurus, who lived
824. leaves it as a thing indifferent; advising all men notwithstanding, in
case there be no lawful let, to communicate every Lords day. De Sermon.
pr^pri^tat. (...). 4.10.
Quotidie Eucharistiae communionem percipere nec vitupero nec laudo, omnibus
tamen dominicis diebus communicandum hortor, si tamen men's in affectu peccandi
non sit, as his words there are. And whereas this good custom had been long
neglected, Can. 21.
it was appointed that the Sacrament should be administered every Lords day by
the Council at Aken, Anno 836. Ne forte qui long est a sacramentis quibus est
redemptus, etc. lest, says the Council, they which keep so much distance from
the Sacraments of their redemption, be kept as much at distance from the
fruition of their Salvation. As for the Holy Days or Saints days, there needed
no such Canon to enjoin on them the celebration of the Sacrament, which was
annexed to them of course. So likewise for the public prayers, besides what
scatteringly has been said in former places, C^^^ Friburien^. Can. 26.
the Council held at Friburg, Anno 895. has determined thus, Diebus dominicis
and sanctorum festis vigiliis and orationibus insistendum est, and ad missas
cuilibet Christiano cum oblationibus currendum: That on the Lords day, and the
Festivals of the Saints, every Christian was to be intent upon his devotions,
to watch and pray, and go to Mass, and there make his offering. It Is true, the
Service of the Church being in the Latin, and in these times that Language
being in some Provinces quite worn out, and in some others grown into a
different dialect from what it was; that part of Gods worship, which was
public prayer, served not so much to comfort and to edification as it should
have done. As for the outward adjuncts of Gods public service on the Churches
part, the principalwas that of Music, which in these Ages grew to a perfect
height. We showed before that vocal Music in the Church, is no less ancient
than the Liturgy of the Church it self, which as it was begun in Ignatius time,
after the manner of plain-song, or a melodious kind of pronunciation, as before
was said; so in S. Austins time it became so excellent, that it drew many to
the Church, and consequently many to the says. Now to that vocal Music which
was then in use, and of which formerly we spoke; it pleased the Church in the
beginning of these Ages to add Instrumental; the Organ being added to the Voice
by Pope Vitalian, Anno 653. above 1000 years ago, and long before the
aberration of the Church from its pristine piety. And certainly it was not done
without good advice, there being nothing of that kind more powerful than melody
both Vocaland Instrumental for raising of men's hearts, and sweetning their
affections toward God. Not any thing wherein the Militant Church here on Earth
has more resemblance to the Church in Heaven triumphant, than in that sacred
and harmonious way of singing praise and Allelujahs to the Lord our God, which
is and has of long been used in the Church of Christ.

To bring this Chapter to an end, Thou shall do no manner of work upon it. For
where they tell us of this day, as before was said, that it was taken up by
custom on the Authority of the Church, as most on Apostolical tradition; this
makes it plain that they intended no such matter as a Sabbath day; though that
the Congregation might assemble in the greater numbers, and men might join
together in all Christian duties with the greater force; it pleased the Church
and principal powers thereof to restrain men from cororal labors, and bind
them to repair to the House of God. Or if they did intend the Lords day for a
Sabbath day, it is plain they must have made more Sabbaths than one day in
seven; those Holy Days which universally were observed in the Christian Church,
being no othersise to be kept than the Lords day was; and those increasing in
these Ages to so great a number, that they became a burden to the common
people. Nor is it likely, that being once free from the bondage of the Jewish
Sabbath, they would submit themselves unto another of their own devising; and
do therewith, as the Idolaters of old with their wooden Gods, first make them,
and then presently fall down and worship them. Rather they took a course to
restrain the Jews from sanctifhing their Sabbah, and other legal Festivals, as
before they used. Can. 10.
Statutum est de Judaeis, in the 12. Council of Tolledo, Anno 681, Ne Sabbata,
caeterasque festivitates ritus sui, celebrare praesumant: and not so only, Sed
ut diebus dominicis and ab opere cessent, but that they should refrain from
labor on the Lords day also. of any Sabbath to be kept in the Christian
Church, some few might dream perhaps, such filthy dreamers as Saint Jude speaks
of;but they did only dream thereof, they few no such matter. They which had
better Visions could perceive no Subbath; but in this life a Sabbath or a rest
from sin, and in the life to come, a Sabbath, or a rest from misery. Plainly
Rupertus so conceived it, as great a Clerk as any in the times wherein he
lived, which was in the beginning of the twelfth Century. Nam sicut signum
circumcisionis incarnationem, etc. For as, says he, the sign of Circumcisian
foreshewed the Incarnation of our Lord and Savior, the offering of the Paschal
Lamb, his Death and Passion: Sic Sabbatismus ille requiem annunciabat, quae
post hanc vitam posita ^^t fanctis and ^lectis; so did the Sabbath signify
that eternal rest, which after this life is provided for the Saints and elect
of God. And more than this, Spiritualis homo non uno die hebdomadis, sed omni
tempore Sabbatizare satagit; the true spiritual man keeps not his Subbath once
a week, but at all times whatever, every hour and minute. What then? would he
have no day set apart for Gods public service; no, but not the Sabbath.
Because (says he) we are not to rejoice in this world that perishes, but in
the sure and certain hope of the Resurrection; therefore we ought not rest the
seventh day in sloth and idleness: But we dispose our selves to prayers and
hearing of the Word of God upon the first day of the week, on the which Christ
rose: cum summa cura providentes, ut tam illo quam caeteris diebus feriati
semper simus a servili opere peccati. Provided always that upon that, and all
days else, we keep our selves free from the servile Acts of sin. This was the
Sabbath which they principally looked for in this present life; never applying
of that name to the Lords day, in any of those monuments of Learning they have
left behind them. The first who ever used it, to denote the Lords day, (the
first that I have met with in all this search) is one Petrus Alfonsus, he lived
about the times that Rupertus did, who calls the Lords day by the name of the
Christian Sabbath, Dies domnica, dies viz. resurrectionis, quae suae
salvationis causa extitit, Christianorum sabbatum est. But this no otherwise to
be construed than by Analogy and resemblance, no otherwise than the Feast of
Easter is called the Christian Passover. As for the Saturday, the old Sabbath
day, though it continued not a Sabbath, yet it was still held in an high esteem
in the Eastern Churches; counted a festival day, or at least no fast, and
honored with the meetings of the Congregation. In reference to the first, we
find how it was charged on the Church of Rome, by the sixth Council in
Constantinople, Anno 692. that in the holy time of Lent. (...), they used to
fast the Saturday, which was directly contrary to the Canons of the Apostles,
as they there allege. This also was objected by Photius Patriarch of
Constantinople, against Pope Nicolas of Rome, Anno 867. and after that by
Michael of Constantinople, against Leo the ninth, Anno 1053. which plainly
shows that in the Eastern Churches they observed it otherwise. And in relation
to the other, Curopalat.
we find that whereas in the principal Church of Constantinople, the holy
Sacrament was celebrated only on the greater feasts, as also on the Saturdays
and the Sundays [Sabbatis and dominicis] and not on other days, as at Rome it
was: Constantine surnamed Mononiachus, Anno 1054, enriched it with revenue, and
bestowed much fair plate upon it, that so they might be able every day to
perform that office. Which proves sufficiently that Saturday was always one in
all public duties, and that it kept even pace with Sunday. But it was
otherwise of old in the Church of Rome, where they did laborare and jejunare,
as Humbertus says, in his defense of Leo the ninth against Nicetas. And this
with little opposition or interruption, save that which had been made in the
City of Rome, in the beginning of the seventh Century, and was soon crushed by
Gregory then Bishop there, as before we noted. And howsoever Urban of that name
the second, Hect. Boet. hist. l. 22.
did consecrate it to the weekly service of the blessEd Virgin, and instituted
in the Council held at Clermont, Anno 1095. that our Ladies office [Officium B.
Mariae] should be said upon it, Eandemque Sabbato quoque die, praecipua
devotione, populum Christianum colere debere, and that upon that day all
Christian folk should worship her with their best devotions; yet it continued
still, as before it was, a day of fasting and of working. So that in all this
time, in 1200 years, we have found no Sabbath, nor do we think to meet with any
in the times that follow, either amongst the Schoolmen, or amongst the
Protestants, which next shall come upon the Stage.

CHAP. VI. What is the judgment of the Schoolmen and of the Protestants, and
what the practice of those Churches in this Lords day business.
1. That in the judgment of the Schoolmen, the keeping of one day in seven, is
not the moral part of the fourth Commandment. 2. As also that the Lords day is
not founded on Divine Authority, but the Authority of the Church. 3. A
Catalogue of the Holy Days drawn up in the Council of Lions; and the new
Doctrine of the Schools, touching the native sanctity of the Holy Days. 4. In
what estate the Lords day stood, in matter of restraint from labor, at the
reformation. 5. The Reformators find great fault, both with the said new
doctrine, and restraints from labor. 6. That in the judgment of the Protestant
Divines, the keeping of one day in seven is not the moral part of the fourth
Commandment. 7. As that the Lords day has no other ground on which to stand,
than the Authority of the Church. 8. And that the Church has power to change
the day, and to transfer it to some other. 9. What is the practice of all
Churches, the Roman, Lutheran, and Calvinian chiefly in matter of Devotion,
rest from labor, and sufferance of lawful pleasures. 10. Dancing cried down by
Calvin and the French Churches, not in relation to the Lords day, but the sport
it self. 11. In what estate the Lords day stands in the Eastern Churches; and
that the Saturday is no less esteemed of by the Ethiopians than the said Lords
day.


WE are now come unto an Age wherein the Learning of the world began to make a
different show from what it did, Protestants; in the beginning of the
sixteenth, endeavoring to destroy those buildings, which with such diligence
and curiosity had been erected by the Schoolmen, though they consented well
enough in the present business, so far as it concerned the Institution either
of the Lords day, or the Sabbath. Of these, and what they taught, and did in
reference to the point in hand, we are now to speak; taking along with us such
passages of especial note as happened in the Christian world, by which we may
learn any thing that concerns our business. And first beginning with the
Schoolmen, they tell us generally of the Sabbath, that it was a Ceremony, and
that the fourth Commandment is of a different nature from the other nine: That
whereas all the other precepts of the Decalogue are simply moral, the fourth
which is the third in their account, 22. qu. 122. art. 4. ad 1.
is partly moral, partly ceremonial. Morale quidem quantum ad hoc, quod homo
deputet aliquod tempus vitae suae, ad vacandum divinis, etc. Moral it is in
this regard, that men must set apart some particular time for Gods public
service; it being natural to man to destinate particular times to particular
actions, as for his dinner, for his sleep, and such other actions. Sed in
quantum in hoc praecepto determinatur speciale tempus in s gnum creationis
mundi, sic est praeceptum ceremoniale. But inasmuch as that there is a day
appointed in the Law it self, in token of Gods rest, and the worlds creation;
in that respect the Law is ceremonial, and ceremonial too they make it, in
reference to the Allegory, our Saviors resting in the grave that day; and in
relation to the Analogical meaning of it, as it prefigureth our eternal rest in
the Heaven of glories. Finally, they conclude of the fourth Commandment, that
it is placed in the Decalogue, in quantum est praeceptum morale, non in quantum
est ceremoniale; only so far forth as it is moral, and not as ceremonial: that
is, that we are bound by the fourth Commandment to destinate some time to Gods
public service, which is simply moral; but not the Seventh day, which is
plainly ceremonial, Aquinas so resolves it for all the rest; In Gr at. de
Sabbato.
his judgment in this point (if Doctor Prideaux note be true, as I have no
reason but to think so) being universally embraced, and followed by all the
Schoolmen of what sect soever. So that in him we have them all; all of them
consonant in this point, to make up the Harmony, however dissonant enough in
many others. But that this consent may appear the more full and perfect, we
will take notice of two others, men famous in the Schools, and eminent for the
times in which they lived. First Bonaventure, who lived in the same time with
Aquinas, and died the same year with him. which was 1274. has determined thus.
Sermon. de december praecept.
Imelligendum est quod praeceptum illud habet aliquid, quod est mere morale,
etc. It is to be conceived, says he, that in the fourth Commandment there is
something which is simply moral, something again that is plainly ceremonial,
and something mixed. The sanctifying of a day is Moral; the sanctifying of a
Seventh day, Ceremonial: rest from the works of labor, being mixed of both.
Quod praecipit Deus sanctificationem, est Praeceptum morale! Est and in hoc
praecepto aliquid ceremoniale, ut figuratio dici septimae. Item continetur
aliquid quod est partim morale, partim ceremoniale, ut cessatio ab operibus.
Lastly, In Exodus 20. qu. 11.
Tostatus Bishop of Avila in Spain has resolved the same; aliquid est in eo
juris naturalis, aliquid legalis: that in the fourth Commandment there is
something Natural, and something Legal; that it is partly Moral and partly
Ceremonial. Natural est quod dum Deum colimus, ab aliis abstineamus, etc.
Moral and Natural it is, that for the time, we worship God, we do abstain from
every thing of what kind soever, which may divert our thoughts from that holy
action. But that we should design, in every week, one day unto that employment;
and that the whole day be thereto appointed; and that in all that day, a man
shall do no manner of work: those things he reckons there to be Ceremonial.

So for the Lords day, it is thus determined by Aquinas, 2.20. qu. 122. art. 4.
ad 4.
and not on any obligation laid upon us by the fourth Commandment. Diei
dominicae observantia in nova lege, succedit observantiae sabbati, non ex vi
praecepti legis, sed ex constitutione Ecclesiae and consuetudine populi
Christiani. What follows thereupon? Et ideo non est ita arcta prohibitio
operandi, in die dominica, sicut in die Sabbati. Therefore, says he, the
prohibition of doing no work on the Lords day, is not so rigorous and severe,
as upon the Sabbath; many things being licensed on the one, which were
forbidden on the other: as dressing meat and others of that kind and nature.
And not so only, but he gives us a dispensatur facilius in nova lege, an easier
hope of dispensation under the Gospel in case upon necessity we meddle with
prohibited labors; than possibly could have been gotten under the Law. The
like Tostatus tells us, though in different words: save that he does extend the
prohibiton, as well to all the Feasts of the Old Testament, as all the Holy
days of the New; and neither to the Sabbath, nor the Lords day only. In veteri
lege major fuit strictio in observatione festorum, In Exodus 20. qu. 13.
quam in nova lege. How so? In omnibus enim festivitatibus nostris
quantaecunque sint, etc. Because, says he, in all our Festivals how great
soever, whether they be the Lords days, or the feasts of Easter, or any of the
higher rank, it is permitted to dress meat and to kindle fire, etc. As for the
grounds whereon they stood, he makes this difference between them, that the
Jews Sabbath had its warrant from Divine commandment; but that the Lords day,
though it came in the place thereof, is founded only on Ecclesiastical
constitution. Colebatur Sabbatum ex mandato Dei, cujus loco successit dies
dominica, In Matthew 23. qu. 148.
and tamen manifestum est, quod observatio diei dominicae, non est de jure
divino, sed de jure humano Canonico. This is plain enough; and this he proves,
because the Church has still a power mutare illum diem, vel totaliter tollere,
either to change the day, or take it utterly away, and to dispense touching the
keeping of the same: which possibly it neither could nor ought to do, were the
Lords day of any other institution, than the Churches only. They only have the
power to repeal a Law, which had power to make it; Qui habet institutionem,
habet destitutionem, as is the Bishops plea in a Quare Impedit. As for the
first of these two powers, that by the Church the day may be transferred, and
abrogated; Suarez has thus distinguished in it; verum id esse absolute, non
practice: that is, as I conceive his meaning, that such a power is absolutely
in the Church, though not convenient now to be put in practice. According unto
that of St. Paul, which probably was the ground of the distinction. All things
are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. This is the general tendry
of the Roman Schools, that which is publicly avowed, and made good amongst
them. And howsoever Petrus de Anchorana and Nicholas Abbat of Patermo two
learned Canonists; as also Angelus de Clavasio, and Silvester de Prierats, two
as learned Casuists, seem to defend the institution of the Lords day to have
its ground and warrant on divine Authority: yet did the general current of the
Schools, and of the Canonists also, run the other way. And in that current
still it holds, the Jesuits and most learned men in the Church of Rome,
following the general and received opinion of the Schoolmen, whereof see
Bellarm. de cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 11. Estius in 3. Sent. did. 37. Sect. 13.
but especially Agsorius, in his Institut. Moral. part second cap. 2. who gives
us an whole Catalogue or them, which hold the Lords day to be founded only on
the authority of the Church. Touching the other power, the power of
Dispensation, there is not any thing more certain, than that the Church both
may and does dispense with such as have therein offended against her Canons.
The Canons in themselves do profess as much; there being many casus reservati,
as before we said, expressed particularly in those Laws and constitutions,
which have been made about the keeping of this day, and the other Festivals;
wherein a dispensation lies, if we disobey them. Many of these were specified
in the former Ages; and some occur in these whereof now we write. It pleased
Pope Gregory the ninth, Decretal. l. 2. tit. de feriis. cap. 5.
Anno 1228. to inhibit all contentious Suits on the Lords day and the other
Festivals; and to inhibit them so far, that judgment given on any of them,
should be counted void, Etiam consentientibus partibus, although both parties
were consenting. Yet was it with this clause, or reservation, nisi vel
necessitas urgeat vel pietas suadeat, unless necessity enforced, or piety
persuaded that it should be done. So in a Synod holden in Valladolit [apud
vallem Oleti] in the parts of Spain, Council. Sabiness. de^feriis.
Anno 1322. a general restraint was ratified that had been formerly in force,
quod nullus in diebus dominicis and festivis, agros colere audeat, aut manualia
artificia exercere praesitmat; that none should henceforth follow Husbandry; or
exercise himself in mechanic Trades upon the Lords day or the other Holy days:
Yet was it with the same Proviso, nisi urgente necessitate, vel evidentis
pietatis causa, unless upon necessity, or apparent piety or charity: in each of
which he might have license from the Priest, his own Parish Priest, to attend
his business. Where still observe that the restraint was no less peremptory on
the other Holy days, than on the Lords day.

These Holy days as they were named particularly in Pope Gregory's Decretal;
Lions, ^e consecrat. distinct. 3. c. 1.
Anno 1244. which being celebrated with a great concourse of people, from all
parts of Christendom, the Canons and decrees thereof, began forthwith to find a
general admittance. The Holy days allowed of there, were these that follow,
viz. the feast of Christ's nativity, St. Stephen, St John the Evangelist, the
Innocents, St. Silv^ster, the Circumcision of our Lord, the Epiphany, Easter,
together with the week precedent, and the week succeeding, the three days in
Rogation week, the day of Christ's Ascension, Whitsunday, with the two days
after, St. John the Baptist, the feasts of all the twelve Apostles, all the
festivities of our Lady, St. Lawrence, all the Lords days in the year, St.
Michael the Archangel, All Saints, St. Martins, the Wakes or dedication of
particular Churches, together with the Feasts of such topical or local Saints
which some particular people had been pleased to honor, with a day particular
amongst themselves. On these and every one of them the people were restrained,
as before was said, from many several kinds of work, on pain of Ecclesiastical
censures to be laid on them, which did offend: unless on some emergent causes,
either of charity or necessity, they were dispensed with for so doing. In other
of the Festivals which had not yet attained to so great an height, the Council
thought not fit perhaps by reason of their numbers, that men should be
restrained from labor; as neither that they should be encouraged to it, but
left them to themselves, to bestow those times, as might stand best with their
affairs, and the Common wealth. For so the Synod did determine, Reliquis
festivitatibus quae per annum sunt, non esse plebem cogendam ad feriandum sed
nec probibendam. And in this state things stood a long time together, there
being none that proferd opposition, in reference to these restraints from
labor on the greater Festivals; though some there were, that thought the
Festivals too many, on which those burden of restraints had unadvisedly been
imposed on the common people. Nicholas de Clemangis, complained much as of some
other abuses in the Church, so of the multitude of Holy days, Ap. Hospin cap. ^
de fest. (...).
which had of late times been brought into it. And Pet. de Aliaco Cardinal of
Cambray, in a Discourse by him exhibited to the Council of Constance, made
public suit unto the Fathers there assembled, that there might a stop be put
in that kind, hereafter: as also that excepting Sundays and the greater
Festivals, liceret operari post auditum officium, it might be lawful for the
people, after the end of Divine Service, to attend their businesses: the poor
especially having little time enough on the working days, ad vitae necessaria
procuranda, to get their livings. But these were only the expressions of well
wishing men. The Popes were otherwise resolved, and did not only keep the Holy
days, which they found established, in the same state in which they found them;
but added others daily, as they saw occasion. At last it came unto that pass by
reason of that rigorous and exact kind of rest, which by the Canon Law had been
fastened on them, that both the Lords day and the other Festivals were accounted
Holy, not in relation to the use made of them, or to the holy actions done on
them, in the honor of God: but in and of themselves considered, they were
avowed to be vere aliis sanctiores, Bell arm. de cultu S. l. 3. c. 10.
truly and properly invested with a greater sanctity than the other days. Yea
so far did they go at last, that it is publicly maintained in the Schools of
Rome, non sublatam esse, sed mutatam tantum [in novo Testamento]
significationem discretionem dierum: that the difference of days and times and
the mysterious significations of the same, which had before been used in the
Jewish Church; was not abolished, but only changed in the Church of Christ.
Aquinas did first lead this Dance, in fitting every legal Festival, with some
that were observed in the Christian Church; laying this ground, that ours
succeeded in the place of theirs. Sabbatum mutatur in diem dominicum; similiter
aliis solennitatibus veteris legis, novae solennitates succedunt: 1. 2 ae. qu.
103. Art. 3. ad 4.
as his words there are. Upon which ground of his, the Doctrines now remembered
were, no question, raised: and howsoever other men might think all days alike
in themselves considered; yet those of Rome will have some holier than the
rest, even by a natural and inherent holiness.

And in this state things stood, both for the doctrine and the practice, until
such time as men began to look into the errors and abuses in the Church of
Rome, with a more serious eye than before they did: the Canonists being no less
nice, in the point of practice; than were the Schoolmen and the rest exorbitant
in the point of Doctrine. Whose Niceties, especially in matter of restraint, we
have most fully represented to us by Tostatus: In Exodus 12.
one that had run through all the parts of Learning at that time on foot, and
was as well studied in the Canon, as in the Schools. He then determines of it
thus. Itinerando pro negotiis peccatum esse mortale, etc. Qu. 25.
He that does travel on the Holy days (for in that general Name the Lords day
and the other Festivals are comprehended) about worldly business, commits
mortal sin; as also if he Trade or Traffic in the place wherein he lives. But
this has two exceptions, or reservations: First, if the business by him done
be but small and light, quae quietem Sabbati non impediunt, such as are no
great hinderance to the Sabbaths rest; and secondly nisi hoc sit in causa pia,
unless it were on some devout and pious purpose. To read unto, or teach a man,
to deal in actions of the Law, or determine Suits, Qu. 26.
or to cast Accounts, si quis doceret ut lucretur, if it be done for hire, or
for present gain, become servile works, and are forbidden: Otherwise, if one do
it gratis. Qu. 27.
If a Musician wait upon a Gentleman, to recreate his mind with Music, and
that they are agreed on a certain wages; or that he be hired only for a present
turn; he sins, in case he play, or sing unto him on the Holy days: but not if
his reward be doubtful, Qu. 28.
and depends only upon the bounty of the parties, who enjoy his Music. A Cook
that on the Holy days is hired to make a Feast, or to dress a Dinner, does
commit mortal sin: sed non pro toto mense aut anno, but not if he be hired by
the month, or by the year, Meat may be dressed upon the Lords day, or the other
Holy days: Qu. 29.
but to wash Dishes on those days, was esteemed unlawful; and differri in diem
alteram, Qu. 32.
and was to be deferred till another day. Lawyers, that do their Clients
business for their wonted see, were not to draw their Bills, or frame their
Answers, or peruse their Evidences, on the Holy days: Secus si causam agerent
pro miserabilibus personis, etc. but it was otherwise, if they dealt for poor
indigent people, such as did sue in forma pauperis, as we call it; or in the
causes of a Church, or Hospital, in which the Popes had pleased to grant a
Dispensation. A man that traveled on the Holy days, Qu. 34.
to any special shrine or Saint, did commit no sin, Si autem in redeundo,
peccatum est mortale; but if he did the like in his coming back, he then sinned
mortally. Qu. 35.
In any place where formerly it had been the custom, neither to draw Water, nor
to sweep the House, but to have those things ready on the day before; the
custom was to be observed; where no such custom is, there they may be done.
Actions of a long continuance, if they were delightful, or if one played three
or four hours together on a Musical Instrument; were not unlawful on the Holy
days: yet possibly they might be sinful, at si quis hoc ageret ex lascivia: as
if one played only out of wantonness, Qu. 36.
or otherwise were so intent upon his Music, that he went not to Mass.
Artificers which work on the Holy days for their own profit only, are in mortal
sin; unless the work be very small: quia modicum non facit solennitatem
dissolvi, because a little thing dishonours not the Festival: De minimis non
curat lex, as our saying is. Contrary Butchers, Vintners, Bakers,
Coster-mongers, sinned not in selling their Commodities; because more profit
does redound to the Common wealth, which cannot be without such commodities,
than to them that sell; yet this extended not to Drapers, Shoomakers, or the
like, because there is not such a present necessity for clothes, as meat. Yet
where the custom was, that Butchers did not sell on the Holy days, but
specially not upon the Lords day; that commendable custom was to be observed:
though in those places also, it was permitted to the Butcher, that on those
days, at some convenient times thereof, he might make ready what was to be sold
on the morrow after, as kill and skin his Bestial which were fit for sale; in
case he could not do it with so much convenience [non ita congrue] at another
time. Qu. 37.
To write out or transcribe a Book, though for a man's own private use, was
esteemed unlawful, except it were exceeding small, because this put no
difference between the Holy days and the other: yet was it not unlawful
neither, in case the Argument were Spiritual, nor for a Preacher to write out
his Sermons, or for a Student to provide his Lecture for the day following.
Windmils were suffered to be used on the Holy days, Qu. 38.
not Watermills, because the first required less labor and attendance, than
the other did. This is the reason in Tostatus, though I can see no reason in
it: the passage of the Water being once let run, being of more certainty and
continuance, than the changeable blowing of the Wind. But to proceed, Qu. 39.
Ferry-men were not to transport such men, in their Boats or Wherries, as did
begin their Journey on an Holy day, unless they went to Mass, or on such
occasions: but such as had begun their Journey, and now were in pursuit
thereof, might be ferried over, quia forte carebunt victu, because they may
perhaps want Victuals if they do not pass. Qu. 41.
To repair Churches on the Lords day and the other Holy Days, was accounted
lawful; in case the Workmen did it gratis, and that the Church were poor, not
able to hire Workmen on the other days: not if the Church were rich and in case
to do it. Qu. 42.
So also to build Bridges, repair the walls of Towns and Castles, or other
public Edifices, on those days, was not held unlawfu; si instent hosts, in
case the Enemy be at hand: though otherwise not to be done, where no danger
was. These are the special points observed and published by Tostatus. And these
I have the rather exactly noted, partly that we may see in what estate the
Lords day and the other Holy days, were in the Church of Rome, what time the
reformation of Religion was first set on foot: but principally to let others
see, how near they come in their new fancies and devices, unto the Niceties of
those men whom they most abhor.

Thus stood it, Roman Church. with a more serious eye than before they did: and
at first sight, they found what little pleased them, in this particular. Their
Doctrine pleased them not, in making one day holier than another, not only in
relation to the use made of them, but to a natural and inherent holiness,
wherewith they thought they were invested. Nor did their practice please much
more, in that they had imposed so many burdens of restraint, upon the
consciences of Gods people; and thereby made that day a punishment. which was
intended for the ease, of the laboring man. Against the doctrine of these men,
and the whole practice of that Church, Calvin declares himself in his book of
Institutions. And therewith taxes those of Rome, L. 2. cap. 8. p. 34.
qui Judaica opinione populum superioribus seculis imbuerunt, who in the times
before possessed the peoples minds with so much Judaism; that they had changed
the day indeed, as in dishonor of the Jew, but otherwise retained the former
sanctity thereof; which needs must be, says he, if there remain with us, (as
the Papists taught) the same opinion of the mysteries and various
significations of days and times, which the Jews once had. And certainly, says
he, we see what dangerous effects have followed, on so false a Doctrine: those
which adhere to their instructions, having exceedingly out gone the Jews,
crassa carnalique Sabbatismi superstitione, in their gross and carnal
superstitions, about the Sabbath. In Apocal. 1. v. 10.
Beza his Scholar and Achates, sings the self-same Song, that howsoever the
Assemblies of the Lords day were of Apostolical and divine Tradition: sic tamen
ut Judaica cessatio ab omni opere non observaretur, quoniam hoc plane fuisset
Judaismum non abolere, sed tantum, quod ad diem attinet, immutare; yet so that
there was no cessation from work, required as was observed among the Jews. For
that, says he, had not so much abolished Judaism, as put it off and changed it
to another day. And then he adds, that this cessation was first brought in by
Constantine, and afterward confirmed with more and more restraints, by the
following Emperors: by means of which it came to pass, that that which first
was done for a good intent, viz. that men being free from their worldly
businesses, might wholly give themselves to hearing of the Word of God; in
merum Judaismum degenerarit, degnerated at the last into downright Judaism. So
for the Lutheran Churches, Chemnitius challenges the Romanists of
superstition, quasi dominicae diei and reliquis diebus festis, per se,
peculiaris quaedam insit sanctitas, because they taught the people that the
Holy days, considered only in themselves, had a Native Sanctity. And howsoever
for his part, he think it requisite, that men should be restrained from all
such works, as may be any hinderance unto the sanctifying of the day: yet he
accounts it but a part of the Jewish leaven; nimis scrupulose diebus festis
prohibere operas externas, quie vel quando, non impediunt publicum ministerium:
so scrupulously to prohibit such external Actions which are at all no hindrance
to Gods public service, and man's Sabbath Duties. Bueer goes further yet, and
does not only call it a superstition, In Mat. 12.
but an Apostasy from Christ, to think that working on the Lords day, in it
self considered, is a sinful thing. Si existimetur operari in eo die, per se,
esse peccatum, superstitio, and gratiae Christi, qui ab elementis mundi nos suo
sanguine liberavit, negatio est: as his own words are. Then adds, that he did
very well approve of the Lords day meetings, si eximatur e cordibus hominum
opinio necessitatis, if men were once dispossessed of these opinions, that the
day was necessary to be kept, that it was holier in it self than the other
days, and that to work upon that day, in it self, was sinful. Lastly, the
Churches of the Switzers profess in their Confession, that in the keeping of
the Lords day, they give not the least hint to any Jewish superstitions. Neque
enim alteram diem altera sanctiorem esse credimus, nec otium Deo, per se
probari existimamus. For neither, Cap. 24.
(as they said) do we conceive one day to be more holy than another; or think
that rest from labor, in it self considered, is any way pleasing unto God. By
which we plainly may perceive, what is the judgment of the Protestant Churches
in the present point.

Indeed, It is not to be thought, keeping holy one day of seven, is not the
Moral part of the fourth Commandment, or to be reckoned as a part of the law of
Nature; 2. That the Lords day is not founded on Divine Commandment, but only on
the authority of the Church; and 3. That the Church has still authority to
change the day, and to transfer it to some other. First, for the first, it
seems that some of Rome, considering the restraints before remembered, and the
new Doctrine thence arising, about the Natural and inherent holiness which one
day had above another; had altered what was formerly delivered amongst the
Schoolmen, and made the keeping of one day in seven, to be the Moral part of
the fourth Commandment. This Calvin charge them withal that they had taught
the people in the former times, Instit. l. 1. Cap. 8.11, 34.
that whatsover was ceremonial in the fourth Commandment, which was the keeping
of the Jews seventh day, had been long since abrogated: remanere vero quod
morale est, nempe unius diei observationem in hebdomade, but that the moral
part thereof which was the keeping of one day in seven, did continue still.
With what else is it, as before was said, than in dishonor of the Jews, to
change the day; and to affix as great a sanctity thereunto, as the Jews ever
did. And for his own part he professes, that howsoever he approved of the
Lords day meetings, Non tamen numerum septennarium ita se morari, ut ejus
servituti Ecclesias astringeret; yet stood not he so much for the number of
seven, as to confine the Church unto it. If Calvin elsewhere be of another
mind, and speak of keeping holy one day in seven as a matter necessary; (which
some say he does) either they must accuse him of much inconstancy and
forgetfulness; or else interpret him, with Rivet; as speaking of an
Ecclesiastical custom, not to be neglected, In decalog.
non de necessitate legis divinae, and not of any obligation laid upon us by
the Law of God. Neither is he the only one that has so determined. Simler has
said it more expressly. Quod dies una cultui divino consecretur, ex lege naturae
est; quod autem haec sit septima, non octava, nona aut decima, juris est
divini, sed ceremonialis: In Exodus 20.
That one day should be set apart for Gods public Worship, is the law of
Nature, but that this day should be the seventh, and not the eighth, ninth, or
tenth, was of Divine appointment, but as ceremonial. Aretius also in his common
places, Loc. 55.
distinguished between the substance of the Sabbath, and the time thereof; the
substance of it, which was rest, and the works of Piety, being in all times to
continue; tempus autem ut septime die observetur, hoc non fuit necessarium in
Ecclesia Christi, but for the time, to keep it on the seventh day always, that
was not necessary in the Church of Christ. So also Frankisc. Gomarus, that
great undertaker against Arminius, in a Book written purposely de origin and
institutione Sabbati, affirms for certain, that it can neither be made good by
the law of Nature, Cap. 5. n. 8.
or Text of Scripture, or any solid Argument drawn from thence, unum e septem
diebus ex vi praecepti quarti ad cultum Dei necessario observandum, that by the
fourth Commandment, one day in seven, is of necessity to be dedicated to Gods
service. In Exodus 20. p. 1^0.
And Ryvet, as professed an Enemy of the Remonstrants, though for the antiquity
of the Sabbath, he differs from the said Gomarus, yet he agrees with him in
this: not only making the observance of one day in seven, to be merely
positive, as in our first part we observed; but lays it down for the received
opinion of most of the Reformed Divines, unum ex septem diebus, non esse
necessario eligendum, ex vi praecepti, ad sacros conventus celebrandos; the
very same with what Gomarus affirmed before. So lastly for the Lutheran
Churches, In Examine. Conc. Trid.
Chemnitius makes it part of our Christian liberty, quod nec sint alligati nec
debeant alligari ad certorum vel dierum vel temporum observationes, opinione
necessitatis, in Novo Testamento, etc. That men are neither bound, nor ought to
be, unto the observation of any days, or times, as matters necessary, under the
Gospel of our Savior: though otherwise he account it for a barbarous Folly,
not to observe that day with all due solemnity, which has for so long time
been kept by the Church of God. Therefore in his opinion also, the keeping of
one day in seven, Medull. Theel. l. 2.15.
is neither any moral part of the fourth Commandment, or parcel of the law of
Nature. As for the subtle shift of Amesius finding, that keeping holy of one
day in seven is positive indeed, sed immutabilis plane institutionis, but such
a positive Law as is absolutely immutable; and does as much oblige, as those
which in themselves are plainly natural and moral: it may then serve, when
there is nothing else to help us. For that a positive Law should be immutable
in its self; and in its own nature, be as universally binding, as the Moral
Law; is such a piece of Learning, and of contradiction, as never was put up to
show, in these latter times. But he that learnt his lirry in England, here; and
durst not broach it but by halves, amongst the Hollanders.

For the next Thesis, Lords day is not founded on divine Commandment, but the
authority of the Church: it is a point so universally resolved on, as no one
thing more; and first we will begin with Calvin, who tells us how it was not
without good reason, that those of old, appointed the Lords Day as we call it,
to supply the place of the Jewish Sabbath. Institut. l. 2. c. 8. l. 3.
Non sine delectu, dominicum, quem vocamus diem, veteres in locum sabbati
subrogarunt, as his words there are. Where none, I hope will think, that he
would give our Savior Christ or his Apostles such a short come off, as to
include them in the name of Veteres, only: which makes it plain, that he
conceived it not to be their appointment. In Matthew. 12.
Bucer resolves the point more clearly, communi Christianorum consensu
Dominicum diem publicis Ecclesiae conventibus ac quieti publicae, dicatum esse,
ipso statim Apostolorum tempore: and says, that in the Apostles times, the
Lords day by the common consent of Christian people, was dedicated unto public
rest, and the assemblies of the Church. In Genesis 2.
And Peter Martyr, upon a question asked, why the old seventh day was not kept
in the Christian Church; makes answer, that upon that day, and on all the rest,
we ought to rest from our own works, the works of sin. Sed quod is magis quam
ille, eligatur ad externum Dei cultum, liberum fuit Ecclesiae per Christum, ut
id consuleret quod ex re magis judicaret: nec illa pessime judicavit, etc. That
this was rather chose than that for Gods public service, That, says he,
Christ left totally unto the liberty of the Church, to do therein what should
seem most expedient: and that the Church did very well, in that she did prefer
the memory of the Resurrection, before the memory of the Creation. These two I
have the rather thus joined together, as being sent for into England in King
Edwards time, and place by the Protector in our Universities, the better to
establish Reformation, at that time begun: and doubt we not, but that they
taught the self-same Doctrine (if at the least they touched at all upon that
point) with that now extant in their writings; In Apoc. 1.
at the same time with them lived Bullinger and Gualter, two great Learned men.
Of these, the first informs us, hunc diem, loco sabbati in memoriam resurgentis
Domini delegisse sibi Ecclesias, that in memorial of our Saviors Resurrection,
the Churches set apart this day in the Sabbaths stead, whereon to hold their
solemn and religious meetings. And after, Sponte receperunt Ecclesiae illam
diem, non legimus eam ullibi praeceptam, that of their own accord, and by their
own authority, the Church made choice thereof for the use aforesaid; it being
no where to be found that it was commanded. In Act. Ap. Hom. 131.
Gualter, more generally, that the Christians first assembled on the Sabbath
day, as being then most famous, and so most in use: but when the Churches were
augmented, preximus a sabbato dies rebus sacris destinatus, the next day after
the Sabbath was designed to those holy uses. If not before, then certainly not
so commanded by our Savior Christ: and if designed only, then not enjoined by
the Apostles. Apoc. 1.10.
Yea Beza though herein he differ from his Master, Calvin; and makes the Lords
day meetings to be Apostolicae and verae divinae traditionis, to be indeed of
Apostolical, and divine Tradition: yet being a Tradition only, although
Apostolical, it is no Commandment. And more than that, he tells us in another
place, that from St. Paul's preaching at Troas, and from the Text. In Act. 20.
1 Corinthians. 16.2. non inepte colligi, it may be gathered not unfitly, that then
the Christians were accustomed to meet that day, the ceremony of the Jewish
Sabbath beginning by degrees to vanish. But sure the custom of the people makes
no divine Traditions; and such conclusions, as not unfitly may be gathered from
the Text, are not Text it self. Others there be, who attribute the changing of
the day, to the Apostles; not to their precept, but their practice. So Mercer,
Apostoli, in Dominicum converterunt, In Genesis
the Apostles changed the Sabbath to the Lords day: in Genesis 2. Paraeus
attributes the same Apostolicae Ecclesiae unto the Apostolical Church, or
Church in the Apostles time: quomodo autem facta sit haec mutatio in sacris
liberis expressum non habemus; but how, by what authority such a change was
made, is not delivered in the Scripture. In Thesib. p. 733.
And John Cuchlinus though he call it consuetudinem Apostolicam an Apostolical
custom; yet he is peremptory that the Apostles gave no such Commandment;
Apostolos praeceptum reliquisse constanter negamus. So Simler calls it only
consuetudinem tempore Apostolorum receptam, a custom taken up in the Apostles
time. And so Hospinian, De sestis Chr. p. 24.
although says he, it be apparent that the Lords day was celebrated in the
place of the Jewish Sabbath, even in the times of the Apostles: non invenitur
tamen vel Apostolos, vel alios, lege aliqua and praecepto, observationem ejus
instituisse: yet find we not that either they, or any other, did institute the
keeping of the same, by any law or precept, but left it free. In 4. praecept.
Thus Zanchius, nullibi legimus Apostolos, etc. We do not read, says he, that
the Apostles commanded any to observe this day. We only read what they and
others did upon it, liberum ergo reliquerunt, which is an argument that they
left it to the Churches power. To those add Vrsin in his Exposition of the
fourth Commandment, liberum Ecclesiae reliquit alios dies eligere, In Catech.
Palate.
and that the Church made choice of this, in honor of our Saviors
Resurrection: Aretius in his Common-places, Christiani in Dominicum
transtulerunt: Gomarus and Ryvet, in the Tracts before remembered. Both which
have also there determined, that in the choosing of this day, the Church did
exercise as well her Wisdom, as her Freedom: her freedom, being not obliged
unto any day, by the Law of God; her wisdom ne majori mutatione Judaeos
offenderet, that by so small an alteration, she might the less offend the Jews,
who were then considerable. As for the Lutheran Divines; it is affirmed by
Doctor Bound, that for the most part they ascribe too much unto the liberty of
the Church, in appointing days for the assembly of the people: which is plain
confession. But for particulars, Brentius, as Doctor Prideaux tells us, calls
it civilem institutionem, a civil institution, and no commandment of the
Gospel: which is no more indeed, than what is elsewhere said by Calvin, when he
accounts no otherwise thereof, than, ut remedium retinendo ordini necessarium,
as a fit way to retain order in the Church. And sure I am Chemnitius tells us,
that the Apostles did not impose the keeping of this day; as necessary, upon
the consciences of Gods people by any Law or Precept whatsoever: sed libera
fuit observatio ordinis gratia, but that for orders sake, it had been
voluntarily used amongst them, of their own accord.

Thus have we proved that by the Doctrine of the Protestants, of what side
soever, Lutherans in general of the same opinion; that the Lords day is of no
other institution than the authority of the Church. Which proved, the last of
the three Theses, that still the Church has power to change the day, and to
transfer it to some other, will follow of it self, on the former grounds: the
Protestant Doctors before remembered, in saying that the Church, did institute
the Lords day, as we see they do; confessing tacitly, that still the Church
has power to change it. Nor do they tacitly confess it, as if they were
afraid to speak it out: but some of them in plain terms affirm it, as a
certain Truth. Zuinglius, the first Reformer of the Switzers, has resolved it
so, in his Discourse against one Valentine Gentilis, a new Arian Heretic. Audi
mi Valentine, quibus modis and rationibus, sabbatum ceremoniale reddatur. Tom.
1. p. 254. ^.
Harken now Valentine by what ways and means, the Sabbath may be made a
ceremony: if either we observe that day which the Jews once did, or think the
Lords day so affixed unto any time, ut nefas sit illum in aliud tempus
transfer, that we conceive it an impiety, it should be changed unto another;
on which as well as upon that, we may not rest from labor, and harken to the
Word of God, if perhaps such necessity should be: this would indeed make it
become a ceremony. Nothing can be more plain than this. Yet Calvin is as plain,
when he professes, that he regards not so much the Number of seven, ut ejus
servituti Ecclesias astringeret, as to enthral the Church unto it. Sure I am,
Doctor Prideaux reckons him, as one of them, who teach us that the Church
has power to change the day, and to transfer it to some other: and that John
Barclaie makes report, In orat. de Sab.
how once he had a Consultation, de transferenda Dominica in feriam quintam, of
altering the Lords day unto the Thursday. Bucer affirms as much, as touching
the Authority, and so does Bullinger, and Brentius, Vrsine, and Chemnitius, as
Doctor Prideaux has observed. Of Bullinger, Bucer Brentius, I have naught to
say, because the places are not cited; but take it, as I think I may upon his
credit. But for Chemnitius he says, often, that it is libera observatio, a
voluntary observation; that it is an especial part of our Christian liberty,
not to be tied to Days and Times, in matters which concern Gods service; and
that the Apostles made it manifest by their Example, Singulis diebus, vel
quocunque die. That every day, or any day, Catech. qu. 103.. 2.
may by the Church be set apart for religious Exercises. And as for Vrsine, he
makes this difference between the Lords day and the Sabbath, that it was
utterly unlawful to the Jews, either to neglect or change the Sabbath, without
express Commandment from God himself, as being a ceremonial part of divine
Worship: but for the Christian Church, that may design the first, or second, or
any other day to Gods public service. Ecclesia vero Christiana primum, vel
alium diem, tribuit ministerio, salva sua liberate, sine opinione cultus vel
necessitatis: as his words there are. To these add Dietericus a Lutheran
Divine, Dom. 17. post Trinit.
who though he makes the keeping of one day in seven, to be the moral part of
the fourth Commandment; yet for that day, it may be dies Sabbati, or dies
Solis, or quicunque alius, Sunday or Saturday, or any other, be it one in
seven. And so Hospinian is persuaded, Dominicum diem mutare and in alium
transserre licet, That is the occasions of the Church do so require, the Lords
day may be changed unto any other: provided it be one of seven; and that the
change be so transacted, that it produce no scandal or confusion in the Church
of God. Nay by the doctrine of the Helvetian Churches, if I conceive their
meaning rightly, every particular Church may destinate what day they please, to
religious meetings; and every day may be a Lords day, Cap. 2.
or a Sabbath. For so they give it up in their Confession, Deligit ergo quaevis
Ecclesiae sibi certum tempus ad preces publicas, and Evangelii praedicationem,
necnon sacramentorum celebrationem: though for their parts, they kept that day,
which had been set apart for those holy uses, even from the time of the
Apostles, yet so, that they conceived it free, to keep the Lords day, or the
Sabbath: Sed and Dominicum, non Sabbatum, libera observatione, celebramus. Some
Sectaries, since the Reformation, have gone further yet, and would have had all
days alike, as unto their use, all equally to be regarded, and reckoned that
the Lords day as the Church continued it was a Jewish Ordinance, thwarting the
Doctrine of Saint Paul, who seemed to them to abrogate that difference of days,
which the Church retained. This was the fancy, or the frenzy rather of the
Anabaptist, taking the hint perhaps from something, which had been formerly
delivered by some wiser men; and after them, of the Swinck feildian, and the
Familist: as in the times before, of the Petro-Brusians, and (if Waldensis
wrong him not) of Wiclef also.

Such being the Doctrine of those Churches, Rome, it is not to be thought but
that their practice is according: Both make the Lords day only an
Ecclesiastical constitution, and therefore keep it so far forth, as by the
Canons of their Churches, they are enjoined. These what they are at Rome, and
those of her obedience, we have seen already; and little has been added since.
It has not been, of late, a time, to make new restraints; rather to mitigate
the old, to lay down such which were most burdensome, and grievous to be born
withal. And so it seems they do, Azorius the Jesuit being more remiss in
stating and determining the restraints, imposed on the Lords day, and the other
Holy days; than Tostatus was, who lived in safer times by far, than these now
present: nor is their Discipline so severe, as their Canon, neither. So that
the Lords day there, for ought I could observe, when I was amongst them, is
solemnized much after the same manner as with us in England: repairing to the
Church, both at Mass and Vespers, riding abroad to take the Air, or otherwise
to refresh themselvas, and following their honest pleasures at such leisure
times, as are not destir ate to the public meetings; the people not being
barred from traveling about their lawful business, as occasion is, so they
reserve some time for their Devotions in the public. Which is indeed agreeable
to the most ancient and most laudable custom, in the Church of God. Now for the
protestant Churches, the Lutherans do not differ much, from that which we have
said before of the Church of Rome: and therefore there is nothing to be said of
them. But for the rest which follow Galvin, and think themselves the only
Orthodox and Reformed Churches; we will consider them in three several
circumstances: first in the exercise of Religious Duties, secondly, in
restraint from labors, and thirdly in permission of Recreations. And first for
the excrcise of religious Duties, they use it in the Morning only: the
Afternoon being left at large, for any, and for every man to dispose thereof,
as to him seems fitting. So is it in the Churches of high Germany, those of the
Palatinate, and all the others of that mould. For I have heard from Gentlemen
of good repute, that at the first reception of the Lady Elizabeth into that
Country, on Sunday after Dinner, the Coaches and the Horses were brought
forth; and all the Princes Court, betook themselves unto their pleasures,
sures, Hunting or Hawking, as the season of the year was fit for either. Which
tend the Princcss thither: answer was made, it was their custom so to do, and
that they had no Evening-service, but ended all the Duties of the day with the
Morningsermon. Nor is this custom only, and no more but so. art. 46.
There is a Canon for it in some places, it must be no otherwise. For in the
first Council of Dort, Anno 1574. it was Decreed, Publicae vespertinae preces
non sunt, introducendae, ubi non sunt introduciae, ubi sunt, tollantur: that in
such Churches where public Evening Prayer had not been admitted, it should
continue as it was, and where they were admitted, they should be put down. So
Doctor Smith relates the Canon (if so irregular a Decree may deserve that name)
in his collat. doctr. Cathol. and Protest. cap. 68. Art. 1. And so it stood
till the last synod of Dort, Anno 1618. what time, to raise the reputation of
the Palatine Catechisin, Sess. 14.
being not long after to be admitted into their Canon, it was concluded, that
Catechism-lectures should be read each Sunday in the afternoon; nor to be laid
aside propter auditorum infrequentiam, for want of Auditors. Now to allure the
people thither, being before staved off by a former Synod, it was provided that
their Ministers should read howsoever, Coram paucis auditoribus, immo vel coram
suis famulis tantu, Though few were present, or none but their domestic
servants; in hope by little and little to attract the people. And secondly it
was resolved on, to implore the civil Magistrate, Vt opera omnia servilia, seu
quotidiana, etc. quibus tempus pomeridianum diebus Dominicis maxim in pagis,
plerunque transigi soleret, that by their Edicts they would restrain all
servile works, the works of ordinary days, and especially, Games,
Drinking-matches, and other profanations of the Sabbath, wherewith the
afternoon or Sundays, chiefly in smaller Towns and Villages, had before been
spent; that so the people might repair to the Catechizing. By which we also may
perceive, that there was no restraint, on Sundays in the afternoon, from any
kind of servile works, or daily labors, but that men might and did apply
themselves to their several businesses, as on other days. As for the greater
Towns there is scarce any of them wherein there are not Fairs and Markets,
Kirk-masses, as they use to call them, upon the Sunday: and those as much
frequented in the afternoon, as were the Churches in the forenoon. A thing from
which they could not hold, not in Dort it self, what time the Synod was
assembled. Nor had it now been called upon, as it is most likely, had not
Amesius, and some other of the English Malcontents, scattered abroad Bounds
principles amongst the Netherlands, which they had sown before in England. And
certainly they had made as strong a faction there before this time, their
learned men beginning to bandy one against the other, in the debates about the
Sabbath; but that the livelihood of the States, consisting most on Trade and
Traffic, cannot spare any day, Sunday no more than any other, from venting
their commodities, and providing others. So that in general, the Lords day is
no otherwise observed with them (though somewhat better than it was twelve
years ago) than an Half-holiday is with us: the Morning though not all of that,
unto the Church; the afternoon, to their Employments. So for the French and
German Churches, we may perceive by their Divines, Calvin, and Beze, and Martin
Bucer who do so highly charge the Romanists, for the restraint of working on
the Lords day; that they were well enough content to allow the same. And for
the Churches of the Switzers, Resp. ad Va^. Gentilem.
Zuinglius avoweth it to be lawful, Die dominico peractis sacris laboribus
incumbere, On the Lords day after the end of Divine Service, for any man to
follow and pursue his labors, as commonly we do, says he, in the time of
Harvest. Indeed the Polish Churches formerly decreed in two several Synods, the
one at Cracow, An. 1573. the other at Petricow, Ann. 1578. Vt Domini in suis
ditionibus prohibeant Dominicis diebus nundinas annuas and septimanales, That
Lords of Mannours (as we call them) should not permit on the Lords day either
Fairs or Markets in any of the Towns unto them belonging: Neque iisdem diebus
colonos suos ullos laboribus aut vecturis onerent; nor on those days employ
their Tenants in carriages, or such servile labors. But this was rather done
to please the Lutherans, amongst whom, and those of the Communion of the Church
of Rome, under whom they live, than out of any principle or example of those
Churches, whom they chiefly followed. For Recreations last of all, there is no
question to be made, but that where working is permitted, and most kind of
business, a man may lawfully enjoy himself and his honest pleasures; and
without danger of offense, pursue those pastimes by which the mind may be
refreshed, and the spirits quickened. Already have we told you what the custom
is in the Palatine Churches. And for the Belgic, besides it was before
declared from the Synod of Dort, touching the usual spending of that day in
Games and Drinking-matches; S^^ps. (...) a^p. 81. n. 58.
their four great Doctors, Polyander, Ryvet, Thysius, and Walaeus, make
Recreation to be part of the Sabbaths rest, Et inter fines Sabbati esse, and to
be reckoned as a principal intent thereof. Even in Geneva it self, the Mother
Church unto the rest, as Robert Johnson tells us in his enlargement of Boterus,
All honest exercises, Shooting in Pieces, Long-bows, Cross-bows, etc. are used
on the Sabbath day, and that in the morning both before and after Sermon:
neither do the Ministers find fault therewith, so they hinder not from hearing
of the Word at the time appointed. Indeed there is no reason why they should
find fault, the practice so directly rising upon their principles.

Dancing indeed they do not suffer, Geneva or the French Churches (though not
prohibited for ought I can learn, in either Germany, or any of the Lutheran
Kingdoms;) but this not in relation to the day, but the sport it self, which
absolutely they have forbidden on all days whatever. Calvin took great offense
thereat (of so austere a life would he have the People) and kept a great ado
about it in Geneva, when he lived amongst them; Epist. ad Farel.
as he does thus relate the story to his friend Farellus, Corneus, and Perinus,
two of special power and quality in that City, together with one Heinrichus,
one of the Elders of the Church, a Syndic (which is one of the four chief
Officers of the Commonwealth) and some others of their friends, being merry at
an Invitation, fell to dancing. Notice hereof being given to Calvin, by some
false brother, they were all called into the Consistory, excepting Corneus and
Perinus; and being interrogated thereupon, Impudenter Deo and nobis mentiti
sunt; they lied, says he, most impudently unto God and us. (Most Apostolically
said.) At that (says he) I grew offended, as the indignity of the thing
deserved; and they persisting in their contumacy, Censui ut jure-jurando ad
very confessionem adigerentur. I thought it fit to put them to their Oaths
about it. So said, so done, and they not only did confess their former dancing,
but that that very day they had been dancing in the house of one Balthasats
Widow. On his confession he proceeded unto the censure which certainly was
sharp enough for so small a fault (for a fault it was, if he would have it:)
the Syndick being displaced, the Elder turned out of his office, Perryn and his
Wife both clapped in Prison, and all the rest, pudore confusi, put to open shame.
This was in Anno 1546. And afterward, considering how much he disliked it,
their Ministers and Preachers cried down dancing as a most sinful and
unchristian pastime, and published diverse tracts against it. At last in Anno
1571. it was concluded in a Synod held at Rochel, and made to be a part of
their public discipline, viz. that all Congregations should be admonished by
their Ministers seriously to reprehend and suppress all Dances, Mummeries, and
Enterludes: As also that all Dancing-masters, or those who make any dancing
meetings, after they have been often admonished to desist, ought to be
excommunicate for that their contumacy and disobedience. Which rigidness of
theirs, as it is conceived, considering how the French do delight in Dancing,
Dallingtons ^^ew of (...).
has been no small impediment unto the general entertainment of the reformed
Religion in that Kingdom. So great is their delight therein, and with such
eagerness they pursue it, when they are at leisure from their business; that as
it seems, they do neglect the Church on the Holy Days, that they may have the
more time to attend their Dancing. Upon which ground it was, (...)
and not that Dancing was conceived to be no lawful sport for the Lords day,
that in the Council of Sens, Anno 1524. in that of Paris, Anno 1557. in those
of Rhemes, and Tours, Anno 1583. and finally in that of Bourges, Anno 1584.
dancing on Sundays, and the other Holy Days has been prohibited; prohibited
indeed, but practiced by the People, notwithstanding all their Canons. But this
concerns the French and their Churches only, our Northern Nations not being so
bent upon the sport, as to need restraint. Only the Polish Churches did
conclude in the Synod of Petricow before remembered, that Tavern-meetings,
Drinking-matches, Dice, Cards, and such like pastimes, as also Musical
Instruments and Dances should on the Lords day be forbidden. But then it
follows with this clause, Praesertim eo temporis momento quo concio and
cultus divinus in temple peragitur, especially at that instant time, when men
should be at Church to hear the Sermon, and attend Gods worship. Which clearly,
shows that they prohibited dancing, and the other pastimes then recited, no
otherwise than as they were a means to keep men from Church. Probably also they
might be induced unto it by such French Protestants as came into that Country
with the Duke of Anjou, when he was chosen King of Poland, Anno. 1574. which
was four years before this Council.

As for the Churches of the East, being now heavily oppressed with Turkish
bondage, Saturday continues in the same regard, wherein once it was: both of
them counted days of Feasting, and both retained for the Assemblies of the
Church. First, that they are both days of Feasting, or at the least exempted
from their public Fasts, appears by that which is related by Christopher
Angelo, a Grecian, whom I knew in Oxford, De institut. Graec. c. 16.
(...), that on the Saturday and Sunday, which we call the Lords day, they do
both eat Oil and drink Wine, even in Lent it self, whereas on other days they
feed on Pulse, and drink only water. Then that they both are still retained for
the Assemblies of the Church, with other Holy Days, he tells us in another
place; where it is said, Id. c. 17.
(...), etc. that for the Lords days, and the Saturday, and the other
Festivals, they use to go unto the Church on the Eve before, and almost at
midnight, where they continue till the breaking up of the Congregation. For the
Egyptian Christians, or Cophties, as we call them now, it is related by G.
Sandys, Travels l. 2.
That on the Saturday presently after midnight, they repair unto their
Churches, where they remain well nigh until Sunday at noon; during which time,
they neither sit nor kneel, but support themselves on Crutches; and that they
sing over the most part of David's Psalms at every meeting, with diverse parcels
of the Old and New Testament. He has informed us also of the Armenians,
another sort of Eastern Christians, that coming into the place of the Assembly
on Sunday in the afternoon, he found one sitting in the midst of the
Congregation, in habit not differing from the rest, reading on a Bible in the
Chaldean tongue; that anon after came the Bishop in an Hood or Vest of black,
with a staff in his hand: that first he prayed, and then sung certain Psalms
assisted by two or three; after, all of them singing jointly, at interims
praying to themselves; the Bishop all this while, with his hands erected, and
face toward the Altar: That service being ended, they all kissed his hand, and
bestowed their Alms, he laying his other hand on their heads and blessing them;
finally, that bidding the succeeding Fasts and Festivals, he dismissed the
Assembly. The Muscovites being near unto the Greeks, once within the
jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople, partake much also of their
customs. They count it an unlawful thing to fast the Saturday, Gagvinus de
Moscovit.
which shows that somewhat is remaining of that esteem, in which once they had
it; and for the Holy Days, Sundays as well as any other, they do not hold
themselves so strictly to them, but that the Citizens and Artificers,
immediately after Divine Service, betake themselves unto their labor and
domestic businesses. And this, most probably, is the custom also of all the
Churches of the East, as holding a Communion with the Church of Greece, though
not subordinate thereunto: From the which Church of Greece, the faith was first
derived unto these Muscovites, as before was said; and with the faith, the
observation of this day, and all the other Holy Days at that time in use. As
for the Country people, as Gagvinus tells us, they seldom celebrate or observe
any day at all, at least not with that care and order as they ought to do;
saying, that it belongs only unto Lords and Gentlemen to keep Holy Days. Last
of all, for the Habassines, or Ethiopian Christians, though further off in
situation; they come as near unto the fashions of the ancient Grecians.
Enquiries c. 23
Of them we are informed by Master Brerewood out of Damiani, that they
reverence the Sabbath, keeping it solemn equally with the Lords day. Emend.
Temp. lib. 7.
Scaliger tells us that they call both of them by the name of Sabbaths; the one
the first, the other the later Sabbath: or in their own language, the one
Sanbath Sachristos, that is, Christ's Sabbath; the other Sanbath Judi, or the
Jews Sabbath. Bellarmine thinks that they derived this observation of the
Saturday or Sabbath from the Constitutions ascribed to Clemens; which indeed
frequently do press the observation of that day with no less fervor than the
Sunday. ^e Script Ecclin. Clem.
Of this we have already spoken. And to this Bellarmine was induced the rather,
because that in the Country they had found authority, and were esteemed as
Apostolical. Audio Ethiopes his Constitutionibus uti, ut vere Apostolocis, and
ea de causa in erro^ibus versari, circa cultum Sabbati, and diei Dominicae. But
if this be an error in them, they have many partners; and those of ancient
standing in the Church of God, as before was shown. As for their service on the
Sunday, they celebrate the Sacrament in the morning early, except it be in the
time of Lent: when fasting all the day, they discharge that duty in the
Evening, and then fall to meat; as the same Scaliger has recorded. So having
looked over all the residue of the Christian World, and found no Sabbath in the
same, except only nominal, and that as well upon the Saturday as upon the
Sunday; it is now time we turned our course, and set sail for England, where we
shall find as little of it as in other places, until that forty years ago, no
more, some men began to introduce a Sabbath thereunto, in hope thereby to
countenance and advance their other projects.

CHAP. VII. In what estate the Lords day stood in this Isle of Britain, from
the first Planting of Religion to the Reformation.
1. What does occur about the Lords day, and the other Festivals, amongst the
Churches of the Britains. 2. Of the estate of the Lords day, and the other
Holy Days in the Saxon Heptarchy. 3. The honors done unto the Sunday and the
other Holy Days, by the Saxon Monarchs. 4. Of the public actions Civil,
Ecclesiastical, mixed, and Military, done on the Lords day, under the first six
Norman Kings. 5. New Sabbath Doctrins broached in England, in King John's Reign;
and the miraculous original of the same. 6. The prosecution of the former
story, and ill success therein of the undertakers. 7. Restraint of worldly
business on the Lords day, and the other Holy Days, admitted in those times, in
Scotland. 8. Restraint of certain servile works on Sundays, Holy Days, and the
Wakes, concluded in the Council of Oxon, under Henry III. 9. Husbandry and
Legal process, prohibited on the Lords day first, in the Reign of Edward III.
10. Selling of Wools on the Lords day, and the solemn Feasts, forbidden first
by the said King Edward, as after, Fairs and Markets generally, by King Henry
VI. 11. The Cordwainers of London restrained from selling their Wares on the
Lords day, and some other Festivals, by King Edward IV. and the repealing of
that Act by King Henry VIII. 12. In what estate the Lords day stood, both for
the doctrine and the practice, in the beginning of the Reign of the said King
Henry.


AND now at last we are for England, and are by Act of Parliament so far still
in force, as they oppose not the Prerogative Royal, or the municipal Laws and
Statutes of this Realm of England. Now that we may the better see how it has
been adjudged of here, and what has been decreed ordome touching the Lords
day, and the other Holy Days; we will ascend as high as possibly we can, even
to the Church and Empire of the Britains. Of them indeed we find not much, and
that delivered in as little; it being said of them by Beda, Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
that in the time of Constantine they did dies festos celebrare, observe those
Holy Days which were then in use; which, as before we said, were Easter,
Whitsontide, the Feasts of Christ's Nativity, and his Incarnation every year;
together with the Lords day weekly. And yet it may be thought that in those
times the Lords day was not here of any great account, in that they kept the
Feast of Easter after the fashion of the Churches, in the Eastern parts, decima
quarta luna, on what day of the week soever: which certainly they had not done,
had the Lords day obtained amongst them that esteem, which generally it had
found in the Western Churches. And howsoever a late writer of Ecclesiastical
History, endeavor to acquit the Britains of these first Ages from the
erroneous observation of that Feast, Brought. hist. l. 4. c. 13.
and make them therein followers of the Church of Rome: yet I conceive not that
his proofs come home to make good his purpose. For where it is his purpose to
prove, by computation, that that erroneous observation came not in amongst the
Britains till 30 years before the entrance of S. Austin, and his associates
into this Island; and for that end has brought a passage out of Beda, touching
the continuance of that custom: It Is plain that Beda speaks not of the
British, but the Scottish Christians. Permansit autem apud eos [ the
Scottish-Irish Christians, as himself confesseth] hujusmodi observantia
Paschalis tempore non pauco, hoc est usque ad annum Domini. 717. per annos 150.
which was (as he computes it somewhat near the point) but 30 years before the
entrance of that Austin. Now for the Scots, it is apparent that they received
not the faith till the year of Christ 430, (not to say any thing of the time
wherein they first set footing in this Island, which was not very long before:)
and probably might about that time, of which Beda speaks, receive the custom of
keeping Easter from the Britains, who were next neighbors to them, and a long
time lived mingled with them. But for the Britains, it is most certain that
they had longer been accustomed to that observation; though for the time
thereof, whether it came in with the first plantation of the Gospel here, we
will not contend, as not pertaining to the business which we have in hand.
Suffice it, that the Britains anciently were observant of those public
Festivals which had been generally entertained in the Church of God: though for
the time of celebrating the Feast of Easter, they might adhere more unto one
Church than unto another. As for the Canon of the Council of Nice, Anno 198.
which is there alleged, Baronius rightly has observed out of Athanasius,
that notwithstaning both the Canon and the Emperors Edicts thereupon: tamen
etiam postea, Syros, Cilices, and Mesopotamios, in eodem errore permansisse,
the Syrians, Cilicians, and Mesopotamians, continued in their former errors.
And why not then the Britains, which lay farther off, as well as those that
dwelt so near the then Regal City?

Proceed we next unto the Saxons, Rome, so did they therewithal, receive such
institutions as were at that time generally entertained in the Roman Church;
the celebration of the Lords day, and the other Festivals, which were allowed
of and observed, when Gregory the Great attained the Popedom. And here, to take
things as they lie in order, we must begin with a narration concerning
Westminster, which for the prettiness of the story I will here insert. Sebert
the first Christian King of the East Saxons, having built that Church unto the
honor of God, and memory of Saint Peter, invited Mellitus Bishop of London,
Adredus de Gestis Edwardi.
on a day appointed unto the consecration of it. The night before, S. Peter
coming to the further side, crosses the Ferry, goes into the Church, and with
a great deal of celestial music, lights, and company, performs that office;
for the dispatch of which Mellitus had been invited. This done, and being
wafted back to the further side, he gives the Ferri-man for his fare a good
draught of Fishes, only commanding him, to carry one of them, which was the
best for price and beauty, for a present from him to Mellitus, in testimony
that the work was done to his hand already. Then telling who he was, he adds,
that he and his Posterity, the whole race of Fishermen should be long after
stored with that kind of Fish; tantum ne ultra piscari audeatis in die
Dominica; provided always that they fished no more upon the Sunday. Aldredus so
reports the story. And though it might be true, as unto the times wherein he
lived, (which was in the declining of the twelfth Century) that Fishing on the
Lords day was restrained by Law; yet sure he placed this story ill, in giving
this injunction from St. Peter in those early days, when such restraints were
hardly settled; if in a Church new planted they had yet been spoken of. Leaving
this therefore as a fable, let us next look on Beda, what he has left us of
this day, in reference to our Ancestors of the Saxons-Race: and many things we
find in him, worth our observation. Before we showed you, how the Sunday was
esteemed a Festival, that it was judged heretical to hold Fasts thereon. Hist.
l. 3. c. 23.
This Ordinance came in amongst us with the faith it self. S. Chadd, having a
place designed him by King Oswald, to erect a Monastery, did presently retire
unto it, in the time of Lent: In all which time, Dominica excepta, the Lords
day excepted, he fasted constantly till the Evening, as the story tells us. The
like is told of Adamannus, Hist. l. 4. c. 25.
one of the Monastery of Coldingham, now in Scotland, (but then accounted part
of the Kingdom of Northumberland,) that he did live in such a strict and
abstemious manner, ut nil unquam cibi vel potus, excepta die Dominica, and
quinta Sabbati perciperet; that he did never eat nor drink but on the Sunday
and Thursday only. This Adamannus lived in Anno 690. Before we showed you, with
what profit Music had been brought into the Church of God: and hither it was
brought, it seems, (...) hist. l. 2. c. 20.
with the first preaching of the Gospel. Beda relates it of Paulinus, that when
he was made Bishop of Rochester, which was in Anno 631. he left behind him in
the North one James a Deacon, cantandi in Ecclesia peritissimum, a man
exceeding perfect in Church Music: who taught them there that form of singing
Divine Service, which which he learnt in Canterbury. And after in the year 668,
what time Archbishop Theodorus made his Metropolitical visitationn, Lib. 4. c.
2.
the Art of singing Service, which was then only used in Kent (for in the North
it had not been so settled, but that it was again forgotten) was generally taken
up over all the Kingdom. Sonos cantandi in Ecclesia, quos eatenusin Cantica
tantum noverant, ab hoc tempore per omnes Anglorum Ecclesias dicere coeperunt,
as that Author has it. Before we showed, how Pope Vitalianus, Anno 653. added
the Organ to that vocal Music, which was before in use in the Church of
Christ, In less than 30 years after, and namely in the year 679. were they
introduced by Pope Agatho, into the Churches of the English: and have continued
in the same well near 1000 years, without interruption. Before we showed you,
how some of the greater Festivals, were in esteem before the Sunday: Bed. Eccl.
hist. l. 4. c. 19.
and that it was so even in the Primitive times. And so it also was in the
Primitive times of this Church of England: it being told us of Qu. Etheldreda,
that after she had put her self into a Monastery, she never went unto the
Bathes praeter imminentibus soleniis majoribus, but on the approach of the
greater Festivals, such as were Easter, Pentecost, and Christmas; for so I
think he means there by Epiphanie: as also, that unless it were on the greater
Festivals she did not use to eat, above once, a day. This plainly shows, that
Sunday was not reckoned for a greater Festival; that other days were in the
opinion and esteem above it: and makes it evident withal, that they conceived
not that the keeping of the Lords day, was to be accounted as a part of the law
of Nature; or introduced into the Church, by divine Authority, but by the same
Authority that the others were. Ap. Lambert. Archaion.
For Laws in these times made, we meet with none but those of Ina, a West Saxon
King, who entered on his Reign Anno 712. A Prince exceedingly devoted to the
Church of Rome, and therefore apt enough to embrace any thing, which was there
concluded. By him it was enacted, in the form that follows, Servus si quid
operis patrarit die Dominico, ex praecepto Domini sui, liber esto, etc. If a
servant work on the Lords day, by the appointment of his Master, he was to be
set free, and his Master was to forfeit 30 shillings: but of he worked without
such order from his Master, to be whipped, or mulcted. Liber si hoc die
operetur injussu Domini sui, etc. So if a Freeman worked that day, without
direction from his Master, he either was to be made a Bondsman, or pay 60
shillings. As for the Doctrine of these times, In Luc. 59.
we may best judge of that by Beda. First for the Sabbath, that he tell us, ad
Mosis usque tempora caeterorum dierum similis erat, was merely like the other
days until Moses time, no difference at all between them: therefore not
institute and observed in the beginning of the World, as some teach us now.
Next for the Lords day, that he makes an Apostolical sanction only, no Divine
Commandment; as before we noted: and how far Apostolical sanctions bind, we may
clearly see, by that which they determined in the Council of Jerusalem. Of
these two Specialties, we have spoken already.

This is the most we find in the Saxon Heptarchie; Saxon Monarchy. In this we
meet with Alured first, the first that brought this Realm in order, Lambert.
Archaion.
who in his Laws cap. de diebus festis and solennibus, reckons up certain
days in which it was permitted unto Freemen to enjoy their Festival liberty, as
the phrase there is: servis autem and iis qui sunt legitima officiorum
servitute astricti, non item, but not to slaves, and such as were in service
unto other men, viz. the twelve days after Christ's Nativity, dies ille quo
Christus subegit diabolum, the day wherein our Savior overcame the Devil; the
Festival of Saint Gregory, seven days before Easter, and as many after, the
Festival day of Saint Peter and Paul, the week before our Lady day in Harvest,
All Hallowtide, and the four Wednesdays in the Ember-weeks. Where note how many
other days, were privileged in the self-same manner, as the Lords day was; in
case that be the day then spoken of, wherein our Savior overcame the Devil, as
I think it is: as also that this privilege extended unto Freemen only, servants
and bondmen being left in the same condition as before they were; to spend all
days alike in their Masters businesses. This Alured began his Reign, Anno 871.
and after him succeeded Edward, surnamed the Elder, in the year 900. who in a
league between himself and Gunthrun King of the Danes in England, did publicly
on both sides prohibit, as well all markettings on the Sunday, as other kind of
work whatsoever on the other Holy days. Dacus si die Dominico quicquam fuerit
mercatus, reipsa, and Oris praeterea 12 mulctator; Anglus 30 solidos numerato,
etc. If a Dane bought any thing on the Lords day, he was to forfeit the thing
bought, and to pay 12 Oras, (every Ora being the fifteenth part of a pound) an
Englishman doing the like to pay 30 shillings. A Freeman if he did any work,
die quocunque festo, on any of the Holy days, was forthwith to be made a
Bondsman, or to redeem himself with Money; a Bondslave to be beaten for it, or
redeem his beating with his Purse. The Master also whether that he were
Englishman or Dane, if he compelled his servants to work on any of the Holy
days, was to answer for it. So when it had been generally received in other
places to begin the Sunday-service on the Eve before, it was enacted by King
Edgar, surnamed the Peaceable, who began his Reign. An. 959. diem Sabbati, ab
ipsa die Saturni hora pomeridiana tertia, usque in lunaris diei diluculum,
festum agitari: that the Sabbath should begin on Saturday, at three of the
clock in the afternoon, (and not as Fox relates it in his Acts and Monuments,
at nine in the morning) and so hold on till day break, on Monday. Where, by the
way, though it be dies Sabbati in the Latin, yet in the Saxon Copy, it is only
Healde, the Holy day. After this Edgars death, the Danes so plagued this Realm,
that there was nothing settled in it either in Church or State, till finally
they had won the Garland, and obtained the Kingdom. The first of these,
Canutus, an heroic Prince; of whom it is affirmed by Malmesbury, omnes leges
ab antiquis regibus, and maxim sub Etheldredo latas, that he commanded all
those Laws to be observed which had been made by any of the former Kings, (and
those before remembered amongst the rest, of which see the 42. of his
Constitutions;) especially by Etheldred his predecessor: and that upon a
grievous mulct, to be laid on such, who should disobey them. These are the Laws
which afterward were called K. Edwards, non quod ille statuerit, sed quod
observarit, not because he enacted them, but that he caused them to be kept. Of
these more anon. Besides which Laws so brought together, there were some others
made at Winchester by this King Canutus: and amongst others, this, that on the
Lords day there should be no markettings, no Courts, or public meetings of the
people for civil businesses: Leg. 14.15.
as also that all men abstein from Hunting, and from all kind of earthly work.
Yet was there an exception too, nisi flagitante necessitate, in cases of
necessity, wherein it was permitted both to buy and sell and for the people to
meet together in their Courts. For so it passes in the Law, Die Dominico
mercata concelebrari, populive conventus agi, nisi flagitante necessitate
planissime vetamus: ipso praeterea die sacrosancto a venatione, and opere
terreno prorsus omni, quisque abstineto. Not that it is to be supposed, as some
would have it, that he intended Sunday for a Sabbath day, for entering on the
Crown A. 1017. he did no more than what had formerly been enacted by Charles
the Great, and several Councils after him: Lib. 6. c. 29.
none of which dreamed of any Sabbath. Besides it is affirmed of this Canutus,
by Otho Frisingensis, that in the year 1027. he did accompany the Emperor
Conrade at his Coronation on an Easter day; which questionless he would not
have done, knowing those kind of Pomps to be merely civil, and to have in them
much of ostentation; had he intended any Sabbath, when he restrained some works
on Sunday. But to make sure work of it, without more ado, the Laws by him
collected, which we call St. Edwards, make the matter plain: where Sunday has
no other privilege than the other Feasts; and which is more, is ranked below
them. The Law is thus entitled, Rog. de Hoveden. in Henri^. secundo.
De temporibus and diebus pacis Domini Regis, the Text as follows. Ab adventu
Domini usque ad octavam Epiphaniae, pax Dei and Ecclesiae, per omne regnum,
etc. From Advent to the Octavei of Epiphanie; Let no man's Person be molested,
nor no Suit be pursued: the like from Septuagesima, to Low-sunday; and so from
Holy Thursday to the next Sunday after Whitsontide. Item omnibus Sabbatis ab
hora nona usque ad diem Lunae, etc. The like on Saturdays from three in the
afternoon until Monday morning; as also on the Eves of the Virgin Mary, S. John
the Baptist, all the holy Apostles; of such particular Saints whose Festivals
are published in the Churches on the Sunday mornings; the Eve of All Saints in
November from three of the clock, till the solemnity be ended. As also that no
Christian be molested, going to Church for his Devotions, or returning thence:
or traveling to the dedication of any new erected Church, or to the Synods, or
any public Chapter meeting. Thus was it with the Lords day, as with many
others, in S. Edwards Laws; which after were confirmed and ratified by King
Henry the second, after they had long been neglected.

Now go we forwards to the Normans, Lords day; whether they either took or
meant it for a Sabbath. And first beginning with the Reign of the first six
Kings, we find them times of action, and full of troubles, as it does use to be
in unsettled States: no Law recorded to be made touching the keeping of this
day; but many actions of great note to be done upon it. These we will rank for
orders sake under these five Heads: 1. Coronations, 2. Synods Ecclesiastical,
3. Councils of Estate, 4. Civil business, and 5. Battles and Assaults; which we
shall sum up briefly in their place and time. And first for Coronations, which
as before I said, are mixed kind of actions, compound of sacred and of civil:
William, surnamed Rufus, was crowned at Canterbury by Archbishop Lanfrancke,
the 25 of September. being Sunday; Anno 1087. So was King Stephen, the 21 of
December. being Sunday too, Anno 1135. On Sunday before Christmas day was Henry
the second crowned at London, by Archbishop Theobald, Anno 1155. and on the
Sunday before Septuagesima, his Daughter Joane was, at Palermo, crowned Queen
of Sicily. Of Richard the first it is recorded, that hoysing Sail from
Barbeflet in Normandy, he arrived safely here upon the Sunday, before our Lady
day in Harvest: whence setting toward London, there met him his Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, and Barons, cum copiosa militum multitudine, with a great
multitude of Knightly rank; by whose advise and Council he was crowned on a
Sunday, in September following, Anno 1189. and after crowned a second time on
his return from Thraldom and the Holy Land, Anno 1194. on a Sunday too. The
Royal and magnificent form of his first Coronation, they who list to see, may
find it most exactly represented in Rog. de Hoveden. And last of all King John,
was first inaugurated Duke of Normandy, by Walter Archbishop of Roane, the
Sunday after Easter day, Anno 1200. and on a Sunday after crowned King of
England, together with Isabel his Queen, by Hubert at that time Archbishop of
Canterbury. For Synods next, Anno 1070. A Council was assembled at Winchester,
by the appointment of King William the first, and the consent of Alexander then
Pope of Rome, for the degrading of Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury: and this
upon the Sunday next after Easter. And we find mention of a Synod called by
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 1175. the Sunday before holy Thursday:
ad quod concilium venerunt fere omnes Episcopi and Abbates Cantuariensis
dioeceseos; where were assembled almost all the Bishops and Abbots of the whole
Province. For Councils of Estate, there was a solemn meeting called on Trinity
Sunday, Anno 1143. in which assembled Maud the Empress, and all the Lords which
held her party; where the Ambassadors from Anjou gave up their account: and
thereupon it was concluded, that the Earl of Gloucester should be sent thither
to negotiate his Sisters business. So in the year 1185, when some Ambassadors
from the East, had offered to King Henry the second, the Kingdom of Jerusalem;
the King designed the first Sunday in Lent for his day of answer. Upon which
day there met at London, the King, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Bishops,
Abbots, Earls, and Barons of the Realm of England; as also William King of
Scotland, and his Brother David, with the Earls and Barons of the Country: and
habito inde cum deliberatione concilio, etc. and then and there upon mature
deliberation, it was concluded, that though the King accepted not the Title,
yet he would give his people leave, to put themselves into the action, and take
up the Cross. For civil Business of another nature, we find it on Record that
on the fourth Sunday in Lent, next following, the same King Henry Knighted his
Son John, and sent him forthwith into Ireland: Knighthood at those times being
far more full of ceremony, than now it is. Which being but a preparation to War
and military matters, leads us unto such Battles, as in these times were fought
on Sunday. Of which we find it in our Annals, that in the year 1142. upon a
Sunday being Candlemas day, King Stephen was taken prisoner at the battle of
Lincoln: as also that on Holy-Cross day next after, being Sunday too, Robert
Earl of Gloucester, Commander of the adverse force, was taken Prisoner at the
battle of Winchester. So read we that on Sunday the 25th. of August, Anno 1173.
the King of France besieged and forced the Castle of Dole in Britain,
belonging to the King of England: As also that on Sunday the 26th. of September.
Anno 1198. King Richard took the Castle of Curceles from the King of France.
More of the kind might be remembered, were not these sufficient, to show how
anciently it has been the use of the Kings of England to create Knights, and
hold their Councils of estate on the Lords day, as now they do. Were not the
others here remembered, sufficient to let us know that our Progenitors did not
think so superstitiously of this day, as not to come upon the same unto the
Crowning of their Kings, or the public Synods of the Church; or if need were,
and their occasions so required it, to fight as well on the Lords day, as on
any other. Therefore no Lords day Sabbath hitherto, in the Realm of England.

Not hitherto indeed. But in the Age that followed next, Fulco, a French
Priest, and a notable Hypocrite, Rog. de Hoteden.
as our King Richard counted him, and the story proves, lighted upon a new
Sabbatarian fancy; which one of his Associates, Eustathius Abbat of Flay, in
Normandy, was sent to scatter here in England: but finding opposition to his
doctrine, he went back again, the next year after, being 1202. he comes better
fortified, preaching from town to town, and from place to place, ne quis forum
rerum venalium diebus Dominicis exerceret, that no man should presume to market
on the Lords day. Where by the way we may observe, that notwithstanding all the
Canons and Edicts before remembered in the fifth Chapter of this book, and the
third Section of this Chapter, the English kept their markets on the Lords day,
as they had done formerly, as neither being bound to those which had been made
by foreign states; or such as being made at home, had long before been cut in
pieces by the sword of the Norman Conqueror. Now for the easier bringing of the
people to obey their dictates they had to show, a warrant sent from God
himself, as they gave it out. The title this, Mandatum sanctum Dominicae diei
quod de coelo venit in Jerusalem, etc. An holy mandat touching the Lords day,
which came down from Heaven unto Jerusalem, found on S. Simeons Altar in
Golgotha, where Christ was Crucified for the sins of all the world; which lying
there three days, and as many nights, struck with such terror all that saw it,
that falling on the ground, they besought Gods mercy. At last the Patriarch,
and Akarias the Archbishop (of I know not whence) ventured to take into their
bands that dreadful letter, which was written thus. Now wipe your eyes and look
a while on the Contents, which I shall render with as much brevity as the thing
requires. Ego Dominus qui praecepi vobis ut observaretis diem sanctum
Dominicum, and non custodistis eum, etc. I am the Lord which has commanded to
keep holy the Lords day, and you have not kept it, neither repented of your
sins, etc. I caused Repentance to be preached unto you, and you believed not.
Thent sent I Pagans amongst you, etc. and because you did not keep the Lords
day holy, I punished you a while with famine, etc. Therefore I charge you all,
that from the ninth hour on the Saturday, until Sun rising on the Monday, no
man presume to do any work but what is good; or if he do, that he repent him of
the same. Verily I say and swear unto you by my Seat and Throne, and by the
Cherubins that keep my seat, that if you do not harken to this my Mandat, I
will no more send to you any other Epistle; but I will open the heavens, and
rain upon you stones, and wood, and scalding water, etc. This I avow, that you
shall die the death, for the Lords day and other festivals of my Saints, which
you have not kept: and I will send amongst you Beasts, with the heads of Lions,
and the hair of Women, and the tails of Camels; and they shall eat you and
devour you. There is a great deal more of this wretched stuff, but I am weary
of abusing both my pains and patience. Only I cannot choose but wish that those
who have enlarged their Lords day Sabbath to the same extent, would either show
us some such letter, or bring us any of the miracles which hereafter follow; or
otherwise be pleased to lengthen out the Festivals of the Saints in the self
same manner, as by this goodly Script they are willed to do.

But to procced, the said Eustathius thus furnished, and having found but ill
success the former year, in the Southern parts, where he did Angliae Praelatos
praedicatione sua molestare, disturb the Prelates by his preachings, as my
Author has it; he went up to York. There did he preach his doctrins, and
absolve such as had offended; conditioned that hereafter they did show more
reverence unto the Lords day, and the other Holy days, doing no servile works
upon them; nec in diebus Dominicis exercerent forum rerum venalium;
particularly, that on the Lords day they should hold no Markets. The people
hereunto assented, and promised they would neither buy nor sell on the Lords
day, nisi forte cibum and potum praetereuntibus, excepting meat and drink to
passengers. Whereby it seems, that notwithstanding all this terror, men were
permitted yet to travel on the Lords day, as they had occasion. This coming to
the notice of the King and Council, my men were all fetched up; such specially
qui in diebus Dominicis forum rerum venalium dejecerant, which had disturbed
the Markets, and overthrown the Booths and Merchandise on the Lords day, and
made to fine unto the King for their misdemeanour. Then were they fain to have
recourse to pretended miracles. A Carpenter making a wooden Pin, and a Woman
making up her Web, both after three on Saturday in the afternoon, are suddenly
smitten with the Palsy. A certain man of Nafferton, baking a Cake on Saturday
night, and keeping part until the morrow, no sooner brake it for his breakfast,
but it gushed out blood. A Miller of Wakefield, grinding Corn on Saturday,
after three of the clock, instead of Meal, found his Bin full of Blood, his
Mill-wheel standing still of its own accord. One or two more there are of the
same edition. And so I think is that related in the Acts and Monuments, out of
an old Book entitled de Regibus Angliae; which, now I am fallen upon these
fables, shall be joined with them: King Henry the Second, says the story,
being at Cardiffe in Wales, and being to take horse, there stood a certain man
by him, having on him a white Coat, and being barefoot, who looked upon the
King, and spoke in this wise: Good old King, John Baptist and Peter straightly
charge you, that on the Sundays throughout all your Dominions, there be no
buying or selling, nor any other servile business (those only except which
appertain to the preparation of meat and drink) which thing if thou shall
observe, whatsoever thing thou take in hand, thou shall happily finish.
Adding withal, that unless he did these things, and amend his life, he should
hear such news within the twelve-moneth, as would make him mourn till his dying
day. But to conclude, what was the issue of all this, Hoveden.
this terrible letter and forged miracles? That the Historian tells us with no
small regret, informing us, that notwithstanding all these miracles, whereby
God did invite the people to observe this day: Populus plus timens regiam
potestatem, quam divinam, the people fearing more the Kings power than Gods,
returned unto their Marketting, as before they did.

I say that the Historian tells it with no small regret; inimicus humani
generis, the Devil envying the proceedings of this holy man so far, so
possessed the King and the Princes of darkness (so he calls the Council) that
they forthwith proceeded against them who had obeyed him. Which makes me think
that this Eustathius was a familiar of the Popes, sent hither for the
introducing of those restraints which had been formerly imposed on most parts
of Christendom; though here they found no entertainment, the Popes had found
full well how ill their justlings had succeeded hitherto with the Kings of
England, of the Norman race; and therefore had recourse to their wonted arts,
by prodigies and miracles to ensnare the people, and bring them so unto their
bent. And this I do the rather think, because that in the following year, Anno
1203. there was a Legate sent from Rome to William King of Scots, with several
presents, and many indulgences. Quae quoniam grato accepit animo, Hect. Boet.
lib. 13.
eodem concilio approbante decretum est, etc. Which he accepting very kindly,
it pleased him with the approbation of his Parliament at that time assembled,
to pass a Law, that Saturday from twelve at noon should be counted holy; and
that no man should deal in such worldly businesses as on the Feast-days were
forbidden. As also that at the sounding of the Bell, the People should be
busied only about holy actions, going to Sermons, hearing the Vespers, or the
Evensong; idque usque in diem Lunae facerent, and that they should continue
thus until Monday morning, a penalty being laid on those who should do the
contrary. So passed it then, and in the year 1214 some eleven years after, it
was enacted in a Parliament at Scone, Lex aquarum cap. 16.. 2.
under Alexander the third King of the Scots, that none should fish in any
waters, a die Sabbati post vesperas usque ad diem lunae post ortum solis, from
Saturday after Evening prayer, until Sunrising on the Monday. This after was
confirmed in the first Parliament of King James the first, and is to this day
called the Saturdays Slop. So easily did the Popes prevail with our now friends
of Scotland; that neither miracle, nor any special packet from the Court of
Heaven, was accounted necessary.

But here with us in England it was not so, John, that unhappy Prince; and had
in Canterbury an Archbishop of their own appointment, even that Steven Langton,
about whom so much strife was raised. Which notwithstanding, and that the King
was then a Minor, yet they proceeded here with great care and caution, and
brought the Holy Days into order, not by command, or any Decretal from Rome,
but by a Council held at Oxford, Ap. Lindwood
Anno 1222. where amongst other Ordinances tending unto the Government of the
Church, the Holy Days were divided into these three ranks. In the first rank
were those, quae omni veneratione servanda erant, which were to be observed
with all reverence and solemnity; of which sort were omnes dies Dominici, etc.
all Sundays in the year, the feast of Christ's Nativity, together with all
others now observed in the Church of England: as also all the Festivals of the
Virgin Mary, excepting that of her Conception which was left at large; with
diverse which have since been abrogated. And for conclusion, festum dedicationis
cujuslibet Ecclesiae in sua parochia, the Wakes or Feasts of Dedication of
particular Churches in their proper Parishes, are there determined to be kept
with the same reverence and solemnity, as the Sundays were. Nor was this of the
Wakes or Feasts of Dedication any new device; but such as could plead a fair
original from the Council held in Mentz, anno 813. If it went no higher. For in
a Catalogue there made of such principal feasts as annually were to be
observed, they reckon dedicationem templi, the consecration Feast, or Wake, as
we use to call it; and place it in no lower rank, in reference to the solemnity
of the same, than Easter, Whitsontide, and the rest of the greater Festivals.
Now at the first those Wakes or Feasts of dedication were either held upon the
very day on which, or the Saints day to which, they had been first consecrated.
But after finding that so many Holy days brought no small detriment to the
Commonwealth, it came to pass that generally these Wakes or Feasts of
dedication were respited until the Sunday following, as we now observe them. Of
the next rank of Feasts in this Council mentioned, were those which were by
Priest and Curate to be celebrated most devoutly, with all due performances;
minoribus operibus servilibus, secundum consuetudinem loci, illis diebus
interdictis, all servile works of an inferior and less important nature,
according to the custom of the place, being laid aside. Such were Saint Fabian
and Sebastian, and some twenty more, which are therein specified, but now out
of use: and amongst them the Festival of Saint George was one, which after in
the year 1414. was made by Chicheley, then Archbishop, a Majus duplex, and no
less solemnly to be observed than the Feast of Christmas. Of the last rank of
Feasts, were those in quibus post missam opera rusticana concedebantur, sed
antequam non; wherein it was permitted that men might after Mass pursue their
Country, businesses, though not before: and these were only the Octaves of
Epiphany, and of John the Baptist, and of Saint Peter, together with the
translations of Saint Benedict and Saint Martin. But yet it seems that on the
greater Festivals, those of the first rank, there was no restraint of Tillage
and of Shipping, if occasion were; and that necessity did require, though on
those days, Sundays and all before remembered, there was a general restraint of
all other works. For so it stands in the title prefixed before those
Festivals, haec sunt festa, in quibus, prohibitis aliis operibus, conceduntur
opera agriculturae and carrucarum. Where by the way, I have translated
carrucarum, shipping: the word not being put for Plough or Cart, which may make
it all one with the word foregoing, but for ships and sailing. Carruca,
signifies a Ship of the greater burden, such as to this day we call Carrects,
which first came from hence. And in this sense the word is to be found in an
Epistle writ by Gildas, Illis ad sua remeantibus emergunt certatim de
Carruchis, quibus sunt trans Scyticam vallem avecti. So then, as yet, Tillage
and Sailing were allowed of on the Sunday, if, as before I said, occasion were,
Math. Westmonaster.
and that necessity so required. Of other passages considerable in the Reign of
K. Henry III. the principal to this point and purpose, are his own Coronation,
on Whitsunday, anno 1220. two years before this Council, which was performed
with great solemnity and concourse of People. Next, his bestowing the order of
Knighthood on Richard de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, accompanied with forty
other gallants of great hopes and spirit, on Whitsunday too, Anno 1245. and
last of all, a Parliament Assembled on Mid-lent Sunday, Parliamentum
generalissimum, the Historian calls it the next year after.

This was a fair beginning, but they staid not here. Islippes (he was advanced
unto the Sea, Lindw. l. 2. tit. de feriis.
Anno 1349.) it was decreed de fratrum nostrorum consilio, with the assent and
counsel of all the Prelates then assembled, that on the principal Feasts
hereafter named, there should be generally a restraint through all the
Province, ab universis servilibus operibus etiam reipubl. utilibus, even from
all manner of servile works, though otherwise necessary to the Commonwealth.
This general restraint, in reference to the Sunday was to begin on Saturday
night, ab hora diei Sabbati vespertina, as the Canon goes, not a minute sooner:
and that upon good reason too, ne Judaicae superstitionis participes videamur,
lest if they did begin it sooner (as some now would have us) they might be
guilty of a Jewish superstition. the same to be observed in such other Feasts,
quae suas habent vigilias, whose Eves had formerly been kept. As also that the
like restraint should be observed upon the Feast of Christmas, S. Steven, S.
John, etc. and finally on the Wakes, or Dedication Feasts which before we spoke
of, Now for the works before prohibited, though necessary to the Common wealth,
as we may reckon Husbandry, and all things appertaining thereunto, so probably
we may reckon Law-days, and all public Sessions in Courts of Justice; in case
they had not been left off in former times, when as the Judges general being of
the Clergy, Fin^^ of the Law, l. 1. c. 3.
might in obedience to the Canon Law forbear their Sessions on those days, the
Lords day especially. For as our Sages in the Law have resolved it generally,
that day is to be exempt from such business, even by the Common Law, for the
solemnity thereof, to the intent that people may apply themselves to prayer,
and Gods public service. Particularly, Fitz-Herbert tells us that no plea
shall be holden Quindena Paschae, Not. Brevium, fol. 17. 1 Eli^ p. 168.
because it is always on the sunday, but it shall be holden crastino quindenae
paschae, on the morrow after. So Justice Dyer has resolved, that if a Writ of
scire facias out of the Common Pleas, bear Test on a Sunday, it is an error,
because that day is not dies juridicus in Banco. And so it is agreed amongst
them, that on a Fine levied with Proclamations according to the Statute of King
Henry VII. if any of the Proclamations be made on the Lords day, all of them
are to be accounted erroneous Acts. But to return unto the Canon where before
we left, however that Archbishop Langton formerly, and Islip at the present
time, had made these several restraints from all servile labors; yet they were
far enough from entertaining any Jewish fancy. The Canon last remembered, that
of Simon Islip does express as much. But more particularly and punctually we
may find what was the judgment of these times in a full declaration of the
same, in a Synod at Lambeth, what time John Peckham was Archbishop, which was
in Anno 1280. Lindw, l. 1. tit. de offic. Archipresb.
It was thus determined. Sciendum est quod obligatio ad feriandum in Sabbato
legali expiravit omnino, etc. It is to be understood that all manner of
obligation of resting on the legal Sabbath, as was required in the Old
Testament, is utterly expired with the other ceremonies. And it is now
sufficient in the New Testament, to attend Gods service upon the Lords days,
and the other Holy days, ad hoc Ecclesiastica authoritate deputatis, appointed
by the Church to that end and purpose. The manner of sanctifying all which
days, non est sumendus a superstitione Judaica, sed a Canonicis institutis, is
not to be derived from any Jewish superstition, but from the Canons of the
Church. This was exact and plain enough, and this was constantly the doctrine
of the Church of England. Joannes de Burgo, who lived about the end of K. Henry
VI. does almost word for word resolve it so in his Pupilla oculi, part 10. c.
11. D.

Yet find we not in these restraints, Edward III. cap, 14. it was accorded and
established, that showing of Wools shall be made at the Stapie every day of the
week, except the Sunday and the solemn Feasts in the year. This was the first
restraint in this kind with us here in England; and this gives no more
privilege to the Lords day than the solemn Festivals. Antiq. Brit. in Stafford.
Nor was there more done in it for almost an hundred years; not till the time
of Henry VI. Anno 1444. what time Archbishop Stafford decreed throughout his
Province, ut nundina and emporia in Ecclesiis, aut Coemiteriis, diebusque
Dominicis atque Festis, praeterquam tempore messis, non teneantur; that Fairs
and Markets should no more be kept in Churches and Churchyards, or on the
Lords days, or the other Holy Days, except in time of Harvest only. If in that
time they might be suffered, then certainly in themselves they were not
unlawful on any other; further than as prohibited by the higher powers. Now
that which the Archbishop had decreed throughout his Province, Tabians
Chronicle.
Catworth Lord Mayor of London, attempted to exceed within that City. For in
this year, says Fabian, (Anno 1444.) an Act was made by Authority of the
Common Council of London, that upon the Sunday should no manner of thing within
the franchise of the City be bought or sold, neither Victual nor other thing;
nor no Artificer should bring his Ware unto any man to be worn or occupied that
day; as Taylers Garments, and Cordwayners Shoes, and so likewise all other
occupations. But then it follows in the story, the which Ordinance held but a
while; enough to show by the success, how ill it does agree with a Lord Mayor,
to deal in things about the Sabbath. Afterward in the year 1451. which was the
28 of this Henry's Reign, it pleased the King in Parliament to ratify what
before was ordered by that Archbishop in this form that follows. 28. H. 6. c.
16.
Considering the abominable injuries and effences done to Almigvty God, and to
his Saints always ayders and finguler affistants in our necessities, by the
necasion of Fairs and Marhets upon their high and principal Feasts; as in the
Feast of the Ascension of our Lord. in the day of Corpus Christi, in the day of
Whitsunday, Trinity Sunday, and other Sundays; as also in the high Feast of the
Assumption of our Blessed Lady, the day of all Saints, and on Good Friday,
accustomably and miserably holden and used in the Keaim of England, etc. our
Sovereign Lord the King, etc. has ordained that all manner of Fairs and
Markets on the said principal Feasts and Sundays, and Good Friday, shall
clearly cease from all showing of any Goods and Merchandises, necessary Victual
only ercept, (which yet was more than was allowed in the City-Act) upon pain of
forfeiture of all the goods aforesaid to the Lord of the franchise or liverty,
where such goods be or shall be she wed contrary to this Ordinance; the four
Sundays in Harvest except. Which clause or reservation shows plainly that the
things before prohibited were not esteemed unlawful in themselves: as also that
this Law was made in confirmation of the former order of the Archbishop, as
before was said. Now on this Law I find two resolutions made by my Lords the
Judges. First Justice Brian in the 12th. of King Edward the fourth, declared
that no sale made upon a Sunday, though in a Fair or Market-overt, (for
Markets, as it seems, were not then quite laid down, though by Law
prohibited) shall be a good sale to alter the property of the goods. And
Ploydon in the time of Queen Elizabeth was of opinion, Daltons Justice. cap. 27.
that the Lord of any Fair or Market kept upon the Sunday contrary to the
Statute, may therefore be indicted for the King or Queen, either at the
Assizes, or general Goal delivery, or Quarter Sessions within that County. If
so, in case such Lord may be Endicted for any Fair or Market kept upon the
sunday, as being contrary to the Statute; then by the same reason may he be
Endicted for any Fair or Market kept on any of the other Holy Days in that
Statute mentioned.

Nor staid it here. For in the 1465. which was the fourth year of King Edward
IV. Our Sovereign Lord the King, etc. has ordained and established that no
Cordwainer or Cobbler within the City of London, or within three miles of any
part of the said City. etc. do upon any Sunday in the year, or on the Feasts of
the Ascension or Nativity of our Lord, or on the Feasi of Corpus Christi, sell
or command to be sold any Shwe, Huseans, (i. e. Boots) or Galoches; or upon
the Sunday, or any other of the said Feasts, shall set or put upon the feet or
legs of any person any Shwes, Huseans, or Galoches, upon pain of forfeiture and
loss of? O shillings, as often as any person shall do contrary to this
Ordinance. Where note, that this restraint was only for the City of London, and
the parts about it; which shows that it was counted lawful in all places clse.
And therefore there must be some particular motive why this restraint was laid
on those of London only; either their insolences, or some notorious neglect of
Gods public service; the Gentle craft had otherwise been ungently handled,
that they of all the Tradesmen in that populous City should be so restrained.
Note also, that in this very Act, there is a reservation or indulgence for the
Inhabitants of S. Martins le Grand, to do as formerly they were accustomed, the
said Act or Statute not withstanding. 14 and 15 of H. 8. cap. 9.
Which very clause did after move King Henry VIII. to repeal this Statute, that
so all others of that trade might be free as they: or as the very words of the
Statute are, That to the Honor of Almighty God, all the Kings Subjects might
be hereafter at their liberty, as well as the Inbabitants of S. Martins le
Grand. Now where it seems by the Proeme of the Statute 17. of this King
Edward IV. c. 3. that many in that time did spend their Holy Days in dice,
Quoits, Tennis, bowling, and the like unlawful Games, forbidden (as is there
affirmed) by the Laws of the Realm; which said unlawful Games are thereupon
prohibited, under a certain penalty in the Statute mentioned; It is most
manisest that the Prohibition was not in reference to the time, Sundays or any
other Holy Days, but only to the Games themselves, which were unlawful at all
times. For public actions in the times of these two last Princes, the greatest
were the battles of Towton and Barnet; one on Palm Sunday, and the other on
Easter Day; the greatest Fields that ever were fought in England. And in this
State things stood till King Henry VIII.

Now for the doctrine and the practice of these times before King Henry the
VIII. and the Reformation; we cannot take a better view than in John de Burgo,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridg, I pitta O^^i Pl. 12. and 11. D.
about the latter end of King Henry the sixth. First Doctrinally he
determincth, as before was said, that the Lords day was instituted by the
authority of the Church, and that it is no otherwise to be observed, than by
the Canons of the Church we are bound to keep it. Then for the name of Sabbath,
that the Lords day, and quaelibet dies statuta ad divinam culturam, Id. lb. E.
and every day appointed for Gods public service, may be so entitled, because
in them we are to rest from all servile works: such as are Arts Mechanic,
Husbandry, Law-days, and going to Markets, with other things quae ab Ecclesia
determinantur, Il ply 5.9. cap. 7. H.
which are determined by the Church. Lastly, that on those days, insistendum
est orationibus etc. We must be busied at our prayers, the public service of
the Church, in Hymns, and in spiritual Songs, and in hearing Sermons. Next
practically for such things as were then allowed of, he does sort them thus.
First generally, Non tamen prohibentur his diebus faccre quae pertinent ad
providentiam necessariorum, etc. We are not those days restrained from doing
such things as conduce to the providing of necessaries either for our selves or
for our Neighbors: as in preserving of our persons, or of our substance; or in
avoiding any loss that might happen to us. Id. ib. J.
Particularly next, si jacentibus, etc. In case our Corn and Hay in the Fields
abroad, be in danger of a Tempest, we may bring it in, yea though it be upon
the Sabbath. Butchers and Victualers, if they make ready on the Holy days, what
they must sell the morrow after, either in open Market, or in their shops; in
case they cannot dress it on the day before, or being dressed they cannot keep
it: Id. ib. L.
non peccant mortaliter, they fall not by so doing, into mortal sin. vectores
mercium, etc. Carriers of Wares, or Men, or Victuals, unto distant places, in
case they cannot do it upon other days without inconvenience, are to be
excused. Barbers and Chirurgions, Smiths or Farriers, if on the Holy days they
do the works of their daily labor, Id. ib. M.
especially. propter necessitatem eorum quibus serviunt, for the necessities of
those who want their help; are excusable also, but not in case they do it
chiefly for desire of gain. Id. ib. N.
Messengers, Posts and Travelers, that travel, if some special occasion be, on
the Holy days; whether they do it for reward, or not; non audeo condemnare, are
not at all to be condemned. As neither Millers, which do grind either with
Water-mils, or Wind-mils, and so can do their Work without much labor; but
they may keep the custom of the place in the which they live, not being
otherwise commanded by their Ordinaries: Id. ib. O.
secus si traciu jumentorum multuram faciunt; but if it be an Horse-mill, then
the case is altered. So buying and selling on those days, in some present
exigent, as the providing necessary Victuals for the day, was not held
unlawful: dum tamen exercentes ea non subtrabunt se divinis officiis, in case
they did not thereby keep themselves from Gods public Service. Lastly, Id. ib.
Q.
for Recreations, for dancing on those days, he determins thus: that they which
dance on any of the Holy days, either to stir themselves, or others: unto
carnal lusts, commit mortal sin; and so they do, says he, in case they do it
any day. But it is otherwise, if they dance upon honest causes, and no naughty
purpose; and that the persons be not by Law restrained. Choreas ducentes,
maxim in diebus sestis, causa incitanda se, vel alios, ad peccatum mortale,
peccant mortaliter: and similiter si in profestis diebus hoc fiat: secus si hoc
fiat ex causa honesta, and intention non corrupta, and a persona, cui talia
non sunt probibita. With which determination I conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. The story of the Lords Day, from the Reformation of Religion, in
this Kingdom, till this present time.
1. The doctrine of the Sabbath and the Lords day, delivered by three several
Martyrs, conformably to the judgment of the Protestants before remembered. 2.
The Lords day, and the other Holy days, confessed by all this Kingdom, in the
Court of Parliament, to have no other ground, than the authority of the Church.
3. The meaning and occasion of that clause in the Common Prayer book, Lord have
mercy upon us, etc. repeated at the end of the fourth Commandment. 4. That by
the Queens Injunctions, and the first Parliament of her Keign, the Lords day
was not meant for a Sabbath day. 5. The doctrine in the Homilies delivered,
about the Lords day, and the Sabbath. 6. The sum and substance of that Homily;
and that it makes not any thing for a Lords day Sabbath. 7. The first original
of the New Sabbath Speculations, in this Church of England; by whom, and for
what cause invented. 8. Strange and most monstrous Paradoxes, preached on
occasion of the former doctrines; and of the other effects thereof. 9. What
care was taken of the Lords day in King James his Reign; the spreading of the
doctrines: and of the Articles of Ireland. 10. The Jewish Sabbath set on foot:
and of King James his declaration about lawful sports, on the Lords day. 11.
What Tracts were writ and published in that Princes time, in opposition to the
doctrines before remembered. 12. In what estate the Lords day and the other Holy
days have stood in Scotland, since the reformation of Religion in that Kingdom.
13. Statutes about the Lords day, made by our present Sovereign; and the
misconstruing of the same: His Majesty reviveth, and enlarges the Declaration
of King James. 14. An exhortation to obedience unto his Majesty's most
Christian purpose, concludes this History.


THUS are we safely come to these present times, the times of Reformation,
England, as with other things, with that which we have now in hand, the Lords
day, and the other Holy days: keeping the days, as many of them as were thought
convenient for the advancement of true godliness, and increase of piety; but
paring off those superstitious conceits and matters of opinion, which had been
entertained about them. But first, before we come to this, we will by way of
preparation, lay down the judgments of some men in the present point; men of
good quality in their times, and such as were content to be made a sacrifice,
in the common Cause. Of these I shall take notice of three particularly,
according to the several times in the which they lived. And first we will begin
with Master Frith, who suffered in the year 1533. who in his declaration of
Baptism, thus declares himself. Our forefathers, says he, Page 96.
which were in the beginning of the Church, did abrogate the Sabbath, to the
intent that men might have an ensample of Christian liberty, etc. Howbeith
because it was necessary that a day should be reserved in which the people
should come together, to hear the Word of God, they ordained instead of the
Sabbath which was Saturday, the next day following which is Sunday. And
although they might have kept the Saturday with the Jew, as a thing
indifferent, yet they did much better. Some three years after him, Anno 1536.
being the 28. of Henry the eighth, suffered Master Tyndall, who in his answer
to Sir Thomas More, has resolved it thus. As for the Sabbath we be Lords over
the Sabbath, Page 287.
and may yet change it into Monday, or into any other day, as we see need; or
may make every tenth day Holy day only, if we see cause why. Neither was there
any cause to change it from the Saturday, but to put a difference between us
and the Jews; neither reed we any Holy day at all, if the people might be
taught without it. Last of all bishop Hooper, sometimes Bishop of Gloucester,
who suffered in Queen Mary's Reign, does in a Treatise by him written on the
Ten Commandments, and printed in the year 1550. go the self-same way. age 103.
We may not think (says he) that God gave any more holiness to the Sabbath,
than to the other days. For if ye consider Friday, Page 103.
Saturday, or Sunday, inasmuch as they be days, and the work of God, the one is
no more holy than the other: but that day is always most holy, in the which we
most apply and give our selves unto holy works. To that end did he sanctify
the Sabbath day, not that we should give our selves to illness, or such
Ethnical pastime as is now used amongst Ethnical people: but being free that
day from the travels of this World, we might consider the works and benefits of
God, with thanksgiving; hear the Word of God, honor him and fear him; then to
learn who, and where be the poor of Christ, that want our help. Thus they: and
they amongst them have resolved on these four conclusions. First, that one day
is no more holy than another, the Sunday than the Saturday or the Friday;
further than they are set apart for holy Uses. Secondly, that the Lords day
has no institution from divine authority, but was ordained by our forefathers
in the beginning of the Church, that so the people might have a Day to come
together, and hear Gods Word. Thirdly, that still the Church has power to
change the day from Sunday unto Monday, or what day she will. And lastly, that
one day in seven, is not the Moral part of the fourth Commandment: for Mr.
Tyndal says expressly, that by the Church of God, each tenth day only may be
kept holy, if we see cause why. So that the marvel is the greater, that any man
should now affirm, as some men have done, that they are willing to lay down
both their Lives and Livings, in maintenance of those contrary Opinions, which
in these latter days have been taken up.

Now that which was affirmed by them, Anno the fifth and sixth of King Edward
the sixth; 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 3.
where, to the honor of Almighty God, it was thus enacted: For as much as men
be not at all times so mindful to Iaud and praise God, so ready to resort to
hear Gods holy Word, and to come to the holy Communion etc. as their bounden
duty does require: therefore to call men to remembrance of their duty, and to
help their infirmity, it has been wholsomly provided, that there should be
some certain times and days appointed, wherein the Christians should cease from
all kind of labor, and apply themselves only and wholly unto the aforesaid
holy works, properly pertaining to true Keligion, etc. Which works as they may
well be called Gods Service, so the time especially appointed for the same, are
called Holy days: Rot for the matter or the nature either of the time or day,
etc. for to all days and times are of like holiness, but for the nature and
condition of such holy works, etc. whereunto such times and days are sanctified
and hallowed: that is to say separated from all profane uses, and dedicated
not unto any Saint or Creature, but only unto God, and his true worship.
Neither is it to be thought that there is any certain time or definitive number
of days, prescribed in holy Scripture; but the appointment both of the time,
and also of the number of days, is left by the authority of Gods Word unto the
liberty of Christ's Church, to be determined and assigned orderly in every
Country, by the discretion of the Rulers and Ministers thereof, as they shall
judge most expedient, to the true setting forth of Gods glory, and edification
of their people. Nor is it to be thought, that all this Preamble was made in
reference to the Holy days or Saints days only; whose being left to the
authority of the Church, was never questioned: but in relation to the Lords day
also, as by the Act it self does at full appear; for so it follows in the
Act: Be it therefore enacted, etc. That all the days hereafter mentioned, shall
be kept, and commanded to be kept Holy days, and none other: that is to say,
all Sundays in the Year, the Feasts of the Circumcision of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of the Epiphanie, of the Purification, (with all the rest now kept, and
there named particularly) and that none other day shall be kept and commanded
to be kept holy day, and to abstain from lawful bodily labor. Nay, which is
more, there is a further Clause in the self-same Act, which plainly shows that
they had no such thought of the Lords day, as that it was a Sabbath, or so to
be observed, as the Sabbath was; and therefore did provide it, and enact by the
Authority aforesaid, a bat it shall be lawful to every Husbandman, Labourer,
Fisherman, and to all and every other person or persons, of what estate,
degree, or condition be or they he, upon the holy days aforesaid in Harvest, or
at any other times in the year, when necessity shall so require, to labor,
ride, fish, or work any kind of work at their free-wills and pleasure: any
thing in this Act unto the contrary notwithstanding. This is the total of this
Act; which, if examined well, as it ought to be, will yield us all those
propositions or conclusions, before remembered, which we collected from the
writings of those three particular Martyrs: Nor is it to be said, that it is
repealed, and of no Authority. Repealed, indeed, it was, in the first year of
Queen Mary; and stood repealed in Law, though otherwise in use and practice,
all the long Reign of Queen Elizabeth: but in the first year of King James, was
revived again. Note here, that in the self-same Parliament, the Common
Prayer Book, now in use, being reviewed by many godly Prelates, was confirmed
and authorized; wherein, so much of the said Act, as does concern the Names and
Number of the Holy days, is expressed, and as it were incorporate into the
same. Which makes it manifest, that in the purpose of the Church, the Sunday
was no otherwise esteemed of, than another Holy day.

This Statute, as before we said, was made in Anno 5. and 6. of Edward the
sixth. Common Prayer Book was confirmed, which still remains in use amongst us:
save, that there was an alteration or addition of certain Lessons to be used on
every Sunday of the Year: 1 Eliz. cap. 2.
the form of the Letany altered, and corrected; and two Sentences added in the
delivery of the Sacrament unto the Communicants. Now, in this Common
Prayer Book thus confirmed, in the fifth and sixth years of King Edward the
sixth, Cap. 1.
it pleased those that had the altering and revising of it, that the
Commandments, which were not in the former Liturgy, allowed of in the second of
the said Kings Reign, should now be added, and accounted as a part of this; the
people being willed to say after the end of each Commandment, Lord have mercy
upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Which being used accordingly,
as well upon the hearing of the fourth Commandment, as of any others; has
given some men a color to persuade themselves, that certainly it was the
meaning of the Church, that we should keep a Sabbath still, though the day be
changed; and that we are obliged to do it, by the fourth Commandment.
Assuredly, they who so conclude, conclude against the meaning of the Book and
of them that made it. Against the meaning of the Book: for if the Book had so
intended, that that Ejaculation was to be understood in a literal sense,
according as the words are laid down in terminis: it then must be the meaning
of the Book, that we should pray unto the Lord, to keep the Sabbath of the
Jews, even the seventh day precisely, from the Worlds Creation, and keep it in
the self-same manner, as the Jews once did: which no man, I presume, will say
was the meaning of it. For, of the changing of the day, there is nothing said,
nor nothing intimated; but the whole Law laid down in terminis, as the Lord
delivered it. Against the meaning also of them that made it: for they that made
the Book, and reviewed it afterward, and caused these Passages and Prayers to
be added to it; Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury; Ridley, Bishop of London;
and certain others of the Prelates, then and there assembled; were the same
men, by whose advice and counsel, the Act before remembered, about keeping Holy
days, was in the self-same Parliament drawn up, and perfected. And is it
possible, we should conceive so ill of those reverend persons, as that they
would erect a Sabbath in the one Act, and beat it down so totally in the other:
to tell us in the Service Book, that we are bound to keep a Sabbath, and that
the time and day of Gods public Worship, is either pointed out in the fourth
Commandment, or otherwise ordained by Divine Authority: and in the self-same
breath, to tell us, that there is neither certain time, nor definite number of
days, prescribed in Scripture, but all this left unto the liberty of the
Church? I say, as formerly I said, it is impossible we should think so ill of
such Reverend persons: nor do I think, that any will so think hereafter, when
they have once considered the non sequitur of their own Conclusions. As for the
Prayer there used we may thus expound it, according to the doctrine and the
practice both, of those very times; viz. that their intent and meaning was, to
teach the people, to pray unto the Lord, to incline their hearts to keep that
Law, as far as it contained the Law of Nature, and had been entertained in the
Christian Church; as also to have mercy on them for the neglect thereof, in
those Holy days, which by the wisdom and authority of the Church, had been set
apart for Gods public Service. Besides, this Prayer was then conceived, when
there was no suspicion, that any would make use thereof, to introduce a Jewish
Sabbath; but when men rather were inclined to the contrary error, to take away
those certain and appointed times, Lords days, and other Holy days, which by
the wisdom of the Church had been retained in the Reformation. The Anabaptists
were strongly bent that way, as before we showed; and if we look into the
Articles of our Church, See Art. 26.37, 38, 39.
we shall then find what special care was taken, to suppress their errors in
other points, which had taken footing, as it seems, in this Church and Kingdom.
Therefore the more likely it is, that this Cluse was added, to crush their
furious fancies, in this particular, of not hallowing certain days and times to
Gods public Service. Yet I conceive withal, that had those Reverend Prelates
foreseen how much their pious purpose would have been abused, by wresting it to
introduce a Sabbath, which they never meant; they would have cast their meaning
in another mould.

Proceed we to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Injunctions, published the first
year of her Empire: in which, the Sunday is not only counted with the other
Holy days; but labor, at some times permitted; and which is more, enjoined
upon it: For thus it pleased her to declare her will and pleasure; Injunct. 20.
All the Queens faithful and loving Subjects shall from henceforth celebrate
and keep their holy day, according to Gods holy will and pleasure: that is, in
hearing the Word of God read, and taught; in private and public Prayers; in
knowledging their offenses unto God, and amendment of the same; in reconciling
of themselves charitably to their Neighbors, where displeasure has been; in
oftentimes receiving the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ; in bistting
the Poor, and Sick, using all soberness, and godly conversation. This seems to
be severe enough; but what follows next? Yet notwithstanding, all Parsons,
Vicars, and Curats shall teach and declare to their Parishioners, that they may
with a safe and quiet conscience, after their Common Prayer, in the time of
Harvest, labor upon the boly and Festival days, and save that thing which God
has sent: And if, for any scrupulosity or grudg of Conscience, men should
superstitiously abstain from working on these days, that then they should
grievously offend and displease God. This makes it evident, that Qu. Elizabeth
in her own particular, took not the Lords day for a Sabbath; or to be of a
different nature from the other Holy days: nor was it taken so, by the whole
Body of our Church, and State, in the first Parliament of her Reign; 1 Eliz. c.
2.
what time it was enacted, That all and every person and persons inhabiting
within this Realm, and any other the Queens Dominious, shall diligently and
faithfully, having no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent, endeavor
themselves to resort to their Parish Church, or Chapel, accustomed: or upon
reasonable let thereof, to some usual place where Common Prayer shall be used
in such time of let, upon every Sunday, and other days ordained and used to be
kept as Holy day, and then and there to abide orderly and soverly, During the
time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or other Service of God, upon pain of
punishment, etc. This Law is still in force, and still like to be; and by this
Law, the Sundays and the Holy days are alike regarded: Nor by the Law only, but
by the purpose and intent of holy Church, who in her public Liturgy is as full
and large for every one of the Holy days, as for the Sunday, the Letany
excepted only. For otherwise by the rule and prescript thereof, the same
Religious Offices are designed for both, the same devout attendance required
for both: and whatsoever else may make both equal. And therefore by this
Statute, and the Common Prayer Book, we are to keep more Sabbaths than the
Lords Day Sabbath, or else none at all.

Next look we on the Homilies, England, set forth and authorized, Anno 1562.
being the fourth of that Queens Reign. In that entitled Of the place and time
of Prayer, we shall find it thus. As concerning the Time in which God has
appointed his people to assemble together solemnly, it does appear by the
fourth Commandment, etc. And Albeit this Commandment of God does no^ hind
Christian people so straightly to observe and keep the utter ceremonies of the
Sabbath day as it did the Jews, as touching the forbearing of work and labor
in the time of great necessity, and as thouching the precise keeping of the
seventh Day, after the manner of the Jews: ( for we keep now the first day,
which is our Sunday, and make that our Sabbath, that is, our day of rest, in
honor of our Savior Christ, who as upon that day he rose from death
conquering the same most triumphantly.) Yet notwithstanding whatsoever is found
in the Comandment appertaining to the Law of Nature, as a thing most godly,
most just, and needful for the setting forth of Gods glory, ought to be
retained and kept of all good Christian people. And therefore by this
Commandment we ought to have a time, as one day in the week, wherein we ought
to rest, yea from our lawful and needful words. For like as it appears by
this Commandment, that no man in the six days ought to be slothful and idle,
but diligently to labor in that state wherein God has set him, even so God
has given express charge to all men, that upon the Sabbath day, which is now
our Sunday. they should cease from all weekly and work-day labor; to the
intent, that like as God (...) wrought six days, and rested the seventh, and
blessed and sanctified it, and consecrated it to quietness and rest from
labor; even so Gods obedient people should use the Sunday Holily, and rest
from their common and daily business, and aisa give themselves wholly to
Heavenly exercises of Gods true religion and service. ^o that God does not only
command the observation of this holy day but also by his own example does stir
and provoke us to the diligent keeping of the same, etc. Thus it may plainly
appear that Gods will and Commandment was to have a solemn time and standing
day in the week. Wherein the people should come together, and have in
remembrance his wonderful benefits, and to render him thank's for them, an
appertains to loving, kind, and obedient people. This example and Commandment
of God, the godly Christian people began to follow im^ediately after the
Ascension of our Lord Christ, and began to choose them a standing day of the
week to come together in; yet not the seventh day, which the Jews kept, but the
Lords day, the day of the Lords resurrection, the day after the seventh day,
which is the first day of the week, etc. Sithence which time, Gods (...) has
always in all Ages, without any gainsaying, used to come together ^^ the
Sunday. to celebrate, and honor the Lords blessed Name, and carefully to (...)
that (...) If it and quietness, both Man and Woman, Child, Servant, and
Stranger. So far the Homily: and this is all thereof which is doctrinal. The
residue consists in reprehension of two sorts of men; one of the which, if they
had any business to do, though there were no extreme need, would not spare the
Sunday, but med all days alike, the holy days and work-days all as one; the
other so consumed the day in gluttony and drunkenness, and such fleshly
filthiness, that as it is there said, the Lord was more dishonored, and the I
evil better served on the Sunday, than upon all the days in the week besides.

This says the Homily, England; as at this present time, to justify the
disobedience of those men who have refused to publish the Princes pleasure in
point of Recreations. But this, if well examined, will as little help them, as
Lord have mercy upon us, in the Common Prayer book. For first it is here said,
that there is no more of the fourth Commandment to be retained and kept of good
Christian people, than whatsoever is found in it appertaining to the law of
Nature. But we have proved before that there is nothing in the fourth
Commandment of the law of Nature, but that some time be set apart for Gods
public service; the precept so far forth, as it enjoins one day in seven, or
the seventh day precisely from the worlds creation, being avowed for ceremonial
by all kind of Writers. Secondly it is said, not that the Lords day was
enjoined by Divine Authority, either by Christ himself, or his Apostles; but
chosen for a standing day to come together in, by godly Christian people,
immediately after the Ascension of our Lord Christ: If chose by them, then not
enjoined by the Apostles; if not till after the Ascension of our Savior
Christ, then not at all by him commanded. Thirdly, whereas they chose
themselves a standing day in the week to come together in, they did not this by
any obligation laid upon them by the fourth Commandment, but only by a
voluntary following of Gods example, and the Analogy or equity of Gods
Commandment, which was (they do not say which is) that he would have, [amongst
the Jews] a solemn time and standing day in the week, wherein the people (...)
have in remembrance his wonderful benefits, and render thanks to him for the
same. For it is said, that this example and Commandment of God, the gody
Christian people began to follow after Christ's Ascension: So that it seems they
might have chosen whether they would have followed them or not. Fourthly, when
they had chosen this day which we now observe for their public meetings, they
did not think themselves obliged by the fourth Commandment, to forbear work and
labor in time of great necessity, or to the precise keeping of the same, after
the manner of the Jews; both which they must have done, had they conceived the
keeping of one day in seven to be the moral part of the fourth Commandment; and
to oblige us now, no less than it did them formerly, as some men have taught
us. Now whereas some have drawn from hence these two conclusions. First, that
according to this Homily, we ought to keep one day in seven by the fourth
Commandment; and secondly, that we must spend it wholly in religious exercises.
I would fain know how those conclusions can be raised from the former premises.
It Is true, the Homily has told us that by the fourth Commandment we ought to
have a time, as one day in the week, wherein we ought to rest from our needful
works. Where note, that there it is not said, that by the fourth Commandment we
ought to have one day in the week, which is plain and peremptory; but that we
ought to have a time, as one day in the week, which was plainly arbitrary. A
time we ought to have by the fourth Commandment, as being that part of it which
pertains to the law of Nature: But for the next words, as one day in the week,
they are not there laid down, as imposed on us by the Law; but only instanced
in, as settled at that time in the Church of God. So where it is affirmed in
another place, that Gods will and commandment was to have a solemn time and
standing day in the week; we grant indeed that so it was: and that the Godly
Christian people in the Primitive times were easily induced to give God no less
than what he formerly commanded. But had the meaning of the Homily been this,
that we were bound to have a standing day in the week by the fourth
Commandment; they would have plainly said, it is Gods will and pleasure that it
should be so, and not have told us what it was in the times before. It Is true,
the Homily has told us that we should rest our selves on Sunday from our
common business, and also give our selves wholly to Heavenly exercises of Gods
true religion and service. Where note, it is not said that we should spend the
day wholly in Heavenly exercises; for then there were no time allowed us to eat
and drink, which are mere natural employments: But that we give our selves
wholly, that is our whole selves, body and soul to that performance of those
heavenly exercises which are required of us in the way of true religion, and
Gods public service. It is accounted, as we have formerly made plain, to be
the ceremonial part of the fourth Commandment, In Exodus 20. qu. 11.
quod fiat semel in qualibet hebdomada; and quod fiat in una die tota, ista
observatio; and quod per totam diem abstineatur ab operibus servilibus: First
the determining of the day, to be one in seven; next that this one day wholly
be so employed; and last of all, that all that day there be an absolute
cessation from all servile works. Therefore the spending wholly of one day in
seven, being ceremonial, comes not within the compass of the Homily; which
would have no more of the fourth Commandment to be kept amongst us, than what
is appertaining to the law of Nature. Now it pertains unto the law of Nature,
that for the times appointed to Gods public worship, Id. ib.
we wholly sequester our selves from all worldly businesses; natural est quod
dum Deum colimus, ab aliis abstineamus, as Tostatus has it: and then the
meaning of the Homily will be briefly this, that for those times which are
appointed by the Church for the assembly of Gods people, we should lay by our
daily business, and all worldly thoughts, and wholly give our selves to the
heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and Service. But to encounter them at
their own weapon, it is expressly said in the Act of Parliament about keeping
Holy Days, that on the days and times appointed, as well the other Holy days as
the Sunday, Christians should cease from all kind of labor, and only and
wholly apply themselves to such holy works as appertain to true Religion; the
very same with that delivered in the Homily. If wholly in the Homily must be
applied unto the day, then it must be there; and then the Saints days and the
other Holy Days must be wholly spent in religious exercises. When once we see
them do the one, we will bethink our selves of doing the other. As for the
residue of that Homily which consists in popular reproofs and exhortations,
that concerns not us, in reference to the point in hand. The Homilies, those
parts thereof especially which tend to the correction of manners, and
reformation of abuses, were made agreeable to those times wherein they were
first published. If in those times men made no difference between the
Working-day and Holy Day, (...) kept their Fairs and Markets, and bought and
sold, and rowed and ferried, and drow and carried, and rode and journeyed, and
did their other business on the Sunday as well as on the other days, when there
was no such need but that they might have tarried longer; they were the more to
blame, no doubt, in trespassing so wilfully against the Canons of the Church,
and Acts of Parliament, which had restrained many of the things there
specified: The Homily did well to reprove them for it. If on the other side
they spent the day in ungodliness and filthiness, in gluttony and drunkenness,
and such like other crying sins as are there particularly noted; the Prelates
of the Church had very ill discharged their duty, had they not taken some
course to have told them of it. But what is that to us, who do not spend the
Lords day in such filthy fleshliness, (whatever one malicious sycophant has
affirmed therein:) or what is that to dancing, shooting, leaping, vaulting,
may-games, and meetings of good Neighborhood, or any other Recreation not by
Law prohibited, being no such ungodly and filthy acts as are therein mentioned.

Thus upon due search made, London obtained from Queen Elizabeth, that Plays
and Enterludes should no more be acted on the Sabbath Day, within the liberties
of their City. As also that in 83. on the 14th. of January being Sunday, many
were hurt, and eight killed outright by the sudden falling of the Scaffolds in
Paris-garden. This shows that Enterludes and Bear-baitings were then permitted
on the Sunday, and so they were a long time after, though not within the City
of London; which certainly had not been suffered, had it been then conceived
that Sunday was to be accounted for a Sabbath. But in the year 1595. some of
that faction which before had labored with small profit to overthrow the
Hierarchy and government of this Church of England; now set themselves on work
to ruinate all the orders of it: to beat down at one blow all days and times,
which by the wisdom and authority of the Church had been appointed for Gods
service, and in the stead thereof to erect a Sabbath of their own devising.
These Sabbath speculations, and Presbyterian directions, as mine Author calls
them, they had been hammering more than ten years before; thought they produced
them not till now: and in producing of them now, they introduced, says he, a
more than cither Jewish or Popish superstition into the Land, Rogers in preface
to the Articles.
to the no small blemish of our Christian profession, and scandal of the true
servants of God, and therewith doctrine most erroneous, dangerous, and
Antichristian. Of these the principal was one Dr. Bound, who published first
his Sabbath Doctrins, Anno 1595. and after with additions to it, and
enlargements of it, Anno 1606. Wherein he has affirmed in general over all the
book, that the Commandment of sanctifying every seventh day, as in the Mosaical
decalogue, is natural, moral, and perpetual: That where all other things in the
Jewish Church were so changed, that they were clean taken away, as the
Priesthood, the Sacrifices, and the Sacraments; this day, the Sabbath, was so
changed, that it still remains, p. 91. that there is great reason why we
Christians should take our selves as straightly bound to rest upon the Lords day,
as the Jews were upon their Sabbath; for being one of the moral Commandments,
it binds us as well as them, being all of equal authority, p. 247. And for
the Rest upon this day, that it must be a notable and singular Rest, and most
careful, exact and precise Rest, after another manner than men were accustomed,
p. 124. Then for particulars; no buying of Victuals, Flesh, or Fish, Bread or
Drink, 158. no Carriers to travel on that day, 160. nor Parkmen, or Drovers,
162. Scholars not to study the liberal Arts; nor Lawyers to consult the Case,
and peruse men's Evidences, 163. Sergeants, Apparitours, and Sumners to be
restrained from executing their Offices, 164. Justices not to examine Causes,
for preservation of the Peace, 166. no man to travel on that day, 192. that
ringing of more Bells than one, that day, is not to be justified, p. 202. No
solemn Feasts to be made on it, 206, nor Wedding Dinners, 209. with a
permission notwithstanding to Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, (he hoped to find
good welcome for this dispensation) p. 211. all lawful Pleasures, and honest
Recreations, as Shooting, Fencing, Bowling, (but Bowling, by his leave, is no
lawful pleasure for all sorts of people) which are permitted on other days,
were on this day to be forborne, 202. no man to speak or talk of pleasures, p.
272. or any other worldly matter, 275. Most Magisterially determined; indeed,
more like a Jewish Rabbin than a Christian Doctor. Yet Jewish and Rabbinical
though his Doctrine were, it carried a fair face and show of Piety, at the least
in the opinion of the common people; and such who stood not to examine the true
grounds thereof, but took it up, on the appearance; such, who did judge
thereof, not by the workmanship of the stuff, but the gloss and color. In
which, it is most strange to see how ^uddenly men were induced not only to give
way unto it, but without more ado, to abett the same; till in the end, and that
in very little time, it grew the most bewitching Error, the most popular
Deceit that ever had been set on foot in the Church of England. And verily I
persuade my self that many an honest and well-meaning man, both of the Clergy
and the Laity, either because of the appearance of the thing it self, or out of
some opinion of those men who first endeavored to promote it; became
exceedingly affected toward the same, as taking it to be a Doctrine sent down
from Heaven for increase of Piety: So easily did they believe it, and grew at
last so strongly possessed therewith, that in the end they would not willingly
be persuaded to conceive otherwise thereof, than at first they did; or think
they swallowed down the hook when they took the bait. An hook indeed, which had
so fastened them to those men who love to fish in troubled waters, that by this
Artifice, there was no small hope conceived amongst them, to fortify their
side, and make good that cause, which till this trim Deceit was thought of, was
almost grown desperate. Once, I am sure, that by this means, the Brethren, who
before endeavored to bring all Christian Kings and Princes under the yoke of
their Presbyteries; made little doubt to bring them under the command of their
Sabbath Doctrines. And though they failed of that applauded parity, which they
so much aimed at, in the advancing of their Elderships; yet hoped they, without
more ado, to bring all higher Powers, whatever, into an equal rank with the
common people, in the observance of their Jewish Sabbatarian rigours. So Doctor
Bound declares himself, page 171. The Magistrate, says he, and Governors in
authority, how High soever, cannot take any privilege to himself, whereby he
might be occupied about worldly business, when other men should rest from
labor. It seems, they hoped to see the greatest Kings and Princes make suit
unto their Consistory for a Dispensation, as often as the great Affairs of
State, or what cause soever, induced them otherwise to spend that Day, or any
part or parcel of it, than by the new Sabbath Doctrine had been permitted. For
the endearing of the which, as formerly to endear their Elderships, they spared
no place, or Text of Scripture, where the word Elder did occur; and without
going to the Heralds, had framed a Pedigree thereof, from Jethro, from Noah's
Ark, and from Adam finally: so did these men proceed in their new devices,
publishing out of holy Writ, both the antiquity and authority of their Sabbath
day: No passage of Gods Book unransacked, where there was mention of a Sabbath,
whether the legal Sabbath, charged on the Jews, or the spiritual Sabbath of the
Soul, from sin, which was not fitted and applied to the present purpose:
though, if examined, as it ought, with no better reason, than Paveant illi, and
non paveam ego, was by an ignorant Priest alleged from Scripture, to prove
that his Parishioners ought to pave the Chancel. Yet, upon confidence of these
proofs, they did already begin to sing Victoria; especially, by reason of the
enterteinment which the said Doctrines found with the common people. For, thus
the Doctor boasts himself, in his second Edition, Anno 606. as before was said,
Many godly learned both in their Preachings, Writings, and Disputations, did
concur with him in that Argument; and, that the lives of many Christians, in
many places of the Kingdom, were framed according to his Doctrine, p. 61.
Particularly, in the Epistle to the Reader, that within few years, three
several profitable Treatises successively were written, by three godly learned
Preachers, [ Greenhams was one, whoseever were the other two] that in the mouth
of two or three witnesses, the Doctrine of the Sabbath might be established.
Egregiam vero laudem, and spolia ampla!

But whatsoever cause he had thus to boast himself, Oxfordshire, that to do any
servile work or business on the Lords day, was as great a sin, as to kill a man
or commit adultery: Secondly, preached in Somersetshire, that to throw a Bowl
on the Lords day was as great a sin, as to kill a man; Thirdly, in Norfolk,
that to make a Feast, or dress a Wedding Dinner on the Lords day, was as great
a sin, as for a Father to take a knife and cut his child's throat: Fourthly, in
Suffolk, that to ring more Bells than one, on the Lords day, was as great a sin
as to commit Murder. I add what once I heard my self, at Sergeants Inn in
Fleetstreet, about five years since, that temporal death, was at this day to be
inflicted, by the Law of God, on the Sabbath-breaker, on him, that on the Lords
day did the works of his daily calling: with a grave application, unto my
Masters of the Law, that if they did their ordinary works on the Sabbath day,
in taking Fees and giving Counsel, they should consider what they did deserve
by the Law of God. And certainly these and the like conclusions cannot but
follow most directly, on the former Principles. For that the fourth Commandment
be plainly moral, obliging us as straightly as it did the Jews: and that the
Lords day be to be observed according to the prescript of that Commandment: it
must needs be, that every wilful breach thereof, is of no lower nature, than
Idolatry, or blaspheming of the Name of GOD, or any other deadly sin against
the first Table; and therefore questionless as great as Murder or Adultery, or
any sin against the second. But to go forwards where I left, my Author whom
before I spoke of, being present when the Suffolk Minister was convented, for
his so lewd and impious Doctrine, was the occasion that those Sabbatarian
errors and impieties, were first brought to light, and to the knowledge of the
State. On which discovery, as he tells us, this good ensued, that the said
books of the Sabbath were called in, and forbidden to be printed and made
common. Archbishop Whitguift by his Letters and Visitations, did the one, Anno
1599. and Sir John Popham Lord Chief Justice did the other Anno 1600. at Bury
in Suffolk, Good remedies indeed had they been soon enough applied: yet not so
good as those which formerly were applied to Thacker and his fellow, in the
aforesaid Town of Bury, for publishing the books of Brown against the service
of the Church. Nor was this all the fruit of so bad a Doctrine. For by
inculcating to the people these new Sabbath speculations, teaching that that
day only was of Gods appointment, and all the rest observed in the Church of
England a remnant of the will worship in the Church of Rome: the other holy
days in this Church established were so shrewdly shaken, that till this day
they are not well recovered of the blow then given. Nor came this on the by, or
besides their purpose; but as a thing that specially was intended from the
first beginning; from the first time that ever these Sabbath Doctrines peeped
into the light. For Dr. Bound, the first sworn servant of the Sabbath, has in
his first edition thus declared himself, Page 31.
that he sees not where the Lord has given any authority to his Church,
ordinarily and perpetually to sanctify any day, except that which he has
sanctified himself: and makes it an especial argument against the goodness of
the Religion in the Church of Rome, that to the seventh day they have joined so
many other days, Page 32.
and made them equal with the seventh, if not superior thereunto, as well in
the solemnity of divine Offices, as restraint from labor. So that we may
perceive by this, that their intent from the beginning was to cry down the holy
days, as superstitious, Popish Ordinances: that so their new found Sabbath
being placed alone (and Sabbath now it must be called) might become more
eminent. Nor were the other, though more private effects thereof, of less
dangerous nature: the people being so ensnared with these new devices, and
pressed with rigours more than Jewish, that certainly they are in as bad
condition, as were the Israelites of old, when they were captivated and kept
under by the Scribes and Pharisees. Some I have known, (for in this point I
will say nothing without good assurance,) who in a furious kind of zeal like
the mad Prophetess in the Poet, have run into the open streets, yea and
searched private Houses too, to look for such as spent those hours on the Lords
day in lawful pastimes, which were not destinate by the Church to Gods public
service: and having found them out, scattered the company, brake the
Instruments; and if my memory fail me not, the Musicians head; and which is
more, they thought that they were bound in conscience so to do. Others, that
will not suffer either baked or roast to be made ready for their Dinners, on
their Sabbath day, lest by so doing they should eat and drink their own
damnation, according to the doctrine preached unto them. Some, that upon the
Sabbath, will not sell a pint of Wine, or the like Commodity: though Wine was
made by God, not only for man's often infirmities, but to make glad his heart,
and refresh his spirits, and therefore no less requisite on the Lords day, than
on any other. Others, which have refused to carry provender to an Horse, on the
supposed Sabbath day, though our Redeemer thought it no impiety on the true
Sabbath day indeed, to lead poor Cattle to the Water: which was the motive and
occasion of M. Brerewoods learned Treatise. So for the female sex,
Maidservants I have met with some two or three, who though they were content
to dress their meat upon the Sabbath, yet by no means would be persuaded either
to wash their Dishes, or make clean their Kitchen. But that which most of all
affects me, is, that a Gentlewoman, at whose House I lay in Leicester, the last
Northern Progress, Anno 1634. expressed a great desire to see the King and
Queen who were then both there. And when I proferd her my service, to satisfy
that loyal longing, she thanked me, but refused the favor, because it was the
Sabbath day. Unto so strange a bondage are the people brought, that as before I
said, a greater never was imposed on the Jews themselves, what time the
consciences of that people were pinned most closely on the sleeves of the
Scribes and Pharisees.

But to go forwards in my story, it came to pass for all the care before
remembered, James, in the first entrance of his Reign, so far to condescend unto
them, as to take off such things which seemed most offensive. To which intent
he signitied his loyal pleasure by Proclamation dated at Theobald, May 7. 1603.
that Whereas he had been informed, that there had been in tormer times a greet
neglect in keeping the Sabbath day; for better obserbing of the same, and for
abeiding of all impious prophanarion of it, be straightly charged and commanded
that no Bear-baiting, Bull baiting, Enterludes, common Plays, or other like
disordered or unlawful exercises or pastimes, be frequented, kept or used at
any time hereafter upon any Sabbath day. Not that his purpose was to debar
himself of lawful pleasures on that day, but to prohibit such disordered and
unlawful pastimes, whereby the common people were withdrawn from the
Congregation, they being only to be reckoned for Common Plays, which at the
instant of their Acting or representing, are studied only for the entertainment
of the common people, on the public Theaters. Yet did not this, though much
content them. And therefore in the Conference at Hampton Court, it seemed good
to D. Reynolds (who had been made a party in the cause) to touch upon the
profanation of the Sabbath, (for so he called it) and contempt of his
Majesty's Proclamation made for the reforming of that abuse; of which be
earnestly desired a straiter course, for reformation thereof: to which he found
a gentral and unanimous assent. Nor was there an assent only, and nothing done.
For presently in the following Convocation, it pleased the Prelates there
assembled, to revive so much of the Queens Injunction before remembered, as to
them seemed fitting, and to incorporate it into the Commons then agreed of:
only a little alteration, to make it more agreeable to the present times, being
used therein. That then they ordered in the Canon for due celebrution of
Sundays, and holp days, Can. 13.
viz. All manner of persons within the Church of England, shall from beneeforth
celebrote and heep the Lords day commonly called Sunday and other Holy days,
according to Gods holy will and pleasure, and the Diders of the Church of
England prescribed in that behalf, i.e. in hearing the Word of God read and
taught in pribate and publich Prapert, in acknowledging their offenses to God,
and amendment of the same, in reconciling themselves charitably to their
Neighbors where displeasure had been, in offentimes receibing the Communion of
the Body and Blood of Christ, using all godly and scber conversation. The
residue of the said Injunction, touching work in Harvest, it seemed fit unto
them not to touch upon; leaving the same to stand or fall, by the statute of
King Edward the sixth before remembered. A Canon of an excellent composition.
For by enjoining godly and sober conversation, and diligent repair to Church to
hear the Word of God and receive the Sacrament, they stopped the course of that
profaneness, which formerly had been complained of: and by their ranking of
the holy days in equal place, and height, with Sunday, and limiting the
celebration of the same, unto the Orders in that case prescribed by the Church
of England; showed plainly their dislike of those Sabbath Doctrines, which had
been lately set on foot; to the dithonour of the Church, and diminution of her
authority in destinating other days to the service of God, than their new
Saint-Sabbath. Yet did not this, the Churches care, either so satisfy their
desires, or restrain the follies of those men, who had embraced the New Sabbath
Doctrines; but that they still went forwards to advance that business, which
was now made a part of the common cause: no book being published by that party,
either by way of Catechism, or Comment on the Ten Commandments, or moral Piety,
or systematical Divinity, of all which, these last times have produced too
many; wherein the Sabbath was not pressed upon the consciences of Gods people,
with as much violence, as formerly with authority upon the Jews. And hereunto
they were encouraged a great deal the rather; because in Ireland, what time his
Majesty's Commissioners were employed, about the settling of that Church, Anno
1615. there passed an Article, which much confirmed them in their Courses, and
has been often since alleged to justify both them and their proceedings.
Art. 56.
The Article is this. The first day of the week which is the Lords day is
wholly to be dedicated to the service of God; and therefore we are bound
therein to rest from our common and daily business, and to bestow that leisure
upon holy Exercises both private and public. What moved his Majesty's
Commissioners to this strict austcrity, that I cannot say: but sure I am, that
till that time, the Lords day never had attained such credit, as to be thought
an Article of the Faith, though of some men's fancies. Nor was it like to be of
long continuance, it was so violently followed: the whole Book being now called
in, and in the place thereof, the Articles of the Church of England confirmed
by Parliament, in that Kingdom, Anno 1634.

Nor was this all the fruit neither of such dangerous Doctrines, that the Lords
day was grown into the reputation of the Jewish Sabbath: but some that built on
their foundations, and ploughed with no other than their Heifers, endeavored
to bring back again the Jewish Sabbath, as that which is expressly mentioned in
the fourth Commandment; and abrogate the Lords day for altogether, as having no
foundation in it nor warrant by it. Of these, one Thraske declared himself, for
such, in King James his time, and therewithal took up another Jewish Doctrine
about Meats and Drinks: as in the time of our dread Sovereign now being,
Theophilus Braborne grounding himself on the so much applauded Doctrine of the
morality of the Sabbath; maintained that the Jewish Sabbath ought to be
observed, and wrote a large Book in defense thereof, which came into the World
1632. For which their Jewish doctrines, the first received his censure in the
Star Chamber, and what became of him I know not: the other had his doom in the
High Commission, and has since altered his opinion, being misguided only by
the principles of some noted men, to which he thought he might have trusted. Of
these I have here spoken together, because the ground of their opinions, so far
as it concerned the Sabbath, were the very same; they only make the
conclusions, which of necessity must follow from the former premises: just as
the Brownists did befoe when they abominated on the Communion of the Church of
England, on the Puritan principles. But to proceed. This of it self had been
sufficient to bring all to ruin, but this was not all. Not only Judaism did
begin, but Popery took great occasion of increase, by the preciseness of some
Magistrates and Ministers in several places of this Kingdom, in bindring people
from their Recreations on the Sunday: the Papists in this Realm being thereby
persuaded that no honest Mirth or Recreation was tolerable in our Religion.
Which being noted by King James, in his progress through Lancashire, King
James's Declarat.
it pleased his Majesty to set out his Declaration, May 24. Anno 1618. the
Court being then at Greenwich, to this effect, that for his good peoples lawful
Recreations his pleasure was, that after the end of Divine Service, they should
not be disturbed, let or discouraged, from any lawful Recreations: such as
Dancing, either Men or Women, Archery for Men, Leaping, Vaulting, or any other
such harmless Recreations: nor from having of Maygames, Whitsun-Ales, or
Morrice-dances, and setting up of May-poles, or other sports therewith used; so
as the same be had in due and cenvenient time, without impediment or let of
Divine Service: and that Women should have leave to carry Rushes to the Church,
for the decoring of it, atcording to their old custom: withal prohibiting all
unlawful Games to be used on the Sundays only, as Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting,
Enterludes, and at all times, in the meaner sort of people, by Law prohibited,
Bowling. A Declaration which occasioned much noise and clamor; and many
scandals spread abroad, as if these Counsels had been put into that Princes
head, by some great Prelates, which were then of most power about him. But in
that point they might have satisfied themselves, that this was no
Court-doctrine: no New-divinity; which that learned Prince had been taught in
England. He had declared himself before, when he was King of the Scots only, to
the self-same purpose: as may appear in his Basilicon Doron, published Anno
1598. This was the first Blow, in effect, which had been given, in all his
time, to the new Lords day Sabbath, then so much applauded.

For howsoever, as I said, those who had entertained these Sabbatarian
Principles, instant in season, and out of season, by public Writings, private
Preachings, and clandestine insinuations, or whatsoever other means might tend
to the promotion of this Catholic Cause: yet find we none that did oppose it
in a public way, though there were many that disliked it: only one Mr. Lo, of
the Church of Exeter, declared himself in his Effigiatio very Sabbatismi, Anno
1606. to be of different judgment from them; and did lay down indeed the truest
and most justifiable Doctrine of the Sabbath, of any Writer in that time. But
being written in the Latin Tongue, it came not to the peoples hands: many of
those which understood it, never meaning, to let the people know the Contents
thereof. And whereas, in the year 1603, at the Commencement held in Cambridg,
this Thesis, or Proposition, Dies Dominicus nititur Verbo Dei; was publicly
maintained by a Doctor there, and by the then Vice Chancellor so determined;
neither the following Doctors there, or any in the other University, that I can
hear of, did ever put up any Antithesis, in opposition thereunto. At last, some
four years after his Majesty's Declaration before remembered, Anno 1622. Doctor
Prideaux, his Majesty's Professor for the University of Oxon, did, in the
public Act, declare his judgment in this point, de Sabbato; which afterward,
in the year 1625. he published to the World, with his other Lectures. Now, in
this Speech, or Determination, he did thus resolve it. First, that the Sabbath
was not instituted in the first Creation of the World; nor ever kept by any of
the ancient Patriarchs, who lived before the Law of Moses: therefore, no moral
and perpetual Precept, as the others are, Sect. 2. Secondly, That the
sanctifying of one day in seven, is ceremonial only, and obliged the Jews; not
Moral, to oblige us Christians to the like Observance, Sect. 3. and 4. Thirdly,
That the Lords day is founded only on the Authority of the Church, guided
therein by the practice of the Apostles: not on the fourth Commandment, which
in the 7. Section he entituleth a seandalous Doctrine; nor any other authority
in holy Scripture, Sect. 6. and 7. Fourthly, That the Church has still
authority to change the day, though such authority be not fit to be put in
practice, Sect. 7. Fifthly, That in the celebration of it, there is no such
cessation from the works of labor, required of us, as was exacted of the Jews:
but that we lawfully may dress Meat, proportionable unto every man's estate; and
do such other things, as be no hinderance to the public Service, appointed for
the day, Sect. 8. Sixthly, That on the Lords day all Recreations whatsoever are
to be allowed, which honestly may refresh the spirits, and increase mutual love
and Neighborhood amongst us: and, that the Names whereby the Jews did use to
call their Festival (whereof the Sabbath was the chief) were borrowed from an
Hebrew word, which signifies to Dance, and to make merry, or rejoice. And
lastly, that it appertains to the Christian Magistrate, to order and appoint,
what Pastimes, on the Lords day, are to be permitted, and what prohibited: not
unto every private person, much less to every man's rash Zeal, as his own words
are, who out of a schismatical Stoicism, (debarring men from lawful Pastimes)
does incline to Judaisin, Sect. 8. This was the sum and substance of his
resolution, then: which, as it gave content unto the sounder and the better
part of the Assembly; so it did infinitely stomach and displease the greater
numbers, such as were formerly possessed with the other Doctrines; though they
were wiser, than to make it a public Quarrel. Only it pleased Mr. Bifeild of
Surrey, in his Reply in a Discourse of Mr. Brerewoods, of Cresham College, Anno
1631. to tax the Doctor as a spreader of wicked Doctrine; and much to marvel
with himself, how either he durst be so hold to say, Page 161.
or having said it, could be suffered to put it forth, viz. That to establish
the Lords day on the fourth Commandment, were to incline too much to Judaism:
This the said M. Bifeild thinks to be a foul aspertion on this famous Church.
But in so thinking, I conceive, that he consulted more his own opinion, and his
private interest, than any public maintenance of the Churches cause; which was
not injured by the Doctor, but defended rather. But to proceed, or rather to go
back a little: About a year before the Doctor thus declared his judgment, one
Tho. Broad, of Gloucestorshire, had published something in this kind: wherein,
to speak my mind thereof, he rather showed, that he disliked those Sabbath
Doctrines, than durst disprove them. And before either, M. Brerewood, whom
before I named, had writ a learned Treatise about the Sabbath, on a particular
occasion therein mentioned; but published it was not, till after both, Anno
1629. Add here, to join them altogether, that in the Schools at Oxon, Anno
1628. it was maintained by Dr. Robinson, now Archdeacon of Gloucester; viz.
Ludos Recreationis gratia in die Dominico, non esse prohibitos Divina Lege;
That Recreations on the Lords day, were not at all prohibited by the Word of
God.

As for our neighbor Church of Scotland; France; the Regent was a desolate
Widow, a Stranger to the Nation, and not well obeyed: So that the people there,
possessed by Cnoxe, and other of their Teachers, took the cause in hand; and
went that way, which came most near unto Geneva, where this Cnoxe had lived.
Among the first things wherewithal they were offended, were the Holy days:
Proceedings at Perth.
These, in their Book of Discipline Anno 1560. they condemned at once;
particularly, the observation of Holy days, entitled by the names of Saints;
the Feasts of Christmas, Circumcision, Epiphany, the Purification, and others
of the Virgin Mary; all which they ranked awongst the abominations of the Roman
Religion, as having neither Commandment nor assurance in the Word of God. But
having brought this Book to be subsigned by the Lords of secret Counsel, it was
first rejected: some of them giving it the Title of Devote Imaginations; Cnoxe,
Hist. of Scotl. p. 523.
whereof Cnoxe complains. Yet notwithstanding, on they went, and at last
prevailed, (for in the middle of the Tumults, the Queen Regent died) and did
not only put down all the Holy days, the Lords day excepted; but when an uprore
had been made in Edenburg, about a Robin-hood, or a Whitson-Lord, they of the
Consistory excommunicated the whole multitud. Now, Proceedings at Perth.
that the holy days were put down, may appear by this; That in the year 1566.
when the Confession of the Helvetian Churches was proposed unto them, they
generally approved the same; save that they liked not of those Holy days, which
were there retained. But whatsoever they intended, and howsoever they had
utterly suppressed those days, which were entitled by the Names of particular
Saints, yet they could never so prevail, but that the people would retain some
memory of the two great and principal Feasts of Christ's Nativity and
Resurrection. For in the year 1575. Complaint was made unto the Regent, how in
Dunfreis they had conveyed the Reader to the Church with Taber and Whissel, to
read Prayers all the Holy days of Zule, or Christmas. Thereupon, Anno 1577. it
was ordained in an Assembly of the Church: That the Visitors should admonish
Ministers, preaching or ministering the Communion, at Pasche or Zule, or other
like superstitious times, under pain of deprivation, to desist therefrom. Anno
1587. it was complained of to his Majesty, That Pasche and Zule were
superstitiously observed in Fife, and about Dunfreis: and in the year 1592. the
Act of the Queen Regent granting license to keep the said two Feasts, was by
them repealed. Yet find we by the Bishop of Brechin, in his Discourse of the
Proceedings at the Synod of Perth, that notwithstanding all the Acts Civil, and
Ecclesiastic, made against the superstitious observation and profane abuse of
Zule day, the people could never be induced to labor on that day: and
wheresoever Divine service was done that day, as in Towns which have always
Morning and Evening Prayers, they were perceived to resort in greater numbers
on that day, than on any other to the Church. As for King James of happy
memory, he did not only keep the said great Festivals from his youth as there
is said; but wished them to be kept by all his Subjects, yet without abuse; and
in his Basilicon Doron published, Anno 1598. thus declares himself; that
without superstition, Plays and unlawful Games may be used in May, and good
Cheer at Christmas. Now on the other side, as they had quite put down those
days, which had been dedicated by the Church to Religious Meetings: so they
appointed others of their own authority. For in their Book of Discipline before
remembered, it was thus decreed, viz. That in every notable Town, a day, besides
the Sunday should be appointed, weekly, for Sermons; that during the time of
Sermon, the day should be kept free from all exercise of labor, as well by the
Master, as by the Servant: as also that every day [in the said great Towns]
there be either Sermon, or Prayers, with reading of the Scriptures. So that it
seems, they only were afraid of the name of Holy days, and were contented
well enough, with the thing it self. As for the Lords day, in that Kingdom, I
find not that it had attained unto the name or nature of a Sabbath day, until
that Doctrine had been set on foot amongst us in England. For in the Book of
Discipline, set out as formerly was said in 560. they call it by no other name
than Sunday; ordaining, that upon four Sundays in the year, which are therein
specified, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper should be administered to the
people: and in the year 1592. an Act of King James the third about the
Saturday, and other Vigills to be kept holy from Evensong to Evensong, was
annulled and abrogated. Which plainly shows that then they thought not of a
Sabbath. But when the Sabbath doctrine had been raised in England, Anno 1595,
as before was said, it found a present entertainment with the Brethren there;
who had before professed in their public Writings to our Puritans here,
Davison. p. 20.
that both their causes were most nearly linked together, and thereupon, they
both took up the name of Sabbath, and imposed the rigor: yet so, that they
esteem it lawful to hold Fasts thereon, quod saepissime in Ecclesia nostra
Scoticana factum est; and use it often in that Church; which is quite contrary
unto the nature of a Sabbath. And on the other side they deny it, to be the
weekly Festival of the Resurrection, Non sunt dies Dominici festa
Resurrectionis as they have resolved it; Altar Damasc. p. 669.
which shows as plainly that they build not the translation of their Sabbath on
the same grounds, as our men have done. Id. 696.
In brief by making up a mixture of a Lords day Sabbath they neither keep it as
the Lords day, nor as the Sabbath. And in this state things stood until the
year 1618. what time some of the Ancient holy days were revived again, in the
Assembly held at Perth: in which, moving some other Rites of the Church of
England which were then admitted, it was thus determined viz. As we abhor the
superstitious observation of festival days by the Papists: and detest all
licentious and profane abuse thereof, by the common sort of Professors; so we
think that the inestimable benefits received from God, by our Lord Jesus
Christ, his Birth, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and sending down of the
Holy Ghost, was commendably and godly remembered at certain particular days and
times by the whole Church of the world, and may be also now. Therefore the
Assembly ordains that every Minister shall upon these days have the
Commemoration of the foresaid inestimable benefits, and make choice of several
and pertinent Texts of Scripture, and frame their Doctrine and Exhortation
thereunto, and rebuke all superstitious observation and licentious profanation
thereof. A thing which much displeased some men of contrary persuasion: first,
out of fear that this was but a Preamble to make way for all the other Holy
days observed in England: And secondly, because it seemed that these five days
were in all points to be observed as the Lords day was, both in the times of
the Assembly, and after the dissolving of the same. But pleased or dispeased,
so it was decreed; and so still it stands.

But to return again to England. 1 Carol. 1.
in his first Parliament to Enact, That from thence-forwards there should be no
Meetings, Assemblies, or concourse of people out of their Parishes on the Lords
day, for any sports or pastimes whatsoever; nor any Bear-baitings,
Bullbaitings, common Plays, Enterludes, or any other unlawful Exercises, or
Pastimes, used by any person or persons in their own Parishes; every offense to
be punished by the forfeiture of 3 s. 4 d. This being a Probation Law, was to
continue till the end of the first Session of the next Parliament: And in the
next Parliament, it was continued till the end of the first Session of the
next, 3 Carol. 1.
which was then to come. So also was another Act made in the said last Session
wherein it was enacted, That no Carrier, Waggoner, Wain-man, Carman, or Drover,
travel thence-forwards on the Lords day, on pain that every person and persons
so offending shall lose and forfeit 20 s. for every such offense: And that no
Butcher, either by himself, or any other by his privity and consent, do kill or
sell any Victual on the said day, upon the forfeiture and loss of 6 s. 8 d.
Which Statutes being still in force, by reason that there has not been any
Session of Parliament, since they were enacted; many, both Magistrates and
Ministers, either not rightly understanding, or wilfully mistaking the intent
and meaning of the first, brought Dancing and some other lawful Recreations,
under the compass of unlawful Pastimes, in that Act prohibited: and thereupon
disturbed and punished many of the Kings obedient people, only for using of
such Sports as had been authorized by his Majesty's Father of blessed memory.
Nay, which is more, it was so publicly avowed and printed by one who had no
calling to interpret Laws, except the provocation of his own ill spirit, That
Dancing on the Lords day was an unlawful Pastime, punishable by the Statute, 1.
Carol. 1. which intended (so he says) to suppress Dancing on the Lords day, as
well as Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, and common Plays, which were
not then so rife and common as Dancing, when this Law was made. Things being at
this height, King Charles Declarat.
it pleased his excellent Majesty, Observing, as he says himself, how much his
people were debarred of Recreation, and finding in some Counties, that under
the pretense of taking away abuses, there had been a general forbidding, not
only of ordinary Meetings, but of the Feasts of the Dedication of Churches,
commonly called Wakes; to ratify and publish the Declaration of his Majesty's
Father, before remembered: adding, That all those Feasts, with others, should be
observed; and that all neighborhood and freedom, with manlike and lawful
exercises, be therein used. Commanding all the Justices of Assize, in their
several Circuits, to see that no man do trouble or molest any of his loyal and
dutiful People in or for their lawful Recreations, having first done their duty
to God, and continuing in obedience unto him and his Laws: and further, that
publication thereof be made by order from the Bishops through all the Parishes
of their several Diocesses respectively. Thus did it please his excellent and
sacred Majesty to publish his most pious and religious purpose of opening to
his loyal people that liberty of the day, which the day allowed of; and which
all Christian States and Churches in all times before had never questioned:
withal, of shutting up that door, whereat no less than Judaism would in fine
have entered, and so in time have overrun the fairest and most beautiful Church
at this day in Christendom. And certainly it was a pious and Princely act,
nothing inferior unto that of Constantine, or any other Christian King or
Emperor before remembered; it being no less pious, in it self considered, to
keep the Holy Days free from Superstition, than to preserve them from
Profaneness; especially considering that permission of lawful Pleasures is no
less proper to a Festival than restraint from labor. Nay, of the two it is
more ancient: For in his time, Tertullian tells us that they did diem solis
laetitiae indulgere, devote the Sunday partly unto Mirth and Recreation, not to
Devotion altogether; when, in an hundred years after Tertullians time, there
was no Law or Constitution to restrain men from labor on this day, in the
Christian Church.

Yet did not his most excellent Majesty find such obedience in some men, via
Regia, the Kings high way; as that which is most safe, and of best assurance,
because most traveled by Gods people. Our private paths do lead us often into
error, and sometimes also into danger. And therefore I beseech all those who
have offended in that kind, to lay aside their passions, and their private
interests, if any are that way misguided; as also not to shut their eyes
against those truths, which are presented to them for their information: that
so the King may have the honor of their due obedience; the Church, the comfort
of their labors, and conformable ministry. For to what purpose should they
hope to be ennobled for their sufferings in so bad a cause, that neither has
the doctrine of the Scripture to authorize it, or practice of the Church of
God, the best Expositor of the Scripture, to confirm and countenance it? or to
be counted constant to their first Conclusions, having such weak and dangerous
premises to support the same; since constancy not rightly grounded, is at best
but obstinacy, and many times does end in Heresy. Once again therefore I
exhort them, even in Gods name, whose Ministers they are, and unto whom they
are to give up an account of their employment; and in the Kings Name, whom as
Gods deputy they are bound to obey not for wrath only, but for conscience sake,
and in the Churches name, whose peace they are to study above all things else;
and their own names lastly, whom it most concerns, that they desist, and go not
forwards in this disobedience, lest a worse business fall upon them. For my
part I have done my best, so far to give them satisfaction in the present point
(so far forth as the nature of an History would permit;) as they might think it
no disparagement to alter their opinions and desert their errors, and change
their resolutions; since in so doing, they shall conform themselves unto the
practice of Gods Church in all times and Ages. The greatest Victory which a man
can get, is to subdue himself, and triumph over sin and error. De Civit. Dei,
l. 22. c. 30.
I end as I began in S. Augustins language: Quibus hoc nimium, vel quibus parum
est, mihi ignoscant; quibus satis est, non mihi, sed Domino mecum
congratulantes, gratias agant. Let such as shall conceive this Treatise to be
too little, or too much, excuse my weakness: And as for those whom it may
satisfy in the smallest measure, let them not unto me, but to God, with me,
ascribe all the honor: to whom belongs all praise and glory even for evermore.

Pibrac. Quadr. 5.
Ne va disant, ma main a faict cest oeuure,
Ou ma virtue ce bell oeuure a parfaict:
Mais dis ainsi, Dieu par moy l'oeuuee a faict,
Dieu est l'Autheur, du peu de bien que l'oeuure.
Say not, my hand this Work to end has brought,
Nor this my virtue has attained unto:
Say rather thus; this God by me has wrought;
God's Author of the little good I do.
FINIS.
Historia Quinqu-Articularis: OR, A DECLARATION Of the Judgment of the WESTERN
CHVRCHES, And more particularly of the CHURCH of ENGLAND; IN The Five
Controverted Points, Reproached in these Last times by the Name of ARMINIANISM.

Collected in the way of an Historical Narration, Out of the Public Acts and
Monuments, and most approved Authors of those several Churches.

By PETER HEYLYN, D. D.

Jer. 6.16. State super vias, and videte, and interrogate de semitis antiquis,
quae sit via bona, and ambulate in ea, and invenietis refrigerium animabus
vestris.

Macrob. in Saturnal. Omne meum and nihil meum.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, to be sold by C. Harper. 1681.

TO THE READER.
IT is well known to some in London and elsewhere, that these Papers were
finished for the Press before August last. But the first breaking out in
Cheshire, and the unsetledness of affairs which ensued upon it, proved such
discouragements to all Engagings of this kind, that Michaelmas was past before
the undertakers would adventure on it. And what distractions have since
followed in the Public Government (sufficient to retard a work of greater
consequence) is unknown to none. But long looked for comes at last, as the
saying is, though why it should come out at all, may be made a question: And I
shall also give the Reader some account of that, but in so doing, must make use
of somewhat which was said elsewhere.

It was more than half against my will, and rather through the indiscretion of
others, than any forwardness of my own, that I was drawn to show my self in
these present Controversies. But being unseasonably brought upon the Stage by
Dr. Bernard, impertinently enough by Mr. Baxter, and with more than ordinary
Petulancy by the Man of Scorn; the occasion was laid hold on by some very able
and discerning men, for pressing me to search into the History of these
disputes, so far forth as the Church of England was concerned in them, and to
make public what I sound upon that inquiry. To which request I made such
answer at the present, as the consideration of my many unfitnesses for an
employment of that nature, might suggest unto me. But coming to me from so many
hands, that it could not fairly be denied, I was prevailed with in the end, to
apply my self to the undertaking, as soon as I had dispatched such other
businesses as lay then upon me.

In the mean time I thought I might comply sufficiently with all expectations,
by fashioning some short Animadversions on the principal passages relating to
the Doctrine of the Church of England; which had been purloyned for the most
part out of Mr. Prinns Book of Anti-arminianism, by a late Compiler. By which
name the old Critics and Grammarians used to call those men, who pilfering
their materials out of other men's writings, did use to lay them close together
as their own, to avoid discovery. Compilo, i. c. Surripio, quia quae fures
auferunt ea pressim colligunt, quod est compilare.
And so the word is took by Horace is his Compilasse, Sermon. 1. verse ult. as is
observed on that verse by the Learned Scoliasts. So that a Compilator and a
Plagiary are but two terms of one signification. And he that would behold a
Plagacy in his proper colors, may find him painted to the lise in the Appendix
to Mr. Pierce his Vindication of the Learned Grotius; to which for further
satisfaction I refer the Reader.

That preamble having led the way, and may other businesses being ever, I
prepared my self unto that search to which I was so earnestly moved, and so
affectionately entreated. My helps were few and weak, which might sufficiently
have deterred me from the undertaking. But a good cause will help to carry on
it self, and truth will find the way to shine, though darkened for a time with
the clouds of Error; as the Sun breaking from an Eclips, does appear more
glorious, though a while obscured: Delitere videtur sol, non delitet, as in the
like case the Father has it. The five disputed points which in these last
times are reproached by the name of Arminianism, had more or less exercised the
Church in all times and ages, especially after the breaking out of the Pelagian
Heresies, where all the Niceties thereof were more thoroughly canvassed.
Neither the piety and sobriety of the Primitive times, nor the authority of the
Popes, nor the commanding spirit of Luther, nor the more powerful name of
Calvin have prevailed so far; but that the Church, and every broken fragment of
it, has sound some subdivision about these Debates. So that it can be no great
wonder if the Church of England be divided also on the same occasion; or that a
Deviation should be made from her public rules, as well as in all other
Churches, and all former times.

Which way the general vote had passed in the elder ages, has been abundantly
set forth by John Gerrard Vossius, in his Historia Pelagiana. But be descended
not so low as these latter times, conceiving he had done enough in showing to
which of the contending parties, the general current of the Fathers did most
incline. And if Tertullians rule be good, that those opinions have most truth
which have most antiquity, ( id verum est quod primum, as his own words are)
the truth must run most clearly in that part of the Controversy which has
least in it of the Zuinglian or Calvinian Doctrins. And so far I shall follow
his method, or example rather, in the pursuit of that design which I have
before me. For though it be my principal purpose to search into the Doctrine of
the Church of England; yet I shall preface my discourse by laying down the
Judgment of the rest of the Western Churches, before I come to that of our
first Reformers. By means whereof it may be seen what guides they followed, or
rather with what parties they concurred in judgment; since in those times the
Church was generally so distracted about these disputes, that with the whole
the aggregate body of believers, there could be no agreement hoped for, no
compliance possible.

In the pursuance of this work I have exemplified so much of the Debates and
Artifices in the Council of Trent, as concerns these points, and may be
paralleled with the like proceedings in the Synod of Dort: I have consulted
also the Confessions, the Synodals, and other public Monuments, and Records of
the several parties, and so many of the best and most approved Authors of this
Church of England, as either were within my power, or could be advised with at
a further distance: One whole discourse I have transcribed about Free Will, not
obvious to the met withal in Shops or Libraries. The like I have done also with
one whole Homily, though the book be easy to be found by those that seek it,
knowing full well how unwilling most Readers are to take more pains in turning
over several books, and examining all quotations which are brought before them,
than of necessity they must. Nor have I purposely concealed or subducted any
thing considerable which may seem to make for the advantage of the opposite
party: And have therefore brought in a discourse of the Martyrologist in favor
of the Calvinian Doctrine. I have also given a just account of the first
breaking out of the Predestinarians in Queen Mary's time, and of the stirs in
Cambridge, in Queen Elizabeth's; not pretermitting such particulars as may be
thought to make for them in the course of this Narrative, even to the Articles
of Ireland, and the harsh expression of King James against Arminius. And
therefore I may say in the words of Curtius, Plura equidem transcribo quam
credo; nec enim affirmare ausuge sum, quae dubito; nec subducere sustineo quae
accepi. I have related many things which I cannot approve, though I have not
let them pass without some censure, that so I may impose nothing on the Readers
belief, without good grounds; nor defraud him of any thing conducible to his
information.

I was not to be told how much my first engaging in this business might offend
those men who loved to countenance their extravagancy by the name of the
Church, and what loud clamours they had raised against the most Reverend Dr.
Whitgift, for encountering with T. C. in behalf of the Liturgy, against Dr. John
Bridges, Dean of Sarisbury, for standing in defense of the sacred Hirarchy,
against the most Learned Bishop Bilson, for crossing Calvin's new device about
Christ descent; against Dr. Barce for opposing the Genevian Rigors in the
points before us; against Mr. Richard Montague for separating the opinions of
private men from the Churches Doctrins, and final against the late Renowned
Archbishop, for laboring to restore this Church to its primitive luster. And
though hI could not hope to be more savourably dealt withal in this case than
my Letters were, yet I might reasonably expect to be used no worse. But on the
contrary I have lately seen a scurrilous Pamphlet, the Author whereof has
licked up all the filth of former Libels, to vomit it at once upon me, without
respect to that civility which beseems a Scholar, or that sobriety and modesty
which adorns a Christian; so Cocks are dieted sometimes with Garlic before
they fight, that they may rather overcome their Adversaries by the stinck of
their breath, than by the sharpness of their spurs, or the strength of their
blows.

But I have been so long accustomed to the noise of this Railing Rhetoric,
that I am now no more troubled at it, than were the Catadupi at the Rorings of
the River Nilus, or Socrates to see himself derided and exposed to scorn on the
public Theater: Or could I be exasperated to a Retaliation, that saying of St.
Cyprian would recall me to my wonted temper; who being bitterly railed at by
some of his Presbyters, returned this Answer, Non Oportet me paria cum illis
facere; that it becomes not me to answer them with the like revilings. And yet
I cannot but take notice of a mischievous project for throwing a Ball of
discord betwixt me and some friends of mine, Doctors in title and degree, and
by the Libeller declared to be of my own persuasion, one of which is affirmed
to say, That I was an unhappy Writer, and marred every thing which I meddled
with; and for the finding of this one, I have nothing but a blind direction of
Hist. in the margin; placed there of purpose, as it seems, to put me into a
suspicion of all eminent persons, whose names begin with those two Letters.

It is recorded in the History of Amianus Marcellinus, that certain men
informed the Emperor Valence by their Devilish Arts, that one whose name began
with THEO should succeed in the Empire. Which put the sealous Prince into such
a general distrust of all whose Names had that beginning (Theodoret,
Theodofius, Theopulos, Theodulos, Theodore) that he caused many of them, though
men of eminent worth, and most exemplary Loyalty, to be made the subjects of
his fear and cruelty. And such a Devilish Art is this of T. C. the younger (by
which two Letters he affects to disguise his name) to work me into a suspicion
of some eminent persons, and such as must be also of my own persuasions. But I
have no such jealousies as Valence had, and therefore shall create no trouble
to my self or others upon that temptation. For first, I know the parties
pointed to in those two letters, to be the masters of so much Candor and
Ingenuity, that I am consident they rather would excuse my infelicities, or
insufficiencies (be they which they will) than bring me under the reproach of
any such censure, as none of different judgment ever laid upon me. And
secondly, so much they have descended beneath themselves, as of their own
accord to certify me both by Letters and Messages, how free they were from
giving any ground to that base suspicion which was contrived with so much
malice and design, to divide between us. And so Autorem Scelus repetet, the
Calumny must be left at the Authors door, as the natural parent of it, till he
can find out more distinctly upon whom to charge it. In the mean time I leave
him to the mercy of the Laws, as a common Barrator, Drenched over head and ears
in the waters of strife, a sower of discord and discention amongst faithful
friends.

But I have wasted too much time on this piece of impertinency, and might
perhaps have better studied my own fame, if I had taken no notice of the Libel,
or the Author either, but that to have been silent altogether in so just a
grievance, might possibly be taken for an argument of insensibility. For
otherwise, as there is nothing in the Author, but the stolen name of Theophilus
Churchman, which descries my Pen, so there is nothing argumentative in the
Pamphlet, either which was not both foreseen and satisfied in the following
papers, before it came unto my hands. I return therefore to my Post, which if I
can make good by Records and Evidence, (the fittest weapons for this Warfare) I
shall not easily be forced from it by Reproach and Clamors, as were the ancient
Gauls from surprising the Capitol by the noise and gagling of the Geese. But
whether I have made it good or not, must be left to the Reader, to whom I hope
it will appear that Calvinism was not the native and original Doctrine of the
Church of England, though in short time it overspread a great part thereof, as
Arrianism did the Eastern Churches in the elder times; Ubi ingemuit orbis, as
St. Hierom has it, when the world groaned and trembled under the calamity of
that dangerous Heresy. And I hope too it will appear by this discourse, that I
am not yet so far reduced ad secundam pueritiam (as the Scorner taunts it) as
that my venerable back and buttocks (pardon me for repeating such unmannerly
language) should be entitled to the Rod of this proud Orbilius. Or if I be, I
doubt not but that God Almighty, who ordains praise out of the mouths of
Babes and Sucklings, will raise some glory to his Name from that second
Childhood. To which great God, and his unspeakable mercies in Jesus Christ our
common Savior, I do most heartily recommend this Church, and all them that
love it.

Lacies Court in Abington, December, 26. 1659. PETER HEYLYN.

Historia Quinqu-Articularis: OR, A DECLARATION Of the Judgment of the
Western-Churches, etc.
CHAP. I. The several Heresies of those who make God to be the Author of Sin,
or attribute too much to the Natural freedom of Man's Will in the Works of
Piety.
1. God affirmed by Florinus to be the Author of sin, the blasphemy encountered
by Irenaeus, and the foul consequents thereof. 2. Revived in the last Ages by
the Libertines, said by the Papists to proceed from the Schools of Calvin, and
by the Calvinists to proceed from the Schools of Rome. 3. Disguised by the
Maniches in another dress, and the necessity thereby imposed on the Wills of
men. 4. The like by Bardesanes, and the Priscilianists, the dangerous
consequents thereof exemplified out of Homer, and the words of S. Augustine. 5.
The error of the Maniches, touching the servitude of the Will revived by
Luther, and continued by the rigid Lutherans. 6. As those of Bardesanes and
Priscilian, by that of Calvin, touching the Absolute Decree, the dangers which
lie hidden under the Decree, and the incompetibleness thereof with Christ's
coming to Judgment. 7. The large expressions of the Ancient Fathers touching
the freedom of the Will, abused by Pelagius and his followers. 8. The Heresy
of Pelagius, in what it did consist, especially as to this particular, and the
dangers of it. 9. The Pelagian Heresy condemned and recalled: the temper of S.
Augustine touching the freedom of the Will in spiritual matters. 10.
Pelagianism falsely charged on the Moderate Lutherans: How far all parties do
agree about the freedom of the Will, and in what they differ.


OF all the Heresies which exercised the Church in the times foregoing,
Florinus, Blastus, and some other of the City of Rome, about the year 180.
encountered presently by that godly Bishop and Martyr S. Irenaeus, who published
a Discourse against them, bearing this Inscription (...), Viz. Hist. Eccl.
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 14. and 19.
That God was not the Author of sin. And he gave this Inscription to it (as the
story tells us) because Florinus not content with those Vulgar Heresies which
had been taken up before, would needs break out into blasphemous Phrensies
against God himself, in making him the Author of all those sins which lewd men
commit. Which Doctrine were it once admitted, not only the first sin of Adam,
but all the sins that have been hitherto perpetrated by his whole Posterity,
must be charged on God, and he alone must be accountable for all Murders,
Robberies, Rapes, Adulteries, Insurrections, Treasons, Blasphemies, Heresies,
Persecutions, or any other Abominations which have been acted in the world
since the first Creation. For certainly there can be no reason why every man
may not say, on the committing of any sin, whatsoever it be, as did Lyconides
in Plantus, when he defloured old Eudio's Daughter, Deus mihi impulsor fuit, is
me ad illam illexit; it was God alone who tempted and provoked them to those
wicked actions.

What Arguments the good Father used to cry down this Blasphemy (for a Heresy
is a name too mild for so lewd a Doctrine) I cannot gather from my Author,
Florinus and the rest had no followers at all (as most Heretics had) or such
as never attained to the height of their Masters Impudence. And so that
damnable Doctrine (the Doctrine of Devils I may call it) seems to be strangled
in the birth, or to be buried in the same grave with the Authors of it, never
revived in more than thirteen hundred years after the death of Irenaeus, when
it was against by the Libertines, a late brood of Sectaries, whom each of the
two opposite parties are ashamed to own. This taught as did Florinus, Calv.
Advers. Libertl. c. 12.
in the Primitive times, Quicquid ego, and tu facimus, Deus efficit; nam in
nobis est, That whatsoever thing they did, was Gods working in them; and
therefore God to be entitled to those wicked actions which themselves
committed. The time of their first breaking out affirmed to be about the year
1529. The Founders of this Sect Loppinus and Quintinus, Flemmings both; and
this Prateolus affirms for certain to be the Progency of Calvin, and other
leading men of the Protestant Churches. They came (says he) Eschola nostrae
tempestatis Evangelicorum. Bellarmin somewhat more remisly, Prateol. Elench.
Haeve. in Quintino. Bellar.
Omnino probabile est, eos ex Calvianianis promanasse, and makes it only
probable that it might be so, but not rightly neither: The Libertines breaking
out, as before was said, Anno 1527. when Calvin was of little credit, and the
name of Calvinists, or Calvinians not so much as heard of. And on the other
side, Paraeus Professor of Divinity in the University of Hidelberg, writing
some Animadversions on the Cardinals works, assures us that they were both
Papists, acquaints us with the place of their Nativity, and the proceedings had
against them. Nor was Calvin wanting for his part, to purge himself from such
an odious imputation, not only by confuting their Opinions in a set discourse,
but making one Franciscus Porquius, a Franciscan Friar to be a chief stickler
in the Cause. Against which I know nothing that can be said, but that the
doctrine of the Libertines in this particular, does hold more correspondence
with Calvin's principles, than any of the received Positions of the Friars of S.
Francis. But whether it were so or not, I shall make this Inference, That the
Doctrine must needs be most impious, which both sides detested, which the
Papists labored so industriously to father on the Schools of Calvin, and the
Calvinians no less passionatly to charge on some of our great Masters in the
Church of Rome.

But so it is, Manes was the first, by birth of Persia, and Founder of the
damnable Sect of the Manicheans, Anno 273. or thereabouts. This Wretch
considering how unsuccesfully Florinus had sped before, in making God (who is
all, and only good) to be the Author of sin: did first excogitate two Gods, the
one good, and the other evil, both of like eternity; ascribing all pious
actions to the one, all Sins and Vices to the other; Which ground so laid, he
utterly deprived the will of man of that natural liberty, of which it is by God
invested; and therefore that in man there was no ability of resisting sin, or
not submitting unto any of those wicked actions which his lusts and passions
offered to him. Prateol. in Elench. Haer. in Marich.
Condendebant, item, peccatum non esse a libero arbitrio, sed a Daemone, and
capropter non posse per liberum arbitrium impediri, as my Author has it. Nor
did they only leave man's will in a disability of hindering or resisting the
incursions of sin, but they left it also under an incapability of acting any
thing in order to the works of Righteousness, though God might graciously
vouchsafe his assisting grace, making no difference in this case, betwixt a
living man and a stock or Statua, for so it follows in my Author. Sed and
nullam prorsus voluntati tribuetant Actionem, nec quidem adjuvante spirity
sancto: quasi nihil interesset inter statuam and voluntatem. In both directly
contrary to that divine counsel of S. James, where he advises us to lay apart
all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, and to receive with meekness the
ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls. Chap. 1. ver. 21. That of S.
Peter exhorting, or requiring rather, That we work out our salvation with fear
and trembling. And finally that golden Aphorism of S. Augustine; si non sit
liberum arbitrium, quomodo Deus judicabit mundum? With what justice says the
Father, can God judge or condemn the world, if the sins of men proceed not from
their own free will, but from some overruling power which enforced them to it?

Others there were who harboring in their hearts the said lewd opinions,
Decrees of the other, necessitating then to those wicked actions which they so
frequently commit. Thus we are told of Bardesanes, Quod fato conversationes
hominum ascriberet, That he ascribed all things to the power of Fate. August.
de Haeres. cap. 25. Ibid. cap. 15. and 70.
And thus it is affirmed of Priscillianus, Fatalibus Astris homines alligatos,
That men were thralled unto the Stars, which last S. Augustine does report of
one Colarbus, save that he gave this power and influence to the Planets only,
but these if pondered as they ought, differed but little, if at all from the
impiety of Florinus before remembered, only it was expressed in a better
language, and seemed to savor more of the Philosopher than the other did. For
if the Lord had passed such an irresistible Law of Fate, that such and such
should be guilty of such foul Transgressions as they commonly committed, it was
all one as if he was proclaimed for the Author of them: and then why might not
every man take unto himself the excuse and plea of Agamemnon, (...). It was not
I that did it, Homer Illiad.
but the Gods and Destiny. Or if the Lord had given so irresistible a power to
the Stars of Heaven, as to enforce men to be wickedly and lewdly given; what
differs this from making God the Author of those vicious actions, to which by
them we are enforced? And then why might not every man cast his sin on God, and
say, as did some good fellows in St. Augustines time. Accusandum potius esse
Autorem syderum, August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 2. c. 27.
quam commissorem scelerum. That he who made the Stars was in the fault, not
the men that did it.

But this absurdity being as much cried down by Augustine and other learned
Writers of those elder times, as the impiety of Florinus had been before;
Heterodoxies of the Roman Schools, that of the Maniches first revived by Martin
Luther, who in mere opposition to Erasmus, who had then newly written a Book De
Arbitrio libero, published a Discourse, entitled, De Arbitrio servo. In which
Discourse he does not only say, That the freedom ascribed unto the Will is an
empty nothing, Titulus, and nomen, sine re, a name of no such thing in Nature:
but holds expressly, that man is drawn no otherwise by the grace of God, than
Velut inanimale quiddam, No otherwise than as a senseless stock or stone (the
Statua of the ancient Maniches) in the great work of his conversion, to a state
of Righteousness. And though Luther afterward conformed his Judgment in this
Point, unto that of Melancthon, as appears by the Augustan Confession, in
drawing up whereof he is acknowledged to have had a principal hand; yet was he
followed in this first Error, as in almost all the rest of his extremities, by
the rigid Lutherans, headed by Flaccus Illyricus, and his Associats in the City
of Magdeburg, at his first separation from the Melancthonian Divines, who
remained at Wittenberg, and had embraced more moderate and sober counsels: of
which more hereafter.

But Luther shall not go alone, and not take Calvin along with him, Luther
revived the Error of the Maniches in denying all freedom to the will,
especially in matters which relate to eternal life; and Calvin will revive the
Errors of Bardesanes, and Priscillian, in charging all men's wicked actions on
the Stars, and Destiny, not positively and in terminis, I must needs say that,
but so that he comes close up to them, to Tantamont, ascribing that to the
inevitable Decrees of Almighty God, which Bardesanes attributed to the powers
of Fate: Priscillian, Clolarbus to the influences of the Stars and Planets: For
if God before all Eternity (as they plainly say) did purpose and decree the
Fall of our Father Adam, Vt sua defectione periret Adam: In the words of
Calvin, Calv. instit. lib. 3. c. 23. sect. 7. V. Synod. Romans
There was in Adam a necessity of committing sin, because the Lord had so
decreed it. If without consideration of the sin of man, he has by his
determinate sentence ordained so many millions of men to everlasting damnation,
and that too necessario, and inevitabiliter, as they please to phrase it, he
must needs pre-ordain them to sin also: there being (as themselves confess) no
way unto the end but by the means. The odious Inferences which are raised out
of these Opinions, I forbear to press, and shall add only at the present: That
if we grant this Doctrine to be true and Orthodox; we may do well to put an
Index expurgatorius upon the Creed, and quite expunge the Article of Chrins
coming to Judgment. For how could God condemn his Creature to unquenchable
Flames? or put so ill an Office upon Christ our Savior, as to condemn them by
his mouth, in case the sins by them committed were not theirs, but his; or
punish the for that himself works in them, unto which rather he decred them
before all Eternity. Falgent. ad Monimum.
Nothing more true than that excellent saying of Fulgentius, Deus non est eorum
ultor, quorum est Author. That God does never punish his own actings in us.

Such were the men, Pelagian Heresies, declared themselves so largely, if not
lavishly also, in the present Point, that the greatest Patrons of Free will in
the Church of Rome, were fain sometimes to qualify their expressions, and put
a milder sense upon them, than the words import. For being to deal with the
fatal necessity of the Pagans on the one side, and the impiety of Maniches on
the other side; they gave themselves such liberty in advancing the powers of
Nature, as might best serve to the refelling of either Adversary; not dreaming
then that any Heresy could arise in opposition to the free Grace of God, to
the advancing of free will above all degrees of power and possibility. But on
the contrary Pelagius, a Britain born, either misguided by the lavishness of
their expressions, or otherwise willing to get a Name unto himself by some new
Invention, ascribed so much unto the freedom of the will in all Acts of Piety.
Vt gratiam Dei necessariam non putaret, as Vincentius Lirynensis tells us of
him.

This man associated with Caelestinus and Julianus two of his Companions,
August. Tom. 2. Epist. 106.
Viz. 1. Non esse liberum Arbitrium, si Dei indiget auxilio, quoniam in propria
voluntate babet unusquisque facere aliquid, vel non facere. 2. Victoriam
nostram non ex Dei adjutorio esse; sed ex Libero Arbitrio: That is to say, 1.
That there is no freedom of the will, if it stand in any need of Gods
assistance, because every man has it in the power of his own will, either to
do a thing, or not to do it, as to him seems best. And 2. That our Victory over
sin and Satan comes not of any help which we have from God, but our own free
will. Add unto this, that which must follow of necessity from the former
Principles. Orationes quas facit Ecclesia pro infidelibus, and aliis
peccatoribus ut convertantur, sive pro fidelibus ut perseverent, frustra fieri.
That is to say, That the Services of the Church, which are made either for the
conversion of the wicked, or the perseverance of the Just, are but labor lost;
because (say they) our own free will is able of it self to attain those ends,
and therefore it is to no purpose to ask those things at the hands of God,
which we may compass of our selves: Quod ad illa omnia sufficere dicant nostri
Arbitrii liberam potestatem, Prattol. Elench. Heret. in Pelag.
and ita non opus esse a Deo petere quae nos ipsi consequi possumus, as my
Author has it; whose words I have laid down at large, that we may see how much
the world was carried to the other extreme, how much the Truth was lost on both
sides, and yet how easy to be found by those who went a middle was in the
search thereof.

For looking on these last opinions as they stand in themselves, Augustine does
particularly of the Stoical Fates: Nil aliud agere nisi ut nullus omnino aut
rogetur aut colatur Deus. They seem to aim at nothing more than the utter
abolition of the Worship and Service of God. But these Pelagian Heresies did
not hold out long, being solemnly condemned in the two Affrican Councils of
Cartbage, and Milevis, confuted by St. Augustine with great care and diligence:
and finally retracted by Pelagius himself in the Synod of Palestine. So that
the Heresy being suppressed, the Catholic Doctrine in that Point became more
settled and confirmed by the opposition, such freedom being left to the will of
man, as was subservient unto grace, cooperating in some measure with those
heavenly influences: And so much is confessed by St. Augustine himself, where
he asks this question, Quis nostrum dicit, quod primi hominis peccato perierit
Arbitrium de humano genere? August. l. 1. contr. Epist. Pelagi. cap. 2.
Does any man (says he) affirm that free will is perished utterly from man by
the fall of Adam? And thereunto he makes this answer: Libertas quidem periit
per peccatum; sed illa quae in Paradiso fuit habendi plenam cum immortalitate
justitiam. That is to say, Freedom is perished by sin, but it is that freedom
only which we had in Paradise, of having perfect righteousness with
immortality. For otherwise it appears to be this Opinion that man was not
merely passive in all the Acts of Grace which conduced to Glory, according to
the memorable saying of his (so common in the Mouths of all men) Qui creavit te
sine te, non salvabit te sine te: That he who first made us without our help,
will not vouchsafe to save us at the last without our concurrence. If any
harsher expressions have escaped his Pen, (as commonly it happens in the heats
of a Disputation) they are to be qualified by this last Rule, and by that
before; in which it was affirmed, That God could not with justice judge and
condemn the World, if all men's sins proceeded not from their own free will, but
from some overruling providence which enforced them to it.

After this time we meet with no such Enemies to the Grace of God, Pelagianism.
It cannot be denied but that Illyricus and some other of the rigid Lutherans
upbraided Melancthon and all the Divines in a manner, both of Lipsique and
Wittenberge, with teaching that a man by the powers of Nature may yield
obedience to the Word, embrace the Promises, and make no opposition to the
workings of the Holy Ghost, as has been noted by Lyndanus. Lindan in Dial. 21.
But then it must be granted, that when their works came to be weighed in the
Scale of the Sanctuary, it will be found that they speak only of such a
Synergie, or cooperation, as makes men differ from a senseless stock, or
liveless statua, in reference to the great work of his own conversion. And
thereupon we may resolve that at the last the Church in general concentred upon
these Propositions.

1. Man in the state of corruption has freedom of will in Actions natural and
civil.

2. That considered in the same estate he has free will in matters moral. And,

3. That man has free will in Actions of Piety, and such as belong unto his
salvation; that is to say, Being first prevented by Gods Grace, and having
afterward the assistance, and support thereof: which Propositions being easy
and intelligible as they stand by themselves, but are made more difficult and
obscure, even to learned men, by interweaving them with many intricate
Disputes, touching the correspondence of free will, with Prescience,
Providence, and Predestination; Disputes so intricate and perplexed, that
Armachanus (as great a Clerk as almost any in his time) traveled no less than
twenty years in the search of one of them alone, and yet could not find it. And
yet I cannot say, that the consent in those three Propositions before
remembered, in which the Church has generally concentred: since the death of
St. Augustine has met with no dissenting Judgment in these later times. Some
men restraining all our Actions to so strict a Rule, as to make the will of man
determined and tied up in all particulars, even to the taking up of a Rush, or
Straw, as in another case it was taught by Cartwright the great Bel-weather of
the Flock in Queen Elizabeth's time, sufficiently derided, Eccles. polit. lib.
11. p. 96.
or rather gravely reprehended for it by judicious Hooker. And if we meet with
any thing which looks that way in the Writings of some Dominican Friars, who
stiffly stand to all the rigours of St. Augustine in the controversies of
Predestination, Grace, Free Will, etc. against the Jesuits, and Franciscans: it
is to be imputed rather to the error of their Education a stiffness in
maintaining their old Opinions, or finally to that Animosity, which commonly
the weaker party carries against the stronger, than to any clear and evident
Authority, which they can pretend to from that Father, or any other ancient
Writers of unquestioned credit; which said, I hope it will be granted without
much difficulty, that such a Doctrine of Predestination, as neither directly
nor indirectly makes God to be the Author of sin, nor attributes so much to the
will of man, in depraved Nature, as to exclude the influences of Gods Heavenly
Grace; is more to be embraced than any other, which dasheth against either of
the said extremes: And that being granted or supposed, I shall first lay down
the Judgment of the differing parties, in the Article of Predestination, and
the points depending thereupon: and afterward declare to which of the said
differing Parties, the Doctrine of the Church of England seems most
inclinable.

CHAP. II. Of the Debates amongst the Divines in the Council of Trent, touching
Predestinations, and Original Sin.
1. The Articles drawn from the Writings of the Zuinglians, touching
Predestination and Reprobation. 2. The Doctrine of Predestination, according to
the Dominican way. 3. As also the old Franciscans, with Reasons for their own,
and against the other. 4. The Historians Judgment interposed between the
Parties. 5. The middle way of Catarinus to compose the differences. 6. The
newness of St. Augustines Opinion, and the dislike thereof by the most learned
Men in the Ages following. 7. The perplexities amongst the Theologues, touching
the absoluteness of the Decrees. 8. The Judgment of the said Divines, touching
the possibility of falling from Grace. 9. The Debates about the nature and
transmitting of Original Sin. 10. The Doctrine of the Council in it.


IN such conditions stood Affairs in reference to the Doctrines of
Predestination Grace, Free will, etc. at the first sitting down of the Council
of Trent, in which, those Points became the subject of many sad and serious
Debates amongst the Prelates and Divines, then and there Assembled, which being
so necessary to the understanding of the Questions which we have before us: I
shall not think my time ill spent in laying down the sum and abstract of the
same, as I find it digested to my hand by Padre Paulo, the diligent and
laborious Author of the Tridentine History; only I shall invert his Method, by
giving precedence to the Disputes concerning Predestination, before the Debates
and Agitations, which happened in canvasing the Articles touching the Freedom of
man's Will, though those about Free Will do first occur in the course and method
of that Council: It being determined by the Council, as that Author has it, to
draw some Articles from the Writings of the Protestants, concerning the
Doctrine of Predestination: It appeared that in the Book of Luther, in the
Augustan Confession, and in the Aplogies and Colloquies, there was nothing
found that deserved Censure; But much they found among the Writings of the
Zuinglians, out of which they drew these following Articles; Viz.

1. For Predestination and Reprobation; that man does nothing, but all is in
the will of God. 2. The Predestined cannot be condemned, nor the Reprobate
saved. 3. The Elect and Predestined only are truly justified. 4. The
Justified are bound by Faith to believe, they are in the number of the
Predestined. 5. The Justified cannot fall from Grace. 6. Those that are
called, and are not in the number of the predestined, do never receive Grace.
7. The Justified is bound to believe by Faith, that he ought to persevere in
Justice until the end. 8. The Justified is bound to believe for certain, that
in case he fall from Grace, he shall receive it again.
In the examining the first of these Articles, Thomas, Scotus, and the rest) do
so think, that is, that God before the Creation, out of the Mass of mankind,
has elected by his only and mere mercy, some for Glory, for whom he has
prepared effectually the means to obtain it, which is called, to predestinate.
That their number is certain and determined, neither can there any be added.
The others not predestined cannot complain, for that God has prepared for
them sufficient assistance for this, though indeed none but the Elect shall be
saved. For the most principal reason they alleged, that S. Paul to the Romans
having made Jacob a pattern of the predestined, and Eau of the Reprobate, he
produces the Decree of God pronounced before they were born, not for their
Works, but for his own good pleasure. To this they joined the example of the
same Apostle: That as the Potter of the same lump of Clay, makes one Vessel to
honor, another to dishonor; so God of the same Mass of men, chooses and
leaves whom he lists: for proof whereof S Paul brings the place where God
says to Moses, I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy, and I will show
pity on whom I will show pity. And the same Apostle concludes: It is not of
him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God who shows mercy; adding
after, that God shows mercy on whom he will, and hardneth whom he will. They
said further, That for this cause the Council of the Divine Predestination and
Reprobation is called by the same Apostle, the height and depth of Wisdom
unsearchable and incomprehensible. They added places of the other Epistles,
where he says, We have nothing but what we have received from God, that we are
not able of our selves, so much as to think well: and where, in giving the
cause, why some have revolted from the Faith, and some stand firm, he said, it
was because the Foundation of God stands sure, and has this seal; the Lord
knows who are his. They added diverse passages of the Gospel of S. John, and
infinite Anthorities of S. Augustine, because the Saint wrote nothing in his
old Age but in favor of this Doctrine.

But some others though of Iess esteem, opposed this opinion, calling it hard,

The first Opinion as it is mystical and hidden, keeping the mind humble,
Bitonto, and the Bishop of Salpi showed himself very partial. The Defenders of
this, using humane Reasons, prevailed against the others, but coming to the
testimonies of Scripture, they were manifestly overcome.

Calarinus, holding the same Opinion, to resolve the places of Scripture,
middle way; That God of his goodness had elected some few whom he will save
absolutely, to whom he has prepared most potent, effectual, and infallible
means; the rest he desires for his part they should be saved; and to that end
has promised sufficient means for all, leaving it to their choice to accept
them and be saved, or refuse them and be damned. Amongst these there are some
who receive them and are saved, though they be not of the number of the Elect;
of which kind there are very many. Other refusing to cooperate with God, who
wishes their salvation, are damned. The cause why the first are predestined,
is only the will of God: why the others are saved, is the acceptance, good
use, and cooperation with the Divine assistance, foreseen by God: why the last
are reprobated, is the foreseeing of their perverse will, in refusing or
abusing it. That S. John, S. Paul, and all the places of Scripture alleged by
the other part, where all is given to God, and which do show infallibility, are
understood only of the first, who are particularly privileged; and in other,
for whom the common way is left, the admonitions, exhortations, and general
assistances are verified, unto which, he that will give ear and follow them, is
saved; and he that will not, perishes by his own fault. Of these few who are
privileged above the common condition, the number is determinate and certain
with God, but not of those who are saved by the common way, depend on humane
liberty, but only in regard of the foreknowledge of the works of every one.
Catarinus said, He wondered at the stupidity of those, who say, the number is
certain and determined, and yet they add that others may be saved; which is as
much as to say, that the number is certain, and yet it may be enlarged: And
likewise of those who say, That the Reprobates have sufficient assistance for
salvation, though it be necessary for him that is saved to have a greater,
which is to say, a sufficient, unsufficient.

He added, Augustins Opinion was not heard of before his time, and himself
confesses it cannot be found in the works of any, who wrote before him;
neither did himself always think it true, but ascribed the cause of Gods will
to merits; saying, God takes compassion on, and hardneth whom he lists. But
that will of God cannot be unjust, because it is caused by most secret merits;
and that there is diversity of sinners: some who though they be justified,
deserve justification. But after the heat of Disputation against the Pelagians
transported him to think, and speak the contrary; yet when his opinion was
heard, all the Catholics were scandalized, as S. Prosper wrote to him, and
Genadius of Marselles, fifty years after in his judgment which he makes of the
famous Writers, said, That it happened to him according to the words of Solomon:
That in much speaking one cannot avoid sin; and that by his fault exagitated by
his Enemies, the question was not then risen, which might afterward bring
forth Heresy, whereby the good Father did intimate his fear of that which now
appears; that is, that by that opposition some Sect and Division might arise.

The censure of the second Article was diverse, according to the three related
Opinions. Catarinus thought the first part true, in regard of the efficacy of
the Divine Will toward those who were particularly favored: But the second
false, concerning the sufficiency of Gods assistance unto all, and man's liberty
in cooperating. Others ascribing the cause of Predestination in all to humane
consent, condemned the whole Article in both parts. But those that adhered unto
S. Augustine, and the common opinion of the Theologans, did distinguish it, and
said, it was true in a compound sense, but damnable in a divided: a subtilty
which confounded the minds of the Prelates, and his own, though he did
exemplify it by saying, he that moves cannot stand still, it is true in a
compound sense, but is understood, while he moves: but in a divided sonse it
is false, that is, in another time. Yet it was not well understood, because
applying it to his purpose: It cannot be said that a man predestined can be
damned, in a time when he is not predestined, seeing he is always so; and
generally the divided sense has no place, where the accident is inseparable
from the subject. Therefore others thought to declare it better, saying, that
God governs and moves every thing according to its proper nature, which in
contingent things is free, and such, as that the act may consist together with
the power to the opposite; so that with the act of predestination, the power to
reprobation and damnation does stand. But this was worse understood than the
first.

The other Articles were consured with admirable concord. Saul, Solomon, and
Judas, one of the twelve; a case more evident than all, by these words of
Christ to the Father: I have kept in thy name all that thou have given me, of
which not one has perished, but the son of Perdition. To these they added
Nicholas, one of the seven Deacons, and others, first commended in the
Scriptures, and then blamed; and for a conclusion of all, the Fall of Luther.

Against the sixth, Just shall abandon justice, and commit iniquity, I will not
remember his works. The example of David was added, who committed Murder and
Adultery; of Magdalen and S. Peter, who denied Christ: They derided the folly
of the Zuinglians, for saying, the Just cannot fall from Grace, and yet sins
in every work. The two last were uniformly condemned of temerity, with
exception of those unto whom God has given a special Revelation, as to Moses
and the Disciples, to whom it was revealed, that they were written in the Book
of Heaven.

Now because the Doctrine of Predestination does naturally presuppose a Curse
from which man was to be delivered: Hist. of the Council. fol. 175.
It will not be amiss to lay down the Judgment of that Council in the Article
of Original sin (which rendered man obnoxious to the dreadful curse) together
with the preparatory Debates amongst the Schoolmen and Divines which were
there Assembled; touching the nature, and transmitting of it from Adam unto his
Posterity, and from one man to another. Concerning which it was declared by
Catarinus, That as God made a Covenant with Abraham, and all his Posterity,
when he made him Father of the faithful: So when he gave Original Righteousness
to Adam, and all mankind, he made him seal an Obligation in the name of all,
to keept it for himself and them, observing the Commandment: which because he
transgressed, he lost it, as well for others as himself, and incurred the
punishment also for them; the which, as they are derived in every one, and to
him as the cause to others, by virtue of the Covenant: so that the actual sin
of Adam is actual sin in him, and imputed to others is Original; for proof
whereof, he grounded himself upon this especially, that a true and proper sin
must needs be a voluntary act, and nothing can be voluntary but that
transgression of Adam imputed unto all. And Paul, saying, that all have sinned
in Adam, it must b e understood that they have all committed the same sin with
him; he alleged for example, that S. Paul to the Hebrews affirms that Levi
paid Tyth to Melchisedeck; when he paid in his great Grandfather Abraham; by
which reason it must be said that the Posterity violated the Commandments of
God when Adam did it; and that they were sinners in him, as in him they
received Righteousness.

Which Application as it was more intelligible to the Prelates Assembled
together in the Council, than any of the Crabbed Intricacies, Canons, or
Anathamatisms (which they had the Notions in their heads) against all such as
had taught otherwise of Original sin, Idem. sol. 181.
than was allowed of and maintained in the Church of Rome, but more
particularly against him. 1. That confesses not, that Adam by transgressing
has lost Sanctity and Justice, incurred the wrath of God, Death, and Thraldom
to the Devil, and is infected in Soul and Body. 2. Against him that averreth
that Adam by sinning has hurt himself only, or has derived into his Posterity
the death only of the Body, and not sin, the death of the Soul. 3. Against him
that affirms the sin, which is one in the beginning, and proper to every one
(committed by Generation, not imitation) can be abolished by any other remedy
than the death of Christ) is applied as well to Children, as to those of riper
years, by the Sacrament of Baptism ministered in the Form and Rite of the Church.

CHAP. III. The like Debates about Free Will, with the Conclusions of the
Council, in the Five Controverted Points.
1. The Articles against the Freedom of the Will, extracted out of Luer's
Writings. 2. The exclamation of the Divines against Luer's Doctrine in the
Point, and the absurdities thereof. 3. The several Judgments of Marinarus,
Catarinus, and Andreas Vega. 4. The different Judgment of the Dominicans and
Francisans, whether it lay in man's power to believe, or not to believe; and
whether the Freedom of the Will were lost in Adam. 5. As also of the Point of
the cooperation of man's Will with the Grace of God. 6. The opinion of Friar
Catanca, in the point of irresistibility. 7. Faintly maintained by Soto a
Dominican Friar, and more cordially approved by others, but in time rejected.
8. The great care taken by the Legates in having the Articles so framed, as to
please all parties. 9. The Doctrine of the Council in the Five controverted
Points. 10. A Transition from the Council of Trent, to the Protestant and
Reformed Churches.


THese Differences and Debates concerning Predestination, Trent, about the
nature of Free Will, and the power thereof. In order whereunto these Articles
were collected out of the Writings of the Lutherans, to be discussed and
censured as they found cause for it. Now the Articles were these that follow,
viz.

1. God is the total cause of our works good and evil, and the Adultry of
David, the cruelty of Manlius, and the Treason of Judas, are the works of God
as well as the Vocation of Saul. 2. No man has power to think well or ill, but
all comes from absolute necessity, and in us is no Free Will, and to affirm it
is a mere fiction. 3. Free Will since the sin of Adam is lost, and a thing only
titular, and when one does what is in his power, he sins mortally: yea, it
is a thing fained, and a Title without reality. 4. Free Will is only in doing
ill, and has no power to do good. 5. Free Will moved by God, does by no means
cooperate, and follows as an Instrument without life, or an unreasonable
Creature. 6. That God corrects those only whom he will, though they will not
spurn against it.
Upon the first Article they spoke rather in a Tragical manner than
Theological; that the Lutheran Doctrine was a frantic wisdom: Maniches,
Priscilianists, and lastly against Aballardus, and Wickliff; and that it was
folly against common sense, every one proving in himself his own Liberty; that
it deserves not confutation, but as Aristotle says, Chastisement and
Experimental proof, that Luther's Scholars perceived the folly, and to moderate
the Absurdity, said after, that a man had liberty in External, Political, and
Oeconomical actions, and in matters of Civil Justice, that, which every one but
a Fool knows, to proceed from Councils and Election, but denied Liberty in
matter of Divine Justice only.

Marinarus said, Catarinus according to his opinion, said, That without Gods
special assistance, a man cannot do a moral good; said, there was no liberty in
this, and therefore that the Fourth Article was not so easily to be condemned.
Vega, after he had spoken with such Ambiguity, that he understood not himself,
concluded that between the Divines and the Protestants, there was no difference
in Opinion. for they concluding now that there is liberty in Philosophical
Justice, and not in Supernatural, in External works of the Law, not in external
and spiritual; that is to say, precisely with the Church, that one cannot do
spiritual works belonging to Religion without the assistance of God. And though
he said, all endeavor was to be used for composition, yet he was not
gratefully heard: it seeming in some sort a prejudice, that any of the
differences might be reconciled; and they were wont to say that this is a point
of the Colloquies, a word abhorred, as if by that, the Laity had usurped the
Authority which is proper to Councils.

A great Disputation arose upon them, Franciscans following Sotus, did deny it:
saying, That as Knowledge does necessarily follow Demonstrations, so Faith does
arise necessarily from persuasions; and that it is in the understanding, which
is a natural Agent, and is naturally moved by the Object. They alleged
Experience, that no man can believe what he will, but what seems true, adding
that no man would feel any displeasure, if he could believe he had it not. The
Dominicans said, that nothing is more in the power of the Will, than to
believe, and by the determination and resolution of the Will only, one may
believe the number of the Stars is even.

Upon the I hird Article, Whether Free Will be lost by sin, very many
Authorities of S. Augustine being alleged, which expressly say it. Hist of
(...) cil. p. 108. etc.
Soto did invent, because ke knew no other means to avoid them, that true
Liberty is equivocal; for either it is derived from the Noun Libertas, Freedom,
or from the Verb Liberare, to set Free: that in the first sense it is opposed
to Necessity, in the second to Servitude; and that when S. Augustine said, That
Free Will was lost, he would infer nothing else, but that it is made slave to
Sin and Satan. This difference could not be understood, because a servant is
not free, for that he cannot do his Will, but is compelled to follow his
Masters: And by this opinion Luther could not be blamed for entituling a Book
of SERVILE WILL; many thought the Fourth Article absurd, saying, That Liberty
is understood to be a power to both the contraries; therefore that it could not
be said, to be a Liberty to Evil, if it were not also to Good: But they were
made to acknowledge their Error, when they were told that the Saints and
blessed Angels in Heaven are free to do good, and therefore that it was no
inconvenience that some should be free only to do Evil.

In the examining the fifth and sixth Articles of the consent which Free Will
gives to Divine Inspiration, or preventing Grace, Franciscans and Dominicans
were of diverse Opinions: The Franciscans contended that the Will being able to
prepare it self, has Liberty much more to accept or refuse the divine
Prevention when God gives assistance, before it uses the strength of Nature.
The Dominicans denied that the Works preceding the Vocation, are truly
preparatoy, and ever gave the first place to God. Notwithstanding there was a
contention between the Dominicans themselves. For Soto defended, that although
a man cannot obtain Grace without the special preventing assistance of God, yet
the Will may ever some way resist and refuse it; and when it does receive it,
it is because it gives assent, and does will so: and if our assent were not
required, there would be no cause why all should not be converted. For
according to the Apocalypse, God stands always at the Gate and knocks: And
it is a saying of the Fathers, now made common, That God gives Grace to every
one that will have it; and the scripture does always require this consent in
us, and to say otherwise were to take away the Liberty of the Will, and to say
that God uses violence.

Friar Aloisius Catanca said to the contrary, Thomas, the one sufficient, the
other effectual: To the first, the Will may consent or resist, but not to the
second, because it implies contradiction, to say, that Efficacy can be
resisted; for proof, he alleged places of S. John, and very clear Expositions
of S. Augustine: He answers that it arises hence, that all are not
converted, because all are not effectually prevented. That the fear of
overthrowing Free Will is removed by S. Thomas, the things are violently moved
by a contrary Cause, but never by their own: and God being the cause of the
WIll, to say it is moved by God, is to say, it is moved by it self. And he
condemned, yea, mocked the Lutherans manner of speech; that the Will follows
as a dead and unreasonable Creature: for being reasonable by Nature, moved by
its own Cause, which is God, it is moved as reasonable, and follows a
reasonable. And likewise that God consents, though men will not, and spurn at
him: For it is a contradiction that the Effect should spurn against the Cause.
That it may happen that god may effectually convert one, that before has
spurned before sufficient prevention, but afterward cannot, because a
gentleness in the Will moved, must needs follow the Efficacy of the Divine
Motion.

Soto said, That every Divine Inspiration was only sufficient, and that,
Affrican and French Councils against the Pelagians, has published, that God
makes them to will, which is to say, that he makes them consent; therefore
giving consent to us, it ought to be attributed to the Divine Power; or else he
that is saved would be no more obliged to God than he that is damned, if God
should use them both alike.

But notwithstanding all these Reasons, the contrary Opinion had the general
applause, though many confessed that the Reasons of Catanca were not resolved
and were displeased that Soto did not speak freely, but said, that the Will
consents in a certain manner; so that it may in a certain manner resist: as
though there were a certain manner of mean between this Affirmation and
Negation. The free speech of Catanca, and the other Dominicans did trouble them
also, who knew not how to distinguish the Opinion which attributes
Justification by consent from the Pelagian; and therefore they counseled to
take heed of leaping beyond the Mark, by too great a desire to condemn Luther:
that Objection being esteemed above all, that by this means the Divine Election
or Predestination would be for Works foreseen, which no Divine did admit.

The Ground thus laid, Rome, in the five Articles disputed afterward with such
heat, betwixt the Remonstrants, and the Contra Remonstrants in the Belgic
Church, so far forth as it may be gathered from the Decrees and Canons of the
Council of Trent, and such preparatory Discourses as smoothed the way to the
Conclusions which were made therein. In order whereunto, it was advised by
Marcus Viguerius, Bishop of Sinigali, to separate the Catholic Doctrine from
the contrary, and to make two Decrees; in the one to make a continued
Declaration and Confirmation of the Doctrine of the Churches, Ibid. p. 215.
and in the other to condemn and Anathematize the contrary. But in the drawing
up of the Decrees, there appeared a greater difficulty, than they were aware
of, in conquering whereof the Cardinal of Sancta Cruz (one of the Presidents of
the Council) took incredible pains, avoiding as much as was possible to insert
any thing controverted amongst the Schoolmen; and so handling those that could
not be omitted, as that every one might be contented. And to this end he
observed in every Congregation, what was disliked by any, and took it away, or
corrected it as he was advised; and he spoke not only in the Congregations, but
with every one in particular, was informed of all the doubts, and required
their Opinions. He diversifyed the matter with diverse Orders, changed sometimes
one part, sometimes another, until he had reduced them unto the Order in which
they now are, which generally pleased, and was approved by all. Nor did the
Decrees thus drawn and settled, give less content at Rome than they did at
Trent, for being transmitted to the Pope, and by him committed to the Friars,
and other learned men of the Court, to be consulted of amongst them, they found
an universal approbation, because every one might understand them in his own
sense: And being so approved of were sent back to Trent, and there solemnly
passed in a full Congregation, on the thirteenth of January, 1547. according to
the account of the Church of Rome. And yet it is to be observed, that though
the Decrees were so drawn up, as to please all parties, especially as to the
giving of no distaste to the Dominican Friars and these Adherents; yet it is
casie to be seen, that they incline more favorably to the Franciscans, whose
cause the Jesuits have since wedded, and speak more literally and Grammatically
to the sense of that party, than they to do the others: which said, I shall
present the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, as to these controverted Points
in this Order following.

1. Of Divine Predestination.
All Mankind having lost its primitive integrity by the sin of Adam, Council.
Trid. Sess. 6. c. 1.
and so much captivated under the command of Satan; that neither the Gentiles
by the power of Nature; nor the Jews by the Letter of the Law of Moses were
able to free themselves from that grievous Servitude. In which respect it
pleased Almighty God the Father of all Mercies to promise first, Ibid, c. 2.
and afterward actually to send his only begotten Son Jesus Christ into the
World, not only to redeem the Jews who were under the Law, but that the
Gentiles also might embrace the righteousness which is by Faith, and all
together might receive the Adoption of Sons. To which end he prepared
sufficient assistance for all, Hist. of the Council. f. 212.
which every man having free will might receive, or refuse, as it pleased
himself; and foreseeing from before all Eternity who would receive his help,
and use it to God: and on the other side, who would refuse to make use thereof;
he predestined and elected those of the first sort to Eternal Life; and
rejected the others.

2. Of the Merit and Effect of the Death of Christ.
Him God proposed to be a propitiation for our sins by his Death and Passion,
and nor for our sins only, Ses. 6. c. 2, 3.
but for the sins of the whole World. But so that though Christ died for all
men, yet all do not receive the benefit of his death and sufferings, but only
they to whom the merit of his Passion is communicated in their new birth or
Regeneration, by which the grace whereby they are justified, or made just, is
conferred upon them.

3. Of Man's Conversion unto God.
The Grace of God is not given no man by Jesus Christ, to no other end, session
6, can. 2, 3.
but that thereby he might the more easily divert himself in the ways of
Godliness, and consequently merit and obtain eternal life, which otherwise he
might do without any such Grace, by his own free will, though with more
difficulty and trouble. And therefore if any man shall say, that without the
preventing Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and his heavenly Influences, a man is
able to even hope, love, or repent, as he ought to do, that so he may be
justified in the sight of God: let him be Anathema.

4. Of the manner of Conversion.
The Freedom of the Will is not so utterly lost in man, Sess. 6. c. 5.
though it be diminished and impaired, as to be accounted nothing but an empty
Name, or the name of no such thing existing in Nature: in that the Will of man
moved and stirred up by the grace of God, retains a power of cooperating with
the heavenly Grace, by which he does prepare and dispose himself for the
obtaining of the Justification, which is given unto him. Can. 4.
And therefore if any one shall say that a man cannot resist this grace though
he would, or that he is merely passive, not acting any thing, but as a stock or
senseless stone, in his own Conversion, let him be also held accursed. And so are
they who have presumed to affirm and teach, that it is not in the power of man
to do evil, but as well bad as good works are done not only by Gods permission,
but by his proper working: so that as well the Treason of Judas, as the Calling
of Paul, is to be reckoned for the work of Almighty God.

5. Of the certainty or uncertainty of Perseverance.
No man is so far to presume on the secret Mystery of Predestination, Sess. 6.
Can. 13.
as to account himself for certain to be within the number of the Elect; as if
he were assured of this, that being justified, he could neither sin no more,
nor were sure of Repentance if he did. And therefore no man is to flatter
himself with any such certainty of perseverance, though all men ought to place
a constant and firm hope (for the obtaining of the same) in the help of God.
Can. 14.
They which by sin have fallen away from the grace received, may recover their
lost Justification, if being stirred up from above, they endeavor the recovery
of it by sincere Repentance, Can. 15.
or by the Sacrament of Penance, as the words there are; And finally the grace
of Justification (or the grace by which a man is justified) is not only lost by
infidelity, by which the Faith it self does suffer Shipwreck, but even by every
mortal sin, though Faith be not lost also at the same time with it.

Such is the Doctrine of this Council in the Points disputed, Canons and
Decrees thereof: one only clause being added to the Article of Predestination,
agreeable to the Opinion in the Conferences and Debates about it, which
prevailed most upon the Prelates and all others who were interessed and
entrusted in drawing up the Products and Conclusions of it, which how far it
agrees or disagreeth with, or from hat which is maintained by the opposite
Parties in the Reformed and Protestant Churches, we are next to see.

CHAP. IV. The Judgment of the Lutherans and Calvinians in these Five Points,
with some Objections made against the Conclusions of the Council of Dort.
1. No difference in the Five Points betwixt the Lutherans and the Church of
Rome, as is acknowledged by the Papists themselves. 1. The Judgment of the
Lutheran Churches in the said five Points, delivered in the famous Confession
of Ausperge. 3. The distribution of the Quarrel betwixt the Franciscans,
Melancthonians, and Arminians, on the one side, the Dominicans, Rigid
Lutherans, and Sublapsarian Calvinists on the other; the middle way of
Catarinus paralleled by that of Bishop Overal. 4. The Doctrine of
Predestination as laid down by Calvin, of what ill Consequence in it self; and
how odious to the Lutheran Doctors. 5. Opposed by Sebastian Castellio in Geneva
it self, but propagated in most Churches of Calvin's Platform, and afterward
polished by Perkins, a Divine of England, and in him censured and confuted by
Jacob Van Harmine, a Belgic Writer. 6. A brief view of the Doctrine of the
Sublapsarians, and the odious Consequences of it. 7. The Judgment of the
Sublapsarians in the said Five Points, collected and presented at the
Conference at the Hauge, Anno 1610. 8. The Doctrien of the Synodists in the
said Points. 9. Affirmed to be repugnant to the holy Scripture, as also to the
Purity, Mercy, Justice, and Sincerity of Almighty God. 10. And the subversion
of the Ministry, and all Acts of Piety, illustrated by the Example of Tiberius
Caesar, and the Lantgrave of Thurin.


SUCH being the Doctrines of this Council in the Points disputed; Lutheran
Chruches; which comes so near to that of the Church of Rome, as to be reckoned
for the same. For in the History of the Council, Hist. of the Council of Tr. p.
210.
it is said expressly, as before is noted, that in the Books of Luther, in the
Augustane Confession, and in Aplogies and Colloquies, there was nothing found
(as to the Doctrine of Predestination) which deserved to be censured. And
therefore they were sain to have recourse unto the Writings of the Zuinglian
party, (amongst which, Calvin and his followers were to be accounted) to find
out matter to proceed upon in their Fulminations: And in particular it is said
by Andreas Vega, one of the stiffest and most learned men amongst the whole
pack of the Franciscans, Ibid. f. 208.
when the Points about Free will were in agitation, that between themselves and
the Protestants there was no difference of Opinion, as to that particular. How
near they came to one another in the other Points, may easily be found in the
Debates and Conferences before laid down, compared with the Judgment of the
Lutheran Doctors, not only in their private Writings, but their public
Colloquies. But then we are to understand, that this Agreement of the Lutheran
Doctors expressed in their private Writings and their public Colloquies, and
especially the solemn Confession at Ausperge, relates to that interpretation of
the Decrees and Canons of the Tridentine Council, which is made by the Jesuits
and Franciscans, and not unto the Gloss or Exposition which is made thereof by
the Preaching and Dominican Friars.

But not to leave so great a matter to a Logical Inference, Lutheran Churches
in the said Five Points, extracted faithfully out of the Augustan Confession,
with the Addition of one Clause only to the first Article (the Makers of the
Confession declining purposely the Point of Predestination) out of the Writings
of Melancthon, and other learned men of the same persuasion. Now the Doctrine
of the said Churches so delivered is this that follows, Viz.

1. Of Divine Predestinction.
After the miserable fall of Adam, August. Confess. cap. 2.
all men which were to be begotten, according to the common course of Nature,
were involved in the guilt of Original sin, by which they are obnoxious to the
wrath of God, and everlasting damnation: In which Estate they had remained, but
that God, beholding all mankind in this wretched condition, was pleased to make
a general conditional Decree of Predestination, Appel. Eving. cap. 4.
under the condition of Faith and perseverance; and a special absolute Decree
of electing those to life, whom he foresaw would believe, and persevere under
the means and aids of Grace, Faith and Perseverance: and a special absolute
Decree of condemning them whom he foresaw to abide impenitent in their sins.

2. Of the Merit and Efficacy of Christ's Death.
The Son of God, who is the Word, assumed our humane Nature in the Womb of the
Virgin, and being very God and very Man, he truly Suffered, was Crucified, Aug.
Confess. c. 3.
Dead, and Buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and to be the Sacrifice not
only for Original sin, but also for all the Actual sins of men.

A great part of St. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews is spent in the proving of
this Point, that only the Sacrifice or Oblation made by Christ, Id. cap. de
Missa.
procured for others Reconciliation and Remission of sins, inculcating that the
Levitical Sacrifices were year by year to be reiterated, and renewed, because
they could not take away sins, but that satisfaction once for all was made by
the Sacrifice of Christ for the sins of all men.

3. Of Man's Will in the state of depraved Nature.
The Will of man retains a freedom in Actions of Civil Justice, Ibid. cap. 18.
and making Election of such things as are under the same pretension of natural
Reason, but has no power without the special Assistance of the Holy Ghost to
attain unto spiritual Righteousness, according to the saying of the Apostle;
That the natural man perceives not the things which are of the spirit of God.
And that of Christ our Saviur, Without me you can do nothing. And therefore the
Pelagians are to be condemned, who teach that man is able by the mere strength
of Nature, not only to love God above all things, but also to fulfill the Law,
according to the substance of the Acts thereof.

4. Of Conversion, and the manner of it.
The Righteousness which is effected in us by the operation and assistance of
the Holy Ghost, which we receive by yielding our assent to the Word of God:
Idem. cap. 18.
according to that of S. Augustine, in the third Book of his Hypognosticks, in
which he grants a freedom of the Will to all which have the use of Reason, not
that they are thereby able either to begin or g o through with any thing in the
things of God, without Gods assistance, but only in the Affairs of this present
life whether good or evil.

5. Of falling after Grace received.
Remission of sins is not to be denied in such who after Baptism fall into
sins, Idem cap. 11.
at what time soever they were converted; and the Church is bound to confer the
benefit of Absolution upon all such as return unto it by Repentance. And
therefore as we condemn the Novatian Heretics, refusing the benefit of
Absolution unto those, who having after Baptism lashed into sin, gave public
Signs of their Repentance: so we condemn the Anabaptists, who teach, that a man
once justified can by no means lose the Holy Ghost, as also those who think
that men man have so great a measure of perfection in this present life, that
they cannot fall again into sin.

Such is the Doctrine of the Lutheran Churches agreed on in the famous Augustine
Confession, so called, because presented and avowed at the Diet of Auspurge. (
Augusta Vindelicorum the Latins call it) 1530. confirmed after many struglings
on the one side, and oppositions on the other, by Charles the fifth, in a
general Assembly of the Estates of the Empire holden at Passaw, Anno 1552. and
afterward more fully in another Diet held at Auspurge, Anno 1555. A Confession
generally ebtertained not only in the whole Kingdoms of Demnark, Norway, and
Sweden, but also in the Dukedom of Prussia, and some parts of Poland, and all
the Protestant Churches of the High Germany: neither the rigid Lutherans, nor
the Calvinians themselves, being otherwise tolerated in the Empire, than as
they shroud themselves under the Patronage and shelter of this Confession. For
besides the first breach betwixt Luther and Zuinglius, which happened at the
beginning of the Reformation, there afterward grew a subdivision betwixt the
Lutherans themselves, occasioned by Flacius Illyricus and his Associates; who
having separated themselves from Melancthon, and the rest of the Divines of
Wittenberge, and made themselves the Head of the rigid Lutherans, did gladly
entertain those Doctrines, in which they were sure to find as good assistance
as the Dominicans and their party could afford unto them. The wisdom and
success of which Council being observed by those of the Zuinglian or Calvinian
Faction, they gladly put in for a share, being not meanly well approved, that
though their Doctrines were condemned by the Council of Trent, yet they found
countenance (especially in the Sublapsarian way) not only from the whole Sect
of the Dominicans, but the rigid Lutherans: And that the Scales might be kept
even between the Parties, there started out another Faction amongst the
Calvinists themselves, who symbolized with the Melanctbonians, or moderate
Lutherans, as they did with the Jesuit and Franciscan Friars. For the abetting
of which their Quarrel, this last side calling to their aid all the Ancient
Fathers both Greek and Latin, who lived before the time of S. Augustine, the
others relying wholly on his single judgment, not always constant to himself,
nor very well seconded by Prosper, nor any other of great Note in the times
succeeding. Finally that Catarinus may not go alone in his middle way, I will
follow him with one of his own Order (for he was afterward made Bishop of
Minori in Italy) that is to say, the right learned Doctor Overal, public
Professor of Divinity in Cambridge, Dean of S. Paul's, and successively Bishop
of Lichfield and Norwhich, whose judgment in a middle way, and though not the
same that Catarinus went, the Reader may find in Mr. Playferts notable Picce,
entitled Apello Evangelium; to which I refer him at the present, as being not
within the compass of my present design, which caries me to such difputes as
have been raised between the Calvinians and their Opposites in these parts of
the world, since the conclusion and determination of the Council of Trent.

And for the better carrying on of my design, Calvin, whom I left under a
suspicion of making God to be the Author of sin; from which, though many have
taken much pains (none more than industrious Doctor Field) to absolve and free
him; yet by his Doctrine of Predestination, he has laid such grounds as have
involved his followers in the same guilt also. For not content to travel a
known and beaten way, he must needs find out a way by himself, which either the
Dominicans, nor any other of the followers of S. Augustine's rigors had found
out before, in making God to lay on Adam an unavoidable necessity of falling
into sin and misery, that so he might have opportunity to manifest his mercy in
the electing of some few of his Posterity, and his justice in the absolute
rejecting of all the rest. In which, as he can find no Countenance from any of
the Ancient Writers, so he pretends not to any ground for it in the holy
Scriptures. For whereas some objected on Gods behalf, De certis verbis non
extare, That the Decree of Adams Fall, and consequently the involving of his
whole Posterity in sin and misery, had no foundation in the express words of
Holy Writ, Institut. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 7.
he makes no other Answer to it than a quasi vero, as if (says he) God made
and created man the most exact Piece of his Heavenly Workmanship, without
determining of his end. And on this Point he was so resolutely bent, that
nothing but an absolute Decree for Adams Fall, seconded by the like, for the
involving of all his Race in the same prediction, would either serve his turn,
or preserve his Credit. For whereas others had objected on Gods behalf, that no
such unavoidable necessity was laid upon mankind by the will of God; but
rather that he was Created by God unto such a perishing estate, because he
foresaw to what his own perverseness at the last would bring him: He answers
that this Objection proves nothing at all, or at least nothing to the purpose,
Calv. Institut. lib. 3. cap. 23. sect. 6.
which said, he tells us further out of Valla, though otherwise not much versed
(as he there affirms) in the holy Scriptures, That this question seems to be
superfluous, because both Life and Death are rather the Acts of Gods Will than
of his Prescience or foreknowledge. And then he adds as of his own, that if
God did but foresee the successes of men, and did not also dispose and order
them by his Will, then this Question should not without cause be moved, Whether
his foreseeing any thing availed to the necessity of them. ^a^m ^^ sect. 7.
But since (says he) he does no otherwise foresee the things that shall come
to pass, than because he has decreed that they should so come to pass: it is
in vain to move any Controversy about Gods foreknowledge, where it is certain
that all things do happen rather by divine Ordinance and appointment. Yet
notwithstanding all these shifts, he is forced to acknowledge the Decree of
Adams Fall to be Horribile decretum, a cruel and horrible Decree, as indeed it
is a cruel and horrible Decree to pre-ordain so many Millions to destruction,
and consequently unto sin, that he might destroy them. And then what can the
wicked and impenitent do, but ascribe all their sins to God, by whose
inevitable Will they are lost in Adam, by whom they were particularly and
personally necessitated to death, and so by consequence to sin. A Doctrine so
injurious to God, so destructive of Piety, of such reproach amongst the
Papists, and so offensive to the Lutherans, of what sort soever, that they
profess a greater readiness to fall back to Popery, than to give way to this
Predestinarian Pestilence (by which name they call it) to come in amongst them.

But howsoever having so great a Founder as Calvin was, Sebastian Castellino in
Geneva it self; but the poor man so despightfully handled both by him and Beza
(who followed him in all, and went beyond him in some of his Devises) that they
never left pursuing him with complaints and clamours, till they had first cast
him out of the City, and at the last brought him to his Grave. The terror of
which example, and the great name which Calvin had attained unto, not only by
his diligent Preaching, but also by his laborious Writings in the eye of the
World: As it confirmed his power at home, so did it make his Doctrines the more
acceptable and esteemed abroad. More generally diffused, and more
pertinaciously adhered unto in all those Churches, which either had received
the Genevian Discipline, or whose Divines did most industriously labor to
advance the same. By means whereof it came to pass (as one well observes) That
of what account the Master of the Sentences was in the Church of Rome; Hooker
in eccle. Pol. Pres. p. 9.
the same and more amongst the Preachers of the Reformed Churches Calvin had
purchased; so that they were deemed to be the most perfect Divines, who were
most skilful in his Writings. His Books almost the very Canon by which both
Doctrine and Discipline were to be judged: The French Churches both under
others abroad, or at home in their own Country, all cast according to the Mold
which he had made. The Church of Scotland in erecting the Fabric of their own
Reformation, took the self same pattern. Receive not long after in the Palatine
Churches, and in those of the Netherlands: In all which, as his Doctrine made
way to bring in the Discipline, so was it no hard matter for the Discipline to
support the Doctrine, and crush all those who durst oppose it. Only it was
permitted unto Beza and his Disciples to be somewhat wilder than the rest, in
placing the Decree of Predestination before the Fall, which Calvin himself had
more rightly placed in Massa corrupta, in the corrupted Mass of Mankind: and
the more moderate Calvinians as rightly presuppose for a matter necessary,
before there could be any place for the Election or Reprobation of particular
persons. But being they concurred with the rest, as to the personal Election or
Reprobation of particular persons; the restraining of the Benefit of our
Saviors sufferings to those few particulars (whom only they had honored with
the glorious name of the Elect) the working on them by the irresistible powers
of Grace in the Act of Conversion, and bringing them infallibly by the
continual assistance of the said Grace unto life everlasting: there was hardly
any notice taken of their Deviation, they being scarce beheld in the condition
of erring brethren, though they differed from them in the main fountain which
they built upon; but passing under the name of Calvinists, as they thus did.
And though such of the Divines of the Belgic Churches as were of the old
Lutheran stock, were better affected unto the Melancthonian Doctrine of
Predestination, than to that of Calvin; yet knowing how precious the name and
memory of Calvin was held amongst them: or being unwilling to fall foul upon
one another, they suffered his Opinions to prevail without opposition. And so
it stood till the year 1592. when Mr. William Perkins, an eminent Divine of
Cambridge published his Book, called the Armilla Aurea, etc. containing such a
Doctrine of Predestination as Beza had before delivered, but cast into a more
distinct and methodical Form. With him as being a Foreiner both by birth and
dwelling, a Supralapsarian in Opinion, and one who had no personal Relations
amongst themselves, it was thought fittest to begin to confute Calvin's
Doctrines in the person of Perkins; as many times a Lion is said to be
corrected by the well Cudgelling of a Dog, without fear of danger. And against
him it was, his order in delivering the Decree of Pedestination, that Arminius
first took up the Bucklers in his Book, entitled Examen Pradestinationis
Perkinsoniae, which gave the first occasion to those Controversies which
afterward involved the Sublapsarians also, of which more hereafter.

In the mean time, 'Supralapsarians, first broacht by Calvin, maintained by
almost all his followers, and at last polished and lickt over by the said Mr.
Perkins, as it was charged upon the Contra Remonstrants in the Conference at
the Hague, Anno 1610. in these following words, viz. That God (as some speak)
by an eternal and unchangeable Decree from amongst men, Arcan. Dog. Aat. Romans
p. 15.
whom he considered as not created, much less as fallen, ordained certain to
eternal life, certain to eternal death, without any regard had to their
righteousness, or sin, to their obedience, or disobedience; only because it was
his pleasure (or so it seemed good to him) to the praise of his Justice and
Mercy, or (as others like better) to declare his saving Grace, Wisdom, and free
Authority (or Jurisdiction:) Many being also so ordained by his eternal and
unchangeable decree, fit for the execution of the same, by the power or force
whereof, it is necessary that they be saved after a necessary and unavoidable
manner, who are ordained to Salvation, so that it is not possible that they
should perish, but they who are destined to destruction (who are the far
greater number) must be damned necessarily and inevitably; so that it is not
possible for them to be saved. Which doctrine first makes God to be the Author
of sin, as both Piscator and Macarius, and many other Supralapsarians, as well
as Perkins, have positively and expressly affirmed him to be; and then concludes
him for a more unmerciful Tyrant, than all that ever had been in the world,
were they joined in one: A more unmerciful Tyrant than the Roman Emperor, who
wished that all the people of Rome had but one Neck amongst them, that he might
cut it off at a blow, he being such in voto only, God alone in opere.

But this extremity being every day found the more indefensible, Calvinians
forsaking the Colors of their first Leaders, betook themselves into the Camp
of the rigid Lutherans, and rather chose to join with the Dominican Friars,
than to stand any longer to the dictates of their Master Calvin. These passing
by the name of Sublapsarians, have given us such an order of Predestination as
must and does presuppose a fall, and finds all mankind generally in the Mass
of Perdition. The substance of whose doctrine both in this and the other
Articles were thus drawn up by the Remonstrants in the Conference at the Hague
before remembered.

1. That God Almighty, willing from eternity, with himself to make a decree
concerning the Election of some certain men, but the rejection of others;
considered mankind not only as created, but also as fallen and corrupted in Adam
and Eve, our first Parents, and thereby deserving the Curse: And that he
decreed out of the fall and damnation to deliver and save some certain ones of
his Grace, to declare his Mercy: But to leave others (both young and old, yea
truly, even certain Infants of men in Covenant, and those INfants baptized, and
dying in their Infancy) by his just Judgment in the Curse, to declare his
Justice: and that without all consideration of Repentance and Faith in the
former, or of impenitence or unbelief in the latter. For the execution of which
decree, God uses also such means whereby the Elect are necessarily and
unavoidably saved; but Reprobates necessarily and unavoidably perish.

2. And therefore that Jesus Christ, the Savior of the World died, not for all
men, but for those only who are elected either after the former or this latter
manner, he being the mean and ordained Mediator, to save those only, and not a
man besides.

3. Consequenty that the Spirit of God, and of Christ does work in those who
are elected that way, or this, with such a force of Grace that they cannot
resist it: and so that it cannot be, but that they must turn, believe, and
thereupon necessarily be saved. But that this irresistible grace and force
belongs only to those so elected, but not to Reprobates, to whom not only the
irresistible Grace is denied, but also grace necessary and sufficient for
Conversion, for Faith, and for Salvation, is not afforded. To which Conversion
and Faith indeed they are called, invited, and freely solicited outwardly by
the revealed Will of God, though notwithstanding the inward force necessary to
Faith and Conversion, is not bestowed on them, according to the secret Will of
God.

4. But that so many as have once obtained a true and justifying Faith by such
a kind of mesistible force, can never totally nor finally lose it, no not
although they fall into the very most enormous sins, but are so led and kept by
the same irresistible force, that it is not possible for them (or they cannot)
either totally, or finally fall, and perish.

And thus we have the doctrine of the Sublapsarian Calvinists, as it stands
gathered out of the Writings of particular men. But because particular men may
sometimes be mistaken in a public doctrine, and that the judgment of such men
being collected by the hands of their Enemies, may be unfaithfully related; we
will next look on the Conclusions of the Synod of Dort, which is to be
conceived to have delivered the Genuine sense of all the parties, as being a
Representative of all the Calvinian Churches of Europe (except those of France)
some few Divines of England being added to them. Of the calling and proceedings
of this Synod, we shall have occasion to speak further in the following
Chapter. A this time I shall only lay down the Results thereof in the five
controverted Points (as I find them abbreviated by Dan. Tilenus.) accordin gto
the Heads before mentioned, in summing up the doctrine of the Council of Trent.

Art. 1. Of Divine Predestination. That God by an absolute decree has Elected
to salvation a very small number of men, without any regard to their Faith, or
obedience whatsoever; Arcan. Dogn. Contr. Remon. p. 23.
and secluded from saving Grace all the rest of mankind, and appointed them by
the same decree to eternal damnation, without any regard to their Infidelity or
Impenitency.

Art. 2. Of the Merit and Effect of Christ's Death. That Jesus Christ has not
suffered death for any other, but for those Elect only, Ibid. p. 29.
having neither had any intent nor commandment of his Father to make
satisfaction for the sins of the whole World.

Art. 3. Of Man's Will in the state of Nature. That by Adam's Fall his Posterity
lost their Free Will, Ibid. p. 33.
being put to an unavoidable necessity to do, or not to do, whatsoever they do,
or do not, whether it be good or evil; being thereunto Predestined by the
eternal and effectual secret decree of God.

Art. 4. Of the manner of Conversion. That God, to save his Elect from the
corrupt Mass, Ibid. p. 41.
does beget faith in them by a power equal to that, whereby he created the
World, and raised up the dead, insomuch that such unto whom he gives that
Grace, cannot reject it, and the rest being Reprobate, cannot accept of it.

Art. 5. Of the certainty of Perseverance. That such as have once received that
Grace by Faith, can never fall from it finally, Ibid. p. 47.
or totally, notwithtanding the most enormious sins they can commit.

This is the shortest, and withal the most favorable Summary, Remonstrants in
their Antidotum, being much more large, and comprehending many things by way of
Inference, which are not positively expressed in the words thereof. But against
this, though far more plausible than the rigorous way of the Supralapsarians,
Gods love to Mankind, p. 45.
it is objected by those of the contrary persuasion: 1. That it is repugnant of
plain Texts of Scripture, as Ezekiel. 33.11. Romans 11.2 John 3.16. 2 timothy 2.4. 2
Pet. 3.9. Genesis 4.7. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Secondly, That it fights
with Gods Holiness, and makes him the cause of sin in the greatest number of
men. 1. In regard that only of his own will and pleasure he has brought men
into an estate in which the cannot avoid sin; that is to say, by imputing to
them the transgression of their Father Adam. Ibid. p. 53.
And 2. In that he leaves them irrecoverably plunged and involved in it,
without affording them power or ability to rise again to newness of life. In
which case that of Tertullian seems to have been fitly alleged, viz. In cujus
manu est ne quid fiat, Tertul. l. 2. contr. Marcion. c. 22.
ei deputatur cum jam sit. That is to say, In whose power it is, that a thing
be not done, to him it is imputed when it is done; as a Pilot may be said to be
the cause of the loss of that Ship, when it is broken by a violent Tempest, to
the saving whereof, he would not lend a helping hand when he might have done
it. They object thirdly, That this doctrine is inconsistent with the mercy of
God, so highly signified in the Scriptures, Gods love to Mankind, p. 62.
in making him to take such a small and speedy occasion, to punish the greater
part of men for ever, and for one sin once committed, to shut them up under an
invincible necessity of sin and damnation. For proof whereof they allege this
saying out of Prosper, viz. Qui dicit quod non omnes homines velit Deus salvos
fieri, Ibid. p. 64.
sed certum numerum praedestinatorum: durius loquitur quam loquutum est de
altitudine inscrutabilis gratiae Dei. That is to say, He which says that God
would not have all men to be saved, but a certain set number of predestinate
persons only: he speaks more harshly than he should of the light of Gods
unsearchable Grace. 4. It is affirmed to be incompatible with the Justice of
God, who is said in Scripture to be Righteous in all his ways, according unto
weight and measure, Ibid. p. 65. and p. 67.
that the far greatest part of mankind should be left remedil^sly in a state
of damnation, for the sin of their first Father only: that under pain of
damnation, he should require faith in Christ, of those to whom he has
precisely in his absolute purpose denied both a power to believe, and a Christ
to believe in; or that he should punish men for the omission of an Act which is
made impossible for them by his own decree, by which he purposed that they
should partake with Adam in his sin, and be stripped of all the supernatural
power which they had in him before he fell. And fifthly, It is said to be
destructive of Gods sincerity, in calling them to repentance, and to the
knowledge of the faith in Jesus Christ, Ibid. p. 58.
that they may be saved, to whom he does not really intend the salvation
offered, whereby they are conceived to make God so to deal with men, as if a
Creditor should resolve upon no terms to forgive his Debtor the very least part
of his debt, Ibid. p. 76.
and yet make him offers to remit the whole upon some conditions, and bind the
same with many solemn Oaths in a public Auditory. The like to be affirmed also
in reference to Gods passionate wishes, that those men might repent, which
repent not; as also to those terrible threatenings which he thundreth against
all those that convert not to him: all which, together with the whole course of
the Ministry, are by this doctrine made to be but so many acts of deep
Hypocrisy in Almighty God, though none of the maintainers of it have the
ingenuity to contess the same, but Piscator only, in his Necesse est, ut
sanctam aliquam si mutationem statuamus in Deo, which is plain and home.

And finally it is alleged that this doctrine of the Sublapsarians is contrary
to the ends by God proposed, Ibid. p. 91.
and tend to those grounds of comfort, by which a Conscience in distress should
be relieved. And thereupon it is concluded, that if it be a doctrine which
discourageth Piety; if it makes Ministers (by its natural importment) to be
negligent in their Preaching, Praying, and other Services which are ordained of
God for the eternal good of their people: if it makes the people careless in
hearing, reading, praying, instructing their Families, examining their
Consciences, fasting and mourning for their sins, and all other godly
exercises, as they say it does: it cannot be a true and a wholesome doctrine, as
they say it is not. This they illustrate by a passage in Suetonius, Sect. de
vit. Tyb. c. 69. p. 180.
relating to Tyberius Caesar, of whom the Historian gives this note: Cire a
Deos and Religiones negligentior erat, quippe addictus mathematicae,
persuasionisque plenus, omnia fato agi. That is to say, That he was the more
negligent in matters of Religion, and about the Gods, because he was so much
addicted to Astrologers, fully persuaded in his own mind that all things were
governed by the Destinies: And they evince by the miserable example of the
Landgrave of Turing, of whom it is reported by Heistibachius, Heisti. lib. 1.
de Minor. Hist l. 27. p. 39. or Gods love to mankind. p. 97.
that being by his Friends admonished of his vicious Conversation, and
dangerous condition, he made them this Answer, viz. Si praedestinatus sum,
nulla peccata poterint mibi, regnum coelorum auferre; si praescitus, nulla
opera mihi illud valebunt confer. That is to say, If I be elected, no sins
can possibly bereave me of the Kingdom of Heaven, if reprobated, no goods deeds
can advance me to it. An Objection not more old than common; but such I must
confess to which I never found a satisfactory Answer from the Pen of
Supralapsarian, or Sublapsarian, within the small compass of my reading.

CHAP. V. The Doctrine of the Remonstrants, and the Story of them, until their
final Condemnation in the Synod of Dort.
1. The doctrine of the Remonstrants ancienter than Calvinism in the Belgic
Churches, and who they were that stood up for it before Arminius. 2. The first
undertakings of Arminius, his preferment to the Divinity Chair at Leiden, his
Commendations and Death. 3. The occasion of the Name Remonstrants, and Contra
Remonstrants; the Controversy reduced to Five Points, and those disputed at
the Hague, in a public Conference. 4. The said Five Points according to their
several Heads first tendered at the Hague, and after at the Synod at Dort. 5.
The Remonstrants persecuted by their Opposites, put themselves under the
protection of Barnevelt, and by his means obtained a collection of their
Doctrine. Barnevelt seized and put to death by the Prince of Orange. 6. The
Calling of the Synod of Dort, the parallel betwixt it and the Council at Trent,
both in the conduct of the business against their Adversaries, and the
differences amongst themselves. 7. The breaking out of the differences in the
Synod in open Quarrels between Martinius one of the Divines of Breeme, and some
of the Divines of Holland; and on what occasions. 8. A Copy of the Letter from
Dr. Belconqual, to S. Dudly Carlaton, his Majesty's Resident at the Hague,
working the violent prosecutions of those Quarrels by the Dutch Divines. 9. A
further prosecution of the parallel between the Council and the Synod, in
reference to the Articles used in the Draught upon the Canons and Decrees of
either, and the doubtful meaning of them both. 10. The quarrelling Parties join
together against the Remonstrants, denying them any place in the Synod; and
finally dismissed them in a furious Oration made by Boyerman, without any
hearing. 11. The Synodists indulgent to the damnable Doctrines of Macorius, and
unmerciful in the banishment or extermination of the poor Remonstrants. 12.
Scandalously defamed, to make them odious, and those of their persuasions in
other places, Ejected, Persecuted, and Disgraced.


HAving thus run through all the other Opinions, touching Predestination,
Remonstrants (or Arminians, as they commonly call them) accused of Novelty, but
ancienter than Calvinism, in the Churches of the Belgic Provinces, which being
originally Dutch, did first embrace the Reformation, according to the Lutheran
model, though afterward they suffered the Calvinian Platform to prevail upon
them. It was about the year 1530, that the Reformed Religion was admitted in
the Neighboring Country of East Priezland, under Enno the first, upon the
preaching of Hardingbergius, a Learned and Religious man, and one of the
principal Reformers of the Church of Emden, a Town of most note in all that
Earldom: From him did Clemens Martini take those Principles, which afterward
he propagated in the Belgic Churches, where the same Doctrine of
Predestination had been publicly maintained, in a Book called Odegus Laicorum,
or the Lay-mans guide, published by Anastasius Velluanus, Ann. 1554. and much
commended by Henricus Antonides, Divinity Reader in the University of Francka:
But on the other side the French Ministers having settled themselves in those
parts, which either were of French Language, or anciently belonged to the Crown
of France, and having more Quicksilver in them than the others had, prevailed
so far with William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, that a Confession of their
framing was presented to the Lady Regent, ratified in a forcible and tumultuus
way, and afterward by degrees obtruded upon all the Belgic Churches: which
notwithstanding the Ministers successively in the whole Province of Vtrecht
adhered unto their former Doctrines; not looked on for so doing as the less
reformed: Nor wanted there some one or other of eminent note, who did from time
to time oppose the Doctrine of Predestination, contained in that Confession of
the year, 1567. when it took beginning. INsomuch that Johannes Isbrandi, one of
the Preachers of Roterdam, openly professed himself an Anticalvinian, and so
did Gellius Succanus also in the Country of West-Friezland, who looked no
otherwise upon these of Calvin's Judgment, than as Innovators in the Doctrine
which had been first received amongst them. The like we find also of Holmanus,
one of the Professors of Leyden, of Cornelius Meinardi, and Cornelius Wiggeri,
two men of principal esteem, before the name of Jacob Van-Harmine, was so much
as talked of.

But so it happened, Van-Harmine: (Arminius he is called by our Latin Writers)
from whom these Doctrines have obtained the name of Arminianism, called so upon
no juster Grounds than the great Western Continent is called by the name of
America, whereas both Christopher collumbus had first discovered it, and the
two Cabots Father and Son had made a further progress in the said discovery,
before Americus Vespatius ere saw those shores. As for Arminius, he had been
fifteen years a Preacher (or a Pastor as they rather phrase it) to the great
Church of Amsterdam, during which times, taking a great distaste at the Book
published by Mr. Perkins, entitled Armilla Aurea, he set himself upon the
canvasing of it, and published his performance in it, by the name of Examen
Predestinationis Perkinsoniae, as before was said. Encouraged with his good
success in this adventure, he undertakes a Conference on the same Argument with
the learned Junius, the sum whereof being spread abroad in several Papers, was
after published by the name of Amica Collatio. Junius being dead in the year
1603. the Curators or Overseers of the University made choice of this
Van-harmine to succeed him in his place. But the Inhabitants of the Town would
not so part with him, till they were overruled by the Entreaties of some, and
the power of others, A matter so unpleasing to the rigid Calvinians, that they
informed against him to the State for diverse Heterodoxies, which they had noted
in his Writings. But the business being heard at the Hague, he was acquitted by
his Judge, dispatched for Leyden, and there confirmed in his place. Toward which
the Testimonial Letters sent from the Church of Amsterdam, did not help a
little. In which he stands commended, Ob vitae inculpatae sanae doctrinae and
morum summam integritatem. That is to say, for a man of an unblameable life,
sound Doctrine and fair behavior, as may be seen at large, in the Oration
which was made at his Funeral in the Divinity Schools of Leyden, on the 22. day
of October, 1609.

Thus died Arminius, Leyden, he drew unto him a great part of the University,
who by the Piety o^he man, his powerful Arguments, his extreme diligence in
that place, and the clear light of Reason which appeared in all his Discourses,
were so wedded unto his Opinions, that no time nor trouble could drown them:
For Arminius dying in the year 1609, as before was said, the heats betwixt the
Scholars, and those of the contrary persuasion, were rather increased than
abated; the more increased for want of such a prudent Moderator, as had before
preserved the Churches from a public Rupture. The breach between them growing
wider and wider, each side thought fit to seek the Countenance of the State,
and they did accordingly: for in the year 1610. the followers of Arminius
address their Remonstrnace, (containing the Antiquity of their Doctrines, and
the substance of them) to the States of Holland, which was encountered
presently, by a Contra Remonstrance, exhibited by those of Calvin's Party: from
hence the names of Remonstrants, and Contra Remonstrants, so frequent in their
Books and Writings; each Party taking opportunity to disperse their Doctrines,
the Remonstrants gained exceedingly upon their Adversaries: For the whole
Controversy being reduced to these five Points, Viz. The Method and Order of
Predestination; The Efficacy of Christ's Death, The Operations of Grace, both
before and after man's Conversion, and perseverance in the same; the Parties
were admitted to a public Conference at the Hague, in the year 1611. in which
the Remonstrants were conceived to have had much the better of the day. Now for
the five Articles above mentioned, they were these that follow;

VIZ.
I. De Electione ex fide praevisa. DEus aeterno and immutabili Decreto, in Jesu
Christo filio suo, ante jactum mundum fundamentum statuit, ex lapso and
peccatis obnoxio humano genere, illos in Christo, propter Christum, and per
Christum servare, qui spiritus sancti gratia in eundem filium ejus credunt, and
in ea fide, fideique obedientia, per eandem gratiam, usque ad finem
perseverant.

II. De Redemptione Universali. Proinde Deus Christus pro omnibus ac singulis
mortuuus est: atque id ita quidem ut omnibus per mortem crucis
Reconciliationem, and Peccatorum Remissionem impetrarit: Ea tamen condition,
ut nemo illa peccatorum Remisione fruatur, praeter hominem fidelem, John 2.26.
1 John 2.2.

III. De causa fidei. Homo fidem salutarem a seipso non habet, nec vi liberi
sui arbitrii, quandoquidem in statu defectionis, and peccati, nihil boni, quod
quidem vere est bonum (quale est fides salutaris) ex se potest cogitare, velle,
aut facere: sed necessarium est, eum a Deo, in Christo, per spiritum ejus
sanctum regigni, renovari, mente, affctibus, seu voluntate, and omnibus
facultatibus, ut aliquid boni posset intelligere, cogitare, velle, and
perficere, secundum illu, JOhn 15.5. sine me potestis nihil.

IV. De Conversionis modo. De, gratia est initiumi progressus, and perfectio
omnis boni, atque adeo quidem, ut ipse homo Kegenitus, absque hac praecedanea
seu Adventitia, excitante, consequente, and co-operante gratia, neq, boni quid
cogitare, velle, aut facere potest, neq, etiam ulli male tentationi resistere,
adeo quidem ut omnia bona opera, quae excogitare possumus, Dei gratiae in
Christo tribuenda sunt. Quoad vero modum co-operationis illius gratiae, illa
non est irresistibilis: de multis enim dicitur, eos spiritui sancto refistisse.
Actotum 7. and alibi multis locis.

V. De Perseverantia incerta. Qui Jesu Christo per veram fidem sunt insiti ac
proinde spiritus ejus vivificantis participes, ii abunde habent facultatum,
quibus contra Satanam, peccatum, mundum, and propriam suam carnem pugnent and
victoriam obtineant: verumtamen per gratiae spiritus sancti subsidium. Jesus
Christus quidem illis spiritu sus in omnibus tentatinnibus adest; manum
porrigit, and modo sint ad certamen prompti, and ejus Auxilium Petant, neque
officio suo desint, eos confirmat: adeo quidem ut nulla satanae fraud, aut vi
seduci, vel e manibus Christi eripi, possint, secundum illud Johannis 10. Nemo
illos e manu mea eripiet, Sed an illi ipsi negligentia sua, principium illud
quo sustentantur in Christo, deserere non possint, and praesentem mundum iterum
amplecti, a sancta doctrina ipsis semel tradita deficere, conscientiae
naufragium facere, a gratia excidere; penitus ex sacra scriptura esset
expendendum, antequam illud cum plena animi tranquillitate, and Plerephoria
dicere possumus.

VIZ.
I. Of Election ont of Faith foreseen. ALmighty God by an Eternal and
unchangeable Decree, ordained in Jesus Christ, his only Son, before the
foundations of the World were laid, to save all those in Christ, for Christ;
and through Christ, who being fallen, and under the command of sin, by the
assistance of the Grace of the Holy Ghost, do persevere in Faith and Obedience
to the very end.

II. Of universal Redemption. To this end Jesus Christ suffered Death for all
men, and in every man, that by his death upon the Cross, he might obtain for
all mankind, both the forgiveness of their sins and Reconciliation with the
Lord their God; with this Condition notwithstanding, that none but true
Believers should enjoy the benefit of the Reconciliation and forgiveness of
sins, John 2.16. 1 John 2.2.

III. Of the cause or means of attaining Faith. Man has not saving Faith in
and of himself, nor can it attain it by the power of his own Freewill, in
regard that living in an estate of sin, and defection from God, he is not able
of himself to think well, or do any thing which is really, or truly good;
amongst which sort saving Faith is to be accounted. And therefore it is
necessary that by God in Christ, and through the Workings of the Holy Ghost he
be regenerated and renewed in his Understanding, Will, Affections, and all his
other faculties; that so he may be able to understand, think, will, and bring
to pass any thing that is good, according to that of St. John, 15.5. Without me
you can do nothing.

IV. Of the manner of Conversion. The Grace of God is the beginning, promotion,
and accomplishment of every thing that is good in us; insomuch that the
Regenerate man can neither think well, nor do any thing that is good, or resist
any sinful Temptations, without this Grace preventing, cooperating and
assisting; and consequently all good works, which any man in his life can
attain unto, are to be attributed and ascribed to the Grace of God. But as for
the manner of the cooperation of this Grace, it is not to be thought to be
irresistible, in regard that it is said of many in the holy Scripture, that
they did resist the Holy Ghost; as in Acts 7. and in other places.

V. Of the uncertainty of Perseverance. They who are grafted into Christ by a
lively Faith, and are thoroughly made partakers of his quickening Spirit, have a
sufficiency of strength, by which (the Holy Ghost contributing his Assistance
to them) they may not only right, but obtain the Victory, against the Devil,
Sin, the World, and all infirmities of the flesh. Most true it is, that Jesus
Christ is present with them by his Spirit in all their Temptations, that he
reaches out his hand unto them, and shows himself ready to support them, if
for their parts they prepare themselves to the encounter, and beseech his help,
and are not wanting to themselves in performing their unties: so that they
cannot be sedoced by the cunning, or taken out of the hands of Christ by the
power of Satan, according to that of St. John, No man takes them out of my
hand, etc. Cap. 10. But it is first to be well weighed and proved by the holy
Scripture, whether by their own negligence, they may not forsake those
Principles of saving Grace, by which they are sustained in Christ, embrace the
present World again, Apostatize from the saving Doctrince once delivered to
them, suffer a Shipwreck of their Conscience, and fall away from the Grace of
God, before we can publicly teach these doctrines, with any sufficient
tranquillity or assurance of mind.

It is reported, Protestants and Papists, in the first Convocation of Queen
Mary's Reign, the Protestants were thought to have had the better, as being
more dextrous in applying and in forcing some Texts of Scripture than the
others were, and that thereupon they were dismissed by Weston the Prolocutor,
with this short come off: You, said he, have the Word, and we have the Sword.
His meaning was, That what the Papists wanted in the strength of Argument, they
would make good by other ways, as afterward indeed they did by Fire and Faggot.
The like is said to have been done by the Contra Remonstrants, who finding
themselves at this Conference to have had the worst, and not to have thrived
much better by their Pen-comments, than in that of the Tongue, betook
themselves to other courses; vexing and molesting their Opposites in their
Classes, or Consistories, endeavoring to silence them from Preaching in their
several Churches: or otherwise to bring them unto public Censure. At which
Weapon the Remonstrants being as much too weak, as the others were at Argument
and Disputation; they betook themselves unto the Patronage of John Van Olden
Burnevelt, a man of great Power in the Council of Estate for the United Belgic
Provinces, by whose means they obtained an Edict from the States of Holland,
and West-Friezland, Anno 1613. requiring and enjoying a mutual Toleration of
Opinions, as well on the one side as the other. An Edict highly magnified by
the Learned Grotius in a Book, entitled, Pietas Ordinum Hollandiae etc.
Against which some Answers were set out by Bogerman, Sibrandus, and some
others, not without some reflection on the Magistrates for their Actings in it:
But this indulgence, though at the present it was very advantageous to the
Remonstrants, as the case then stood, cost them dear at last. For Barnevelt
having some suspicion that Morris of Nassaw, Prince of Orange, Commander
General of all the Forces of those United Provinces both by Sea and Land, had a
design to make himself the absolute Master of those Countries, made use of them
for the uniting and encouraging of such good Patriots as durst appear in
maintenance of the common liberty, which Service they undertook the rather,
because they found that the Prince had passionately espoused the Quarrel of the
Contra Remonstrants. From this time forwards the Animosities began to increase
on either side, and the Breach to widen, not to be closed again; but either by
weakening the great power of the Prince or the death of Barnevelt. This last the
easier to be compassed, as not being able by so small a Party to contend with
him, who had the absolute command of so many Legions. For the Prince being
apprehensive of the danger in which he stood, and spurred on by the continual
Solicitations of the Contra Remonstrnats, suddenly put himself into the Head
of his Army with which he marched from Town to Town, altered the Guards,
changed the Officers, and displaced the Magistrates, where he found any whom he
thought disaffected to him; and having gotten Barnevelt, Grotius, and some
other of the Heads of the Party into his power, he caused them to be condemned,
and Barnevelt to be put to death, contrary to the fundamental Laws of the
Country, and the Rules of the Union.

This Alteration being thus made, Contra Remonstrants thought it a high point
of Wisdom to keep their Adversaries down, now they had them under, and to
effect that by a National Council, which they could not hope to compass by
their own Authority: To which end, the States General being importuned by the
Prince of Orange, and his Solicitation seconded by those of KIng James (to
whom the power and person of the Prince were of like Importance) a National
Synod was appointed to be held as Dort, Anno 1618. Barnevelt being then still
living. To which besides the Commissioners from the Churches of their several
Provinces, all the Calvinian Churches in Europe (those of France excepted) sent
their Delegates also; some eminent Divines being Commissioned by King James to
attend also in the Synod: for th eRealm of Britain. A Synod much like that of
Trent, in the Motives to it; as also in the managing and conduct of it. For as
neither of them was assembled till the Sword was drawn, the terror whereof was
able to effect more than all other Arguments: so neither of them was concerned
to confute, but condemn their Opposites.

Secondly, The Council of Trent consisted for the most part of Italian Bishops,
some others being added for fashion-sake, and that it might the better
challenge the Name of General, as that of Dort, consisted for the most part of
the Delegates of the Belgic Churches, to whom the foreign Divines were found
inconsiderable. The Differences as great at Dort, as they were at Trent, and as
much care taken to adulce the discontented Parties (whose Judgments were
incompatible with the ends of either) in the one as the other. The British
Divines, together with one of those which came from the Breme, maintained the
Universal Redemption of mankind by the death of Christ. But this by no means
would be granted by the rest of the Synod especially by those of North-Holland,
for fear of yielding any thing to the Arminians; as Soto in the Council of
Trent opposed some moderate Opinions, teaching the certainty of Salvation,
because they were too much in favor with the Lutheran Doctrines. First, The
general body of the Synod not being able to avoid the inconveniences which the
Supralapsarian way brought with it, were generally intent on the Sublapsarian:
but on the other side, the Commissioners of the Churches of South-Holland,
thought it not necessary to determine which were considered, an fallen, or not
fallen, while he passed the Decrees of Election and Reprobation. But far more
positive was Gomarus, one of the four Professors of Leyden, who stood as
strongly to the absolute irrespective and irreversible Decree (exclusive of
man's sin, and our Saviors Sufferings) as he could have done for the HOly
Trinity. And not being able to draw the rest unto his Opinion, not willing to
conform to theirs, he delivered his own Judgment in writing apart by it self,
not joining in subscription with the rest of his Brethren, for conformity sake,
as is accustomed in such cases. But Macorius one of the Professors in Frankar,
in West-Friezland, went beyond them all, not only maintaining against Sibrandus
Lubbertus his fellow Collegiate in their open Synod; That God wills sin; That
he ordains sin as it is sin: and, That by no means he would have all men to be
saved; but openly declaring, That if these Points were not maintained, they
must forsake their chief Doctors who had so great a hand in the Reformation.

Some other differences there were amongst them, not reconcilable in this
Synod; foundation of Election, or only the Head of the Elect; And many others
of like nature. Nor were these Differences managed with such sobriety as became
the gravity of the persons, and weight of the business, but brake out many
times into such open heats and violences, as are not to be paralleled in the
like Assemblies; the Provincial Divines banding against the Foreiners, and the
Foreiners falling foulupon one another: for so it happened, that Martinius, one
of the Divines of Breme, a moderate and learned man, being desired to speak his
mind in the Points last mentioned, signitied to the Synod, In his Letters, p.
72.
That he made some scruple touching the Doctrine Passant, about the manner of
Christ's being Fundamentum electionis, and that he thought Christ not only the
Effector of our Election, but also the Author and Procurer of it. Gomarus
presently as soon as Martinius had spoken, starts up and tells the Synod, Ego
hanc rem in me recipio, and therewithal casts his Glove, and challenges
Martinius with this Proverb, Ecce Rhodum, ecce Sullum, and required the Synod
to grant them a Duel, adding, That he knew Martinius could say nothing in
Refutation of that Doctrine. So my dear Friend Mr. Hales of Eaton relates the
story of this passage in a Letter to Sir Dudly Carleton, bearing date Jan. 25.
1618. according to the style of the Church of England: and where he ends, Dr.
Belcanqual shall begin, relating in his Letters to the said Ambassador, the
story of a greater Fray, between the said Martinius and Sibandus Lubberius,
above mentioned, upon this occasion. Martinius had affirmed God to be Causa
Physica Conversionis; and for the truth thereof, appealed to Goclenius a great
Philosopher, being then present in the Synod, who thereupon discoursed upon it
out of Themistinus, Averores, Alexander Aphrodisaeus, and many more; affirming
it to be true in Philosophy, although he would not have it to prescribe in
Divinity. Sibrandus Lubbert taking fire at this, falls upon them both: but the
Fray parted at the present, by the care of Boyerman. Gomarus within few days
after picks a new quarrel with Martinius, and the rest of the Divines of Breme,
for running a more moderate course than the rest of the Synod: many other of
the Provincials seconding Gomarus in the quarrel, and carrying themselves so
uncivilly in the prosecution, that Martinius was upon the Point of returning
homewards. But this quarrel being also taken up, the former is revived by
Sibrandus in the following Session, concerning which Belcanqual writes to Sir
Dudley Carleton, this ensuing Letter, which for the rarity and variety of the
passages contained in it, and the great light which it affords to the present
business, I shall crave leave to add it here.

Dr. Belcanqualis Letter to Sir Dudley Carleton.
My very good Lord,
SInce my last Letters to your Lordship, there has been no business of any
great Note in the Synod, ^^^canquals Letters, p. 10.
but that which I am sure your Lordship will be very sorry to hear; Contention
like to come to some head, if it be not prevented in time: for there has been
such a Plot laid ex composito, for disgracing of the Bremenses, as I think the
Synod shall receive small grace by it. D. Gomarus being he at whom the last
Disquisition of the third and fourth Articles ended, was entreated by the
President to speak his mind of the said Articles; but Sibrandus desires the
President, first, to give him leave to add some few things to that he had poken
the day before: Now what he added was nothing but a renewing of the strife,
which was between him and Martinius in the last Session: two things he
alleged; First, That he had been at Goclenius his Lodging, conferring with him
about that Proposition, whether God might be called Causa Physica of humane
Actions, and delivered certain Affirmations pronounced by Goclenius, tending to
the Negative; for the truth of his relation he appealed to Goclenius there
present, who testified that it was so: next Martinius had alleged a place out
of Paraeus for the Affirmative in opere conversionis. Sibrandus read a great
many places out of Paraeus, tending to the contrary: and (no question it being
pleaded before) be entreats some of the Pallatines (naming them all
severally) who were Paraeus his Colleagues, would speak what they did know of
Paraeus his mind, concerning the said Proposition. Scultetus begins with a
set speech, which he had written lying before him; but such a Speech it was, as
I, and I think all the Exteri, were exceeding grieved it should have come from
a man of so much worth: the sum of it was this, That he did know upon his own
knowledge, that Paraus did hold the contrary of that which had been falsely
fathered on him in the Synod, that he could not endure to hear his dearest
Colleague so much abused as he had been by some men in the Synod: Moreover he
could not now dissemble the great grief he had conceived that some in the Synod
went about to trouble sound Divinity with bringing in Tricas Scolasticas, such
as was to make God Causam Physicam Conversionis ( that was for Martinius) such
portenta vocabulorum, as determinare, and non determinare voluntatem: That some
men durst say that there were some doubts in the Fourth Article, which Calvin
himself had not thoroughly satisfied, nor other Learned Reformed Doctors; that
it was to be feared that they intended to bring in Jesuits Divinity in the
Reformed Churches, and to corrupt the Youth committed to their Charge, with a
strange kind of Divinity. This last Speech concerned D. Grotius. Scultetus
delivered his mind in exceeding bitter and disgraceful words, and repeated his
bitterest sentences twice over: He having ended, Martinius with great modesty
answered, first, That he would read Paraeus his own words, which he did; next
that for Sibrandus, he wondered that he would now in public bring these things
up, since out of his love to Peace, that very day he had sent his Colleague
Grotius to Sibrandus, with a large explication in that sense, in which he was
fully satisfied, and so he made account that that business had been peaceably
transacted: All this while Grotius spoke nothing; Gomarus begins to go on in
the Disquisition, but I think he delivered a Speech against the Bremenses,
which none but a madman would have uttered. First, Whereas Martinius had said
that he did desire the resolution of this doubt, Qui Deus possit ab homine
cujus potentia est finita, fidem, quae est opus omnipotentiae, exigere: and
that neither Calvin, nor any of the Divines, had yet plainly enough untied the
Knot: He replied, first, That he that said so was not Dignus qui solveret
Calvino Corrigiam; and that for the doubt it self, it was such a silly one,
that ipsi pueri in trivio, could ipsius solutionem decantare (at which Speech
very body smiled.) Moverover, whereas Martinius in his Answer to Scultetus, had
not spoken one word against him, but only this, That he was sorry that one who
had now been 25 years a Professor of Divinity, should be thus used for using a
School-term: Gomarus very wisely had a fling at the two, and tells the Synod,
that since some men thought to carry it away annorum numero, he himself had
been a Professor not only 25, but 35 years. Next he falls upon Grotius, and
bids the Synod take heed of these men that brought in the Monstra and
Portenta vocabulorum, the Barbarisms of the Schools of the Jesuits,
determinare, and non determinare voluntatem, with many such speeches delivered
with such sparklings of his eyes, and fierceness of pronunciation, as every man
wondered the President did not cut him off, at last he cut off himself I think
for want of breath; and the President gives Celeberrimo Doctori Gomaro, many
thanks for that his Grave and accurate speech: the Exteri wondered at it; at
last my Lord of Landaff, in good faith, in a very grave short speech (for
which, as for one of the least, I am persuaded he ever delivered, we and all
the Exteri, thought he deserved infinite Commendations:) he spoke to the
President to this purpose, That this Synod called Disquisition, was instituted
for Edification, not for any man to show Studium Contentionis; and therefore
did desire him to look that the knot of Unity were not broken. In this his
Lordships speech, be named no man, the last word was hardly out of his
Lordships mouth, but furious Gomarus, knowing himself guilty, delivered this
wise Speech; Reverendissime D. Praesul, non agendum est hic in Synodo
authoritate, sed ratione. That it was free for him to speak in his own place,
which no man must think to abridge him of by their Authority. My Lord replied
nothing; but the President told my Lord, that Celeberrimus D. Gom, had said
nothing against men's Persons, but their Opinions, and therefore that he had said
nothing worthy of Reprehension: This gave every man just occasion to think the
President was of the Plot. Martinius against this Speech of Gomarus said
nothing, but that he was sorry that he should have this Reward for his far
Journey: The Disquisition went on to Thysius, who very discreetly told the
SYnod he was sorry Martinius should be so exagitated for a speech, which
according to Martinius his explication was true. Just as Thysius was thus
speaking, Gomarus and Sibrandus, who sat next him, pulled him by the Sleeve,
talked to him in a confused angry noise, in the hearing and seeing of all the
Synod, chiding him that he would say so: afterward Thysius with great
moderation, desired Martinius to give him satisfaction of one or two doubtful
Sentences he had delivered; which Martinius, thanking him for his Courtesy,
fully did. The President was certainly in this Plot against Martinius, for at
the same time he read out of a Paper publicly, a note of all the hard Speeches
martinius had used. All this while. D. Grotius his patience was admired by all
men, who being so grossly abused and disgraced, could get leave of his
affections to hold his peace.


I could pursue these Differences further, both in weight and number, without
any great trouble; but that I have some other work to do, which is the pressing
of some other Conformities between this Synod and the Council: the same Arts
being used in drawing up the Canons and Conclusions of the one, as were
observed in the other; what care and artifice was used in the Council of Trent,
so to draw up the Canons and Decrees thereof, as to please all the differing
Parties, has been already shown in the third Chapter of this Book. And in the
History of the Councils, we shall find t his passage, viz. That immediately
after the Session, Friar Dominicus Soto, principal of the Dominicans, wrote
three Books, and did Entitle them of Nature and of Grace: for Commentary of
this Doctrine, and in his Expositions all his Opinions are found. When the work
was published, Hist. of the Contr. p. 215.
Friar Andrew Vega, the most esteemed of the Franciscans, set forth fifteen
great Books for Commentaries, upon the sixteen Points of that Decree, and did
expound it all according to his own Opinion; which two Opinions, says my
Author, do not only differ in almost all the Articles, but in many of them are
expressly contrary. A perfect parallel to which we may find in this Synod; the
conclusions and results whereof, being so drawn up, for giving satisfaction to
the Salapsarians, that those of the Supralapsarian Faction might pretend some
Title to them also: ^rtf. A. 9.
Concerning which, take here this passage from the Arcan. Dogm. Remonstr. long
since published, where we are told of a bitter Contention betwixt Voetius and
Maresius, about the sense of this Synod: the one of them maintaining that the
Synod determined the Decree of Predestination and Reprobation, to antecede the
consideration of the Fall of Adam; the other opposing him with an Apology in
behalf of the Synod, against that Assertion. So that though assembled on
purpose to decide these Controversies, and appease the broyls that Emerged, and
were inflamed upon them, yet (that they (...) seem to agree together in
something) have they wrpt up their Decrees and Canons in so many Clouds, and
confounded them with so many Intricacies, (if a man has recourse to their
suffrages for an Interpretation) that they are like to fall into a greater new
Schism, before they come to a settled resolution, of knowing what the meaning of
that Synod is. And so much of the parallel between the Council of Trent and the
Synod of Dort, touching the managery of all affairs both in fact, and post fact.

It was to be supposed in the midst of so many differences and disorders,
Remonstrants might have found a way to have saved themselves, either by
somenting the Contentions, or by finding some favors at their hands, who
seemed to be any thing inclinable to their Opinions: but no such favor could
be gained, not so much as hoped for; though Ephraim was against Manasses, and
Manasses against Ephraim, yet were they both together against Judah, as the
Scripture tells us. Nor did the differences between the Supralapsarians, and
the Sublapsarians, or those which were of equal moment in the other Points
extend so far, as to be any hindrance to the condemning of those poor men, to
whom they were resolved not to give an equal hearing before the final sentence
of their recondemnation: so truly was it said by some of the Remonstrants
themselves: Exam. Cens. p. 63. D.
Adeo facile Coeunt, qui in fatalitatem absolutam tantum consentiunt. In order
whereunto many direct proceedings had been used to hinder those of the
Remonstrant or Arminian party, by excommunicating some, and citing others to
appear as criminal persons, from being returned Commissioners from their
several Classes; and to refuse admittance to them into the Synod, upon such
returns, except they would oblige themselves to desert their Party, as in the
case of those of Vtrecht, there when the Parties whom they cited, were
authorized by the re^^ to present themselves before the Synod, and to press for
audience, offering to refer their Cause to a Disputation: their offer was not
rejected only, but they were commanded to forbear any further attendance,
unless they would submit themselves unto two Conditions: First, to acknowledge
the Members of the Synod (whom they beheld as Parties) to be competent Judges
in that case. And secondly, To proceed in such a method as they conceived would
be destructive of their Cause: On the refusal of which last, the former Point
being in a manner yielded to, in hope of some fair dealing from the foreign
Divines, they were dismissed without hearing what they could say for themselves,
as before was noted. For Boyerman President of the Synod, having some suspicion
that they would openly report those gross Impieties which were contained under
the absolute Decree of Reprobation; dismissed them the Assembly in a most
bitter Oration, his eyes seeming to sparkle sire for the very fear, or fervency
of spirit which was then upon him, which though I might report with safety
enough from the Pen of some of the Remonstrants, in their Books called the
Synodalia Remonstrantium, and the Antidotum, etc. yet I choose rather to relate
it from a more impartial Author, even from the mouth of my dear Friend Mr.
Hales (the most learned and ingenious John Hales of Eaton) who being then
Chaplain to Sir Dudley Carleton, King James his Resident at the Hague, was
suffered to be present at the hearing of it; so that it might be said of them,
as was affirmed by Tertullian of the ancient Gentiles, when the persecuting
humor was upon them: Audire nolunt, quod auditum damnare non possunt; they
were resolved not to hear those Arguments which they could not answer, or to
give ear unto the proving of those Points, which they could not honestly
condemn, if they had been proved.

More favorable were they unto those of the other extremity, looking no
otherwise on the Supralapsarians, than as erring Brethren; but on the
Remonstrants or Arminians, as their mortal Enemies. Macorius beforementioned,
is charged to have brought many dangerous and blasphemous Paradoxes, in making
God to be the Author of sin, and openly maintaining in the Synod it self, that
God willed sin, that he ordained sin, a^ sin, and that by no means he would
have all men to be saved, as before is said. Gods (...) Mankind p. (...).
He had taught also in his Writings, Deum Reprobis verbum suum proponere non
alio sine, quam ut inexcusabiles reddantur: That is to say, That God does
propound his Word to Reprobates for no other end, than that they might be left
without excuse: That if the Gospel be considered in respect of Gods intention,
the proper end of it, and not the Accidental, in reference to Reprobates, is
their inexcusableness. More than so yet, That Christ knows all the hearts of
Reprobates, who he knows neither can nor will open to him; not that he may
enter in, but parth, that he may upbraid them for their impotency, and partly
that he may increase their damnation: And finally, Deum ideo eis locutum esse,
ut ex cotenptu, and odio filii unigeniti, Grat^r condemnatio esset. That God
does speak unto them to no other end, but that by the contempt and hatred of
his only Son they might incur the greater condemnation. For which, and many
other expressions of the like foul nature, occurring frequently in his
Writings, and those Positions which he stood to in the open Synod, he received
no other Censure from them, but a fair and friendly Admonition, to forbear such
Forms of speech as might give offense to tender Ears, and could not be digested
by persons ignorant and incapable of so great Mysteries: (...)
As also that he would not set light by those distinctions of Divines who had
deserved well of the Church of Christ. But on the other side, the Remonstrants
who maintained no such Impieties, whose Writings neither charged God with
Tyranny and Hypocrisy, or having any hand in the act of sin, were most
reproachfully handled and thrown out of the Senate, without so much as hearing
what they had to say in their own defense, though that was the least part of
the unsery intended to them: For when the Synod had concluded in the
condemnation of their Doctrine, they next proceeded to the destruction of their
persons, calling upon them to subscribe to the Acts of the Synod; and setting
them a peremptory day for conforming to it: And when they saw that would not do
it, by their incensed importunity, they procured a Proclamation from the States
General, to banish them from their Native Country, with their Wives and
Children, and so compelling them to beg their Bread, even in desolate places.

But yet this was no end of their sorrows neither. He must come under a new
Cross, Netherlands, written by one Cross, a fellow of no parts or judgment, and
so more apt to be abused with a false report: It is there affirmed (whether
with greater ignorance or malice, it is hard to say) That there was a Synod
called at Dort, to suppress the Arminians; and that the said Arminians held
amongst other Heresies First, That God was the Author^^ sin: and Secondly, That
he created the far greater part of Mankind, only of purpose for to damn them;
with several others of that kind: Which every man of reason knows, not only to
be the consequence and results of Calvin's Doctrine, but to be positively
maintained and taught by some of his followers. By which and such like subtle
and malicious practices, they endeavored to expose their Adversaries to the
public hatred, and make th em odious with the people; till at last these poor
men might have said most justly, as one the primitive Christians did, under the
burden of the like Calumnies and Imputations, Condemnati sumus quia nominamur,
non quia convincimur, as Tertullian has it, the name of an Arminian carried a
Condemnation in it self without any conviction. Nor was their fury satisfied in
Exauctorating, Banishing, and destroying those of the adverse party, who lived
within the compass of the Belgic Provinces; the genius of the Sect being
active in all parts alike, in none more visibly than the neighboring City of
Ledan, the principal seat and Signory of the Dukes of Bovillon: Out of which
Francisous Auratus, a most faithful Minister of that Church, is said to have
been shamefully ejected for no other reason, by those of the Calvinian party,
but because, preaching on the Text of St. James. 1.13. God tempts no man,
etc. he largely declared that God was not the Author of sin. With what severity
they proceeded in England, when they had gotten the advantage of Power and
Number, and with what Calumnies and Reproaches they aspersed all those which
were of a contrary persuasion to them; the sequestring and ejecting of so many
hundreds of learned and religious men from their several Benefices, the most
odious Pamphet called, The first Century of Scandalous and MALIGNANT PRIESTS,
together with many uncharitable and disgraceful passages against them, in the
Writings of some Presbyterian Ministers, do most clearly evidence.

CHAP. VI. Objections made against the Doctrine of the Remonstrants, the Answer
unto all, and the retorting of some of them on the Opposite Party.
1. The Introduction to the said Objections. 2. The first Objection, touching
their being Enemies to the Grace of God, disproved in general, by comparing the
Doctrine with that of St. Augustine, though somewhat more favorable to Free
Will than that of Luther. 3. A more particular Answer in relation to some hard
Expressions, which were used of them by King James. 4. The second charging it
as Introductive of Propery, began in Holland, and pressed more importunatly in
England, answered both by Reason and Experience to the contrary of it. 5. The
third, as filling men with spiritual pride, first answered in relation to the
testimony from which it was taken, and then retorted on those who objected the
same. 6. The fourth CHarge, making the Remonstrants a factious and seditious
people, began in Holland, prosecuted in England, and answered in the general by
the most Religious Bishop Ridly. 7. What moved King Jmaes to think so ill of
the Remonstrants, as to exasperate the States against them. 8. The Remonstrants
neither so troublesome nor so chargeable to the States themselves, as they are
made by the Assertor; the indirect proceedings of the Prince of Orange, viz.
the death of Barnevelt, and the injustice of the Argument in charging the
practices of his Children, and the Prince upon all the party. 9. Nothing in the
Arminian doctrine, which may incline a man to seditious courses, as it is
affirmed and proved to be in the Calvin. 10. The Racrimination further proved
by a passage in the Conference of the Lord Treasurer Burleigh with Queen Eliz.
in a Letter of some of the Bishops to the Duke of Buckingham, and in that of
Dr. Brooks to the late Archbishop. 11. More fully prosecuted and exemplified by
Campney's an old English Protestant. 12. A Transition to the Doctrine of the
Church of England.


IT may be thought, Synod, course was taken to impeach their Doctrine in these
points of no smaller crimes, than to be destructive of Gods Grace, introductory
of Popery, tending unto spiritual pride, and to Sedition or Rebellion in the
Civil Government. Which Objections I shall here present, as I have done the
Arguments of most importance which were Excogitated, and enforced against the
Conclusions, and Determinations of the Synod in the said five points: and that
being done, I shall return such Answers as are made unto them.

First then it is objected, Pelagian Heresies, ^^^man, Annot. Grotii Putat.
so long since condemned. This is pressed by Boyerman, in his Annotations on
the Book of Grotius, called Pietas Ordinum, etc. where he brings in Pareus,
charging them, with having proceeded E Schola Caelestii and Pelagii, from no
other School, than that of Pelagius, and Caelestius, those accursed Heretics.
Thycius another of the Contra-Remonstrants, but somewhat more moderate than the
rest in this particular, conceives their Doctrine to incline rather to
Semi-Pelagianism, Et aut eandem esse, aut non multo diversam, and either to be
the very same, or not much different. Declar. against Vorstius.
But the authority of King James was of greatest weight, who in his heats
against Vorstius, calls them the Enemies of Gods grace, Atheistical Sectaries,
and more particularly, the Enemy of God Arminius, as the King once called him.
To which Objection it is answered, that whatsoever Paraeus and the rest might
please to call them, they had but little reason for it; the Remonstrants
speaking as honorably of the Grace of God as any other whatsoever. And this
they prove, by comparing the first branch of the Fourth Article, with that
Golden saying of St. Augustine, yiz. Sine gratia Dei praeveniente ut velimus,
and subsequente ne frustra velimus, ad pietatis opera nil valemus: that is to
say, that we may will the things which are good, and following or assisting,
that we do not will them to no purpose, we are not able to do any thing in the
works of Piety. And by comparing the said Clause with St. Augustins words, it
cannot easily be discerned, why the one party should be branded for the Enemies
of the Grace of God, while theo there is honored as the chief Patron, and
Defender of it. It cannot be denied, but that they ascribe somewhat more to the
will of man, than some of the rigid Lutherans and Calvinians do, who will have
a man drawn forcibly, and irresistably, with the cords of Grace, velut
inanimatum quiddam, like a senseless stock, without contributing any thing to
his own salvation. But then it must be granted also, that they ascribe no more
unto it, than what may stand both with the Grace and Justice of Almighty God,
according to that Divine saying of St. Augustine, viz. Si non est gratia Dei,
quomodo salvat mundum? Si non est liberum arbitrium, quomodo judicat mundum?
Were it not for the Grace of God, no man could be saved, and were there not a
freedom of will in man, no man with justice could be condemned.

And as for the Reproachful words which King James is noted to have spoken of
them, Prince) that he was then transported with prejudice or particular
Interesse; and therefore that there lay an Appeal, (as once to Philip King of
Macedon,) from the King being not then well informed, to the same King,
whenever he should be better informed. Touching their proceedings, it was
observed, 1. That he had his Education in the Kirk of Scotland, where all the
Heterodoxies of Calvin were received as Gospel, and therefore could not so
suddenly cast off those opinions, which he sucked in as it were with his MOthers
Milk. 2. He was much governed at that time by Dr. Mountague, then Bishop of
Bath and Wells, and Dean of his Majesty's Chapel Royal, who having been a
great Stickler in the Predestinarian Controversies, when he lived in Cambridg,
thought it his best way, to beat down all such Opinions by Kingly Authority,
which he could not over-bear by the strength of Arguments. And thirdly, That K.
James had then a turn to serve for the Prince of Orange, of which more anon,
which turn being served, and Mountague dying not long after, his ears lay open
to such further informations as were offered to him, which drew him to a better
liking both of the Men and then Opinions than he had formerly entertained of
either of them.

It is objected secondly, Rome, that they serve only for a Bridge for Popery to
pass over, into any Church, into which they can obtain admittance. This
Calamity first laid upon them in a Declaration of the States General, against
Barnevelt before remembered; wherein they charge him with a design of
confederating with the Spaniard, to change the Religion of those Countries, and
countenancing to that end the Arminian party, as his fittest Instruments; which
clamor being first raised in Holland, was afterward much cherished and made
use of, by the Puritan, or Calvinian party amongst us in England. By one of
which it is alleged, Justificat. of the Fathers, etc.
that Mr. Pym being to make a report to the House of Commons, Anno 1626.
touching the Books of Richard Mountague, after Bishop of Chichester, affirmed
expressly, that the whole scope of his Book was to discourage the well-affected
in Religion, and as much as in him lay, to reconcile them unto Popery. He gives
us secondly, a Fragment of a scattered Paper, pretended to be written to the
Rector of the Jesuits college in Bruxels; in which, the Writer lets him know,
that they had strongly fortified their Faction here in England, by planting the
Sovereign Drug Arminianism, which he hoped would purge the Protestants from
their Heresy. Thirdly, he backs this Paper with a Clause in the Remonstrance
of the House of Commons, 1628. where it is said that the hearts of hsi
Majesty's Subjects were perplexed in beholding the daily growth and spreading
of the Faction of Arminanism, that being, as his Majesty well knew, (so they
say at least) but a cunning way to bring in Popery. To all which, being but the
same words out of diverse mouths, it is answered, first, That the points which
are now debated between the Calvinians and the old Protestants in England;
between the Remonstrants, and the Contra-Remonstrants in the Belgic Churches;
and finally between the rigid and moderate Lutherans in the upper Germany, have
been as fiercely agitated, between the Franciscans and the Dominicans in the
Church of Rome: The old English Protestants, the Remonstrants, and the moderate
Lutherans, agreeing in these points with the Franciscans; as the English
Calvinists, the Contra-Remonstrants, and the rigid Lutherans do with the
Dominicans: So that there is a compliance on all sides with one of the said two
differing parties in the Church of Rome. And therefore why a general compliance
in these points with the Friars of S. Dominick, the principal sticklers and
promoters of that Inquisition, should not be thought as a ready a way to bring
in Popery, as any such compliance with the Friars of St. Francis, he must be a
very wise man indeed which can give the reason. Secondly, it is answered, that
the Melancthonian or moderate Lutherans which make up infinitely the greatest
part of the Lutheran Churches, agree in these points with the Jesuits or
Franciscan Friars, and yet are still as far from relapsing to the Church of
Rome, as when they made the first separation from it. And therefore thirdly,
that if Arminianism, as they call it, be so ready a Bridge for passing over to
Popery, it would be very well worth the knowing, how and by what means it
should come to pass, that so few of the Remonstrants in the Belgic Provinces,
and none of those whom they call Arminians in the Church of England, should in
so long a time pass over that Bridge, notwithstanding all the provocations of
want and scorn, which were put upon the one, and have been since multiplied
upon the other.

In the next place, Arminian Doctrines, naturally incline a man to the sin of
pride, Justif. of the Fathers, etc. p. 34.
in attributing so much to the power of his own will, and so little to the
Grace of God, in choosing both the means, and working out of the end of his own
salvation. And for the proof hereof, a passage is alleged out of the History
of the Council of Trent, that the first Opinion, (that is to say, the Doctrine
of Predestination, according to the opinion of the Dominican Friars) as it is
hidden and mystical, keeping the mind humble, and relying on God, without any
confidence in it self, knowing the deformity of Sin, and the excellency of
Divine Grace; so the Second (being that maintained by the Franciscans) was
plausible and populare, and cherished humane presumption, etc. The whole
passage we have had before in the Second Chapter, Numb. 4. but we shall answer
to no more of it than the former Clause. Concerning which, it may be said, that
though Father Paul the Author of the History has filled the Christian World
with admiration, yet it is obvious to the eye of any discerning Reader, that in
many places he savoureth not so much of the Historian, as he does of the Party;
and that being carried by the Interest of his Native Country, (which was the
Signory of Venice) he seldom speaks favorably of the Jesuits; and their
adherents, amongst which the Franciscans in these points are to be accounted.
Secondly, that either Father Paul did mistake himself, or else that his
Translator has mistaken his meaning, in making the Second Opinion to be more
pleasing to the Preaching Friars, than the understanding Divines; the name of
Preaching Friars, being so appropriated in common speech to those of the
Dominican Order, that it is never applied unto any other. And Thirdly, That the
Authority of Father Paul is no otherwise to be embraced in Doctrinal matters,
(what credit soever may be given to him in point of History) than as it is
seconded by Reason. And certainly, if we proceed by the rule of Reason, that
Doctrine must needs more cherish humane presumption, which puffs men up with
the certainty of their Election, the infallibility of assisting and persisting
Grace, and the impossibility of falling from the attaining of that salvation
which they have promised to themselves; than that which leaves these points
uncertain, which puts a man to the continnal necessity of calling on God, and
working out the way unto his salvation with fear and trembling. He that is once
possessed with this persuasion, that all the sins which he can possibly commit,
were they as many as have been committed by all mankind, since the beginning of
the World, are not able to frustrate his Election, or separate him from the
love and favor of Almighty God; will be too apt to swell with Pharisaical
pride, and despise all other men as Heathens and Publicans; when such poor
Publicans as have their minds humble and relying on God, will stand aloof, not
daring to approach too near the Divine Majesty, but crying out with God be
merciful unto me a sinner, and yet shall be more justified in the sight of God
than the others are. For this we need produce no proof, we find it in the
supercilious looks, in the haughty carriage of those who are so well assured of
their own Election; who cannot so disguise themselves, as not to undervalue and
despise all those who are not of the same party, and persuasion with them. A
race of men, whose insolence and pride there is no avoid by a modest
submission, whose favor there is no obtaining by good turns and benefits.
Quorum superbiam frustra per modestiam, and obsequium, effugeris, as in another
case was said by a Noble Britain.

And finally it is objected, Arminians are a Faction, a turbulent, seditious
Faction, so found in the United Provinces, from their very first spawning; not
to be suffered by any Reason of State in a Commonwealth. So says the Author of
the pamphlet called the Observator observed, and proves it by the wicked
conspiracy (as he calls it) of Barnevelt, Obf. Observed, p. 46.
who suffered most condignly (as he tells us) upon that account, 1619. And
afterward by the damnable and hellish plot of Barnevelts Children and Allies,
in their designs against the State, and the Prince of Orange. P. 37.
This Information seconded by the Author of the Book called, The Justification
of the Fathers, etc. who tells us, but from whom he knows not, that the States
themselves have reported of them, that they had created them more trouble, than
the King of Spain had by all his Wars. And both these backed by the Authority of
King James, who tells us of them in his Declaration against Vorstius, That if
they were not with speed rooted out, no other issue could be expected, than the
Curse of God, infamy throughout all the Reformed Churches, and a perpetual
rent, and destraction in the whole body of the State. This is the substance of
the Charge: So old and common, that it was answered long since, by Bishop Ridly
in Qu. Mary's days, when the Doctrine of the Protestants was said to be the
readiest way to stir up Sedition, and trouble the quiet of the Commonwealth;
wherefore to be repressed in time by force of Laws. To which that godly Bishop
returns this Answer, That Satan does not cease to practice his old guiles and
accustomed subtilties: He has ever this Dart in a readiness, to whirl against
his adversaries, to accuse them of Sedition, that he may bring them, if he can,
in danger of the Higher Powers; for so has he by his Ministers, always charged
the Prophets of God. Ahab said unto Elias, art thou he that troubles Israel.
The false Prophets complained also to their Princes of Jeremy; that his words
were seditious, and not to be suffered. Did not the Scribes and Pharisees
falsely accuse Christ, as a seditious person, and one that spoke against Caesar.
Which said, and the like instance made in the Preachings of St. Paul; Confer.
between Kidley and Latimer.
he concludes it thus, viz. But how far they were from all sedition, their
whole Doctrine, Life and Conversation does well declare. And this being said in
reference to the Charge in general, the Answer to each part thereof is not far
to seek.

And first it has been answered to that part of it which concerns King James,
that the King was carried in this business, not so much by the clear light of
his most excellent understanding, as by Reason of State; the Arminians (as they
call them) were at that time united into a party, under the command of John
Olden Barnevelt, and by him used (for the reasons formerly laid down) to
undermine the power of Maurice then Prince of Orange, who had made himself the
Head of the Contra-Remonstrants, and was to that King a most dear Confederate.
Which Division in the Belgic Provinces, that King considered as a matter of
most dangerous consequence, and utterly destructive of that peace, unity and
concord, which was to be the greatest preservation of the States United; on
whose tranquillity and power, he placed a great part of the peace and happiness
of his own Dominions. Upon which reason, he exhorts them in the said
Declaration, To take heed of such infected persons; their own Contrymen
being already divided into Factions, upon this occasion (as he says) which was
a matter so opposite to Unity (which was indeed the only prop and safety of
their State, next under God) as of necessity it must by little and little bring
them to utter tuin, if justly and in time they did not provide against it. So
that King James considering the present breach, as tending to the utter ruin of
those States, and more particularly of the Prince of Orange, his most dear
Ally; he thought it no small piece of King-craft, to contribute toward the
suppression of the weaker party; not only by blasting them in the said
Declaration, with reproachful names, but sending such Divines to the Assembly
at Dort, as he was sure would be sufficiently active in their condemnation.

So that part of the Argument which is borrowed from the States themselves,
Hickman, before it can deserve an Answer; the speech being so Hyperbolical (not
to call it worse) that it can hardly be accounted for a flower of Rhetoric.
The greatest trouble which the States themselves were put to in all this
business, was, for the first eight years of it, but the hearing of Complaints,
receiving of Remonstrances, and being present at a Conference between the
parties. And for the last four years, (for it held no longer) their greatest
trouble was to find out a way to forfeit all their old and Native Privileges
in the death of Barnevelt, for maintenance whereof they had first took up Arms
against the Spaniard. In all which time, no blood at all was drawn by the Sword
of War, and but the blood of five or six men only, by the Sword of Justice,
admitting Barnevelts for one: Whereas their Wars with Spain had lasted above
thrice that time, to the sacking of many of their Cities, the loss of at least
100000, of their own lives, and the expense of many millions of Treasure. And
as for Barnevelt, if he had committed any Treason against his Country, by the
Laws of the same Country he was to be tried. Contrary whereunto, the Prince of
Orange having gotten him into his power, put him over to be judged by certain
Delegates, commissionated by the States General, who by the Laws of the Union,
can pretend unto no Authority over the Life and Limb of the meanest Subject.
Finally, for the conspiring of Barnevelts Children, it concerns only them whose
design it was. Who to revenge his death, so unworthily and unjustly contrived,
and (as they thought) so undeservedly, and against their Laws, might fall upon
some desperate Counsels, and most unjustifiable courses in pursuance of it. But
what makes this to the Arminian and Remonstrant party? Or does evince them for
a turbulent and seditious Faction, not to be suffered by any Reason of State in
a well-ordered Commonwealth. Barnevelts Kindred might be faulty, the Arminians
innocent, or the Armanians faulty, in their practice against the life of the
Prince of Orange, under and by whom they had suffered so many oppressions,
without involving those in their Crimes and Treasons, who hold the same Opinion
with them in their Neighboring Churches.

The reason is, Arminians, (it as relates to the Five points in difference)
which can dispose the Professors of it to any such practices. And therefore if
the Arminians should have proved as turbulent and seditious as their Enemies
made them, yet we were not to impute it to them, as they were Arminians, that
is to say, as men following the Melancthonian way, of Predestination, and
differing in those points from the rest of the Calvinists, but as exasperated,
and provoked, and forced to cast themselves upon desperate courses, Quae
libertatis arma dat ipse dolor, in the Poets language. But so some say, it is
not with the Doctrine of the other party by which men's actions are so ordered
and predetermined by the eternal Will of God, even to the taking up of a straw,
as before was said, ut nec plus boni nec minus mali, that it is neither in
their power, to do more good, or commit less evil than they do. And then
according to that Doctrine, all Treasons, Murders and Seditions, are to be
excused, as unavoidable in them, who commit the same, because it is not in
their power not to be guilty of those Treasons or Seditions which the fire and
fury of the Sect shall inflame them with. And then to what end should Princes
make Laws, or spend their whole endeavors in preserving the public Peace,
when notwithstanding all their cares, and travels to prevent the mischief,
things could no otherwise succeed, than as they have been predetermined by the
Will of God. And therefore the best way would be, Sinere res vadere quo vult
(in the Latin of an old Spanish Monk) to let all matters go as they will, since
we cannot make them go as we would; according to that counsel of the good old
Poet.

Solvite mortales animos, Manil. de Sphe. lib.
curisque levate,
Totque super vacuis animum deplete querelis:
Fata regunt Orbem, certa stant omnia lege.
That is to say,

Discharge thy Soul poor man of vexing fears,
And ease thy self of all superfluous cares.
The World is governed by the Fates, and all
Affairs, by Heaven's decree, do stand or fall.
To this effect, Burleigh should discourse with Queen Eliz. when he was first
acquainted with the making of the Lambeth Articles. Not being pleased
wherewith, Hist. Artic. Lambeth, p. 6, 7.
he had recourse unto the Queen, letting her see how much her Majesty's
Authority, and the Laws of the Realm were thereby violated, and it was no hard
matter to discern what they aimed at, who had most stickled in the same. For,
says he, this is their Opinion and Doctrine; that every Humane action, be it
good or evil, it is all restrained and bound up by the Law of an immutable
Decree; that upon the very wills of men also, this necessity is imposed, ut
aliter quam vellent homines, velle non possent, that men could not will
otherwise than they did will. Which Opinions, says he, Madam, if they be true,
Frustra ego aliique fideles Majestatis tuae ministri, etc. then I and the rest
of your Majesty's faithful Ministers do sit in Council to no purpose, it is in
vain to deliberate and advise about the affairs of your Realm; Cum de his quae
eveniunt necessario, stulta sit plane omnis consultatio, since in those things
that came to pass of necessity, all consultation is foolish, and ridiculous. To
which purpose it was also pressed by the Bishop of Rochester, Oxon, and St.
David's, in a Letter to the Duke of Buckingham, concerning Mountagues Appeal,
Ann. 1625. Cabuba. p. 116.
In which it is affirmed, that they cannot conceive what use there can be of
Civil Government in the Commonwealth, or of Preaching, and external Ministry
in the Church, if such fatal Opinins, as some which are opposite and contrary
to those delivered by Mr. Mountague, shall be publicly taught and maintained.
More plainly and particularly charged by Dr. Brooks. once Master of Trinity
College in Cambridge, in a Letter to the late Archbishop, Cont. Dom. p. 167.
bearing date December. 15. 1630. in which he writes, that their Doctrines of
Predestination is the root of Puritanism, and Puritanism is the root of all
Rebellions, and disobedient untractableness in Parliaments, etc. and of all
Schism and saweiness in the Country, nay in the Church it self; making many
thousands of our People, and too great a part of the Gentlemen of the Land very
Leightons in their hearts; which Leighton had published not long before, a most
pestilent and seditious Book against the Bishops, called Sions Plea, in which
he excited the People to strike the Bishops under the fifth rib, reviling the
Queen by the name of a Daughter of Heth; and for the same was after censured in
the Star Chamber to Pillory, loss of Ears, etc.

But because perhaps it may be said that this is but a new device, Answer to a
certain Let. p. 38.
let us behold what Campneys has delivered of it in the first or second year
of Queen Eliz. at the first peeping of it out to disturb this Church. Where
(says he) who sees not the distraction of England, to follow this Doctrine?
Who sees not the confusion of all Commonwealths to depend hereupon? What
Prince may sit safely in the seat of his Kingdom? What subject may live quietly
possessing his own? What man shall be ruled by the right of Law? If these
Opinions may be perfectly placed in the hearts of the People? Which Corollary
he brings in, in the end of a discourse touching the Rebellion, raised by
Martin Cyrnel, and seconded by the Earl of Lincoln, Martin Swarth, and others,
against Hen. VII. For, building on the Culvinian Maxim, that as God does
appoint the end, so he appoints also the means and causes which lead unto it;
he thereupon infers that Martin Swarth, and his men, according to that
Doctrine were destined by God to be slain at the Batrel of Stoke. In order
whereunto, first Sir Richard Simon the Priest must be appointed and
predestinate of God to pour in the pestilent poison of privy Conspiracy, and
traiterous mischief of vain glory into the heart of Lambert (his Scholar) as a
cause leading to the same end. Secondly, Ibid. p. 38.
That he the said Lambert was appointed and predestinate of God to consent and
agree unto the pestiferous persuasion of his Master S. Richard, in the pride of
Lucifer, to aspire unto the Royal Throne, as another cause leading to the same
end which God ordained. Thirdly, That the Irish men were appointed of God to be
Rebellious Traitors against their Sovereign Lord the King of England, and to
maintain the false and filthy quarrel of Lambert, as another cause leading to
the same end. Fourthly, That in order to the said end, the Lady Margaret
(Sister to K. Edw. IV.) was appointed and predestinate of God to be a
Traytoress to England, and to employ all her wits, forces, and power, to the
utter destruction of her natural Country: And fifthly, in particular, that the
said Lady Margaret was appointed of God, to hire the said Martin Swarth and his
men to invade the Realm of England. Sixthly and finally, that the said Martin
Swarth, the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lorel, the Lord Gerrard, and diverse
others, Captains of the Rebels, were appointed and predestinate of God to be of
such valiant courage in maintaining the false quarrel of traiterous Lambert,
that they were slain, (and on the other side, many a brave English man's blood
was shed) at the Battle of Stoke, which was the end of this woeful Tragedy. Let
them say therefore what they can or will; this mere necessity which our men
teach, is the very same which the Stoics did hold; which opinion, because it
destroyed the state of a Commonwealth, was banished out of Rome, as St.
Augustine declares in lib. Quaest. Vet. and Nov. Testam.

And thus the different judgments of all the other Western Churches, England
seems most inclinable, and afterward proceed in the story of it.

Historia Quinqu-Articularis: OR, A DECLARATION Of the Judgment of the
WESTERN-CHVRCHES, And more particularly of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, In the Five
Controverted Points.
PART II. Containing the Judgment of the Church of England, and the most
Eminent Divines thereof in the Reign of King Henry VIII. and King Edward VI.
CHAP. VII. An Introduction to the Doctrine of the Church of England in the
Points disputed, with the Removal of some rubs which are laid in the way.
1. The Doctrine of the Homilies, concerning the Endowments of man at his first
Creation. 2. His miserable fall. 3. And the promised hopes of his Restitution
in the Lord Christ Jesus. 4. A general Declaration of the judgment of the
Church of England in the points disputed, exemplified in the story of Agilmond
and Lamistus, Kings of Lombardy. 5. The contrary judgment of Wicklif objected,
answered, and applied to all modern Heresies. 6. A general answer to the like
Argument, pretended to be drawn from the Writings of Frith, Tyndal, and Barns.
But more particularly, 7. The judgment of Dr. Barns in the present points, and
the grounds on which he builded the same. 8. Small comfort to be found from the
works of Tyndal, in favor of the Calvinian Doctrines. 9. The falsifyings of
John Frith, and others in the Doctrine of Predestination, reproved by Tyndal.
10. A parallel between some of our first Martyrs, and the blind man restored to
sight in the eighth of Saint Mark.


BEing therefore in the next place to declare the Judgment of the Church of
England, I shall prepare the way, by laying down her public Doctrine, Adam,
and the Restitution of mankind in Jesus Christ, that having cleared God from
being the Author of sin, and having laid a sure foundation for the Restitution
of Mankind to Gods grace and favor, and consequently to the hopes of Eternal
Life, we may proceed with more assurance to the rest that follows: Hom. of
the Nativity, fol. 167.
And this we cannot better do, than by laying down the words of the Homily
concerning the Nativity and Birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; where
we find it thus: Among all the Creatures (says the Homily) that God made in
the beginning of the world, most excellent and wonderful in their kind; there
was none (as the Scripture bears witness) to be compared almost in any point
unto man; who as well in body as soul, exceeds all other no less than the Sun
in brightness and light exceeds every bright and little Star in the
Firmament: He was made according to the similitude and Image of God, he was
endued with all kind of Heavenly gifts, he had no spot of uncleanness in him,
he was sound and perfect in all parts, both outwardly and inwardly; his reason
was incorrupt, his understanding was pure and good, his will was obedient and
goldly; he was made altogether like unto God, in Righteousness, in Holiness, in
Wisdom, in Truth; to be short, in all kind of perfection.

After which, Eden, and the Dominion which God gave him over all the Creatures,
the Homily does thus proceed, viz. But as the common nature of all men is in
time of prosperity and wealth, to forget not only themselves, but also God;
even so did this first man Adam, who having but one Commandment at Gods hand;
namely, That he should not eat of the Fruit of Knowledge of Good and Evil, did
notwithstanding most unmindfully, or rather most wilfully break it, Hom. of the
Nativity, p. 168.
in forgetting the strait charge of his Maker, and giving ear to the crafty
suggestion of the evil Serpent the Devil; whereby it came to pass, that as
before he was blessed, so now he was accursed; as before he was loved, so now
he was abhorred; as before he was most beautiful and precious, so now he was
most vile and wretched in the sight of his Lord and Maker; instead of the Image
of God, he was now become the Image of the Devil; instead of a Citizen of
Heaven, he was now become the Bond-slave of Hell, having in himself no one part
of his former purity and cleanness, but being altogether spotted and defiled,
insomuch, that now he seemed to be nothing else but a lump of sin: and
therefore by the just judgment of God was condemned to everlasting death.

This being said touching the introduction of the body of Sin, This so great
and miserable plague (for so the Homily proceeds) if it had only rested in
Adam who first offended, it had been so much the easier, and might the better
have been born; but it fell not only on him, but also in his Posterity and
Children for ever, so that the whole brood of Adams flesh should sustain the
self same fall and punishment, which their forefather by his offense most
justly had deserved: S. Paul in the fifth to the Romans says, By the offense
of only Adam, the fault came upon all men to condemnation; and by one man's
disobedience, many were made sinners: By which words we are taught, that as in
Adam all men universally received the reward of sin; that is to say, became
mortal and subject unto death, having in themselves nothing but everlasting
condemnation both of body and soul, etc. Had it been any marvel if mankind had
been utterly driven to desperation, being thus fallen from life to death, from
salvation to destruction, from Heaven to Hell! But behold the great goodness
and tender mercy of God in this behalf! albeit man's wickedness and sinful
behavior was such, that it deserved not in any part to be forgiven; yet to the
intent be might not be clean destitute of all hope and comfort in time to come,
he ordained a new Covenant, and made a sure promise thereof; namely, that he
would send a Mediater, or Messiah into the world, which should make
intercession, and put himself as a stay between both parties, to pacify the
wrath and indignation conceived against sin, and to deliver man out of the
miserable curse, and cursed misery whereunto he was fallen headlong, by
disobeying the Will and Commandment of the only Lord and Maker.

Which ground thus laid, England, which teaches us (according to the general
current of the ancient Authors before Augustins time) that God from all
Eternity intending to demonstrate his power and goodness, designed the Creation
of the World, the making of man after his own Image, and leaving him so made,
in a perfect liberty to do, or not to do what he was commanded, and that
foreknowing from all Eternity, the man abusing this liberty, would plung
himself and his posterity into a gulf of miseries; he graciously resolved to
provide them such a Savior, who should redeem them from their sins, to elect
all those to life eternal who laid hold upon him, leaving the rest in the same
state in which he found them, for their incredulity. And this I take to be the
method of Election unto life Eternal, through Jesus Christ our Lord, according
to the Doctrine of the Church of England: For althought there be neither prius
nor posterius in the will of God, who sees all things at once together, and
wills at the first sight without more delay; yet to apply his acts unto our
capacity, as were the acts of God in their right production, so were they
primitively in his intention: But Creation without peradventure did forego the
fall; and the disease or death which ensued upon it, was of necessity to be,
before there could be a course taken to prescribe the cure; and the prescribing
of the cure must first be finished, before it could be offered to particular
persons. Of which, and of the whole doctrine of Predestination, as before
declared, we cannot have an happier illustration than that of Agilmond and
Lamistus in the Longobardian story of Paul the Deacon: In which it is reported,
That Agilmond the second King of Lombardy, riding by a Fish Pond, saw seven
your Children sprawling in it, whom their unnatural Mothers (as the Author
thinks) had thrown into it not long before. Amazed whereat, he put his
hunting spear amongst them, and stirred them gently up and down; which one of
them laying hold on, was drawn to land, called Lamistus, from the word Lama,
which is the Language of that People, and signifies a Fish Pond; Trained up in
that Kings Court, and finally, made his Successor in the Kingdom. Granting that
Agilmond being forewarned in a Vision, that he should find such Children
sprawling for life in the midst of that pond, might thereupon take a resolution
within himself to put his hunting spear amongst them, and the which of them
soever should lay hold upon it, should be gently drawn out of the water,
adopted for his Son, and made Heir of his Kingdom: No Humane story can afford
us the like parallel case to Gods proceeding in the great work of
Predestination to Eternal Life, according to the Doctrine of the ancient
Fathers, and the Church of Rome, as also of the Lutheran Churches, and those of
the Arminian party in the Belgic Provinces.

Now that this was the Doctrine also of the Church of England, Calvinian party
would fain hook in Wicklif, together with Fryth, Barns and Tyndal, which can by
no means be brought under that account, though some of them deserved well of
the Churches for the times they lived in. They that desire to hook in Wicklif,
do first confess that he stands accused by those of the Church of Rome for
bringing in Fatal Necessity, and making God the Author of sin; and then
conclude, that therefore it may be made a probable guess that there was no
disagreement between him and Calvin: The cause of which Argument stands thus,
That there being an agreement in these points betwixt Wicklif and Calvin, and
the Reformers of our Church embracing the Doctrines of Wicklif; therefore they
must embrace the Doctrines of Calvin also. But first, it cannot be made good
that our Reformers embraced the Doctrines of Wicklif, or had any eye upon the
man; who though he held many points against those of Rome, yet had his field
more Tares than Wheat; his Books more Heterodoxies than sound Catholic
Doctrine. And secondly, admitting this Argument to be of any force in the
present case, it will as warrantably serve for all the Sects and Heresies which
now swarm amongst us, as well as for that of Calvin; Wicklif affording them the
grounds of their several dotages, though possibly they are not so well studied
in their own concernments: For they who consult the works of Thomas Waldensis,
or the Historia Wicklifiana, writ by Harpsfield, will tell us that Wicklif,
amongst many other errors, maintained these that follow: 1. That the Sacrament
of the Altar is nothing else but a piece of Bread. 2. That Priests have no more
Authority to minister Sacraments than Laymen have. 3. That all things ought to
be common. 4. That it is as lawful to Christen a Child in a Tub of water at
home, or in a Ditch by the way, as in a Font-stone in the Churches. 5. That it
is as lawful at all times to confess unto a Layman, as to a Priest. 6. That it
is not necessary or profitable to have any Church or Chapel to pray in, or to
do any Divine Service in. 7. That burying in Churchyards is unprofitable, and
in vain. 8. That Holy Days ordained and instituted by the Church, (and taking
the Lords day in for one) are not to be observed and kept in reverence,
inasmuch as all days are alike. 9. That it is sufficient and enough to believe,
though a man do no good works at all. 10. That no Humane Laws or Constitutions
do oblige a Christian. 11. And finally, That God never gave grace nor knowledge
to a great person or rich man, and that they in no wise follow the same. What
Anabaptists, Brownists, Ranters, Quakers, may not as well pretend that our
first Reformers were of their Religion, as the Calivinsts can, if Wicklifs
Doctrine be the rule of our Reformation: Which because possibly it may obtain
the less belief, if they were found only in the works of Harpsfield and
Waldensis before remembered, the Reader may look for them in the Catalogue of
those Mala Dogmata complained of by the Prolocutor in the Convocation, Anno
1536. to have been publicly preached, printed and professed by some of
Wicklifs Followers: for which consult the Church History, lib. 4. fol. 208. and
there he shall be sure to find them.

It is alleged in the next place, Calvinistical Doctrines in these points, may
be found in the Writings of John Frith, William Tyndal, and Dr. Barns,
collected into one Volume, and printed by John Day, 1563. of which the first
suffered-death for his conscience, Anno 1533. the second, Anno 1536. and the
third, Anno 1540 called therefore by Mr. Fox in a Preface of his before the
Book, the Ringleaders of the Church of England: And thereupon it is inferred,
that the Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination, must be the same with that which
was embraced and countenanced by the first Reformers. But first, admitting that
they speak as much in honor of Calvin's Doctrine as can be possibly desired,
yet being of different judgments in the points disputed, and not so Orthodox in
all others as might make them any way considerable in the Reformation, it is
not to be thought that either their Writings or Opinions should be looked on by
us for our direction in this case. Barns was directly a Dominican in point of
Doctrine; Frith soared so high upon the Wing, and quite out-flew the mark, that
Tyndal thought it not unfit to call him down, and lure him back unto his
perch; and as for Tyndal, he declares himself with such care, and caution,
excepting one of his fllyings out against Free Will, that nothing to their
purpose can be gathered from him. Secondly, I do not look on Mr. Fox as a
competent Judge in matters which concern the Church of England, the Articles of
whose Confession he refused to subscribe, he being thereunto required by
Archbishop Parker; and therefore Tyndal Frith and Barns not to be hearkened to
the more for his commendation. Thirdly, if the testimony of Frith and Tyndal be
of any force for defense of the Calvinists, the Anti-Sabbatarians any more
justly make use of of it in defense of themselves, against the new Sabbath
speculations of Dr. Bond and his Adherents, embraced more passionately of late
than any Article of Religion here by Law established: Of which the first
declares the Lords day to be no other than an Ecclesiastical Institution, or
Church Ordinance; the last, that it is still changeable from one day to
another, if the Church so please: For which consult the Hist. of Sab. l. 2. c.
8. Let Frith and Tyndal be admitted as sufficient Witnesses when they speak
against the new Sabbath Doctrines, or not admitted when they speak in behalf of
Calvin's, and then I am sure his followers will lose more on the one side, than
they gained on the other, and will prove one of the crossest bargains to them
which they over made. And then it is in the fourth place to be observed, that
the greatest Treasury of Learning which those and the Famerlines could boast
of, was locked up in the Cloisters of the Begging Friars, of which the
Franciscans were accounted the most nimble Disputants, the Dominicans the most
diligent and painful Preachers; the Augustinians for the most part siding wit
the one, and the Carmelites or White Friars joining with the other; so that
admitting Frith and Tyndal to maintain the same Doctrine in these points, which
afterward was held forth by Calvin, yet possibly they maintained them not as
any points of Protestant Doctrine, in opposition to the errors of the Church
of Rome (which had not then declared it self on either side) but as the
received Opinion of the Dominican Friars, in opposition to the Franciscans. The
Doctrine of which Dominican Friars, by reason of their diligent preaching, had
met with more plausible entertainment, not only amongst the inferior fort of
people, but also amongst many others of parts and Learning.

And as for Barns, Augustinian Friars in Cambridge, whose Doctrines he had
sucked in at his first coming thither, and therefore might retain them to the
very last, without relation to the Zuinglian or Calvinian Tenants, or any
differences then on foot between the Protestant Doctors and the Church of Rome:
Besides, being of the same Order which Luther had quitted, he might the more
willingly incline to Luthers first opinion touching servitude of the will, man's
inability in cooperating with the Grace of God, and being forcibly drawn in
his own conversion, velut inanimatum quiddam, like a stock or stone, in which
he was tenaciously followed by the rigid Lutherans, though he had afterward
changed his judgment touching that particular: So that beholding Dr. Barns
either as one that followed Luther in his first Opinions, or traveled the
Dominican way in the present points as an Augustinian, it is no marvel if we
find somewhat in his Writings agreeable to the palate of the Calvinists and
rigid Lutherans. From whence it is, Dise of Freewill, p. 278.
that laying down the Doctrine of Predestination, he discourses thus; viz. But
yet say thou, that he gives to the one mercy, and the other none. I answer,
what is that to thee? is not his mercy his own? is it not lawful for him to
give it to whom he will? is thine eye evil because his is good? take that which
is thine, and go thy way; for if he will show his wrath, and make his power
known over the vessels of wrath, ordained to damnation; and to declare the
riches of his glory unto the vessels of mercy, Id. ib.
which he has prepared and elected unto Glory; what have thou therewith to do?
-- But here will subtle blindness say, God saw before that Jacob should do
good, and therefore did he choose him; he saw also that Esau should do evil,
therefore did he condemn him. Alas for blindness! what will you judge of that
which God foresaw? how know we that God saw that? and if he saw it, how know we
that it was the cause of Jacobs Election? These Children being unborn, they had
done neither good nor bad, and yet one of them is chosen, and the other is
refused: St. Paul knows no other cause but the will of God, and will you
needs discuss another. He says not, I will have mercy on him that I see shall
do good; but, I will show mercy to whom I will: He says not, I will have
compassion on him that shall deserve it de congruo; but, Of him of whom I will
have compassion. Now as he follows the Dominicans or rigid Lutherans, in
laying down the grounds and method of Predestination: so he draws more to them
also, and the Zuinglians also, touching Gods workings on the will, than
possibly may be capable of a good construction. Ib. p. 281.
Gods, says he of his infinite power, lets nothing to be exempted from him,
but all things to be subject unto his action; and nothing can be done by them,
but by his principal motion: So that he works in all manner of things, that
be either good or had, not changing their nature, but only moving them to work
after their natures: So that good works good, and evil works evil, and God
uses them both as instruments, and yet does he nothing evil, but evil is done
alone through the will of man: God working by him (but not evil) as by an
instrument. Which last Position (notwithstanding all the subtilty in the close
thereof) how far it is from making God to be the Author of sin, I leave to be
determined by men of more Sholastical and Metaphysical heads, than my
simplicity can pretend to.

For Tyndal next, Wicklif before remembered, the number and particulars whereof,
I had rather the Reader should look for in the Acts and Monuments, where they
are mustered up together (about the latter end of the Reign of King Henry the
eighth) than expect them here. That which occurreth in him touchin
Predestination, is no more than this; Prolog. in Epist. to the Romans, p. 42.
1. Grace, says he, is properly Gods favor, benevolence, or kind mind, which
of his own self, without our deservings, he reaches to us, whereby he was
moved and inclined to give Christ unto us, with all other gifts of Grace. Which
having told us in his Preface to Sr. Paul's Epistle to the Romans; he tells us
not long after, that in the 9, 10, 11. Chapters of the Epistle, the Apostle
teaches us of Gods Predestination; From whence it springs altogether whether
we shall believe or not believe; be loosed from sin, or not be loosed: By which
Predestination, our Justifying and Salvation are clear taken out of our hands,
and put into the hands of God only, which thing is most necessary of all; for
we are so weak, and so uncertain, that if it stood in us, there would of truth
no man be saved; Ibid. 15.
the Devil no doubt would deceive him; but now God is sure of his
Predestination, neither can any man withstand or let him; else why do we hope
and sigh against sin? Discoursing in another place of the act the Will has on
the Understanding, he tells us, That the Will of man follows the Wit; that
as the Wit erreth, so does the Will; and as the Wit is in captivity, so is the
Will; neither is it possible that the Will should be free, when the Wit is in
bondage, etc. -- as I err in my Wit, so I err in my Will; when I judge that to
be evil which is good, then indeed do I hate that which is good; and then when
I perceive that which is good to be evil, then indeed do I love the evil.
Finally, in the heats of his Disputation with Sir Thomas Moor who had affirmed,
That men were to endeavor themselves, and captivate their understandings, if
they would believe. He first cries out, lib. 3. Hist. Moor, p. 306.
How Beetle-blind is fleshly reason! and then subjoyns, that the Will has no
operation at all in the working of faith in my soul, no more than the Child
has in begetting of his Father; for, says Paul, it is the gift of God, and
not of us; my Wit must conclude good or had, yet my Will can leave or take; my
Wit must show me a true or an apparent cause why yet my Will have any working
at all.

I had almost forgot John Frith, and if I had, it had been no great loss to our
rigid Calvinists; who not content to guide themselves in these Disputes by Gods
Will revealed, have too audaciously pried into the Ark of Gods Secret Counsels;
of which spirit I conceive this Frith to be; not that I find him such in any of
his Writings extant with the other two, but that he is affirmed for such, in a
Letter of Tyndals directed to him under the borrowed name of Jacob: For in the
collection of his pieces, neither the Index nor the Margent direct us unto any
thing which concerns this Argument, though to the Writtings of the others they
give a clearer sense (howsoever made then) in favor of the Calvinian party,
than the Books themselves, or possibly was ever meant by the men that made
them: Acts and Mon. fol. 987.
Now Tyndals Letter is as follows; Dearly beloved Jacob, my hearts desire in
our Savior Jesus is, That you arm your self with patience, and be hold, sober,
wise and circumspect; and that you keep you a low by the ground, avoiding high
questions that pass the common capacity; but expound the Law truly, and open
the Rule of Moses, to condemn all flesh, and prove all men sinners, and all
deeds under the Law (before mercy has taken away the condemnation thereof to
be sin, and damnable: And then as a faithful Minister, set abroach the mercy of
our Lord Jesus, and let the wounded consciences drink of the water of life: And
then shall your preaching be with power, not as the Doctrine of Hypocrites; and
the Spirit of God shall work with you, and all consciences shall bear record
unto you, and feel that it is so: And all Doctrine that casts a mist on these
two, to shadow and hide them, I mean, the Law of God, and mercy of Christ, that
resist you with all your power. Of him it is, or of such high Climers as he
was, ^roloe, before the Epist, unto the Romans p. 48.
who we find Tyndal speaking in another place: But here, says he, we must set
a mark upon those unquiet, busy, and high-climing Wits, how far they shall go;
which first of all bring hither their high Reasons and pregnant Wits, and begin
first from on high to search the bottomless secrets of Gods Predestination,
whether they be predestined or no: These must needs either cast themselves
headlong down into Desperation, or else commit themselves to free chance
careless: But follow thou the order of this Epistle, and nuzzel thy self with
Christ, and learn to understand the Law and the Gospel-means, and the office of
both, that thou may in the one know thy self, and how thou have of thy self
no strength but to sin; and in the other the grace of Christ; and then see thou
fight against sin and the flesh, as the seven first Ghapters teach thee. Of
these high flyings, Lambert, another of our Martyrs, was endicted also, who as
he would not plead Not guilty, Acts and Mon. fol. 1008.
so he stood not mute, but bound to the Endictment in this manner following;
Unto the Article, says he, whether it be good or evil, comes of necessity,
that is (as you construe it) to wit, whether a man has Free Will, so that he
may deny joy or pain: I say (as I said at the beginning) that unto the first
part of your Riddle, I neither can nor will give any desinitive answer, for so
much as it surmounteth any capacity, trusting that God will send hereafter
others that be of better cunning than I to incite it.

If there be any thing in this which may give any comfort to our rigid
Calvinists, much good do them with it, Tyndal, Barns, and Frith, conjunct or
separate, may be considered as a Rule to our first Reformers; which having
done, I would have them finally observe the passage in the eighth of St. Mark,
where the blind man, whom our Savior at Bethsaida restored to his sight, at
the first opening of his eyes said, he saw men as trees walking; that is to
say, he saw men walking as trees, quasi dicat homines quos ambulantes video,
non homines, sed arbores mihi videntur; as we read in Maldionale: By which the
blind man declared (says he) se quidem videre aliquid, imperfecte tamen
videre, cum inter homines etc arbores distinguere non posset: I discern
somewhat said the poor man, but so imperfectly, that I am not able to
distinguish between trees and men: Such an imperfect sight as this might these
Martyrs have, in giving unto men no greater power of walking in the ways of
Gods Commandments, than as if they had been senseless Trees, or liveless
shadows: And such an imperfect sight as his the Lord gave many times to those
whom he recovered out of the Egyptian darkness of Popish Errors, who not being
able to discern all divine Truth at the first opening of the eyes of their
understanding, were not to be a Rule or President to those that followed and
lived under a brighter beam of illumination. Finally, taking all for granted as
to the judgment of these men in the points disputed, which the Calvinians can
desire and pretend unto, and letting them enjoy the Title which Mr. Fox has
given them, of being called the Ringleaders of the Church of Englanp (which
Bilney, Byfield, Lambert, Garet, or any other of our ancient Martyrs may as
well lay claim to) yet as they suffered death before the public undertaking of
the Reformation under E. 6. so nothing was ascribed to their Authority by the
first Reformers.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparatives to the Reformation, and the Doctrine of the
Church in the present points.
1. The danger of ascribing too much to our ancient Martyrs, etc. exemplified
in the parity of Ministers and popular elections unto Benefices, allowed by Mr.
John Lambert. 2. Nothing ascribed to Calvin's judgment by our first Reformers,
but much to the Augustine Confession, the writings of Melancthon. 3. And to the
Authority of Erasmus, his Paraphrases being commanded to the use of the Church
by King Edward VI. and the Reasons why. 4. The Bishops Book in order to a
Reformation, called, The Institution of a Christian man, commanded by King
Henry VIII. 1537. corrected afterward with the Kings own hand, examined and
allowed by Cranmer, approved by Parliament, and finally, published by the name
of Necessary doctrine, etc. An. 1543. 5. The Doctrine of the said two Books in
the points disputed, agreeable unto that which after was established by King
Edward the Sixth. 6. Of the two Liturgies made in the time of King Edward VI.
and the manner of them; the testimony given unto the first, and the alterations
in the second. 7. The first Book of Homilies, by whom made, approved by Bucer,
and of the Argument that may be gathered from the method of it in the points
disputed. 8. The quality and condition of those men who principally concurred
to the Book of Articles, with the Harmony or consent in Judgment between
Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, Bishop Hooper, etc. 9. The Doctrine
delivered in the Book of Articles, touching the five controverted points. 10.
An answer to the Objection against these Articles, for the supposed want of
Authority in the making of them. 11. An Objection against King Edwards
Catechism, mistaken for an Objection against the Articles, refelled, as that
Catechism by John Philpot Martyr, and of the delegating of some powers by that
Convocation to a choice Committee. 12. The Articles not drawn up in
comprehensive or ambiguous terms to please all parties, but to be understood in
the respective, literal, and Grammatical sense, and the Reasons why.


I Have the longer stood upon the answering of this Objection, to satisfy and
prevent all others of the like condition, in case it should be found on a
further search, that any of our godly Martyrs, or learned Writers, who either
suffered death before the Reign of Edward VI. or had no hand in the carrying on
of the Reformation, embraced any opinions in Doctrine or Discipline contrary to
the established Rules of the Church of England: For otherwise, as we must admit
all Tyndals Heterodoxies, and Friths high flying conceits of Predestination,
which before we touched at, so must we also allow a Parity, or an Identity
rather in Priests and Bishops, because John Lambert, (another of our Godly
Martyrs) did conceive so of it. In the primitive Church (says he) there were
no more Officers in the Church of God than Bishops and Deacons; that is to say,
Ministers, as witnesses, beside Scripture, S. Hierom in his Commentaries on
the Epistles of S. Paul. Whereas (says he) that those whom we now call
Priests, were all one, and no other but Bishops, and the Bishops no other but
Priests, men ancient both in age and learning, so near as could be chosen; nor
were they instituted and chosen as they be now a days, the Bishop and his
Officer only opposing them whether they can construe a Collect; but they were
chosen also with the consent of the people, amongst whom they were to have
their living, as shows S. Cyprian: But alack for pity, such elections are
banished, and new fashions brought in. By which opinion (if it might have
served or a Rule to the Reformation) our Bishops must have been reduced to the
rank of Priests, and the right of Presentation put into the hands of the
people, to the Destruction of all the Patrons in the Kingdom.

If then the question should be asked (as perhaps it may) On whom, Calvin, no
more than to the judgment of Wicklef, Tyndal, Barns, or Frith, whose offered
assistance they refused when they went about it; of which he sensibly
complained unto some of his friends, as appears by one of his Epistles. I
answer next affirmatively in the words of an Act of Parliament, 2. and 3. Edw.
6. where it is said, That they had an eye in the first place to the more pure
and sincere Christian Religion taught in the Scriptures; and in the next place
to the usages of the Primitive Church. Being satisfied in both which ways, they
had thirdly a more particular respect to the Lutheran Plat-forms, the English
Confession or Book of Articles being taken in many places word for word out of
that of Ausberg, and a conformity maintained with the Lutheran Churches in
Rites and Ceremonies; as namely, in kneeling at the Communion, the Cross in
Baptism, the retaining of all the ancient Festivals, the reading of the
Epistles and Gospels on Sundays and Holy Days, and generally in the whole Form
of External Worship. Fourthy, in reference to the points disputed, they
ascribed much to the Authority of Melancthon (not undeservedly called the
Phoenix of Germany) whose assistance they earnestly desired, whose coming over
they expected, who was as graciously invited hither by King Edward the Sixth
(Regiis literis in Angliam vocari) as himself affirms in an Epistle to
Camerarius: His coming laid aside upon the fall of the Duke of Sommerset, and
therefore since they could not have his company, they made use of his writings
for their direction in such points of Doctrine, in which they though it
necessary for the Church to declare her judgment.

I observe finally, Melancthon, so they ascribe no less therein unto that of
Erasmus, once Reader of the Greek Tongue in Cambridge, and afterward one of
the Professors of Divinity there; whose Paraphrases on the four Evangelists
being translated into English, were ordered to be kept in Churches for the use
of the People, and that they owned the Epistles to be studied by all such as
had cure of souls: Concerning which it was commanded by the injunctions of King
Edward VI. published by the advice of the Lord Protector Somerset and the Privy
Council, Acts and Mon. fol. 1181.
in the first year of the said Kings Reign: 1. That they should see provided in
some most convenient and open place of every Church, one great Bible in
English, with the Paraphrase of Erasmus in English, that the People might
reverently, without any let, read and hear the same at such time as they
listed, and not to be inhibited therefrom by the Parson or Curate; but rather
to be the more encouraged and provoked thereunto. And 2. That every Priest
under the degree of a Batchellour of Divinity should have of his own, one New
Testament in English and Latin, with the Paraphrases of Erasmus upon the same,
and should diligently read and study thereupon, and should collect and keep in
memory all such comfortable places of the Scripture, as do set forth the Mercy,
Benefits, and Goodness of Almighty God toward all penitent and believing
persons, that they might thereby comfort their flock in all danger of death,
despair or trouble of Conscience; and that therefore every Bishop in their
Institution should from time to time try and examine them how they have
profited in their studies. A course and care not likely to have entered into the
thoughts of the Lord Protector, or any of the Lords of the Council, if it had
not been advised by some of the Bishops, who then began to have an eye on the
Reformation, which soon after followed; and as unlikely to be counseled and
advised by them, had they intended to advance any other Doctrine than what was
countenanced in the Writings of that Learned man. Whereupon I conclude the
Doctrine of the points disputed, to be the true and genuine Doctrine of the
Church of England, which comes most near to the plain sense of holy Scripture,
the general current of the Fathers in the Primitive times, the famous Augustane
Confession, the Writings of Melancthon, and the Works of Erasmus: To which
Conclusion I shall stand till I find my self encountered by some stronger
Argument to remove me from it.

The ground thus laid, H. 8. by whom it had been ordered in the year 1536. That
the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments should be recited
publicly by the Parish Priest in the English Tongue, and all the Sundays and
other Holidays throughout the year: And that the people might the better
understand the duties contained in them, it pleased him to assemble his Bishops
and Clergy in the year next following, requiring them, andVpon the diligent
search and perusing of Holy Scripture, to set forth a plain and sincere
Doctrine, concerning the whole sum of all those things which appertain unto the
Profession of a Christian man. Which work being finished, with very great care
and moderation, they published by the name of an Institution of a Christian
man, containing the Exposition or Interpretation of the common Creed, the seven
Sacraments, the Ten Commandments, Epls. Dedit.
the Lords Prayer, etc. and dedicated to the Kings Majesty. Submitting to his
most excellent Wisdom and exact Judgment, to be by him recognized, overseen,
and corrected, if he found any word or sentence in it amiss, to be qualified,
changed, or further expounded, in the plain setting forth of his most virtuous
desire and purpose in that behalf. A Dedication publicly subscribed in the
name of the rest, by all the Bishops then being, eight Archdeacons, and
seventeen Doctors of chief note in their several faculties: Amongst which I
find seven by name, who had a hand in drawing up the first Liturgy of King
Edward VI. that is to say, Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury; Goodrich, Bishop
of Ely; Hebeach, then Bishop of Rochester, and of Lincoln afterward; Skip,
then Archdeacon of Dorset, after Bishop of Hereford; Roberson, afterward Dean
of Durham, as Mayo was afterward of S. Paul's, and Cox of Westminster: And I
find many others amongst them also, who had a principal hand in making the
first Book of Homilies, and passing the Articles of Religion in the Convocation
of the year, 1552. and so it rested till the year, 1643. when the King making
use of the submission of the Book which was tendered to him corrected it in many
places with his own hand, as appears by the Book it self, remaining in the
famous Library of Sir Robert Cotton: Which having done, he sends it so
corrected to Archbishop Cranmer; who causing it to be reviewed by the Bishops
and Clergy in Convocation, drew up some Annotations on it: And that he did for
this intent (as I find expressed in one of his Letters bearing date, June 25. of
this present year) because the Book being to be set forth by his Graces censure
and judgment, he would have nothing therein that Momos himself could reprehend,
referring notwithstanding all his Annotations to his Majesty's exacter
judgment: Nor staid it here, but being committed by the King to both Houses of
Parliament, and by them very well approved of, as appears by the Statutes of
this year, Cap. 1. concerning the advancing of true Religion, and the abolition
of the contrary, it was published again by the Kings command, under the title
of Necessary Doctrine and Erudition for any Christian man: And it was published
with an Epistle of the Kings before it, directed to all his faithful and loving
Subjects; wherein it is affirmed, To be a true Declaration of the true
knowledge of God and his Word, with the principal Articles of Religion, whereby
men may uniformly be led and taught the true understanding of that which is
necessary for every Christian man to know, for the ordering of himself in this
life, agreeable unto the will and pleasure of Almighty God.

Now from these Books the Doctrine of Predestination may be gathered into these
particulars; which I desire the Reader to take notice of, Institut. of a
Christian.
that he may judge the better of the Conformity which it has with the
established Doctrine of the Church of England.

1. That man by his own nature was born in sin, and in the indignation and
displeasure of God, and was the very child of Wrath, condemned to everlasting
death, subject and thrall to the power of the Devil and sin; having all the
principal parts or portions of his soul, as reason and understanding, and
free will, and all other powers of his soul and body, not only so destituted
and deprived of the gifts of God wherewith they were first endued, but also so
blinded, corrupted and poisoned with error, ignorance and carnal
concupiscence, that neither his said powers could exercise the natural function
and office for which they were ordained by God at the first Creation, nor could
he by them do any thing which might be acceptable to God.

2. That Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God the Father, was eternally
preordained and appointed by the Decree of the Holy Trinity, to be our Lord;
that is to say, to be the only Redeemer and Savior of Mankind, and to reduce
and bring the same from under the Dominion of the Devil and sin, unto his only
Dominion, Kingdom, Lordship, and Governance.

3. That when the time was come in the which it was before ordained and
appointed by the Decree of the Holy Trinity, That Mankind should be saved and
redeemed, Necessary prayer.
than the Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity, and very God, descended
from Heaven into the world, to take upon him the very habit, form, and nature
of man, and in the same nature of suffer his glorious Passion for the
Redemption and Salvation of all Mankind.

4. That by this Passion and Death of our Savior Jesus Christ, not only
Corporal death is so destroyed, that it shall never hurt us, but rather that it
is made wholesome and profitable unto us; but also, that all our sins, and the
sins also of all them that do believe in him, and follow him, be mortified and
dead, that is to say, all the guilt and offense thereof, as also the damnation
and pains due for the same, is clearly extincted, abolished and washed away, so
that the same shall never afterward be imputed and inflicted on us.

5. That this Redemption and Justification of Mankind could not have been
wrought or brought to pass by any other means in the world, but by the means of
this Jesus Christ, Gods only Son; and that never man could yet, nor never shall
be able to come unto God the Father, or to believe in him, or to attain his
favor, by his own wit and reason, or by his own science and learning, or by
any of his own works, or by whatsoever may be named in Heaven or Earth, but by
faith in the Name and Power of Jesus Christ, and by the gifts and graces of his
Holy Spirit.

But to proceed, Edward VI. that is to say, the Lord Protector, and the rest of
the Privy Council, acting in his Name, and by his Authority, performed by
Archbishop Cranmer, and the other six before remembered, assisted by Thirdby,
Bishop of Winchester; Day, Bishop of Chichester; Ridley, Bishop of Rochester;
Tailor, (then Dean after) Bishop of Lincoln; Redman, then Master of Trinity
College in Cambridge; and Hains, Dean of Exeter; all men of great abilities in
their several stations: and finally, confirmed by the King, the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in Parliament Assembled, 23 Edw. VI. In which
Confirmatory act it is said expressly to have been done by the especial aid of
the Holy Ghost; which testimony I find also of it in the Acts and Monuments,
fol 1184. But being disliked by Calvin, who would needs be meddling in all
matters which concerned Religion, and disliked it chiefly for no other reason
(as appears in one of his Epistles to the Lord Protector) but because it
savoured too much of the ancient Forms, it was brought under a review, the
cause of the reviewing of it being given out to be no other, than that there
had risen diverse doubts in the Exercise of the said Book, for the fashion and
manner of the Ministration, though risen rather by the curiosity of the
Ministers and Mistakers, than of any other cause, 5, 6 Edw. 6. cap. 1. The
review made by those who had first compiled it, though Hobeach and Redman might
be dead before the confirmation of it by Act of Parliament, some of the New
Bishops added to the former number, and being reviewed, was brought into the
same form in which now it stands; save, that a clause was taken out of the
Letany, and a sentence added to the distribution of the blessed Sacrament, in
the first year of Queen Elizabeth, and that some alteration was made in two or
three of the Rubricks, with an addition of Thanksgiving in the end of the
Letany; as also of a Prayer for the Queen, and the Royal Issue in the first of
King James.

At the same time, Edward VI. was the first Book of Homilles composed also; in
which I have some cause to think that Bishop Latimer was made use of amongst
the rest, as one who had subscribed the first other two books before mentioned,
as Bishop of Worcester, Ann. 1537. and ever since continued zealous for a
Reformation, quitting in that respect such a wealthy Bishopric, because he
neither would nor could conform his judgment to the Doctrine of the six
Articles Authorized by Parliament: For it will easily appear to any, who is
conversant in Latimers writings, and will compare them carefully with the book
of Homilies, that they do not only savor of the same spirit in point of
Doctrine, but also of the same popular and familiar style, which that godly
Martyr followed in the course of his preachings; for though the making of these
Homilies be commonly ascribed (and in particular by Mr. Fox) to Archbishop
Cranmer, yet it is to be understood no otherwise of him, thad than it was
chiefly done by encouragement and direction, not sparing his own hand to
advance the work, as his great occasions did permit. That they were made at the
same time with King Edwards first Liturgy, will appear as clearly, first by the
Rubric in the same Liturgy it self, in which it is directed, Let. of Mr. Bucer
to the Church of England.
that after the Creed shall follow the Sermon or Homily, or some portion of one
of them, as they shall be hereafter divided. It appears secondly by a Letter
writ by Martin Bucer, inscribed To the holy Church of England, and the
Ministers of the same, in the year 1549. in the very beginning whereof, he lets
them know, That their Sermons or Homilies were come to his hands, wherein they
godlily and effectually exhort their people to the reading of Holy Scripture
(that being the scope and substance of the first Homily, which occurs in that
book) and therein expounded the sense of the faith whereby we hold our
Christianity and Justification, whereupon all our help censisteth, and other
most holy principles of our Religion, with most godly zeal. And as it is
reported of the Earl of Gondomar, Ambassador to King James from the King of
Spain, that having seen the elegant disposition of the Rooms and Offices in
Burleigh House, not far from Stanford erected by Sir William Cecil, principal
Secretary of State, and Lord Treasurer to Queen Elizabeth, he very pleasantly
affirmed, That he was able to discern the excellent judgment of the great
Statesman, by the neat contrivance of his house: So we may say of those who
composed this book, in reference to the points disputed, A man may easily
discern of what judgment they were in the Doctrine of Predestination, by the
method which they have observed in the course of these Homilies: Beginning
first with a discourse of the misery of man in the state of nature; proceeding
next to that of the salvation of mankind by Christ our Savior only, from sin
and death everlasting; from thence, to a Declaration of a true, lively, and
Christian says, and after that of good works annexed unto faith, by which our
Justification and Salvation are to be obtained; and in the end descending unto
the Homily bearing this inscription, How dangerous a thing it is to fall from
God: Which Homilies in the same form and order in which they stand, were first
authorized by King Edward VI. afterward tacitly approved in the Rubric of the
first Liturgy before remembered, by Act of Parliament, and finally, confirmed
and ratified in the book of Articles, agreed upon by the Bishops and Clergy of
the Convocation, Anno 1552. and legally confirmed by the said King Edward.

Such were the hands, Anno 1537. and most of those who had been formerly
advised with in the reviewing of the book, by the Commandment of King Henry
VIII. 1543. To which were added, amongst others. Dr. John Point, Bishop of
Winchester, an excellent Grecian, well studied with the ancient Fathers, and
one of the ablest Mathematicians which those times produced: Dr. Miles
Coverdale, Bishop of Exon, who had spent much of his time in the Lutheran
Churches, amongst whom he received the degree of Doctor: Mr. John Story, Bishop
of Rochester ( Ridley being then preferred to the Sea of London) from thence
removed to Chichester, and in the end by Queen Elizabeth to the Church of
Hereford; Mr. Rob. Farran, Bishop of St. David's, and Martyr, a man much
favored by the Lord Protector Sommerset, in the time of his greatness; and
finally (not to descend to those of the lower Clergy) Mr. John Hooker, Bishop
of Gloucester, and Martyr; of whose Exposition of the Ten Commandments, and his
short Paraphrase on Romans 13. we shall make frequent use hereafter; a man
whose works were well approved of by Bishop Ridley (the most learned and
judicious of all the Prelates) who notwithstanding they differed in some points
of Ceremony, professes an agreement with him in all points of Doctrine; as
appears by a Letter written to him when they were both Prisoners for the truth,
and ready to give up their lives (as they after did) in defense thereof: Now
the words of the Letter are as follows, But now my dear Brother, forasmuch as
I understand by your works, which I have but superficially seen, that we
thoroughly agree, and wholly consent together in those things which are the
grounds and substantial points of our Religion, Acts and Mon. fol. 1366.
against the which the world now so rages in these our days: Howsoever in
times past, in certain by-matters and circumstances of Religion your wisdom and
my simplicity and ignorance have jarred, each of us following the abundance of
his own sense and judgment: Now I say, be you assured, that even with my whole
heart, God is the witness, in the bowels of Christ, I love you in truth, and
for the truths sake that abides in us, and I am persuaded, by the grace of
God, shall abide in us for evermore. The like agreement there was also between
Ridley and Cranmer, Cranmer ascribing very much to the judgment and opinion of
the learned Prelate, as himself was not ashamed to confess at his Examination;
for which see Fox in the Acts and Monuments, fol. 1702.

By these men, viz. Articuli de quibus in Synodo Londinens. A.D. 1552. ad
tollendam opinionum dissentionem, and consensum verae Religionis firmandum,
inter Episcopos and alios eruditos viros, convenerat, Regia authoritate Londin.
editi; that is to say, Articles agreed upon by the Bishops and other learned
men assembled in the Synod at London, Anno 1552. and published by the Kings
Authority, for the avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the
establishing of consent, touching true Religion. Amongst which Articles
(countenanced in Convocation by Queen Elizabeth, Ann. 1562.) the Doctrine of
the Church in the five controverted points is thus delivered, according to the
form and order which we have observed in the rest before.

1. Of Divine Predestination.
Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly ordered by his Council,
Artic. 17.
secret unto us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom be has chosen
in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting
salvation, as vessels made to honor.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wise at they be generally
set forth to us in holy Scripture, and in our doing the will of God that is to
be followed, which we have expressly declared to us in the Word of God.

2. Of the Redemption of the World by the faith of Christ.
The Son, which is the Word begotten of the Father, begotten from everlasting
of the Father, etc. and being very God, and very Man, did truly suffer, was
Crucified, Dead and Buried, Artic. 2.
to reconcile his Father to us, and be a Sacrifice not only for Original guilt,
but also for the actual sins of men.

The Offering of Christ once made, Artic. 31.
is this perfect Redemption, Propitiation and Satisfaction to all the sins of
the whole world, both Original and Actual.

3. Of man's will in the state of depraved nature: Artic. 9.
Man by Original sin is so far gone from Original righteousness, that of his
own nature be is inclined to evil, so that the flesh lusts always contrary to
the Spirit; and therefore

Works done before the grace of Christ, Artic. 13.
and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they
spring not of faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make men meet to receive
grace, or (as the School Authors say) deserve grace of Congruity.

4. Of the manner of Conversion.
The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works, Artic. 10.
to faith and calling upon God; wherefore we have no power to do good works
pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing
us, that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we have that good
will.

5. Of the uncertainty of Perseverance.
The Grace of Repentance is not to be denied to such as fall into sin after
Baptism, in regard that after we have received the Holy Ghost, Artic. 16.
we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin; and by the grace of God (we
may) arise again and amend our lives; and therefore they are to be condemned
which say they can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny the place of
Repentance to such as truly repent.

Now in these Articles, Edw. VI. under the Great Seal of England. But against
this it is objected, That the Records of this Convocation are but a degree
above blanks; that the Bishops and Clergy then assembled, had no Commission
from the King to meddle in Church business; that the King durst not trust the
Clergy of that time in so great a matter, on a just jealousy which he had of
the ill affections of the major part; and therefore the trust of this great
business was committed unto some few Confidents, cordial to the cause of
Religion, and not unto the body of a Convocation. To which it has been already
answered, That the Objector is here guilty of a greater crime than that of
Scandalum magnatum, making King Edward VI. of pious memory, no better than an
impious and lewd Impostor, in fathering those children on the Convocation,
which had not been of their begetting: For first, the Title to the Articles
runs thus at large, Articuli de quibus, etc. as before we had it; which
Title none durst adventure to set before them, had they not really been the
products of the Convocation. Secondly, the King had no reason to have any such
jealousy at that time of the major part of the Clergy, but that he might trust
them with a power to meddle with matters of Religion; this Convocation being
holden the sixth year of his Reign, when Gardener, B^nner, Day and Tunstall,
and others of the stiffest Romanists, were put out of their places; most of the
Episcopal Sees and Parochial Churches being filled with men according unto his
desires, and generally conformable to the Forms of Worship here by Law
established. Thirdly, the Church of England for the first five years of Queen
Elizabeth, retained these Articles, and no other, as the public tendries of
the Church in point of Doctrine; which certainly she had not done, had it been
recommended to her by a less Authority than a Convocation lawfully assembled
and confirmed. And fourthly, that it is true, that the Records of Convocation
during this King, and the first years of Queen Mary are very defective and
imperfect, most of them lost; amongst others, those of this present year: And
yet one may conclude as strongly, that my Mother died Childless, because my
Christening is not to be found in the Parish Register; as that the Convocation
of this year was barren, because the Acts and Articles of it were not entered in
the Journal Book.

To salve this sore, it is conceived by the Objector, in which sense they may
be said to have made these Articles themselves, by their delegates, to whom
they had deputed their Authority, the case not being so clear, Id. Ib.
but that it occasioned a Cavil at the next Convocation the first of Queen
Mary, when the Papists therein assembled, renounced the legality of any such
former transactions. And unto this it shall be answered, That no such defect of
legality as was here pretended, was charged against the book of Articles it
self, but only against a Catechism which was bound up with it, countenanced by
the Kings Letters Patents prefixed before it, approved by many Bishops and
learned men, and generally voiced to be another of the products of this
Convocation: And therefore for so much as concerns this Catechism, it was
replied by Mr. John Philpot Archdeacon of Winchester, who had been a member in
the former, and was now a member of the Convocation in the first of Queen Mary.
That he thought they were deceived in the Title of it, Acts and Monum. fo. 1282.
in that it owned the Title of the last Synod of London, many which were then
present, not being made privy to the making or publishing of it. He added. That
the said former Convocation, had granted the Authority of making excellent
Laws, unto certain persons to be appointed by the Kings Majesty; so as
whatsoever Ecclesiastical Laws they, or the most part of them did set forth
(according to a Statute in that behalf provided) might be well said to be done
in the Synod of London, though such as were of the house, had no notice thereof
before the promulgation: And thereupon he did infer, That the setters forth of
the Catechism did not slander the House, as they went about to persuade the
World, since they had the Authority of the Synod unto them committed, to make
such Spiritual Laws as they thought convenient and necessary for the good of
the Church. In which Discourse we may observe, that there was not one word
which reflects on the Book of Articles, all of it being made in reference to
the Catechism before remembered; though if the Objection had been made (as
indeed it was not) against the Articles themselves, the defense of that learned
man, and godly Martyr, would have served as fully for the one, as it did for
the other. But whatsoever may be said in derogation to the Authority of the
Book of Articles, as it was published in the time of King Edward the sixth,
Anno Dom. 1552. certain I am, that nothing can be said unto ^^e contrary, but
that they were received, and the far greater part of them agreed upon in full
Convocation, Anno 1562. And therefore for avoiding of all Disputes, I am
resolved to take them in this last capacity, as they were ratified by Queen
Elizabeth, Anno 1563. confirmed by King James, An. 1604. and finally
established by the late King Charles, with his Majesty's Royal Declaration
prefixed before them, Anno 1628.

Less doubt there is concerning the intent of this Convocation in drawing up
the Articles in so loose a manner, English Protestant Church, Chur. Hist. lib.
9. fol. 72.
in the infancy thereof, were drawn up in general terms, foreseeing that
posterity would grow up to fill the same; meaning, that these holy men did
prudently discover that differences in judgment would unavoidably happen in the
Church, and were loath to unchurch any, and drive them off from any
Ecclesiastical communion for petty differences, which made them pen the
Articles in comprehensive words, to take in all, who differing in the branches,
meet in the root of the same Religion: This has been formerly observed to have
been the artifice of those who had the managing of the Council of Trent, and is
affirmed to have been used by such men also as had the drawing up of the Canons
at the Synod of Dort: But the Composers of the Articles of the Church of
England had not so little in them of the Dove, or so much of the Serpent, as to
make the Articles of the Church like an upright shoe, which may be worn on
either foot; or like to Theramenes shoe, as the Adage has it, fit for the foot
of every man that was pleased to wear it; and therefore we may say of our first
Reformers, in reference to the present Book of Articles, as was affirmed of
them by Dr. Brancroft then Bishop of London, in relation to the Rubric in
private Baptism; that is to say, that those reverend and learned men intended
not to deceive any by ambiguous terms; for which, see Conf. at Hampton Court,
Confer.
p. 15. And to this supposition or imagination it is also answered, That the
first Reformers did not so compose the Articles, as to leave any liberty to
diffenting judgments, as the said Author would fain have it in some words
preceding, but did not bind men to the literal and Grammatical sense; they had
not otherwise attained to the end they aimed at, which was ad tollendam
Opiniorum Dissentionem, and consensum in vera Religione firmandum; that is to
say, to take away diversity of Opinions, and to establish an agreement in the
true Religion. Which end could never be effected, if men were left unto the
liberty of dissenting, or might have leave to put their own sense upon the
Articles, as they list themselves: For where there is a purpose of permitting
men to their own Opinions, there is no need of definitions and determinations
in a National Church, no more than is of making Laws to bind the Subjects in an
unsettled Commonwealth, with an intent to leave them in their former liberty,
either of keeping or not keeping them, as themselves best pleased. Which said,
we shall enquire into the meaning of the Articles, as before laid down, whether
they speak in favor of the Melancthonian or Calvinian way, so far forth as the
meaning of them can be gathered from the public Liturgy and book of Homilies,
or from the Writings of those men, who either had a hand in the making of them,
or died in the Religion here by Law established.

CHAP. IX. Of the Doctrine of Predestination delivered in the Articles, the
Homilies, the public Liturgies, and the Writings of some of the Reformers.
1. The Articles indifferently understood by the Calvinian party, and the true
English Protestants, with the best way to find out the true sense thereof. 2.
The definition of Predestination, and the most considerable points contained in
it. 3. The meaning of those words in the Definition; viz. whom he has chosen
in Christ, according to the Exposition of St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, St.
Jerome, as also of Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Latimer, and the Book of Homilies,
4. The Absolute Decree condemned by Bishop Latimer, as a means to
Licentiousness and carnal living. 5. For which, and making God to be the Author
of sin, condemned as much by Bishop Hooper. 6. Our Election to be found in
Christ, not sought for in Gods secret Counsels, according to (...) judgment of
Bishop Latimer. 7. The way to find out our Election, delivered by the same
godly Bishop, and by Bishop Hooper, with somewhat to the same purpose also from
the Book of Homilies. 8. The Doctrine of Predestination, delivered by the holy
Martyr John Bradford, with Fox his gloss upon the same to corrupt the sense. 9.
No countenance to be had for any absolute, personal and irrespective Decree of
Predestination in the public Liturgy. 10. An Answer to such passages out of
the said Liturgy, as seem to favor that Opinion; as also touching the number
of Gods Elect.


THUS have we seen the Doctrine of the Church of England in the five
controverted Points, according as it is delivered in the Book of Articles; take
the Articles in the Literal and Grammatical sense, which is the fairest and
most approved way of Interpretation; according to the saying of an ancient
Writer, Declar. before the Art. 1628.
That if the Literal sense of holy Scripture will stand with the Analogy of
Faith and Piety, it is to be preferred before any other: Others they are (of
which his late Majesty complained) who draw the Articles aside, and put their
own sense or Comment to be the meaning of the Articles; fashioning them to
their own fancies, as they please themselves: Each of the parties in those
curious points in which the present differences do most consist, conceive the
Articles of the Church to speak for them, exclusive wholly of the other, but
with a notable difference in the Application. The Calvinists, Our Divines
commonly called Calvinists, Yates in Ap, Caesar. cap. 5. p. 38.
by which name they love to be called, endeavor to captivate the sense of the
Article, and bring it to the bent of their own understanding, but the true
English Protestants (whom for distinction sake we may call Confessionists)
accommodate, though they do not captivate, their own sense to the sense of the
Church, according to the plain and full meaning of the Articles in the points
disputed. But because possibly both parties may not be agreed on a Rule or
Medium by which the proper sense and meaning of the Articles may be best
discovered, it will not be amiss to follow the directions of the Civil Laws, in
cases of like doubtful nature; which is briefly this, viz. Si de
interpretatione Legis quaeritur, imprimis inspiciendum est, quo jure Civitas
retro in hujusmodi casibus usa fuit: And this we shall the better do, if we
enquire into the Doctrine of those Learned, Religious and Godly men, who either
had a principal hand in the Reformation, or were most conversant with them; and
beloved of them in their several stations, taking along with us the Authority
of the Homilies and public Liturgy, to which all parties have subscribed. In
order whereunto, it will first be necessary to lay down the definition of
Predestination, as before we had it in the Article, to sum up the particular
points and contents thereof, to show the sense of one phrase in it, and then to
travel more exactly in this Enquiry, whether the method of Predestination,
illustrated by the story of Agilmond and Amistus Kings of Lombardy, cap. 7.
number. 4. agree not more hamoniously with the true sense and meaning of the
Church of England, than any other whatsoever.

First then, Predestination unto life, is defined in the seventeenth Article to
be the everlasting purpose of God, whereby, and before the foundations of the
World were laid, he has constantly decreed by his Council secret unto us, to
deliver from damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and
to bring them by Christ unto everlasting salvation. In which definition there
are these things to be observed: First, That Predestination does presuppose a
curse or state of damnation in which all mankind was represented to the sight
of God, which plainly crosses the Opinion of the Supra-Lapfarians, the
Supra-Creaturians, or Credibilitarians, as some call them now. Secondly, That
it is an act of his from Everlasting, because from Everlasting he foresaw into
what misery wretched man would fall, by the abuse of that liberty in which
first he stood. Thirdly, That he founded it, and resolved for it in the Man and
Mediator Christ Jesus, both for the purpose and performance; which crosses as
directly with the Sublapsatians, who place the absolute decree of
Predestination to life, and of Reprobation unto death, both of body and soul,
before the decree or consideration of sending his only beloved Son Jesus Christ
into the World, to be the common Propitiation for the sins of men. Fourthly,
That it was of some special ones alone, Elect called forth, and reserved in
Christ, and not generally extended unto all mankind; a General Election, as
they say, being no Election. Fifthly, That being thus elected in Christ, they
shall be brought by Christ (but not without their own consent and cooperation)
to everlasting salvation. And finally, That this Council is secret unto us; for
though there be revealed to us some hopeful signs of our Election and
Predestination unto life, yet the certainty thereof is a secret hidden in God,
and in this life unknown to us; For who has known the mind of the Lord, or
has been his Counselor? (or of his Secret Council) says the great Apostle.

Such is the definition of Predestination, Whom he has chosen in Christ: which
being the very words of the same Apostle; Ephesians first, cap. 4. we will
first paraphrase in the words of some ancient Writers, Ambros in Ep^st. 1.4.
and then illustrate them by others of our holiest Martyrs, who had a principal
hand in the Reformation: First, St. Ambrose, amongst others, sicut elegit nos
in ipso, as he has chosen us in him, Praescivit enim Deus omnes, scil. qui
credituri essent in Christum: For God (says he) by his general prescience, did
foreknow every man that would believe in Christ: To the same purpose speaks S.
Chrysostom, saying, Quod dicit perinde est ac si dicat, Per quem nos benedixit,
per eundem and elegit; and a little after, Quid est in ipso elegit? per eam
quae in ipso habenda esset, fidem; For, praestitit prius quam ipsi essemus,
Chrysostom in Ep. 14.
magis autem prius quam mundi bujus jacerentur Fundamenta: Which is as much as
to say (says he) as if he had said. That we are blessed in him, in whom we are
chosen; and we are chosen in him in whom we believe; which he performed before
we our selves had any being, or rather before the foundations of the World were
laid; And to the same effect, the Commentary upon St. Paul's Epistles, ascribed
to St. Jerome: viz. in hoc praedestinavit, ut haberent potestatem filii Dei
ficri homines, Hierom. in Epist. 64.
qui credere voluissent; that is to say, in this he has predestined us to
Eternal life, that men may be made the Sons of God, if they will believe. Which
sayings of those ancient Writers, we shall expound by others of our holy
Martyrs; and first Archbishop Cranmer, L. 5. p. 372.
in his Answer to Gardener touching the holy Sacrament, tells us this; viz.
Christ (says he) took unto himself not only their sins that many years before
were dead, and put their trust in him; but also the sins of those that until
his coming again, should truly believe in his Gospel: More fully Bishop
Latimer, thus, When (says he) we hear that some be chosen, Sermon. 3. Sunday
after Epiphany. part. 3. fol. 198.
and some be damned, let us have good hope that we be amongst the chosen, and
live after this hope; that is, uprightly and godly, then shall we not be
deceived; think that God has chosen those that believe in Christ, and Christ
is the Book of Life: If thou believe in him, then art thou written in the
Book of Life, and shall be saved. By which we may the better understand that
passage in the book of Homilies, Hom. of the misery of Man. f. 8.
where it is said, That the Scripture shuts up all under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given unto them that believe;
which is as much as can be comprehended in so narrow a compass.

This said, Calvin then, and his followers since: Of which thus Bishop Latimer
in his Sermon upon Septuagesima. Sermon. on Sepf^ages. f. 213.
Some vain fellows make their reckoning thus, What need I to mortify my body,
with abstaining from all sin and wickedness? I perceive God has chosen some,
and some are rejected; now if I be in the number of the chosen, I cannot be
damned; but if I be accounted amongst the condemned number, then I cannot be
saved: For Gods judgments are immutable; such foolish and wicked reasons some
have, which brings them either to carnal liberty, or to desperation:
Therefore it is as needful to beware of such Reason or Exposition of the
Scriptures, as it is to beware of the Devil himself. To the same purpose in his
third Sermon after the Epiphany: viz. We read in the Acts of the Apostles, that
when St. Paul had made a long Sermon at Antioch, There believed (says the
Evangelist) as many as were ordained unto everlasting life: With the which
saying, a great number of people have been offended; and have said, We perceive
that only those shall come to believe, and so to everlasting life, which are
chosen of God unto it; therefore it is no matter whatsoever we do; for if we be
chosen to everlasting life, we shall have it: And so they have opened a door
unto themselves of all wickedness and carnal liberty, against the true meaning
of the Scripture: For if they must be damned, the fault is not in God, but in
themselves; for it is written, Deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri, God would
have all men should be saved: But they themselves procure their own damnation,
and despise the passion of Christ, by their own wicked and inordinate living.

5. Hooper is bolder yet than he, even to the censuring of those who by the
fatality of these Decrees, Hoop. in Prefac, before the ten Commandm.
make God to be the author of sin: And first he lets us know in general, That
the blind Southsayers that write of things to come, were more to be esteemed of
than our curious and high-climing Wits; for they attribute the cause of ill to
the evil Aspect, and sinister conjunctions of the Planets. Which said, we shall
hear him speaking more particularly to the present point, Id. Ibid.
in this manner following; viz. It is not a Christian man's part to attribute to
his own free will, with the Pelagian, and extenuate Original sin, nor to make
God the Author of evil, and our damnation, nor yet to say, God has written
fatal Laws, with the Stoics, and in the necessity of Destiny, violently
pulls one by the hair into Heaven, and thrusts the other headlong into
Hell. And in another place, Our Gospellists, says he, he better Learned than
the Holy Ghost; Id. Ibid.
for they wickedly attribute the cause of punishment and adversity to Gods
Providence, which is the cause of no ill, as he himself could do no ill; and
every mischief that is done, they say, it is Gods will. Id. Ibid.
And then again -- Howsoever man judges of Predestination, God is not the
cause of sin, thou art not the God that willest sin; and it is said, That thy
Perdition, O Israel, is of thy self, and thy succor only of me. And finally,
to shut up his discourse hereof with some Application, he shall tell us thus:
Being admonished by the Scripture, that we must leave sin, Id. Ibid.
and do the works commanded of God, it will prove but a carnal opinion which we
blind our selves withal, of Fatal Destiny; and in case there follow not in us
knowledge of Christ, amendment of life, it is not a lively faith that we have,
but rather a vain knowledge, and mere presumption.

Next let us look upon such passages in the writings of those godly men which
teach us to enquire no further after our Election, Latimer in the first place
thus, viz. Lat. in Sermon. on Septuages. p. 3. fol. 214.
If thou art desirous to know whether thou art chosen to everlasting life, thou
may not begin with God; for God is too high, thou can not comprehend him,
the judgments of God are unknown to man, therefore thou must not begin there:
But begin with Christ, and learn to know Christ, and wherefore that he came:
namely, That he came to save sinners, and made himself a subject of the Law,
and fulfiller of the same, to deliver us from the wrath and danger thereof, and
therefore was crucified for our sins, etc. -- Consider, I say, Christ and his
coming, and then begin to try thy self whether thou art in the Book of Life or
not: If thou find thy self in Christ, then thou art sure of everlasting
life: If thou be without him, then thou art in an evil case; for it is written,
nemo venit ad patrem nisi per me; that is, no man comes to my Father but
through me; therefore if thou know Christ, thou may know further of thy
Election. And then in another place. -- When we are troubled within our selves,
whether we be elected or no, we must ever have this Maxim or principal rule
before our eyes; namely, that God bears a good will toward us, God loves
us, God bears a Fatherly heart toward us. But you will say, How shall I know
that? or how shall I believe that? We may know Gods good will toward us
through Christ; for so says John the Evangelist, Filius qui est in sinu patris
ipse revelavit; that is, The Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he has
revealeed it: Therefore we may perceive his good will and love toward us. He
has sens the same Son into the World, which has suffered most painful death
for us: Shall I now think that God hates me? or shall I doubt of his love
toward me? And in another place, Here you see how you shall avoid the
scrupulous and most dangerous question of the Predestination of God: for if
thou will enquire into his Councils, and search his Consistory, thy wit will
deceive thee, for thou shall not be able to search the Council of God: But if
thou begin with Christ, and consider his coming into the World, and do
believe that God has sent him for thy sake to suffer for thee, and to deliver
thee from Sin, Death, the Devil, and Hell? Then when thou art so armed with the
knowledge of Christ; then (I say) this simple question cannot hurt thee, for
thou art in the Book of Life, which is Christ himself -- For thus it is writ,
Sic Deus dilexit mundum, that God so entirely loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, to the end that all that believed in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life; whereby appears most plainly, that Christ is the
Book of Life, and that all that believe in him, are of the same Book, and so
are chosen to everlasting life; for only those are ordained that believe.

Not stays that godly Bishop here, but proceeds (after some intervening
passages) toward this Conclusion.

Here is now taught you (says he) how to try your Election; namely, in Christ:
For Christ is the Accompting Book and Register of God, and even in the same
Book, that is, Christ, are written all the names of the Elect; therefore we
cannot find our Election in our selves, neither yet the high Council of God;
for inscrutabilia sunt judicia Altissimi: Where then shall I find my Election?
in the Compting Book of God, which is Christ, etc. Agreeable whereunto we find
Bishop Hooper speaking thus, The cause of our Election, is the mercy of God in
Christ; howbeit, he that will be partaker of this Election, must receive the
promise in Christ by faith; for therefore we be Elected, because afterward we
are made the Members of Christ -- So we judge of Election by the event or
success that happens in the life of man; those only to be Elected, that by
faith apprehend the mercy promised in Christ. To the same purpose also (but not
so clearly and perspicuously) speaks the Book of Homilies; Hom. of the misery
of man. fol. 11.
where we find it thus, viz. That of our selves (as in our selves) we find
nothing whereby we may be delivered from this miserable captivity in which we
were cast (through the envy of the Devil) by breaking Gods Commandment in our
first Parent Adam: It is the Lord with whom is plenteous Redemption; he is the
God which of his own mercy saves us, etc. not for our own deserts, merits, or
good deeds, etc. but of his mere mercy freely, and for whose sake truly, for
Christ Jesus sake, the pure and undesiled Lamb of God, etc. for whose sake God
is fully pacified, satisfied and set at one with man. Such is the Doctrine of
the Church in the matter of Predestination unto life, according to the judgment
of these learned men, and godly Martyrs, who were of such Authority in the
Reformation.

Proceed we next to one of an inferior Order, John Bradford Martyr, a man in
very high esteem with Martin Bucer, made one of the Prebends of S. Paul's Church
by Bishop Ridley, and one who glorified God in the midst of the flames, with as
great courage as his Patron; of whom we find a Letter extant in the Acts and
Monuments, Fox Acts and Mon. fol. 1505.
directed to his friends N. S. and R. C. being at that time not thoroughly
instructed in the Doctrine of Gods Election: The words of which Letter are as
follows I wish to you my good Brethren the same grace of God in Christ, which
I wish and pray the Father of mercies to give me for his holy names sake, Amen.
Your Letter, though I have not read my self, because I would not alienate my
mind from conceived things, to write to others, yet I have heard the sum of it,
that it is of Gods Election; wherein I will briefly relate to you my faith, and
how for I think it good and meet for a Christian to wade in. I believe, that
man made after the Image of God, did fall from that blessed estate to the
condemnation of him and all his posterity: I believe that Christ (for man being
then fallen) did oppose himself to the judgment of God, as a Mediator paying
the ransom and price of Redemption for Adam and his whole Posterity, that
refuse it not finally: I believe, that all that believe (I speak of such as be
of years of discretion) are partakers of Christ and all his merits: I believe,
that faith and belief in Christ is the work and gift of God, given to no other
than to those which be his Children; that is, to those whom God the Father
before the beginning of the World has Predestined in Christ unto Eternal
life. Thus do I wade in Predestination, in such sort' as God has patesied and
opened it. Though to God it be the first, yet to us it is the last opened; and
therefore I begin with Creation, from whence I come to Redemption, so to
Justification, so to Election. On this sort I am sure that warily and wisely a
man may walk it easily by the light of Gods Spirit, in and by his Word, seeing
this faith is not to be given to all men, 2 These. 3. but to such as are born of
God; Predestined before the World was made, after the purpose and good will
of God, etc. Which judgment of this holy man comes up so close to that of the
former Martyrs, and is so plainly cross to that of the Calvinistical party,
that Mr. Fox was fain to make some Scholia's on it, to reconcile a gloss like
that of Orleance, which corrupts the Text; and therefore to have no place here,
however it may be disposed of at another time. But besides the Epistle above
mentioned, there is extant a Discourse of the said godly Martyr, entitled, The
sum of the Doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation; in which is affirmed,
That our own wilfulness, sin, and contemning of Christ, are the cause of
Reprobation, as is confessed by the Author of the Anti-Arminianism, p. 103.
though afterward he puts such a gloss upon it (as he does also on the like
passages in Bishop Hooper) as makes the sin of man to be the cause only of the
execution, and not of the decree of Reprobation.

But it is said, Justifi. Fat^^s.
cannot choose but observe diverse passages that make for a Personal, Eternal
Election. So it is said of late, and till of late never so said by any that
ever I heard of, the whole frame and fabric of the Public Liturgy being
directly opposite to this new conceit. For in the general Confession, we
beseech the Lord to spare them that confess their faults, and restore them that
be penitent, according to his promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus
our Lord: In the Te Deum it is said, that Christ our Savior having overcome
the sharpness of death, did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers: In the
Prayer for the first day of Lent, That God hates nothing which he has made,
but does forgive the sins of all them that be penitent: In the Prayer at the
end of the Commination, That God has compassion of all men, that he hates
nothing which he has made, that he would not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should turn from sin and repent: In the Absolution before the
Communion, That God of his great mercy has promised forgiveness of sins to all
them, which with hearty repentance, and true faith, turn unto him. Can any one
which comes with an unprejudiced mind to the Common Prayer book, observe any
thing that favors of a Personal Election in all these passages? or can he
hope to find them in any other? Look then upon the last Exhortation before the
Communion, in which we are required above all things, To give most humble and
hearty thanks to God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, for the Redemption of the
World, by the death and passion of our Savior Christ, both God and man, who
did humble himself even to the death upon the Cross, for us miserable sinners,
which lay in darkness and the shadow of death. More of which nature we shall
find in the second Article. Look on the Collect in the form of public
Baptism, in which we pray, That whosoever is here dedicated unto God by our
Office and Ministry, may also be endued with Heavenly virtues, and
everlastingly rewarded through Gods mercy: O blessed Lord God, etc. And in the
Rubric before Confirmation, where it is said expr sly. That it is certain by
Gods Word, that Children being baptized, have all things necessary to their
salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. Look on these passages and the rest, and
tell me any one that can, whether the public Liturgy of the Church of
England, speak any thing in favor of such a Personal and Eternal Election;
that is to say, such an absolute, irrespective, and irreversible Decree of
Predestination (and that of some few only) unto life Eternal, as is maintained
and taught in the Schools of Calvin.

Some passages I grant there are, which speak of Gods People, and his chosen
People, and yet intend not any such Personal and Eternal Election, as these men
conceit unto themselves: Of which sort these viz. To declare and pronounce to
his People being penitent -- O Lord save thy People and bless thy Heritage --
that it would please thee to keep and bless all thy People -- and make thy
chosen People joyful, with many others inters^ers'd in several places: But then
I must affirm withal, that those passages are no otherwise to be understood,
than of the whole bo y of the Church, the Congregation of the faithful, called
to the public participation of the Word and Sacraments: Which appears plainly
by the Prayer for the Church Militant here on earth; where having called upon
the Lord, and said, To all thy People give thy Heavenly grace; we are taught
presently to add, especially to this Congregation here present; that is to say,
the members of that particular Church, which there pour forth their prayers for
the Church in general. More to their purpose is that passage in the Collect for
the Feast of All Saints; where it is said, That Almighty God has knit together
his Elect in one communion and fellowship in the mystical body of his Son Jesus
Christ; though it does signify no more but that inseparable bond of Charity,
that Love and Unity, that Holy Communion and Correspondency which is between
the Saints in Glory in the Church Triumphant, and those who are still exercised
under the cares and miseries of this present life in the Church here Militant.
But it makes most unto their purpose (if any thing could make unto their
purpose in the Common Prayer book) that at the burial of the dead we are taught
to pray, That God would please of his gracious goodness shortly to accomplish
the number of his elect, and to hasten his Kingdom: From whence, as possibly
some may raise this inference, That by the Doctrine of the Church of England,
there is a predestined and certain number of Elect, which can neither be
increased nor diminished, according to the third of the nine Articles which
were agreed upon at Lambeth: So others may perhaps conclude, That this number
is made up out of such Elections, such Personal and Eternal Elections as they
have fancied to themselves. But there is nothing in the Prayer which can be
useful to the countenancing of any such fancy, the number of the Elect, and the
certainty of that number being known only unto God in the way of his
Prescience, by which he sees all things past, and all things to come, as if
present with him. And therefore having past a general Decree of Predestination,
touching the saving of all those which believe in Christ, and knowing most
infallibly who, and how many of all Nations will believe in Christ, continue in
the faith to the end of their lives, and consequently attain salvation. The
number of the persons so Predestined, is as well known unto him in the
universal comprehension of his Heavenly Prescience, as if they had been
personally elected unto life Eternal; the accomplishing of which number, that
so his Kingdom may be hastened, and the hastening of his Kingdom, that we, with
all the rest which are departed in the true faith of his holy Name, may have
our perfect Consummation and bliss both in body and soul, is the scope and
purpose of that Prayer: And being the sole scope and purpose of it, cannot
imply such a Personal and Eternal Election as some men imagine, though it
conclude both for a number, and for a certain number of Gods Elect.

CHAP. X. The Doctrine of the Church concerning Reprobatin and Universal
Redemption.
1. The absolute Decree of Reprobation not found in the Articles of this
Church, but against it in some passages of the public Liturgy. 2. The cause of
Reprobation to be found in a man's self, and not in Gods Decrees, according to
the judgment of Bishop Latimer, and Bishop Hooper. 3. The Absolute Decrees of
Election and Reprobation, how contrary to the last clause in the seventeenth
Article. 4. The inconsistency of the Absolute Decree of Reprobation, with the
Doctrine of Universal Redemption by the death of Christ. 5. The Universal
Redemption of mankind by the death of Christ, declared in many places of the
public Liturgy, and affirmed also in one of the Homilies, and the Book of
Articles. 6. A further proof of it from the Mission of the Apostles, and the
Prayer used in the Ordination of Priests. 7. The same confirmed by the writings
of Archbishop Cranmer, and the two other Bishops before mentioned. 8. A
Generality of the Promises, and an Universality of Vocation, maintained by the
said two godly Bishops. 9. The reasons why this benefit is not made effectual
to all sorts of men, to be found only in themselves.


AS the speaking of Heaven does many times beget the discovery of Hell, England
is utterly silent, leaving it to be gathered upon Logical inferences from that
which is delivered by her in the point of Election (for contrariorum contraria
est ratio, as Logicians say) though that which is so gathered, ought rather to
be called a Dereliction than a Reprobation: No such absolute, irreversible, and
irrespective Decree of Reprobation, taught or maintained in any public
Monument of Record of the Church of England, by which the far greater part of
mankind are preordained, and consequently pre-condemned to the pit of
torments, without any respect had unto their sins and incredulities, as
generally is maintained and taught in the Schools of Calvin. Much, I am sure,
may be said against it out of the passages in the Liturgy before remembered;
where it is said, that God has compassion upon all men, and hates nothing
which he has made; but much more out of those which are to come in the second
Article, touching the Universal Reconciliation of mankind unto God the Father,
by the death of Christ. Take now to more than this one Collect, being the last
of those which are appointed for Good Friday, on which we celebrate the
memorial of Christ his death and passion; and is this that follows, viz.
Merciful God, who have made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the death of a sinner, but rahter that he should be converted and
live, have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics, and take from
them all ignorance, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word; and so fetch
them home, blessed Lord, to thy flock, that they may be saved amongst the
remnant of the true Israelites, and be made one fold, under one Shepherd, Jesus
Christ our Lord. A Prayer as utterly inconsistent with the Calvinians Decree of
Reprobation, as the finding of an Hell in Heaven, or any thing else which seems
to be most abhorrent both from faith and piety.

More may be said against it out of the writings of Bishop Latimer and Bishop
Hooper before remembered: Latimer in his 4. Sermon, third Sunday after Epiphany.
4. Sermon. in Lincoln.
Beginning first with Latimer, he will tell us this, viz. That if most be
damned, the fault is not in God, but in themselves; for Deus vult omnes homines
salvos fieri, God would that all men should be saved, but they themselves
procure their own damnation. Thus also in another place, That Christ only, and
no man else, merited Remission, Justification, and Eternal Felicity, for as
many as believe the same, that Christ shed as much blood for Judas, as for
Peter; that Peter believed it, and therefore was saved; that Judas could not
believe it, therefore was condemned, the fault being in him only, and no body
else. More fully, not more plainly, the other Bishop in the said Preface to the
Exposition on the Ten Commandments; where it is said, That Cain was no more
excluded from the promise of Christ, till he excluded himself, than Abel; Saul,
than David; Judas, than Peter; Esau, than Jacob; concerning which two brethren,
he further added That in the sentence of God given unto Rebecca, that there was
no mention at all, that Esau should be disinherited of Eternal life, but that
he should be inferior to his brother Jacob in this world: which Prophecy
(says he) was fulfilled in their Posterity, and not the persons themselves
(the very same withat of Arminius and his followers have since declared in this
case.) And this being said, he proceeds to this Declaration, That God is said
by the Prophet to have hated Esau, not because he was disinherited of Eternal
life, but in laying his mountains and his heritage waste for the Dragons of the
Wilderness, Mal. 1.3. that the threatening of God against Esau (if he had not of
wilful malice excluded himself from the promise of grace) should no more have
hindered his salvation, than Gods threatening against Nineve; that the cause of
Rejection or Damnation is sin in man, which will not hear, neither receive the
promise of the Gospel. And finally thus. That by Gods grace we might do the
good, Exposit. of the Command. cap. of Ignor.
and leave the evil, if it were not through malice or accustomed doing of sin;
the which excuses the mercy and goodness of God, and makes that no man shall
be excused in the latter judgment, how subtly soever they now excuse the
matter, and put their evil doings from them, and lay it upon the Predestination
of God, and would excuse it by ignorance: or say he cannot be good, because he
is otherwise destined; which in the next words he calls A Stoical Opinion,
refuted by those words of Horace; Nemo adeo ferus est, etc.

But that which makes most against the absolute, irrespective, Predestination,
whether it be life or death, is the last clause of our second Article, being
the seventeenth of the Church, as before laid down; where it is said that we
must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be generally set forth to us in
holy Scripture, and that in all our doings that will of God is to be followed
which we have expressly declared to us in holy Scriptures. And in the holy
Scripture it is declared to us, That God gave his Son for the World or for all
mankind, that Christ offered himself a Sacrifice for all the sins of the whole
World, that Christ redeemed all mankind, that Christ commanded the Gospel to be
preached to all; that God wills and commands all men to hear Christ, and to
believe in him; and in him to offer grace and salvation unto all men: That this
is the infallible truth, in which there can be no falsehood; otherwise, the
Apostles, and other Ministers of the Gospel, preaching the same, should be
false witnesses of God, and should make him a liar; than which nothing can be
more repugnant to the Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination, which restrains
Predestination unto life, in a few particulars, without respect had to their
faith in Christ, or Christ's sufferings and death for them, which few
particulars so predestinate to eternal life. shall (as they tell us) by an
irresistible Grace, be brought to God, and by the infallible conduct of the
holy Spirit, persevere from falling away from grace and favor: Nothing more
contrary to the like absolute decree of Reprobation, by which the infinitely
greatest part of all mankind is either doomed remedilesly to the torments of
Hell, when they were but in the state of Creability (as the Supralapsarians
have informed us) and unavoidably necessitated unto sin, that they might
infallibly be damned; or otherwise, as miserably, leaving them under such a
condition, according to the Doctrine of the Sablapsarians, which renders them
incapable of avoiding the wrath to come, and consequently subjected them to a
damnation no less certain than if they were created to no other purpose; which
makes it seem the greater wonder, that Dr. Usher (afterward Lord Primate of
Ireland) in drawing up the Article of predestination for the Church of Ireland,
Anno 1615. should take in so much as he does of the Lambeth Articles, and yet
subjoyn this very clause at the foot thereof, Article of Ireland, Numb. 12.14,
17.
which can no more concorporate with it, than any of the most heterogeneous
metals can unite into one piece of refined Gold; which clause, as it remains
in the Articles of the Church of England, how well it was applied by King
James, and others in the Conference at Hampton Court, we shall see hereafter.

In the mean time we must behold another Argument which fights more strongly
against the positive decree of Reprobation than any of the rest before; that is
to say, England. For though one in our late undertaking seem exceeding
confident, that the granting of universal redemption will draw no inconvenience
with it as to the absoluteness of Gods decrees, or to the insuperability of
converting Grace, Cap. 10.
or to the certain infallible perseverance of Gods Elect aftec Conversion: Yet
I dare say, he will not be so confident in affirming this, That if Christ did
so far die for all, as to procure a salvation for all, under the condition of
faith and repentance, as his own words are, there can be any room for such an
absolute decree of Reprobation, Antecedaneous, and precedent to the death of
Christ, as his great Masters in the School of Calvin, have been pleased to
teach him. Now for the Doctrine of this Church, in that particular, it is
expressed so clearly in the second Article of the five before laid down, that
nothing needs be added either in way of explication or of confirmation;
howsoever, for avoiding of all doubt and hesitancy, we will first add some
farther testimonies touching the Doctrine of this Church in the point of
universal Redemption: And secondly, touching the applying of so great a benefit
by universal Vocation, and finally we shall show the causes, why the benefit is
not effectual unto all alike.

And first, Child is taught to say, that he believes in God the Son, who
redeemed with him all mankind; in that clause of the public Letany, where God
the Son is called the Redeemer of the World,; in the passages of the latter
Exhortation before the Communion, where it is said, That the Oblation of Christ
once offered, was a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice for the sins of the
WHOLE WORLD; in the proper Preface appointed for the Communion on Easter day,
in which he is said to be the very Paschal Lamb that was offered for us, and
takes away the sins of the world, repeated in the Gloria in excelsis to the
same effect. Hom. Salvation. p. 13.
And finally, in the Prayer of Conservation; viz. Almighty God, our heavenly
Father, which of thy tender mercies did give thine only Son Jesus Christ to
suffer death upon the Cross for our Redemption, who made there by his own
Oblation of himself once offered, a firm, and perfect, and sufficient
Sacrifice, Oblation, and Satisfaction for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD. To this
purpose it is said in the book of Homilies, That the World being wrapped up in
sin by the breaking of Gods Law, God sent his only Son our Savior Christ into
this world to fulfill the Law for us; and by shedding of his most precious
blood, to make a Sacrifice and Satisfaction, or as it may be called, amends to
his Father for our sins, to assuage his wrath and indignation conceived against
us for the same. Out of which words it may be very well concluded, That the
World being wrapped up in sin, the Recompense and Satisfaction which was made to
God, must be made to him for the sins of the World, or else the plaster had
not been commensurate to the sore, nor so much to the magnifying of Gods
wonderful mercies in the offered means of Reconcilement betwixt God and man;
the Homily must else fall short of that which is taught in the Articles: In
which (besides what was before delivered from the second and 31. concerning the
Redemption of the world by the death of Christ) it is affirmed in the 15. as
plain as may be, That Christ came to be a Lamb without spot, who by the
Sacrifice of himself once made, should take away the sins of the world: Than
which there can be nothing more conducible to the point in hand.

And to this purpose also, To go unto all the World, and preach the Gospel to
every Creature, Mark 16.15. So that there was no part of the World, nor any
Creature in the same, (that is to say, no rational Creature) which seems to be
excluded from a Possibility of obtaining Salvation by the Preaching of the
Gospel to them, if with a faith unfeigned they believe the same, which the
Church further teaches us in this following Prayer, appointed to be used in
the Ordering of such as are called to the Office of the holy Priesthood; viz.
Almighty God and Heavenly Father, which of thine Infinite Love and Goodness
toward us, have given to us thy only and most Dear Beloved Son Jesus Christ, to
be our Redeemer and Author of Everlasting Life; who after he had made perfect
our Redemption by his Death, and was ascended into Heaven, sent forth abroad
into the world, his Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors and Pastors, by
whose labor and Ministry, he gathered together a great Flock in all the parts
of the World, to set forth the Eternal Praise of his Holy Name: For these so
great Benefits of thy Eternal Goodness, and for that thou have vouchsafed to
call thy Servant here present to the same Office and Ministry of Salvation of
Mankind, we render unto thee most hearty thanks, and we worship, and praise
thee; and we humbly beseech thee, by the same, thy Son, to grant unto all,
which either here, or elsewhere call upon thy Name, that we may show our selves
thankful to thee for these and all other thy benefits; and that we may daily
increase and go forward in the knowledge and faith of thee and thy Son, by the
Holy Spirit: So that as well by these thy Ministers, as by them to whom they
shall be appointed Ministers thy Holy Name may be always glorified, and thy
Blessed Kingdom enlarged; through the same, thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who
lives and reigns with thee in the Unity of the same Holy Spirit, world
without end, Amen. Which Form in Ordering and Consecrating Bishops, Priests and
Deacons (I note this only by the way) being drawn up by those which had the
making of the first Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, and confirmed by Act of
Parliament in the fifth and sixth of the said King, was afterward also
ratified by Act of Parliament in the eighth year of Queen Elizabeth, and ever
since has had its place amongst the public Monuments and Records of the
Church of England.

To these I shall only add one single testimony out of the Writings of each of
the three godly Martyrs before remembered, Calvinists (though not by the
Outlandish, also) that any longer insisting on it may be thought unnecessary:
First then, Bishop Cranmer tells us in the Preface to his Book against Gardener
of Winchester aforementioned, That our Savior Christ, according to the will of
his Eternal Father, when the time thereof was fully accomplished, taking our
Nature upon him, came into this World, from the high Throne of his Father, to
declare unto miserable Sinners the Goodness, etc. To show that the time of
Grace and Mercy was come, to give light to them that were in darkness and in
the shadow of death, and to preach and give Pardon and full Remission of sin to
all his Elected: And to perform the same, he made a Sacrifice and Oblation of
his body upon the Cross which was a full Redemption, Satisfaction and
Propitiation for the sins of the whole World. More briefly Bishop Latimer thus,
The Evangelist says, When Jesus was born, etc. Sermon. 1. Sund. after Epiph.
What is Jesus? Jesus is an Hebrew word, which signifies in our English Tongue
a Savior and Redeemer of all Mankind born into the World. This Title and Name
To save, appertains properly and principally unto him; for he saved us; else
had we been lost for ever. Bishop Hooper in more words to the same effect, That
as the sins of Adam, Pref. to the ten Commandments.
without Privilege or Exemption, extended and appertained unto all and every of
Adams Posterity; so did this Promise of Grace generally appertain as well to
every and singular of Adams Posterity as to Adam; as it is more plainly
expressed, where God promises to bless in the seed of Abraham; all the people
of the World.

Next for the point of Universal Vocation, That God received the learned and
unlearned, and casts away none, Hom. of Holy Scrip. p. 5.
but is indifferent unto all. And in another place more largely, that the
imperfection or natural sickness taken in Adam, excludes not that person from
the promise of God in Christ, except we transgress the limits and bounds of
this Original sin, by our own folly and malice; If we have Christ, then have we
with him, Hom. against fear of death. p. 62.
and by him all good things whatsoever we can in our hearts wish or desire; as
Victory over death, sin, hell, etc. The truth hereof is more clearly evidenced
in the Writings of the godly Martyrs so often mentioned; as first of Bishop
Latimer, who discourses thus; We learn, says he, by this sentence, that multi
sunt vocati, that many are called, etc. that the preaching of the Gospel is
universal, that it appertains to all mankind, Sermon. Septure.
that it is written in omnem terram exivit sonus eorum, through the whole world
their sound is heard. Now seeing that the Gospel is universal, it appears
that he would have all mankind be saved; that the fault is not in him if they
be damned; for it is written thus, Deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri, God
would have all mankind saved; his salvation is sufficient to save all mankind.
Thus also in another place, That the promises of Christ our Savior are
general, they appertain to all mankind: He made a general Proclamation, saying,
Qui credit in me, 1 Sermon: Lincol:
habet vitam aeternam, Whosoever believes me, has eternal life -- And not
long after in the same Sermon, That we must consider wisely what he says with
his own mouth, Venite and me omnes, Hook. pres. to Common.
etc. Mark here, he says, mark here, he says, Come all ye; wherefore should
any body despair, or shut out himself from the promises of Christ, which be
general, and appertain to the whole world? The like says Bishop Hooper also,
telling us, Pref. to his Exposition.
There was no diversity in Christ of Jew or Gentile; that it was never forbid,
but that all sorts of people, and every propeny of the World, to be made
partakers of the Jews Religion. And then again in the example of the Ninevites:
Thou have, says he, good Christian Reader, the mercy of God, and general
promise of salvation performed in Christ, for whose sake only God and man were
set at one.

The less assistance we had from Bishop Hooper in the former points, That to
the obtaining the first end of his justice, he allureth as many as be not
utterly wicked, and may be helped, Ibid.
partly with threatenings, and partly with promises, and so provokes them unto
amendment of life, etc. and would have all men to be saved; therefore provokes
now by fair means, now by foul, that the sinner should satisfy his just and
righteous pleasure; not that the promises of God appertain to such as will not
repent, or his threatenings unto him that does repent; but these means he uses
to save his creature; this way uses he to nurture us, until such time as the
holy Spirit works such a perfection in us, that we will obey him, though
there were neither pain nor joy mentioned at all -- And in another place more
briefly. That if either out of a contempt or hate of Gods Word we fall into
sin, and transform our selves into the image of the Devil, then we exclude our
selves by this means from the promises and merits of Christ. Sermon. 1. Sund.
after Epiph.
Bishop Latimer to the same point also: His salvation is sufficient to satisfy
for all the World, as concerning it self; but as concerning us, he saves no
more than such as put their trust in him; and as many as believe in him shall
be saved; the other shall be cast out as Infidels into everlasting damnation;
not for lack of salvation, but for infidelity and lack of faith, which is the
only cause of their damnation. One word more out of Bishop Hooper to conclude
this point, which in fine is this, To the Objection (says he) touching that S.
Peter speaks of such as shall perish for their false doctrine, etc. this the
Scripture answers, that the promise of grace appertains to every sort of
men in the world, and comprehends them all, howbeit within certain limits and
bounds, the which if men neglect to pass over, they exclude themselves from the
promise of Christ.

CHAP. XI. Of the Heavenly influences of Gods grace in the Conversion of a
Sinner, and man's cooperation with those Heavenly influences.
1. The Doctrine of Deserving Grace ex congruo, maintained in the Roman Schools
before the Council of Trent, rejected by our ancient Martyrs, and the Book of
Articles. 2. The judgment of Dr. Barns and Mr. Tyndal, touching the necessary
workings of Gods grace on the will of man, not different from that of the
Church of England. 3. Universal grace maintained by Bishop Hooper, and proved
by some passages in the Liturgy and Book of Homilies. 4. The offer of Universal
grace made ineffectual to some, for want of faith; and to others, for want of
repentance, according to the judgment of Bishop Hooper. 5. The necessity of
Grace preventing, and the free cooperation of man's will being so prevented,
maintained in the Articles, in the Homilies, and the public Liturgy. 6. The
necessity of this cooperation on the part of man, defended, and applied to the
exercise of a godly life, by Bishop Hooper. 7. The Doctrine of Irresistibility,
first broached by Calvin, pertinaciously maintained by most of his followers,
and by Gomarus amongst others. 8. Gainsaid by Bishop Hooper, and Bishop
Latimer. 9. And their gainsayings justified by the tenth Article of King
Edwards Books. And 10. The Book of Homilies.


THIS leads me unto the Disputes touching the influences of Grace, Rome seems
to have had some alteration to the better, since the debating and concluding of
those points in the Council of Trent; before which time the Doctrine of the
Roman Schools was thought to draw too near to the lees of Pelagianism, to
ascribe too much to man's Free Will, or so much to it at the least, as by the
right use of the powers of nature, might merit grace ex congruo (as the
Schoolmen phrase it) of the hands of God. Against this it was that Dr. Barnes
declared, as before was said in his discourse about Free Will; and against
which the Church of England then declared in the 13 Article, His works, p. 821.
affirming, That such works as are done before the grace of Christ, and the
inspiration of his Spirit, do not make men meet to receive grace; or (as the
Schoolmen say) deserve grace of Congruity. Against which Tyndal gives this
note, That Free Will preventeth not Grace; which certainly he had never done,
if somewhat to the contrary had not been delivered in the Church of Rome; and
against which it was declared by John Lambert, another of our ancient Martyrs,
in these following words, viz. Concerning Free Will (says he) I mean
altogether, as does S. Augustine, that of our selves we have no liberty nor
ability to do the will of God, but are subject unto sin, Acts and Mn. fol. 1009.
and thrals of the same, conclusi sub peccato; or as witnesses S. Paul: But by
the grace of God we are rid and set at liberty, according to the proportion
that every man has taken of the same, some more, some less,

But none more fully showed himself against this opinion than Dr. Barnes before
remembered, Collection of his works by I. D. sol. 266.
but writing a Discourse particularly against the errors of that time in this
very point: But here (says he) we will search what strength is of man in his
natural power, without the Spirit of God, to will or do those things that be
acceptable before God, unto the fulfilling of the will of God, etc. A search
which had been vain and needless, if nothing could be found which tended to the
maintenance of acting in spiritual matters, by man's natural power, without the
workings of the Spirit: And therefore he says very truly, That man can do
nothing by his Free Will, as Christ teaches (for without me ye can do nothing,
etc.) where it is opened, that Freewill without Grace can do nothing (he speak
not of eating and drinking, though they be works of Grace) but nothing that is
fruitful, that is meritorious, that is worthy of thanks, that is acceptable
before God. To which effect we also find these brief Remembrances, Man's
Free Will without Gods Grace, can do nothing that is good, p. 268. that all
which Free Will can do without Grace, is but sin, etc. fol 269. In which
passages of those godly Martyrs, as there is nothing in it self not Divine and
Orthodox, so find we somewhat in their writings, which does as truly and
Religiously express the workings of Gods Spirit in the heart of man, without
depriving him of the ability of cooperation, which afterward was taught and
countenanced by the Church of England: Of which thus Tyndal in his Pathway;
Collection of his works, sol. 382.
When the Evangelion is preached (says he) the Spirit of God enters into them
whom God has ordained and appointed to Everlasting life, and opens their
inward eyes, and works such a belief in them, when the woeful Consciences feel
and taste how sweet a thing the bitter death of Christ is, and how merciful and
loving God is through Christ's Purchasing and Merits, so that they begin to love
again, and consent to the Law of God, how that it is good, and ought so to be,
and that God is righteous that made it, and desire to fulfill the Law, as a sick
man desires to be whole. According to which Doctrine, 19. Sund. after Trin.
the Church has taught us to pray thus, viz. O God, forasmuch as without thee
we are not able to please thee, grant that that working of the Spirit may in
all things direct and rule our hearts, through Christ our Lord, Amen. More of
which Prayers might be produced to the same effect, were not this enough; the
point concerning the necessity of Gods grace toward man's Conversion, not being
in Dispute between the Parties.

Now for Gods Grace, according as it is set forth in the Church of England,
Hooper thus discoursing in the sixth Chapter of his Exposition of the Ten
Commandments: Thus did S. Paul (says he) convince the Gentiles of sin, because
they knew the evil they did was condemned by the testimony of their own
Conscience; for the Law of God to do well by, is naturally written in the heart
of every man: He that will diligently search himself, Exposi. cap. 6.
shall sometime find the same; and in case man should behold his own misery
both in body and soul, although there were no Law correcting, nor no Heavens
over our heads to testify the justice and judgment of God, and the equity of
an honest life, man's Conscience would tell him when he does well, and when he
does evil -- Further (says he) the judgment and discovery of Reason, directs
not only to live just in this World, but also to live for ever in Eternal
felicity without end: And that comes by the similitude of God which remains
in the soul since the sin of Adam; whereby we plainly see, that those excuses
of ignorance be damnable, when man sees that he could do well if he followed
the judgment of his own Conscience. Our Articles indeed say nothing to this
particular, but our Liturgy does; and somewhat is found also of it in the Book
of Homilies: For what can be more clear and full than that clause in the
Collect, where it is said if God Almighty, That he shows to all men being in
error, the light of his truth, to the intent they may return to the way of
righteousness, etc. What more comfortable to a man deprived of the outward
benefit of the Word and Sacraments, than that clause in the Homily, where it is
said, Exhortation to Holy Scripture, Hom. p. 5.
That if we lack a Learned man to instruct and teach us, God himself from above
will give light unto our minds, and teach us those things which are necessary
for us.

If then it be demanded, Hooper ascribing it in some men to the lack of faith;
and in others, to the want of repentance: Touching the first, Pres. to the
Expost. of the Law.
he tells us this, That S. Paul concludes, and in a manner includes the Divine
Grace and Promise of God within certain terms and limits; that only Christ
should be profitable and efficacious to those that apprehend and receive this
abundant Grace by faith; and to such as have not the use of faith, neither
Christ, nor Gods Grace to appertain. After which he proceeds in this manner
toward the other sort of men, which make not a right use of this general Grace
for want of Repentance: d. ib.
Howbeit (says he) that we know by the Scripture, that notwithstanding this
imperfection of faith, many shall be saved; and likewise, notwithstanding that
Gods promise be general, unto all people of the world, yet many shall be
damned. These two points must therefore diligently be discussed; first, how
this faith being unperfect, is accepted of God; then, how we be excluded from
the promise of grace that extends to all men, etc. To which first it is thus
answered, That S. Paul, S. John, and Christ himself, damneth the contemners of
God, or such as willingly continue in sin, and will not repent; these the
Scripture excludes from the general promise of Grace.

Here then we have the Doctrine of the Church of England delivered in the
Liturgy, Homilies, more punctually pressed and applied in the words of godly
Bishop Hooper, concerning Universal Grace, and somewhat also of the reasons of
its not being efficacious in all sorts of men, relating to that liberty which
remains in man, of closing or contending with it, as he is either ruled by
reason, or else misguided by the tyranny of his lusts and passions. But before
I come unto this point, we may behold the necessary workings of Gods Grace,
preventing man by the inspirations of his holy Spirit, and the concurrence or
cooperation of man's will being so prevented, which is, the Celestial
influences of the Grace of God: Of which the Church has spoken so fully in all
the Authentic Monuments and Records thereof, that no true English Protestant
can make question of it: Artic. 10.
For thus she tells us in the tenth Article of her Confession, viz. That the
condition of man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works, to faith and
calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable unto God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will and working with us, when we have that good will. In the
first clause the Church declares her self against the old Pelagians, and some
of the great Schoolmen in the Church of Rome; and in the last, against the
Manichees, and some of the more rigid Lutherans in the Churches Protestant,
which make man in the work of his own Conversion to be no other than a Statue,
or a senseless stock: Exhort. to the reading of the Scrip. p. 6.
Contrary whereunto we are instructed in the Homily exhorting to the reading of
holy Scripture, to use all possible endeavors in our own Salvation. If we read
once, twice, or thrice, and understand not, let us not cease so, but still
continue reading, praying, asking of other men, and so by still knocking, at
last the door shall be opened (as S. Augustine has it) which counsel had been
vain and idle, if man were not invested with a liberty of complying with it.
More plainly is the same expressed in many of our public Prayers, Collect for
Easter day.
as partly in the Collect for Easter day; in which we humbly beseech Almighty
God, That as by his special Grace preventing us, he does put in our mind good
desires, so by his continual fellowship, that he would bring the same to good
effect. Col. after Trin.
And in that on the seventh Sunday after Trinity, That his Grace may always
prevent and follow us, and make us continually to be given to all good works.
But most significantly we have it in one of the Collects after the Communion,
that namely in which we pray to the Lord, Col. before the Communion.
To prevent us in all our doings by his most glorious favor, and further us
with his continual help, that in all our works begun, and continued in him, we
may so glorify his holy Name, that finally, by his mercy we may obtain life
everlasting, through Christ Jesus our Lord. So that upon the whole matter it
needs must follow, that as we can do nothing acceptable in the sight of God,
without Grace preventing; so by the freedom of man's will, cooperating with the
Grace preventing, and by the subsequent Grace of God cooperating with the Will
of man, we have a power of doing such works as are agreeable to the will of our
Heavenly Father.

Now to this plain Song of the Articles, Hooper, which declare his judgment in
the point; where he not only speaks of man's concurrence or cooperation with
the Grace of God, but lays his whole damnation on the want thereof: Look not
therefore (says he) on the promises of God, Preface to his Exposities, etc.
but also what diligence and obedience he requires of thee, lest thou exclude
thy self from the promise: There was promised to all those that went out of
Egypt with Moses, the Land of Canaan; howbeit, for disobedience of Gods
Commandments, there were but one or two that entered. This he affords in his
Preface, and more than this in his tenth Chapter of the Exposition, relating to
the common pretense of Ignorance: For though (says he) thou can not come to
so far knowledge in the Scripture as others that believe, by reason thou art
unlearned, or else thy vocation will not suffer thee all days of thy life to be
a Student, yet must thou know, and upon pain of damnation art bound to know God
in Christ, and the holy Catholic Church; Hoop. cap. dign.
by the Word written, the Ten Commandments, to know what works thou should
do, and what to leave undone; the Pater noster, Christ his Prayer, which is an
Abridgement, Epitomy, or compendious Collection of all the Psalms and Prayers
written in the whole Scripture, in the which thou prayest for the remission of
sin, as well for thy self, as for all others, desire the Grace of the Holy
Ghost to preserve thee in virtue, give thanks for the goodness of God toward
thee and all others. He that knows less than this, cannot be saved; and he
that knows no more than this, if be follow his knowledge, cannot be damned.

But the main Controversy in the point of man's Conversion, moves upon this
hinge; Calvin first harped upon this string, and all his followers since have
danced to the tune thereof, Illud toties a Chrysostomo repetitum repudiari
necesse est, Calv. Institut. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Quem trabit, volentem trahit, quo insinuat Dominum porrecta tantum manu
expectare an suo auxilio juvari nobis adlubescat. These words (says he) so
often repeated by Chrysostom, viz. That God draws none but such as are willing
to go, are to be condemned, the Father intimating by those words, that God
expects only with an outstretched and ready arm, whether we be willing or
not: In which, though he does not express clearly the good Fathers meaning, yet
he plainly does declare his own, insinuating, Declar. p. 20.
that God draws men forcibly, and against their will to his Heavenly Kingdom.
Gomarus, one of later date, and a chief stickler in these Controversies, comes
up more fully to the sense which Calvin drives at: For putting the question in
this manner, An gratia haec datur vi irresistibili, id est, efficaci operatione
Dei, ita ut voluntas ejus qui regeneratur, facultatem non habeat illi
resistendi? He answers presently, Credo and profiteor ita esse; that is to
say, his question is, Whether the Grace of God be given in an irresistible
manner; that is to say, with such an efficacious operation, that the will of
him who is to be regenerated, has not the power to make resistance? And then
the answer follows thus, I believe and profess it to be so. More of which kind
might be produced from other Authors, but that this serves sufficiently to set
forth a Doctrine which is so little countenanced by the burning and most
shining lights of the Church of England.

Beginning first with Bishop Hooper, we shall find it thus: It is not (says
he) a Christian man's part to attribute his salvation to his own Free Will, with
the Pelagian, Pres. to his Exp.
and extenuate Original sin, nor to make God the Author of ill and damnation,
with the Maniche; nor yet to say that God has written Fatal Laws, and with
necessity of Destiny, violently pulls the one by the hair into Heaven, and
thrusts the other headlong into Hell, etc. More fully in his gloss on the
Text of St. John, viz. No man comes to me except my Father draw him, chap.
6.44. Many (says he) understand these words in a wrong sense, as if God
required no more in a reasonable man than in a dead post, and mark not the
words which follow, Every man that hears, and learneth of my Father, comes
unto me, etc. God draws with his Word and the Holy Ghost, but man's duty is to
hear and learn; that is to say, to receive the grace offered, consent to the
promise, and not to impugn the God that calls. More fully, but to the same
purpose also speaks Bishop Latimer. Gods salvation, says he, is sufficient to
save all mankind: But we are so wicked of our selves, that we refuse the same;
Sermon. on Septu. fol. 214.
and we will not take it when it is offered unto us, and therefore he says,
pauci vero electi, few are chosen; that is, few have pleasure and delight in
it, for the most part are weary of it, cannot abide it; and there are some that
hear it, but they will abide no danger for it, -- And in few lines after thus,
Such men are cause of their own damnation; for God would have them saved, but
they refuse it, like Judas the Traitor, whom Christ would have had to be saved,
but he refused his salvation, he refused to follow the Doctrine of his Master
Christ. The like occurs in another place of the same Sermon, where we find,
That seeing the preaching of the Gospel is universal, it appears that God
would have all mankind saved; and that the fault is not in him if they be
damned: For thus it is written, Deus vult omnes homines falvos fieri, God would
have all men to be saved, but we are so wicked of our selves, that we refuse
the same, and will not take notice of it when it is offered.

And here for strength and confirmation unto all the rest, Edwards book, and
the book of Homilies. And first for the tenth Article of King Edwards book, it
is this that follows, viz. Gratia Christi, sive Spiritus Sanctus qui per
eundem datur, cor lapideum aufert, and dat cor carneum. Atque licet ex
nolentibus quae recta sunt, volentes faciat, and ex volentibus prava, nolentes
reddat: Voluntati tamen nullam violentiam infert, and nemo hac de causa cum
peccaverit, ut eam ob causam, accusari nonmereatur aut damnari. That is to say
-- The Grace of Christ, or the Holy Ghost which is given by him, does take from
man the heart of stone, and gives him a heart of flesh: And though it renders
us willing to do those goed work which before we were unwilling to do, and
unwilling to do those evil works which before we did; yet is no violence
offered by it to the will of man; so that no man when he has sinned can excuse
himself, as if he had sinned against his will, or upon constraint; and
therefore that he ought not to be accused or condemned upon that account. The
composition of which Article does most clearly show that our first Reformers
did as little countenance that Doctrine of the Irresistibility of Gods grace in
its workings on the will of man, which the Calvinians now contend for, as they
did the Dreams and Dotages of some zuinglian Gospellers, into whose writings if
we look, we shall easily find that Gods divine Predestination is by them made
the cause of sin, by which men are necessitated and compelled to those acts of
wickedness which they so frequently commit: By the virtue of Gods will, says
one, all things are done, yea even those things which are evil and excerable.
By Gods Predestination, says another, we are compelled to do those things for
which we are damned, as will appear more fully in the sixtecnth Chapter, when
the extravagancies of the Predestinarians come to be considered. And it is
probable enough, that to encounter with these monstrous Paradoxes of the
Zuinglian Gospellers, this Article was first composed; in which Provision seems
to have been made against all those who taught that men sinned against their
wills, or upon constraint, or that men might excuse themselves from the blame
thereof upon that consideration. If any of the Calvinian factions can find any
thing in this Article against Arminianism (as they call it) or in defense of
the determining of the will by converting grace, or the consistency of the
freedom or liberty of the will, much good may it do them. But then they should
think themselves obliged to give a better reason than I think they can, why
this article is not to be found in the Book as now it is Printed. Either this
Article was not made in favor of Calvinism, when it was published with the
rest in King Edwards time; or the Reformers of the Church under Queen
Elizabeth, were no friends to Calvinism, in cansing it to be left out in the
second Book, Anno 1562. to which subscription is required by the Laws of the
Land.

Proceed we next unto the book of Homilies; Hom. of the Mis. of Man. p. 10.
that few of the proud, learned, wise, perfect, and holy Pharisees was saved by
Christ, because they justified themselves by their counterfeit holiness before
men. -- And in another thus, But the corrupt inclination of man was so much
given to follow his own fancies (and as you would say) to favor his own bird,
Hom. of good works, p. 33.
that he worships himself, that all the admonitions, exhortations, benefits,
and the precepts of God, could not keep him from their intention. More clearly
and expressly in another place, where after the recitation of some pious duties
by God commended to the Jews, the Homily proceeds in this manner following: But
these things they passed not of, they turned their backs and went their way;
they stopped their ears that they might not hear, 1. p. of the Ser. of felling
from God, p. 53.
and they hardened their hearts as an Adamant stone, that they might not listen
to the Law, and the words that the Lord had sent through his holy Spirit:
Wherefore the Lord showed his great indignation upon them. It came to pass
(says the Prophet) even as I told them, and they would not hear, so when they
cried they were not heard, but were scattered into all Kingdoms, which they
never knew, and their Land was made desolate. And to be short, all they that
may not abide the Word of God, but following the persuasions and stubbornness
of their own hearts, go backward and not forward (as is said in Jeremy) they go
and turn away from God. Nor is this spoken only of such a temporary resistance
as may be overcome at last by the unconquerable power of the Spirit of God; but
even of such an obstinate and perverse resistance, as in the end will lead the
way to a final Apostasy, an unrecoverable forsaking of God, and being as
irrecoverably forsaken by him: Of which we shall speak more at large in the
fifth and last Article, concerning the uncertainty of perseverance.

CHAP. XII. The Doctrine of Freewill agreed upon by the Clergy in their
Convocation, Anno 1543.
1. Of the Convocation holden in the year, 1543. in order to the Reformation of
Religion in points of Doctrine. 2. The Article of Freewil in all the powers and
workings of it, agreed on by the Prelates and Clergy of that Convocation,
agreeable to the present Doctrine of the Church of England. 3. An Answer to the
first Objection concerning the Popishness of the Bishops and Clergy in that
Convocation. 4. The Article of Freewil approved by King Henry the eighth, and
Archbishop Cranmer. 5. An Answer to the last Objection concerning the
Conformity of the Article to the present established Doctrine in the Church of
Rome.


BUT First, I am to take in my way another evidence, Freewil, contained amongst
some others, in the Book published by the Authority of King Henry the cighth,
in the year 1543. entitled, A necessary Doctrine and Erudition for all
Christian men: Concerning which, as we have spoken at large already in Chapter 8.
of this Work, so now we must add something touching this particular, of which
there was no notice taken in the Bishops book: For when the Bishops Book which
had been printed in the year 1537. under the Title of An Institution for a
Christian man, had for some time continued without alteration, it was brought
under the review of the Bishops and Clergy assembled in their Convocation, An.
1543. and having been reviewed in all the parts and members of it, a particular
Treatise touching the nature of Freewil, which in those times had exercised the
greatest wits: Of which I find this Memorandum in the Acts of the Convocation;
that is to say, Art. of Confess. 1543. April. ult.
That on Monday, being the last of April, Lecto and public exposito Articulo
Liberi Arbitrii in vulgari, etc. The Article of Freewil being read, and
publicly expounded in the English Tongue, the most Reverend Archbishops
delivered it into the hands of the Prolocutor, to the end that he should
publish it before the Clerks of the lower House of Convocation, as is
accustomed in such cases, Quo lecto, and per eos approbato; which being read
and approved by them, it was returned with the residue to the upper House of
Convocation, with this Approbation, Quod pro Catholicis and Religiosis
acceperunt, necnon gratias ingentes patribus egerunt, quod tantos labores,
sudores, and vigilias Religionis and Reipublicae causa, and unitatis gratia
subierant; that is to say, that they embraced them all for sound and Orthodox,
rendering unto the Fathers their most humble thanks for the great care and pains
which they had undertaken for the good of the Church and Commonwealth, and the
preserving of peace and unity among the people. Which passage I have at large
laid down, to show by whose hands, and by what Authority, as well the Book it
self, which we have spoken of before, as this particular Treatise in it, was at
first fashioned and set forth. And that being said, I shall first present the
Treatise or Discourse it self, and after Answer such Objections as either
prejudice or partiality may devise against it. Now the article follows in
haec verba.

The Article of Freewill.
The Commandments and threatenings of Almighty God in Scripture, whereby man is
called upon, and put in remembrance what God would have him to do, Romans 12. 1 Timothy 4. 1 John 2. Matthew. 19.
most evidently do express and declare, that man has Freewil also now after
the fall of our first Father Adam, as plainly appears in these places
following. Be not overcome of evil, neglect not the grace that is in thee; Love
not the World, etc. If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. Which
undoubtedly should be said in vain, unless there were some faculty or power
left in man, whereby he may by the help and grace of God (if he will receive
it, when it is offered him) understand his Commandments, and freely consent
unto and obey them: which thing of the Catholic Fathers is called Freewill,
which if we will describe, we may call it conveniently in all men, A certain
power of the Will joined with Reason, whereby a reasonable creature, without
constraint in things of Reason, discerns and wills good and evil; but it
wills not the good which is acceptable to God, except it be helped with
Grace; but that which is ill it wills of it self. And therefore other men
define Freewill in this wise. Freewill is a power and Reason of Will by which
good is chosen by the assistance of Grace, as evil is chosen without the
assistance of the same.

Howbeit the state and condition of Freewill was otherwise in our first
Parents, before they sinned, than it was either in them or their Posterity
after they had sinned. For our first Parents, Adam and Eve, until they wounded
and overthrew themselves by sin, had so in possession the said power of
Freewill by the most liberal gift and grace of God their Maker, that noe only
they might eschew all manner of sin, but also know God and love him, and fulfill
all things appertaining to their felicity and welfare; For they were made
righteous, and to the image and similitude of God, 1. (...). 16.
having power of Freewill ( as Chrysostom says) to obey or disobey; so that by
obedience they might live, and by disobedience they should worthily deserve to
die. A
For the wise man affirms of them that the state of them was of this sort in
the beginning, saying thus, God in the beginning did create man, and left him
in the hands of his own counsel, he gave unto him his Precepts and
Commandments, saying, If thou will keep these Commandments, they shall preserve
thee; He has set before thee fire and water, put forth thy hands to whether
thou will; before man is life and death, good and evil; what him lists, that
shall he have. From this must happy estate our first Parents falling by
disobedience, most grievously hurted themselves and their posterity; for
besides many other evils that came by that transgression, the high power of
man's Reason and Freedom of will were wounded and corrupted, and all men thereby
brought into such blindness and infirmity, that they cannot eschew sin, except
they be made free and illuminated by an especial grace, that is to say, by a
supernatural help and working of the holy Ghost, which although the goodness of
God offers to all men, yet they only enjoy it, which by their Freewill do
accept and embrace the same.

Nor they also that be helped by the said grace can accomplish and perform
things that be for their wealth, but with much labor and endeavor; So great
is in our Nature the corruption of the first sin, and the heavy burden hearing
us down to evil. For truly albeit the light of Reason does abide, yet is it
much darkened, and with much difficulty does discern things that be inferior,
and pertain to this present life; but to understand and perceive things that be
spiritual, and pertain to that everlasting life, it is of it self unable. And
so likewise there remains a certain freedom of the will in those things which
do pertain unto the desires and works of this present life; yet to perform
spiritual and heavenly things, Freewill of it self is unsufficient; and
therefore the power of man's Freewill being thus wounded and decayed, has need
of a Physician to heal it; and one help to repair it, that it may receive light
and strength, whereby it may be so, and have power to do those godly and
spiritual things which before the fall of Adam it was able and might have done.

To this blindness and infirmity of man's Nature, proceeding of Original sin the
Prophet David has regard, when he desired his eyes to be lightened of Almighty
God, that he might consider the mavelous things that be in his Law. And also
the Prophet Jeremy saying, Psalm 115. Jer. 16.
Heal me O Lord, and I shall be made whole. Augustine also plainly declares the
same, saying, We conclude that Freewill is in man after his fall, which thing
whosoever denies, is not a Catholic man; but in spiritual desires and works to
please God, it is so weak and feeble, hat it cannot eithre begin or perform
them, unless by the Grace and help of God it be prevented and helped. And
hereby it appears that man's strength and Will in all things which be helpful
to the soul, and shall please God, has need of the graces of the holy Ghost,
by which such things be inspired to men, and strength and constancy given to
perform them, if we do not wilfully refuse the said Grace effered to them.

And likewise as many things be in the Scripture which do show Freewill to be
in man; so there be now fewer places in Scripture which declare the Grace of
God to be so necessary, that if by it Freewill be not prevented and helped, it
neither can do, nor will any thing good and godly, of which sort be these
Scriptures following, Without me you can do nothing: no man comes to me except
it be given him of my Father. John 15. Jon. 6.1. Cor. 3.
We be not sufficient of our selves as of our selves to think any good thing.
According unto which Scriptures and such other like it follows, That
Freewill, before it may will or think any godly thing, must be helped with the
grace of Christ, and by his Spirit be prevented and inspired that it may be
able thereunto. And being so made able, may from thenceforth work together with
grace; and by the same sustained, helped and maintained, may, both accomplish
good works, and avoid sin, and persevere also, and increase in grace; It is
true of the grace of God only that first we are inspired and moved to any good
thing: but to resist temptations, and to persist in goodness and go forward, it
is both of the Grace of God and our Freewill and endeavor. And finally after
we have persevered unto the end, to be crowned with glory therefore, is the
gift and mercy of God, who of his bountiful goodness has ordained that reward
to be given after this life according to such good works as be done in this
life by his Grace.

Therefore men ought with much diligence and gratitude of mind to consider and
regard the inspiration, wholesome motions of the holy Ghost, and to embrace the
Grace of God which is offered to them in Christ, and moves them to work good
things. And furthermore to go about by all means to show themselves such, as
unto whom the Grace of God is not given in vain. And when they do settle, that
notwithstanding their diligence, yet through their infirmity they be not able
to do that they desire, then they ought earnestly and with a fervent devotion
and steadfast faith to ask of him, which gave the beginning, that he would
vouchsafe to perform it: which thing God will undoubtedly grant, according to
his promise, to such as persevere in calling upon him. For he is naturally
good, and wills all men to be saved, and cares for them, and provideth all
things by which they may be saved, except BY THEIR OWN MALICE they will be
evil, and so by the righteous judgment of God, perish and be lost. For truly
men be to themselves the AVTHOR OF SIN and DAMNATION. God is neither the AVTHOR
OF SIN, nor the CAUSE OF DAMNATION, and yet does he most righteously damn those
men, that do with Vices corrupt their Nature, which he made good, and do abuse
the same to evil desires, against his most holy will; wherefore men be to be
warned, that they do not impute to God their Vice, or their damnation; but to
themselves, who by Freewill have abused the grace and benefits of God. All men
be also to be monished, and chiefly Preachers, that in this high matter they
looking on both sides, so attemper and moderate themselves, that neither they
so preach the Grace of God, as to take away thereby Freewill, Nor on the other
side so extol Freewill, that injury be done to the grace of God.

Such was the judgment of the Bishops and Clergy assembled in Convocation, Anno
1543. touching the nature of Freewill, and the co-operations of it with the
grace of God; In which I can see nothing not agreeable to the present
established Doctrine of the Church of England. And if it be objected, as
perhaps it may, that this Convocation was held in times of Popery, and managed
by a Popish Clergy: it may be answered that the Bishops and Clergy then
assembled were such as had a principal hand in the Reformation, and generally
subscribed unto the Articles of Religion, agreed upon, and published in King
Edwards time, Anno 1552. At which time fifteen of the Bishops which had been
present at the Convocation, Anno 1543. were not only living, but present, and
consenting to the Articles in King Edwards time, that is to say, Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury; Parfew, Bishop of Saint Asaph; Buchely, Bishop of
Bangor; Bush, Bishop of Bristol; Sampson, Bishop of Litchfield; Barlow, Bishop
of Saint David; Goodrich, Bishop of Ely; Ship, Bishop of Hereford; Folgate,
Bishop of Landaff, and afterward Archbishop of York; King, Bishop of Oxon;
Chambers, Bishop of Peterborough; Cepon, Bishop of Sarum; Thirlby, then Bishop
of Westminster; Aldrich, then Bishop of Carlisle; and Bird, Bishop of Chester:
By which proportion, we may conclude that a far greater number of the Deans and
Archdeacons, who have a personal right of voting in all Convocations, and
coming to the number of eighty and thereabouts, must be living and consenting
also to the Reformation, as being younger men than the Bishops were; not to say
any thing of the Clerks or Procurates of Cathedral Churches, and those of the
Diocesan Clergy, as being variable and changeable from time to time, though
possibly a great part of them might be present and consenting also, 1552. Nor
stood this book nor the Article of Freewill therein contained, upon the order
and authority only of this Convocation, but had as good countenance and
encouragement to walk abroad as could be superadded to it by an Act of
Parliament, as appears plainly by the Kings Preface to that Book, and the Act
it self, to which for brevity sake I refer the Reader.

But if it be replied, Edward the sixth, as indeed it was: we might refer the
Reader to a passage in the Kings Epistle, before remembered, in which the
Doctrine of Freewill is affirmed to have been purged of all Popish Errors;
concerning which take here the words of the Epistle, Epist. Ded.
viz. And for as much as the heads and senses of our people have been imbusied,
and in these days traveled with the understanding of Freewill, Justification,
etc. We have by the advice of our Clergy for the purgation of Erroneous
Doctrine, declared and set forth openly, plainly, and without ambiguity of
speech, the mere and certain truth of them: so as we verily trust, that to know
God, and how to live after his pleasure to the attaining of everlasting life in
the end, this Book contains a perfect and sufficient Doctrine, grounded and
established in holy Scriptures. And if it be rejoyned, as perhaps it may, that
King Henry used to shift Opinion in matters which concerned Religion, according
unto interest and reason of State; it must be answered that the whole Book, and
every Tract therein contained, was carefully corrected by Archbishop Cranmer,
the most blessed instrument under God, of the Reformation, before it was
committed to the Prolocutor and the rest of the Clergy. For proof whereof I am
to put the Reader in mind of a Letter of the said Archbishop, relating to the
eighth Chapter of this book; in which he signified to an honorable Friend of
his, that he had taken the more pains in it, because the Book being to be set
forth by his Graces (that is to say, the Kings) censure and judgment, he could
have nothing in it that Momus himself could reprehend, as before was said: And
this I hope will be sufficient to free this Treatise of Freewill from the crime
of Popery.

But finally, Calvinian party, that the Doctrine of Freewill, which is there
delivered, is in all points the same with that which was concluded and agreed
on in the Council of Trent, as appears Cap. de fructibus justificationis, and
merito bonorum operum, Can. 34. and therefore not to be accounted any part of
the Protestant Doctrine; which was defended and maintained by the Church of
England, according to the first Rules of her Reformation: the answers will be
many, and every answer not without its weight and moment. For first, it was not
the intent of the first Reformers to depart farther from the Rites and
Doctrines of the Church of Rome, than that Church had departed from the
simplicity both of Doctrine and Ceremonies, which had been publicly maintained
and used in the Primitive times, as appears plainly by the whole course of
their proceedings, so much commended by King James in the Conserence at Hampton
Court. Secondly, this Doctrine must be granted also to be the same with that of
the Melancthonian Divines or moderate Lutherans, as was confessed by Andreas
Vega, one of the chief sticklers in the Council of Trent, who on the agitating
of the Point, did confess ingenuously, that there was no difference betwixt the
Lutherans and the Church touching that particular. And then it must be
confessed also, that it was the Doctrine of Saint Augustine, according to that
Divine saying of his, Sine gratia Dei praeveniente ut velimus, and subsequente
ne frustra velimus, ad pietatis opera nil valemus, which is the same of that of
the tenth Article of the Church of England, where it is said, That without the
grace of God preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us
when we have that good will, we can do nothing that is acceptable to him in the
ways of piety. So that if the Church of England must be Arminian, and the
Arminian must be Papist, because they agree together in this particular; the
Melancthonian Divines amongst the Protestants, yea, and St. Augustine amongst
the Ancients himself, must be Papists also.

CHAP. XIII. The Doctrine of the Church of England, concerning the certainty or
uncertainty of Perseverance.
1. The certainty of Grace debated in the Council of Trent, and maintained in
the Affirmative by the Dominicans, and some others. 2. The contrary affirmed by
Catarinus and his adherents. 3. The doubtful resolution of the Council in it.
4. The Calvinists not content with certainty of Grace, quoad statum praesentem,
presume upon it also, quoad statum suturum. 5. The bounds and limits wherewith
the judgment in this point ought rationally to be circumscribed. 6. The
Doctrine of the Church of England in the present Article. 7. Justified by the
testimonies of Bishop Latimer, Bishop Hooper, and Master Tyndal. 8. And proved
by several arguments from the public Liturgy. 9. The Homily commends a
probable and sted-fast hope: But 10. Allows no certainty of Grace and
perseverance (in any ordinary way) to the Sons of men.


OF all the Points which exercised the wits and patience of the Schoolmen in
the Council of Trent, there was none followed with more heat between the
parties, Luther, wherein such certainty was maintained as necessary unto
justification, and an essential part thereof. In canvasing of which point, the
one part held that certainty of grace was presumption, the other that one might
have it meritoriously. The ground of the first was, Hist. of the Coun of Trent.
fol. 205. etc.
that Saint Thomas, Saint Bonaventure, and generally the Schoolmen thought so;
for which cause the major part of the Dominicans were of the same opinion;
besides the authority of the Doctors, they alleged for reasons, that God would
not that man should be certain, that be might not be lifted up in pride, and
esteem of themselves, that he might not prefer himself before others, as he
that knows himself to be just would do before manifest sinners; and a
Christian would so become drowsy, careless, and negligent to do good.
Therefore they said that uncertainty was profitable, yea and meritorious
besides, because it is a passion of the mind which does afflict it; and being
supported, is turned to merit. They alleged many places of the Scripture also;
of Solomon, that a man knows not whether he be worthy of has or love; of
Wisdom, which commands not to be without fear of these sins pardoned; of
Saint Peter, to work out our salvation with fear and trembling; of Saint Paul,
who said of himself, though my Conscience accuse me not, yet I am not thereby
justified. These Reasons and Testimonies, together with many places of the
Fathers were brought and amplified, especially by Levipandus, Vega, and Soto.

But Catarinus and Marinarus had other places of the same Fathers to the
contrary, which showed they had spoken accidentally in this particular, as the
occasions made most for their purpose, sometimes t comfort the scrupulous,
sometimes to repress the audacious; yet they kept themselves close to the
authority of the Scripture. They said that to as many as it is read in the
Gospel that Christ has forgiven sins, to all them he said, Believe that your
sins are forgiven, and it would be an absurdity that Christ should give an
occasion of temerity and pride; or, if the contrary were profitable, or a
merit, that he would deprive all men of it. That the Scripture binds us to
give God thanks for our justification, which cannot be given except we know
that we have obtained it; for to give them when we are uncertain, would be most
foolish and impertinent. That St. Paul does plainly confirm the certainty, when
he puts the Corinthians in mind to know that Christ is in them, except they
be Reprobates. And when he says, we have received from God the Spirit to know
what is given us by his divine Majesty, and more clearly, that the holy Spirit
does bear witness to our spirit that we are the Sons of God: and it is much to
accuse them of rashness who believe the Holy Ghost that speaks with them. For
St. Ambrose says that the Holy Ghost does never speak unto us, but does make
us know that it is he that speaks. After this he added the words of Christ in
St. John, that the world cannot receive the Holy Ghost, because it sees him
not, nor knows him, but that the Disciples shall know him, because he shall
dwell in them. Calarinus did fortify himself strongly by saying that it was
the opinion of a man in a dream, to defend that Grace is valuntarily received,
when we know not whether we have it or not; as if to receive a thing willingly,
it be not necessary that the willing receive should know it is given him, that
he does really receive it, and that after it is received, he does possess it.

The force of these Reasons made them first retire a little that censured the
opinion of Temerity, and yield that there might be a conjecture, though not an
ordinary certainty; yet they acknowledged a certainty in the Martyrs, in the
newly Baptized, and in some by special revelation, and from conjecture, they
were brought to call it moral Faith: And that Vego who in the beginning
admitted probability only, overcome by these Reasons, and beginning of favor
the certainty, for fear of conforming himself to the Lutheran opinion, said
that there was so much certainty as did exclude all doubt, and could not be
deceived; yet that it was not Christian Faith, but humane and experimental. But
Catarinus and his party which were all the Carmelites, not resting satisfied
either in the terms of an experimental faith, or a moral persuasion, did press
the certainty so far, that many of the Prelates began to incline to that
opinion, and to persuade themselves, that certainty of Grace was founded upon
such an assurance as might in some sort be called divine; though when they came
to draw up the Decree therein, they found themselves involved in more
perplexities than they were aware of. For the Point being followed with great
heat between the parties, and each of them conceiving that the truth was
clearly on their side; it was found necessary to cast the Decree into such a
mold as those of the two contrary opinions might repose themselves on it. And
certainly he that looks on the ninth Chapter of the sixth Session of the
Council, entitled Contra inanem Haereticorum siduciam, may easily perceive
into what streights they were reduced by seeking to content the Leaders of the
several factions. For when the Decree came to be discussed, it was no hard
matter to make them join against that confidence which was maintained by many
of Luthers followers, as if a man were no otherwise justified than by the
confidence which he had in his own justification; yet when they came to express
that certainty which had occasioned that intricate and perplexed dispute, they
were not so well able to state the point, as not to show their own irresolution
and uncertainty in it. For in the conclusion of the Decree in which they were
to declare some cause for which no man could certainly know that he has
obtained Grace at the hands of God, the Cardinal to satisfy one part, added
certainty of faith; and he with the Dominicans not thinking it to be enough,
urged him to add the word Catholic to it; so that the sense thereof might seem
to be to this effect, that no man could assure himself of obtaining Grace by
any such certainty of Faith as may come under the notion of Catholic. But
because the Adherents of Catarinus were not so contented, Hist. of the Coun. of
Trent. fell. 215.
instead of those words of Catholic Faith (no which the Dominicans insisted)
it was thought necessary to declare that they meant it not of such a faith, cui
non potest subesse falsum, which cannot be subject to falsehood. And thereupon
the conclusion was drawn up in these following words, viz. Quilibet dum
seipsum, suamque propriam infirmitatem and indispositionem respicit, de gratia
formidare and timere potest, cum nullus scire valeat certitudine Fidei cui non
potest subesse falsum, se gratiam Dei esse consecutum; that every one in regard
of his own disposition and infirmity may doubt with himself whether he has
received this Grace or not, because he cannot know by certainty of infallible
faith that he has obtained it. A temperament which contented both sides. For
one party inferred that all the certainty of faith which could be had herein,
might be false or fallible, and therefore to be thought uncertain; the others
inferred with equal confidence, and content that the certainty therein
declared, could have no doubt of fashood or fallibility, Hict. of Coun. p. 21^.
for the time that it remained in us; and that it could no otherwise become
false or fallible, than by changing from the state of grace to the state of
sin, as all contingent truths, by the alteration of their subjects may be made
false also.

By which last clause it does appear that all the certainty which Catarinus and
the Carmelites contended for, was no more but this, that the Regenerate and
righteous man might be certain of grace and his own justification, quoad statum
praesentem, but not that he could challenge or pretend to any such certainty,
quoad statum futurum, or build on a continual perseverance in it for the time
to come. For even those men who stickled most in maintenance of the certainty
of Grace quoad statum praesentem, concurred with those who maintained the
uncertainty of perseverance, together with the possibility of falling totally
and finally from the Grace received, for which see Chap. 2. Number. Appell. Caes.
part. 2. cap. 26.
8. of this present Book. But the Calvinists being men of another making,
presume not only (as one says of them) to know all things that belong to their
present justification a assuredly as they know that Christ in Heaven, but are
as sure of their eternal election, and of their future glorification, as they
are of this Article of our Creed, that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary. And
that he may not be thought to have spoken this without good authority, we need
look no farther than the fifth Article of the Contra-Remonstrants which was
disputed at the Hague, according as it is laid down in our fourth Chap. Numb.
7. compared with the determination of the Council of Dort touching the point of
perseverance, the sum whereof is briefly this, viz. That God will preserve in
the Faith all those who are absolutely elected from eternity, and are in time
brought to faith by an almighty and irresistible operation or working, so that
though they fall into detestable wickednesses and villainies, and continue in
them some space of time, Arcan. Dry. Anti. Remo. p. 21.
against their conscience, yet the said wicked villainies do not binder so much
as a straw amounts to, their election or salvation; neither do they, or can
they by means of, or because of these, fall from the Grace of Adoption, and
from the state of Justification, or lose their faith; but all their sins, how
great soever they be, both which heretofore they have committed, and those
which after they will or shall commit, are surer than assuredly forgiven them;
yea and moreover, they themselves, at last, though it be at the last gasp,
shall be called to repentance, and brought out into possession of salvation. To
which determination of the Synod it self, it may be thought impertinent to
subjoyn the words and suffrages of particular men, though those of Roger
Dontebeck are by no means to be omitted: by whom is affirmed, That if it were
possible for any one man to commit all the sins over again which have been
acted in the world, it would neither frustrate his election, nor alienate him
from the love and favor of God: For which and many other passages of like
nature, too frequent in the writings of the Contra-Remonstrants, the Reader may
consult the Appendix to the book called Press-Declaratio Sententiae
Remonstrantium, printed at Leiden, Anno 1616. and there he may he satisfied in
his curiosity.

But on the other side, such as have looked into the mysteries of eternal life
with the eye of Reverence, are neither so confident in the point, Donlebeck,
and others of the presumptuous sort of our modern Calvinists, Moun. against.
the Gagger. c. 22. p. 185.
by whom we are informed, that all assurance is twofold, that is to say, in
respect of the object known, believed; and in regard of the subject believing,
knowing: As man relieth upon his Evidence, or as his Evidence to rely upon,
that all Evidence is divine or humane, from God or man; that Evidence divine,
if apprehended, is over certain, and infallible, both for the necessity of our
object, God, in whom is no change, nor shadow of change; as also for the manner
of determining the Evidence, whereby that is certain or necessary for effect,
which is but contingent otherwise in it self; that such Evidence as is most
clear, and such assurance as is most certain in it self, may be contingent and
uncertain, as we may both use it and dispose it, who are here and there, off
and on as our judgments vary, being irresolute in our ways, and as inconstant
in our works: And thereupon it is inferred in behalf of those who maintain the
infallibility of such assurance that they mean no otherwise than this; that is
to say, that in regard of God, faithful and true; in respect of his promises,
Yea and Amen; every Child of God renewed by Grace, may (and ought infallibly)
assure himself of his own salvation procured in Christ, who yet in regard of
his own infirmity and inconstancy, cannot choose but waver in his assurance, and
fear the worst, though he hope the best. And this, if Bellarmine say right, is
St. Augustines doctrine, out of whom he collects thus much, Ex promissione
Christi potest unusquisque colligere se transisse a morte ad vitam, and in
judicium non venire; that is to say, that every man (he means it only of the
regenerate man) may collect from the promise of Christ, that he is translated
from death to life, and shall not be brought unto the judgment of condemnation;
the Cardinal thereupon resolves, that a man may collect so much by infallible
assurance and divine, if he look into the faithfulness of him that promises;
but if he consider his own disposition, we assign no more but probable and
conjectural assurance only.

Which said as to the certainty and incertainty of the assurance which a man
may have within himself, not only concerning his present being in the state of
Grace, that after we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from the Grace
given, and fall into sin; and by the Grace of God we may arise again and amend
our lives; Art. 16.
where plainly the Church teaches a possibility of falling or departing from
the Graceof the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us, and that our rising again,
and amending of our lives upon such a rising is a matter of contingency only,
and no way necessary on Gods part to assure us of a Doctrine so repugnant to
that of the Calvinists, that to make the Article come up to their opinion, they
would fain add neither finally nor totally (as appears by that of Doctor
Reynolds at Hampton Court) to the first clause of it: By which addition, as
they would make the last part of it to be absolutely unprofitable, and of no
effect; so do they wilfully oppose themselves against the known maxim in the
Civil Laws, which tells us, Non esse distinguendum, ubi lex non distinguit,
that no distinctions must be made in the explicating or expounding of any Law,
which is not to be found in the Law it self. And therefore for the clear
understanding of the Churches meaning, we must have recourse in this as in
other Articles to the plain words of Bishop Latimer and Bishop Hooper, so often
mentioned in this work.

And first we find Bishop Latimer discoursing thus, Let us not do, says he, as
the Jews did, which were stiff-necked; they would not leave their sins, they
had a pleasure in the same, Bishop Latimer in his 8. Sermon in Linc.
they would follow their old Traditions, refusing the Word of God; therefore
their destruction came worthily upon them: And therefore, I say, let us not
follow them, lest we receive such a reward as they had, lest everlasting
destruction come upon us; and so we be cast out of the favor of God, and
finally lost, world without end. And in another place -- I say there be two
manner of men; Idem in Sermon. Romans 13.11.
some there be that are not justified, not regenerate, not yet in the state of
salvation, that is to say, not Gods servants: they take the Renovation or
Regeneration, they be not come yet to Christ, or if they were, be fallen again
from him, and so lost their justification; as there be many of us when we fall
willingly into sin against Conscience, we lose the favor of God, and finally
the Holy Ghost -- But you will say, How shall I know that I am in the Book of
Life? See Ibid.
I answer, that we may be one time in the Book, and another time come out of it
again, as appears by David, who was written in the Book of Life, but when he
sinned foully, at that time came out of the favor of God, until he repented,
and was sorry for his faults: so that we may be in the Book one time, and
afterards when we forget God, and his Word, and do wickedly, we come out of the
Book, which is Christ. The like we find in Bishop Hooper, Pref. to the Expos on
the ten Commandments.
first telling us that the causes of Rejection or Damnation is sin in man, that
will not hear, neither receive the promise of the Gospel, or else after he has
received it, by accustomed doing of ill, falls either unto a contempt of the
Gospel, or will not study to live thereafter, or else he hates the Gospel
because it condemns his ungodly life. After which he proceeds to the
Application -- Refuse not therefore the Grace offered, nor once received,
banish it with ill conversation. If we fall, let us hear Almighty God that
calls us to repent, and with his Word, and return; let us not continue in
sin, nor heap one sin upon another, lest at last we come to a contempt of God
and his Word. In the beginning of his Paraphase or Exposition to the thirteenth
Chapter of the Romans, he speaks as plainly to this purpose; which passage
might here deserve place also, but that I am called upon by Master Tyndal,
Collect. of his Works by J. Day. p. 185.
whose testimony I am sure will be worth the having, and in the Prologue to his
Exposition on the same Epistle he informs us thus. None of us (says he) can be
received to Grace, but upon a condition to keep the Law, neither yet continue
any longer in Grace than that promise lasts. And if we break the Law, we must
sue for a new pardon, and have a new light against sin, hell, and desperation;
yet we can come to a quiet faith again, and feel that sin is forgiven; neither
can there be in thee a stable and undoubted faith, that thy sin is forgiven
thee, except there be also a lusty courage in thy heart, and trust that thou will sin no more; for on this condition that thou will sin no more, is the
promise of mercy and forgiveness made unto thee.

But against all this it is objected that Montague himself, Gag and his Appeal,
confesses that the Church has left this undecided; Hick. in his justi. of the
Fathers etc. Pres. Montag. Gag. cap. 20. p. 171.
that is to say, neither determining for finally or totally, and much less for
both. And that he does so in the Gag, I shall easily grant, where he relates
only to the words of the Article, which speaks only of a possibility of
falling, without relating to the measure or duration of it. But he must needs
be carried with a very strange confidence, which can report so of him in his
book called Appello Caesarem, in which he both expressly says, and proves the
contrary. He says it first in these words, after a repetition of that which he
had formerly said against the Gagger. I determine nothing in the question, that
is to say, nor totally nor finally, Appell. Caes. cap. 4. p. 28.
or totally not finally, or totally and finally; but leave them all to their
Authors and Abetters; resolving upon this, not to go beyond my bounds, the
consented, resolved and subscribed Articles of the Church of England; in which,
nor yet in the Book of Common Prayer, and other divine Offices, is thee any tie
upon me to resolve in this much disputed question, as these Novellers would
have it (not as these Novellers would have it, there is no doubt of that,) For
if there be any, it is for a possibility of total falling, of which more anon.
He proves it next by several Arguments extracted from the book of Homilies, and
the public Liturgy. Out of which last he observes theee passages, the first
out of the Form of Baptism, in which it is declared, that the Baptized Infant
being born in original sin, by the Laver of Regeneration in Baptism, is
received into the number of the Children of God, Ibid. p. 3^.
and Heirs of everlasting life: the second out of the public Catechism, in
which the Child is taught to say, that by his Baptism he was made a Member of
Christ, the Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. The third
out of the Rubric before Confirmation, in which it is affirmed for a truth,
that it is certain by Gods Word, that Children being Baptized, have all things
necessary for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. And thereupon he does
observe that it is to be acknowledged for a Doctrine of this Church, that
Children duly Baptized, are put into a state of Grace and salvation: And
secondly, that it is seen by common experience, that many Children so Baptized,
when they come to Age, by a wicked and lewd life do fall away from God, and
from the state of Grace and salvation wherein he had set them, to a worse
state, wherein they shall never be saved. From which what else can be inferred,
but that the Church maintains a total, and a final falling from the grace of
God? Add hereunto that the Church teaches men to pray to Almighty God not to
take his holy Spirit from us. And in another place, that he suffer us not at
our last hour for any pains of death to fall from him; which certainly she had
never done, were it not possible for a man so far to grieve and vex the Holy
Spirit of God, and so far to despair of his gracious mercy, as to occasion him
at the last to deprive us both of the one and the other.

Next for the Homilies, That none of those their causes of the fear of death,
(that is to say, the sorrow of repenting from our worldly pleasures, the
terrible apprehension of the pangs of death, and the more terrible apprehension
of the pains of Hell) do make any trouble to good men, Hom. p. 67.
because they stay themselves by true faith, perfect charity, and sure hope of
the endless joy and bliss everlasting. All therefore have great cause to be
full of joy, that he joined to Christ with true Faith, steadfast hope, and
perfect charity, and not to fear death, nor everlasting damnation. The like we
find not long after, where it speaks of those, Who being truly penitent for
their offenses, depart hence in perfect charity and in sure trust, that God is
merciful to them; forgiving them their sins, for the merits of Jesus Christ the
only natural Son. In the third part of which Sermon it is thus concluded: He
that conceives all these things, and believes them assuredly, Ibid. p. 68.
as they ought to be believed, even from the bottom of his heart, being
established in God, in his true faith, having a quiet Conscience in Christ, a
firm hope and assured trust in Gods mercy through the merits of Jesus Christ,
to obtain this rest, quietness, and everlasting joy, shall not only be without
fear of godly death when it comes, but greatly desire in his heart ( as St.
Paul did) to be rid from all these occasions of evil, and live ever to Gods
pleasure, in perfect obedience of his Will, with Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, to whose gracious presence, etc, By all which passages it is clear and
evident that the Church teaches us to entertain a probable and steadfast hope
of our salvation in Christ Jesus; but whether it teaches also such an
infallibility of persisting in grace, such a certainty of perseverance, as to
exclude all possibility of a total or a sinal falling, we are next to see.

And see it we may without the help of Spectacles, or any of the Optical
instruments, viz. A Sermon showing how dangerous a thing it is to fall from
God. And it had been ridiculous if not somewhat worse, to write a Sermon de non
ente, to terrify the people with the danger of that misfortune, which they
were well enough assured they should never suffer. Out of which Homilies the
Appellant makes no use but of these words only, Whereas God has showed unto
all them that truly do believe his Gospel, his face of mercy in Christ Jesus;
which does so enlighten their hearts, that they be transformed into his Image,
be made partakers of the Heavenly light, and of his holy Spirit; Hom. p. 54.
be fashioned to him in all goodness requisite to the Child of God; So if they
do afterward neglect the same, if they be unthankful unto him, if they order
not their lives according unto his Doctrine and Example, and to the setting
forth of his glory, he will take from them his holy Word, his Kingdom whereby
be should reign in them, because they bring not forth fruit which he looked
for. besides which there are money other passages to this effect, where it is
said, that as by pride and sin we fall from God, Ibid. p 50.
so shall God and all goodness go from us -- that sometimes men go from God by
lack of faith and mistrusting of God -- and som^t^^te. by neglecting his
Commandments concerning their Neighbors. And after some examples given in
these several cases, it follows that by these examples of holy Scripture we
may know that as we forsake God, Id. p 54.
so shall he forsake us. And what a miserable estate does consequently and
necessarily follow thereupon, a man may easily consider by the horrible
threatenings of God, etc. And finally having not only laid before us the said
horrible threatenings, but the recital also of those gentle courses by which he
does endeavor to gain us to him, it concludes thus, viz. that if these will
not serve, but still remain disobedient to his Word and Will, not knowing him,
or loving him; not fearing him, nor putting our whole trust and confidence in
him: and on the other side to our Neighbors, behaving our selves uncharitably
by disdain, envy, malice, or by committing murder, robbery, adultery, gluttony,
deceit, lying, swearing, or other like detestable works, and ungodly behavior;
then he threatens us by terrible comminations, swearing in great anger, that
whosoever does these works, shall never enter into his rest, which is the
Kingdom of Heaven.

CHAP. XIV. The Plain Song of the second Homily, touching the falling from God,
and the Descants made upon it.
1. More from some other Homilies, touching the possibility of falling from the
grace received. 2. The second Homily or Sermon touching falling from God, laid
down verbatim. 3. The sorry shifts of Mr. Yates, to elude the true meaning of
the Homily, plainly discovered, and confuted. 4. An Answer unto his Objection,
touching the passage cited from the former Homily, in Mr. Mountagues Appeal. 5.
The Judgment of Mr. Ridley, Archdeacon of Canterbury, in the points of Election
and Redemption. 6. As also touching the Reasons why the Word was not preached
unto the Gentiles till the coming of Christ, the influences of of grace, the
co-workings of man, and the possibility of falling from the truth of Christ.


NOR does the Church declare this only in the former Homily, obiter, and upon
the by, whert it discourses principally on some other subject; Hom. of good
works, p. 32.
for in the second part of the Sermon of good Works, we shall find St.
Chrysostom speaking thus; viz. The Thief thawas hanged when Christ suffered,
did believe only, and the most merciful God justified himt And because no man
shall say again that he wanted time to do good works, for else he could have
done them; truth it is, and I will not contend herein; but this I will surely
affirm, that faith only saved him. If he had lived, and not regarded Faith, and
the works thereof, he should have lost his salvation again; which words of
Chrysostom passing for a part of the Homily, declare sufficiently, that by the
Doctrine of the Church in King Edwards time, not only Faith, but Justification
once had, may be lost again. To the same purpose in the second part of the
Homily against Swearing it is plainly said; Page 50.
That whosoever forsakes the Truth for love or displeasure of any man, or for
lucre and profit to himself, does forsake Christ, and with Judas betray him.
And somewhat also to this purpose may be found in the third Sermon against the
peril of Idolatry; Page 58. page 130.
and in the second part of that touching the time and place of Prayer, though
not so proper at the present, because not made within the compass or the first
Reformation in King Edwards Reign; and keeping my self within the compass, I
think it not amiss to present unto the eye of the Reader, the second part of
the Sermon, about ^alling from God, and to present the same verbatim, as it
stands in the Book; and afterward to clear it from all such evasions and
Objections which the sullenness rather than the subtilty of some men have found
out against it. Now the said second Sermon, (beginning with a recapitulation of
that which had been taught in the first) is this that follows.

She Second Part of the Sermon of falling from God.
In the former part of this Homily, you have learned how many manner of ways
men fall from God, some by Idolatry, some for lack of Faith, some by neglecting
of their Neighbors, Hom. of falling from God, Part 1. fol. 55.
some by not hearing of Gods Word, some by the pleasure they take in the
vanities of worldly things; you have also learned in what misery that man is
which is gone from God; and how that God yet of his infinite goodness to call
again man from that his misery, uses first gentle admonitions by his
Preachers; after he lays on terrible threatenings: Now if this gentle monition
and threatening together do not serve, then God will show his terrible
countenance upon us, he will pour intolerable plagues upon our heads, and after
he will take away from us all his aid and assistance wherewith before he did
defend us from all such manner of calamity, as the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah,
agreeing with Christ his Parable, Isa. 5. Mat. 21.
does teach us, saying, That God has made a goodly Vineyard for his beloved
Children; he hedged it, he walled it round about, he planted it with chosen
Vines, and made a Turret in the midst thereof, gathering also a Wine Press, and
when he looked that it would bring forth good grapes, it brought forth wild
grapes, and after it follows; Now shall I show you (says God) what I will do
with my Vineyard, I will pluck down the hedges thereof that it may perish; I
will break down the walls that it may be trodden under foot; I will let it lie
waste, it shall not be cut, it shall not be dug, but briars and thorns shall
overgrow it, and I will command the clouds that they shall no more rain upon it.

By these threatenings we are monished and warned, that if we which are the
chosen Vineyard of God, bring not forth good grapes, that is to say, good works
that may be delectable and pleasant in his sight, when he looks for them,
when he sends his Messengers to call upon us for them, but rather bring forth
wild grapes; that is to say, sour works; unsavory and unfruitful; then will he
pluck away all defense, and suffer grievous plagues of famine, battle, dearth
and death to light upon us. Finally, if these serve not, he will let us lie
waste, he will give us over, he will turn away from us, he will dig and delve
no more about us, he will let us alone, and suffer us to bring forth even such
fruit as we will, to bring forth brambles, briars and thorns, all naughtiness,
all vice, and that so abundantly, that they shall clean over-grow, choke,
strangle, and utterly destroy us. But they that in this World live not after
God, but after their own carnal liberty, perceive not this great wrath of God
toward them, that he does let them alone even to themselves: but they take
this for a great benefit of God to have all their own liberty; and so they
live, as if carnal liberty were the true liberty of the Gospel: But God forbid
(good people) that ever we should desire such liberty; for although God suffer
sometimes the wicked to have their pleasure in this world, yet the end of
ungodly living is at length endless destruction; the murmuring Israelites had
that they longed for, they had Quails enough, yea, till they were weary of
them; but what was the end thereof? their sweet meat had sour sauce; even
whilst the meat was in their mouths, the plague of God alighted upon them, and
suddenly they died: So if we live ungodly, and God suffers us to follow our
own wills, to have our own delights and pleasures, and corrects us not with
some plagues, it is no doubt but he is almost utterly displeased with us; and
although it be long ere he strike, yet many times when he strikes such
persons, he strikes them once for ever; so that when he does not strike us,
when he cease to afflict us, to punish or beat us, and suffers us to run
headlong into all ungodliness, and pleasures of this world that we delight in,
without punishment or adversity, it is a dreadful token that he loves us no
longer, that be cares no longer for us, but has given us over to our selves.

As long as a man does prune his Vines, does dig at the root, and lay fresh
earth to them, be has a mind to them, he perceives some token of fruitfulness
that may be recovered in them; but when he will bestow no more such cost and
labor about them, it is a sign that he thinks they will never be good: And the
Father as long as he loves his Child, he looks angerly, he corrects him,
when he does amiss; but when that serves not, and upon that he cease from
correction of him, and suffers him to do what he list himself, it is a sign
he intends to disinherit him, and cast him away for ever; so surely nothing
should pierce our hearts so sore, and put us into such horrible fear, as when
we know in our conscience that we have grievously offended God, and do so
continue, that yet he strikes not, but quietly suffers us in the naughtiness
that we here delight in, then especially it is time to cry, and to cry again as
David did, Cast me not away from thy face, Psalm 51.
and take not thy holy Spirit from me; hide not thy face from me, lest I be
like unto them that go down into hell. The which lamentable prayers of his, as
they do certify us what horrible danger they be in from whom God turns his
faced for the time, and as long as he so does) so should they more and more
^^ir us to cry unto God with all our heart, that we may not be brought into the
state which doubtless is so sorrowful, so miserable, and so dreadful as no
Tongue can sufficiently express, nor any heart can think; for what deadly grief
can a man suppose it is to be under the wrath of God, to be forsaken of him, to
have his holy Spirit the Author of all goodness, to be taken from him; to be
brought to so vile a condition, that he shall be l^ft meet for no better
purpose than to be for ever condemned to Hell? for not only such places of
David de show, that upon the turning of Gods face from any persons, they stall
be l^ft bare from all goodness, and far from hope of remedy; but also the place
rehearsed last before of Isaiah, does mean the same, which shows, that God at
length does so fosake his unfruitful Vineyard, that he will notonly suffer it
to bring forth weeds, briars and thorns, but also further to punish the
unfruitfulness of it, he says he will not cut it, he will not delve it, and he
will command the clouds that they shall not rain upon it; whereby is signified
the teaching of the holy Word, which St Paul after a like manner expressed by
planting and watering, Meaning that he will take that away from them, so that
they shall be no longer of his Kingdom, they shall be no longer governed by his
holy Spirit, they shall be put from the grace and benefits they had, and ever
might have enjoyed through Christ; they shall be deprived of the heavenly light
and life which they had in Christ whilst they abode in him; they shall be (as
they were once) as men without God in the world, or rather in a worse taking.

And to be short, they shall be given into the power of the Devil, which
bears the rule of all men which be cast away fro God, as he did in Saul and
Judas, and generally in all such as work after their own wills, the Children of
wistrust and unbelief; let us beware therefore good Christian people, lest that
we rejecting, or casting away Gods Word (by which we obtain and retain true
faith in God) be not at length cast so far off, that we become as the Children
of unbelief, which be of two sorts far diverse, yea, almost clean contrary, and
yet both be very far from returning to God: the one sort only weighing their
sinful and detestable living with the right judgment and straitness of Gods
righteousness, be so without content, and be so comfortless, ( as they all must
needs be from whom the Spirit of counsel and comfort is gone) that they will
not be persuaded in their hearts, but that either God cannot or else that he
will not take them again to his favor and mercy; the other, hearing the loving
and large promises of Gods mercy, and so not conceiving a right faith thereof,
make those promises larger than ever God did. Trusting that although they
continue in their sinful and detestable living never so long, yet that God at
the end of their life will show his mercy upon them; and that then they will
return. And that both these two sorts of men be in a damnable estate, and yet
nevertheless God (who wills not the death of the wicked) has showed means
whereby both the same (if they take heed in season) may escape. The first, as
they defend Gods rightful justice in punishing sinners (whereby they should be
dismayed, and should despair indeed, as touching any hopes that may be in
themselves) so if they would constantly and steadfastly believe, that Gods mercy
is the remedy prepared against such despair and distrust, not only for them,
but generally for all that be sorry, and truly repentant, and will therewithal
stick to Gods mercy, they may be sure they shall obtain mercy, and enter into
the Port or Haven of safeguard, into the which whosoever do come, be they
before time never so wicked, they shall be out of danger of everlasting
damnation, as godly Ezekiel says. What time soever a sinner does return, and
take earnest of true Repentance, I will forgive all his wickedness.

The other as they be ready to believe Gods promises, so they should be as
ready to believe the threatenings of God;as well believe the Law as the Gospel;
as well that there is an Hell, and everlasting fire, as there is an Heaven, and
everlasting joy; as well they should believe damnation to the threatened to the
wicked and evil doers, Ezekiel. 3.
as salvation to be promised to the faithful in Word and Works; as well they
should believe God to be true in the one as the other.

And for sinners that continue in this wicked living, they ought to think that
the promises of Gods mercy and the Gospel pertain not unto them being in that
state; but only the Law, and those Scriptures which contain the wrath and
indignation of God, and his threatenings, which should certify them, that as
they do over-boldly presume of Gods mercy, and live dissolutely; so does God
still more and more withdraw his mercy from them, as he is so provoked thereby
to wrath at length, that he destroys such presumers many times suddenly; for
of such St Paul said thus, When they shall say it is peace, there is no danger,
then shall sudden destruction come upon them; 1 Thessalonians. 5.
let us beware therefore of such naughty boldness to sin; For God which has
promised his mercy to them that be truly penitent, (although it be at the
latter end) has not promised to the presumptuous sinner either that he shall
have long life, or that he shall have true Repentance at the last end. But for
that purpose has he made every man's death uncertain, that he should not put
his hope in the end, and in the mean season (...) to Gods high displeasure)
live ungodlily: Wherefore let us follow the counsel of the Wise man, let us
make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, let us not put off from day to day; for
sudenly his wrath comes, and in time of vengeance he will destroy the wicked;
let us therefore turn betimes, and when we turn, let us pray to God as Hosea
teached, saying, Forgive ad our sins, receive us graciously: Hosea 14.
And if we turn to him with an humble and a very penitent heart, he will
receive us to his favor and grace for his holy Names sake, for his Promise
sake, for his Truth and Mercies sake promised to all faithful Believers in
Jesus Christ his only natural Son. To whom the only Savior of the world, with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor, glory and power, world without
end. Amen.

These are the very words of the second Himily, touching falling from God,
England. And hereunto I must needs say, that I never met with any satisfactory
and sufficient Answer, how much soever some have slighted the authority of it,
or the strength rather of the Argument which is taken from it; for Mr. Yetes of
Ipswitch (from whose Candle most of them that followed, borrow all their light)
in his book entitled, Ibis ad Caesarem, written against Mountagues Appeal, can
find no better Answers to it, or evasions from it, than they four that follow,
viz. 1. That the Homily speaks of the visible Church, and therefore it is not
to be construed in the same sense of all; whereas the Homily speaks of Gods
chosen people, Ibid. ad Cas. p. 2. c. 3. p. 139.
(his chosen Vineyard are the words) and consequently not only of the mixed
multitude in a visible Church: He answers secondly, That it speaks with
limitation and distinction; some beholding the face of Gods mercy aright, other
not as they ought to do; the one of which may fall quite away, the other being
transformed, can never be wholly deformed by Satan: but this is such a pitiful
shift, as could not save the man from the scorn of laughter, had he been deal
with in his kind; the Homily speaking largely of those men, which having beheld
Gods face of mercy in Jesus Christ as they ought to do, do afterward neglect
the same, prove unthankful to him, and order not their lives according to his
Example and Doctrine, etc. For which, consult the place at large in the former
Church. He answers thirdly, that the Homily speaks conditionally, if they
afterward, etc. (that is to say, if afterward they neglect the same, prove
unthankful to him, and order not their lives according to his Example and
Doctrine, etc.) and so concludes nothing positively and determinately, which is
a sorrier shift than that which you had before, for if such conditional
Propositions conclude nothing positively, what will become of all those
Propositions in the Scriptures by which we are assured, That if a sinner do
repent him of his sins wickednesses, he shall find mercy from the Lord? Do they
conclude nothing positively neither? most miserable were the state of man, if
these conditional Propositions should conclude nothing to the comfort of a
troubled conscience. And finally, he answers thus, that the Homily speaks of
Gods dreadful countenance appearing in Plagues, Sword, Famine, and such like
temporal punishments, wherewith the Elect may be chastened as well as others,
that they may not for ever be condemned with the wicked: the first part of
which Allegation I confess to be true, Gods judgments falling promiscuously on
all sorts of people: but the addition is unknown, and is not to be found in the
words of the Homily. And secondly, the Homily speaks not only of Gods temporal
judgments, with which the Elect be chastened as well as others, that they may
not for ever be condemned with the wicked; but positively and determinately, of
taking from them his Kingdom; and holy Word, as in the former, so that they
shall be no longer in his Kingdom, governed no longer by his holy Spirit, put
from the Grace and benefit which they had, etc.

But Master Yates intends not so to leave the matter, that though the godly do
fall, yet they walk not on purposely in sin, they stand not still to continue
and tarry in sin, they sit not down like careless men, Hom. of certain places
of Scripture. fol. 150.
without all fear of Gods just punishment for sin; through Gods great grace and
infinite mercy they rise again and fight against sin, etc. But first it may be
hoped that Master Yates could not be ignorant how great a difference there is
betwixt such passages as fall occasionally, and on the by, from the pen of a
Writer, discoursing on another Argument, and those which do occur in such
Discourses, Sermons, and other Tractates, as purposely are made and fitted to
the point in hand. And secondly, though it be affirmed in the said Homily, that
the godly man which shall add sin to sin, by Gods great grace and infinite
mercy may arise again and fight against sin: Yet can it not be gathered thence,
that it is so at all times, and in all such cases; that is to say, that neither
the great grace, nor his infinite mercy shall be wanting at any time unto such
as are fallen from God; or that man shall not be wanting to himself in making a
right use of it to his rising again. And then this passage in the Homily will
affirm no more to this purpose than the Article does; Art. 16.
where it is said, that after we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart
from grace given, and fall into sin, and by the grace of God (we may) arise
again and amend our lives.

Now to these testimonies from the Homilies, Lancelot Ridley Archdeacon of
Canterbury, who by his name seems to have had relation to Doctor Nicholas
Ridley Bishop of London, and by his office to Doctor Cranmer, Archbishop of
Canterbury; the two chief Agents in the work of the Reformation. This man had
published some Expositions on Saint Paul's Epistles to the Ephesians and
Philippians, as he did afterward on that to the Collossians also; which last
was printed by Richard Grafton, 1548. At which time both the first Liturgy, and
the first book of Homilies were in force and practice, and therefore was not
like to contain any point of Doctrine repugnant unto either of them. And if we
look upon him in his Comment upon the Epistle, we shall find him thus declare
himself in the points disputed; which I will lay all together, according to the
method formerly observed in setting down the Articles sor points themselves.
For first in reference to Election unto life eternal, he tells us, That all
fullness of the Father is said to dwell in Christ, Ridley in Col^s. cap. 1, 6.
that all men should know all the goodness they have to come of God by Christ
to them; and all that believe in Christ, should not perish, but be saved, and
should have life everlasting by Christ with the F^ther. Li^^ in cap. 2. P. 1.
And afterward speaking on those virtues which St. Paul commends in the Elect,
he tells us, That those virtues do show unto us who be elected of God, and who
not, as far as man can judge of outward things; and that those men may be
concluded to be elected of God who hate all vice and sin, that love virtue and
godly living, and in it do walk all their lifetime by true faith and works of
the spirit. 2. More plainly does he speak in the second place of Universal
Redemption, Id. in cap. 1, 6.
telling us that all men which either for their Original sin, or for their
Actual sin, were out of Gods favor, and had offended God, should by Christ
only be reconciled to Gods favor, and have remission of their sins, and be
made partakers of everlasting life; that Christ's death was a full and
sufficient satisfaction for the sins of the whole World, Id Ibid. (...). 1.
and for all them that shall be sanctified and saved; that Christ by his death
once for all, Id. Ibid. (...).
has fully and perfectly satisfied for the sins of all men; and finally, that
there re this is an undoubted truth, ever to be believed of all Christians,
that Christ by his Passion and Death has taken away all the sins of the World.

In the next place he puts the question with reference to the application of so
great a benefit, That it is a point not to be too curiously searched, or
enquired after. Secondly, That it is enough for us to know that it was so
ordered by Gods Will, Id. Ibid. G. 2, 3.
But thirdly, That it might yet be done, either because by their sins they had
deserved their blindness and damnation (as indeed they had) or that God saw
their hard hearts, or their stiff necks, and that they would not have received
it before Christ's comings, if the Gospel had been preached unto them; or
finally, that God reserved that mystery unto the coming of our Savior Christ,
that by him all goodness should be known to come to us, Id. cap. 2. H. 7.
etc. As for the necessary influences of Gods Grace, and man's co-working with
the same, he tells us briefly, That no man ought to ascribe the good works
that he does ^s himself, or to his own might and power, but to God the Author
of all goodness; but then withal, that it is not enough for men to have
knowledge of Christ and his benefits, but that they must increase in the
knowledge of God, Id^^. cap. 4.
which knowledge comes by Gods Word. And finally, as to the point of falling
away, he gives us first the example of Demas, who as long as all things were
prosperous with S. Paul, was a faithful Minister to him, and a faithful
Disciple of Christ; but when he saw Paul cast into Prison, he forsook Paul and
his Doctrine, and followed the World; then he infers that many such there be
in the World, etc. -- of whom speaks Christ, Matthew. 13. Many for a time do
believe, but in time of tribulations they shrink away. And finally he concludes
with this advice, That he that stands should look that he did not fall, and
that he do no trust too much to his own might and power; for if he did, he
should deceive himself, and have a fall as Demas had. And so much for the
judgment and opinion of Master L. Ridley in the points disputed, who being
Archdeacon of Canterbury, as before was said, may be presumed to be one of
those who concurred in Convocation to the making of the Articles of K. Edwards
book, 1552. to find the true and natural meaning of which Articles we have
taken this pains.

CHAP. XV. Of the Author and Authority of King Edwards Catechism, as also of
the judgment of Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr in the Points disputed.
1. The Catechism published by the Authority of King Edward VI. Ann. 1553.
affirmed to have been writ by Bishop Poinet, and countenanced by the rest of
the Bishops and Clergy. 2. Several passages collected out of that Catechism to
prove that the Calvinian Doctrines were the true, genuine, and ancient
Doctrines of the Church of England. 3. With a discovery of the weakness and
impertinency of the Allegation. 4. What may most probably be conceived to have
been the judgment of Bishop Pointer, in most of the Controverted Points. 5. An
Answer to another Objection derived from Mr. Bucer, and Peter Martyr; and the
influence which their Auditors and Disciples are supposed to have had in the
Reformation. 6. That Bucer was a man of moderate Counsels, approving the first
Liturgy of King Edward VI. assenting to the Papists at the Diet of Ratisbone,
in the possibility of falling from grace; and that probably Peter Martyr had
not so far espoused the Calvinian quarrels, when he lived in Oxon. as after his
return to Zurick and Calvin's Neighborhood. 7. The judgment of Erasmus,
according as it is delivered in his Paraphrases on the four Evangelists,
proposed first in the general view, and after more particularly in every of the
Points disputed.


SEcuri de salute, de gloria certemus: Tacit in vita Agric.
and backed by the consenting Testimonies of Learned men, and godly Martyrs, it
would add something at the least in point of Reputation, if not of glory also,
to gain Bishop Poinet to the side; of whom, as to his personal capacity we have
spoken already, and must now look back upon him in relation to a Catechism of
his setting forth, Printed by Wolf in Latin, and by Day in English, Anno
1553. being the next year after the Articles were agreed upon in the
Convocation; a Catechism which comes commended to us with these advantages,
that it was put forth by the Authority of King Edward VI. to be taught by all
Schoolmasters in the Kingdom. By another of the same persuasion, Prin.
Anti-Armin. Page 44.
that the King committed the perusal of it to certain Bishops, and other
Learned men, whom he much esteemed; by whom it was certified to be agreeable to
the Scripture, and Statutes of the Realm; that thereupon he presixt his Epistle
before it, in which he commands and charges all Schoolmasters whatsoever
within his Dominions, as they did reverence his Authority, Anti-Armin. Page. 48.
and as they would avoid his Royal displeasure, to teach this Catechism
diligently and carefully in all and every their Schools; that so the youth of
the Kingdom might be settled in the grounds of true Religion, and furthered in
Gods worship. The Church Historian seems to give it some further countenance,
Ch Hist. lib. 7. fol. 421.
by making it of the same extraction with the book of Articles, telling us that
by the Bishops and Learned men beforementioned, we are to understand the
Convocation; and that it was not commanded by his Majesty's Letters Patents to
all Schoolmasters only, but by him commended to the rest of the Subjects,
which cost these several Authors have bestowed upon it, out of an hope of
gaining some greater matter by it, toward the countenancing and advancing of
the Calvinian Doctrine, Predestination, as the true genuine and ancient
Doctrine of this Church; certain I am, that both Mr. Prin and his Shadow so
declare themselves; Anti-Armin. Page 48.
the one affirming that all these passages are directly for them, and
punctually opposite to their Arminian Antagonists; the other crying out with
some admiration, How do the Master and Scholar plainly declare themselves to b^
no friends to the Tenants which the English Arminians how contend for! but
notwithstanding all this cry, I fear we shall get but little wool, when we come
to consider of those passages in Poynets Catechism, which are most relied on,
and which h^re follow, as I find them in the Anti-arminianism, without
alteration of the words or syllables, though with some alteration in the method
of the Collection: Now the pass^ges collected out of Poynets Catechism, are
these that follow, viz.

The Image of God in man by original sin and evil custom, was so obscured in
the beginning, and the natural judgment so corrupted, Ca^^^^. Page 7.8, 12.
Page 9.
that man himself could not sufficiently understand the difference between good
and bad, between just and unjust, etc. As for the sacrificings, cleansings,
washings, and other Ceremonies of the Law, they were Shadows, Types, Images,
and Figures of the true and eternal sacrifice that Jesus Christ made upon the
Cross, by whose benefit alone all the sins of all Believers from the beginning
of the World are pardoned, by the sole mercy of God, Page 13.
and not by any merit of their own. As soon as ever Adam and Eve had eaten of
the forbidden fruit, they both died; that is, that they were not only liable to
the death of the body, but likewise lost the lise of the soul, which is
righteousness, and forthwith the Divine Image was obscured in them; and those
lineaments of Righteousness, Holiness, Truth, and knowledge of God, exceeding
comely, were disordered and almost obliterated; the terrene Image only
remained, coupled with unrighteousness, fraud, carnal affections, and great
ignorance of Divine and Heavenly things; from thence also proceeded the
infirmity of our flesh, from thence corruption and confusion of affections and
desires; hence that plague, hence that seminary and nutriment of sin, wherewith
all mankind is infected, which is called Original sin. Moreover, nature is
sodepraved and cast down, that unless the goodness and mercy of Almighty God
had helped us by the medicine of grace, as in body we were thrust down into all
the miseries of death, so it was necessary that all men of all sorts should be
cast into eternal torments and fire which cannot be quenched. ^e^. 18.
Those things which are spiritual are not seen but by the eye of the spirit: He
therefore that will see the Divinity of Christ on Earth, let him open the eyes,
not of the body, but of the mind, and of Faith, and he shall see him present,
whom the eye does not see, he shall see him present in the midst of them:
Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in his Name, he shall see him
present with us to the end of the World. What have I said, he shall see Christ
present! yea, he shall both see and feel him dwelling in himself no otherwise
than his own soul, for he does dwell and reside in the soul, and in the heart
of him who does place all his confidence in him.

Above all things this cannot be concealed, that the benefits which are brought
unto us by the Death, (...). 23.
the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, were so great and ample, that no
tongue either of men or Angels can express it, etc. From these, and from other
actions of Christ, two benefits do accrue unto us. One, that whatsoever he did,
he did it all for our profitand commodity; so that they are as much ours, if we
cleave fast to him with a firm and lively faith, as if we our selves had done
them. He verily was nailed to the Cross, and we are crucified with him, and our
sins are punished in him. He died and was buried; we likewise with our sins are
dead and buried; and that so, as that all the memory of our sins is utterly
abolished; he rose again, and we also are risen with him, being made partakers
of his resurrection and life, that henceforth death might no more domineer in
us: for there is the same Spirit in us that raised Jesus from the dead. Lastly,
as he ascended into Celestial glory, so we are exalted together with him. Fol.
30.
The Holy Ghost is called holy, not only for his own holiness, but because the
Elect of God, Fol. 31.
and the Members of Christ are made holy by him. The Church is the company of
them who are called to eternal life by the Holy Ghost, by whom she is guided
and governed; which time she cannot be understood by the light of sense or
nature, is justly placed amongst the number of those things which are to be
believed; and is therefore called the Catholic, that is the universal Assembly
of the faithful, F^^. 44, 45.
because it is not tied to any certain placed. God who rules and governs all
things, can do all things. No man is of so great power that he can so much as
withst and him, but he gives whatsoever he shall decree according to his own
pleasure; and those things which are given to us by him, he is able to take
them away.

After the Lord God had made the Heavens and Earth, (...) from Page 37. to 41.
and holy Commmon-wealth. The Apostles and Ancient Fathers that writ in Greek,
called it Ecclesia, in English a Congregation or Assembly, into the which he
has admitted an infinite number of men that should be subject to one King as
their Sovereign and only Head: him we call Christ, which is as much as to say
Anointed; or to the furnishing of this Commonwealth, belong all they, as many
as do truly fear, honor, and call upon God, daily applying their minds to holy
and godly living; and all those, that putting all their hope and trust in him,
do assuredly look for bliss of everlasting life. But as many as are in this
Faith steadfast, were fore-chosen, predestinate, and appoined to everlasting
life before the World was made, witness whereof they have within their hearts
the merit of Christ the Author, earnest and unfailable pledge of their Faith;
which Faith only is able to perceive the mysteries of God, only brings peace
unto the heart, only takes hold on the Righteousness which is in Christ Jesus.

Master. Does then the Spirit alone and Faith (sleep we never so securely, or
stand we never so reckless or slothful) work all things for us, as without any
help of our own to convey us to Heaven?


Scholar. Just Master (as you have taught me) to make a difference between the
Cause and the Effect. The first principal and most proper cause of our
Justification and Salvation, is the goodness and love of God, whereby he chose
us for his, before he made the World. After that, God grants us to be
calledby preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, when the Spirit of the Lord
is poured upon us; by whose guiding and governance we be led to settle our
trust in God, and hope for the performance of his promise. With this choice is
joined as companion, the mortifying of the Old man, that is, of our affections
and lusts, from the same Spirit also comes our Sanctification, the love of
God, and of our Neighbor, justice and uprightness of life. Finally, to say all
in sum, whatever is in us, or may be done of us, honest, pure, true, and good,
that altogether springs out of this most pleasant Rock, from this most
plentiful Fountain, the goodness, love, choice, and unchangable purpose of God;
he is the cause, the rest are the fruits and effects. Yet are also the choice
and Spirit of God, and Christ himself, causes conjoined and coupled each with
other; which may be reckoned amongst the principal causes of salvation. As often
therefore as we use to say that we are made righteous and saved by Faith only,
it is meant thereby, that faith, or rather trust alone, does lay hard upon,
understand, and perceive our righteous making to be given us of God freely;
that is to say, by no deserts of our own, but by the free grace of the Almighty
Father. Moreover, Faith does engender in us love of our Neighbor, and such
works as God is pleased withal: for if it be a lively and true faith quickened
by the Holy Ghost, she is the mother of all good saying and doing. By this
short tale it is evident by what means we attain to be righteous. For not by
the worthiness of our deservings were we heretofore chosen, or long ago saved,
but by the only mercy of God, and pure grace of Christ our Lord, whereby we
were in him made to do those good works that God had appointed for us to walk
in. And although good works cannot deserve to make us righteous before God, yet
do they so cleave unto Faith, that neither Faith can be found without them, nor
good works be any where found without Faith; Fol. 68.
immortality and bless life God has provided for his chosen, before the
foundations of the World were laid.


These are the passages which Mr. Prin has gathered out of Poynets Catechism,
Calvinism is the true, genuine, and original Doctrine of the reformed Church of
England, in the Points disputed; for my part, I can see no possible
inconvenience which can follow on it, in yielding so far to his desires, as to
admit the passages before recited to be fully consonant to the true genuine
sense, and proper meaning of all, but more especially of our 9, 10, 13, 16, and
17. Articles then newly composed; so that whatsoever is positively and clearly
affirmed in this Catechism of any of the Points now controverted, may be safely
implied as the undoubted Doctrine of our Church and Articles. For who can find,
if he looks upon them with a single and impartial eye, that all or any of the
passages before treated, can be made use of for the countenancing of such a
personal and eternal election, without relation unto sin, as is supposed by the
Supralapsarians, or without reference to Christ's death and sufferings, as is
defended by the Sublapsarians in the Schools of Calvin? What ground can a man
find here for the Horribile Decretum, that cruel and most unmerciful decree of
pre-ordaining the far greatest part of all mankind to everlasting damnation,
and consequently unto sin, that they might be damned? What passage find we in
all these, either in opposition to the Doctrine of Universal Redemption (though
that be before said to be here condemned) or in maintenance of the irresistible
working of the grace of God, as takes away all freedom and cooperation from
the will of man, and renders him as unable to his own conversion, as to the
work of his own being begotten to the life of nature; or to the raising of his
dead body to life of glory? And finally, what assurance is here, that the man
once justified shall not fall into deadly sin, or not continue in the same,
multiplying one sin upon another, till he has made up the measure of his
iniquities? and yet all this while remain in the favor of God, and be as sure
and certain of his own salvation by the like unresistible working of the holy
Spirit, as if he had never wandered from the ways of Righteousness! He must see
further into a Millstone than all men living, who can conclude from all, or
any of those passages, that the Zuinglian and Calvinian Doctrines (the Anti-
Arminian Doctrines, Antia^m.
as that Author calls them) are manifestly approved, and undeniably confirmed
by them, as the only ancient, established, and professed Doctrines of our
Church and Articles, or that can honestly affirm (as his echo does) that both
the Master and the Scholar declare themselves plainly in that Catechism, to be
no friends to any of the Tenants which those of the opposite side contend for.

Which said, (...) Faith. and (...).-arm. p. 102.
we will endeavor to find out Bishop Poynets judgment in the points disputed
(or so many of them at the least as are touched upon) as well from such
fragments as are offered to us in the Anti-Arminianism, as from such passages
as have been cunningly slipped over, of purpose to subduct them from the eye of
the Reader. And first, the Author lets us know that God created man after his
own Image, that is to say ( in ea absolutissima Justitia, and perfectissima
sanctimonia, etc.) in such a high degree of righteousness and perfect holiness
as came most near unto the nature of God himself; that this Divine image was so
defaced by the sin of our first Parents, Adam and Eve, that those lineaments of
righteousness, holiness, truth, and knowledge of God were disordered, and
almost obliterated; that man being in this wretched case, it pleased God to
raise him to a new hope of Restitution in the seed of the Woman; that is to
say, in Jesus Christ his only Son, conceived of the Holy Ghost, and born of the
pure and most immaculate Virgin Mary; the actions of whose life do so much
redound to our benefit and commodity, that if we cleave fast unto them with a
true and lively faith, they shall be as much ours as his; and finally, that as
many as are in this faith steadfast, were fore-chosen, predestinate, and
appointed to everlasting life before the world was made. 2. In the next place
he lets us know (which the Author has amongst his fragments) that the
sacrificings, cleansings, washings, and other Ceremonies of the Law were
Shadows, Types, Images, and Figures of the true and eternal Sacrifice of Jesus
Christ made upon the Cross; by whose benefit alone all the sins of all
Believers from the beginning of the World, are pardoned by the sore mercy of
God, and not by any deserts of their own, But then he lets us know withal
(which that Author does not) that he did truly die, and was truly buried, ut
iratum humano generi Patrem suavissimo sacrificio placaret, that by so sweet a
Sacrifice he might reconcile his angry and offended Father unto all Mankind.
3. In the third place, by asking this question, viz. Whether the Spirit alone,
and Faith, sleep we never so securely, or stand we never so wreckless or
slothful, work all things for us, as without any help of our own to carry us to
Heaven? He plainly shows first that some me there were who did so conceive
it, but that they were to be condemned for conceiving so of it. And secondly,
that all men were to lend a helping hand toward their salvation, not only by
laying hold on Christ with the hand of faith, but in being fruitful of good
works, without which, faith is neither to be reckoned true and lively, or
animated by the Holy Ghost. 4. He tells us finally, that the Chuch is the
company of them that are called to eternal life by the Holy Ghost, by whom she
is guided and governed. And yet it cannot but be feared that many of those who
are called to eternal life by the Holy Ghost, and cheerfully for a time obey
the calling, and live continually within the pale of the Church, which is
guided by the most bllessed Spirit, do fall away from God and the grace
received, and thereby bring themselves into a state of damnation from which
they never do recover by sincere repentance.

As little comfort can be drawn from that Argument, Martin Bucer, Godw. Annal.
in Edw. 6.
and Peter Martyr, by whose Disciples and Auditors they are alleged to have
been composed, or at the least by such as held consent with them in Doctrine;
but unto this it has been answered, that our first reformers were
Archbishops, Deans, and Archdeacons, most of them too old to be ut to School
again to either of them. Secondly, the first Liturgy of King Edward VI. which
was the Key to the whole work, was finished, confirmed, and put in execution
before either of them were brought over; dispatched soon after their arrival to
their several chairs; Martyr to the Divinity Lecture in Oxon, and Bucer unto
that of Cambridge where he lived not long. And dying so quickly as he did, (
Luctu Academiae, as my Author has it) though he had many Auditors there, yet
could he not gain many Disciples in so short a time. Thirdly, that though Peter
Martyr lived to see the Death of King Edward, and consequently the end of the
Convocation, Ann. 1552. in which the Articles of Religion were first composed
and agreed on; yet there was little use made of him in advising, and much less
in directing any thing which concerned that business; for being a stranger, and
but one, and such an one who had no Authority in Church or State, he could not
be considered as a Master Builder, though some use might be made of him as a
labourer to advance the work. And fourthly, as to their consent in point of
doctrine, it must be granted in such things, and in such things only in which
hey join together against the Papists, not in such points wherein those Learned
men agreed not between themselves, and therefore could be no foundation of
consent in others.

For they who have consulted the Lives and Writings of these Learned men, Bucer
having spent the most part of his time in the Lutheran Churches, was more
agreeable to the doctrines which were there maintained; as Martyr who was most
conversant amongst the Suitzers, showed himself more inclinable to the
Zuinglian or Calvinian Tenants, And it is generally observed also that Bucer
was a man of moderate counsel, and for that received a check from Calvin, at
his first coming hither, putting him in remembrance of his old fault (for a
fault he thought it) Mediis consiliis Autorem esse vel approbatorem, of being
an Author, or an approver of such moderate courses as the hot and fiery temper
of the Calvinists could by no means like. And governing himself with such
moderation, he well approved of the first Liturgy, translated into Latin by
Alexander Alesius a learned Scot, that he might be the better able to
understand the composure of it, and pass his judgment on the same accordingly.
And yet it cannot bedenied, but that there are many passages in the first
Liturgy which tend directly to the maintenance of universal Redemption by the
death of Christ, of the cooperation of man's will with the grace of God, and
finally of the possibility of falling from that grace, and other the benefits
and fruits thereof before received. In which last point it is affirmed that he
amongst some others of the Protestant Doctors, assented to the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome at the Diet at Ratisbone. And it is more than probable that
Peter Martyr was not Peter Martyr, I mean that he was not the same man as the
Zuinglian and Calvinian Doctrine is, and his espousing the same being here as
he was after his departure, when he had spent some further time amongst the
Suitzers, and was thereby grown a nearer neighbor unto Calvin than he was in
England. For whereas his book of Common-Places, Anti-arm. p. 79.83, 94, 102,
103, 108, etc.
and his Commentary to St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, are most insisted on
for the proof of his Calvinism; it appears plainly by his Epistle to Sir
Anthony Coke, that the last was not published till the year 1558. which was
more than five years after his leaving of this Kingdom. And as for his book of
Common-Places, although it was Printed first at London, yet it received
afterward two impressions more, the one at Zurick, and the other at Basil,
before the last Edition of it by Massonius after his decease, Ann. 1576. By
which Edition, being that which is in Oxon Library, and probably remaining only
in the hands of Students, or in the private Libraries of Colleges, it will be
hard, if not impossible, to judge of his opinion in these points, when he lived
in England.

And now Iam fallen amongst these strangers, Erasmus in the English tongue,
Vide Chap. 8. Sect. 3. and Chap. 17. Sect. 4.
which certainly had never been commended to the reading both of Priest and
People, as well by the injunctions of Queen Eliz. as K. Edw. VI. if they had
contained in them any other Doctrine than what is consonant to the Articles,
the Homilies, and the public Liturgy of this Church. Paraph. Erasm. fol. 434.
Now in his Paraphrase on the third Chapter of St. John, v. 16. we shall find
it thus. Who (says he) would have believed the charity of God to have been so
great toward the world, being rebellious against him, and guilty of so many
great faults; that not only he did not revenge the ungracious acts that had
been committed therein, but also sent down his only Son from Heaven unto Earth,
and delivered him to suffer death, yea, even the most shamesful death of the
Crossed, to the intent that what man soever would believe in him, were he Jew,
Grecian, or never so barbarous, should not perish, but obtain eternal life
through the faith of the Gospel. For albeit, that in time to come the Father
should judge the universal World by his Son at his l^st coming; yet at this
time which is appointed for mercy, God has not sent his Son to condemnn the
World for the wicked deeds thereof, but by his death to give free salvation to
the world through says. And lest any body perishing wilfully should have
whereby to exercise his own malice, there is given to all folks an easy entry
to salvation. For satisfaction of the faults committed before, is not required.
Neither yet observation of the Law, nor circumcision; only he that believes in
him shall not be condemned, for as much as he has embraced that thing, by which
eternal salvation is given to all folk, be they never so much burdened with
sins, so that the same person after he has professed the Gospel, do abstain
from the evil deeds of his former life, and labor to go forward to perfect
holiness, according to the doctrine of him whose name he has professed. But
whosoever condemning so great charity of God toward him, and putting from
himself the salvation that was freely offered, does not believe the Gospel, he
has no need to be judged of any body, for as much as he does openly condemn
himself; and rejecting the thing whereby he might obtain everlasting life,
makes himself guilty of eternal pain.

By which passages and the rest that follow on this Text of Scripture,
designation of eternal life to all that do believe in Christ, the universality
of Redemption by his death and passion, the general offer of the benefit and
effect thereof to all sorts of people; the freedom of man's will in cooperating
with the grace of God, or in rejecting and refusing it when it is so offered,
and relapsing from the same when it is received. All which we find in many
other passages of those Paraphrases, as occasion is presented to him. But more
particularly it appears, first, that he groundeth our Election to eternal life,
on the eternaland divine prescience of Almighty God; telling us in his
Explication of the 25. Chap. of Sain Matthews Gospel, Ibid. fol. 96.
that the inheritance o the heavenly Kingdom was prepared by the providenceand
determination of God the fore-knower of all things before the World was made.
Secondly, of Universal Redemption, in his gloss on the first Chap. of Saint
John, Ibid. fol. 414.
he tells us thus: This Lamb (says he) is so far from being subject to an
kind of sin, that he alone is able to take away all the sins of the whole
World. He is so well beloved of God, that he only may turn his wrath into
mercy; He is also so gentle, and so desirous of man's salvation, that he is
ready to suffer pains for the sins of all men, and to take upon him our evils,
because he would bestow upon us his good things. Thirdly, of the manner of the
working of Gods grace, he speaks as plainly in his Explication of the sixth
Chap. of the same Evangelist; where he tells us, that of a truth whosoever
comes unto Christ, shall obtaineternal life; that by faith must men come to
him, and that faith comes not at all adventures, Ibid. fol. 443.
but is had by the inspiration of God the Father, who like as he draws to him
men's minds by his Son, in such wife that through the operation of both jointly
together, men come to them both: the Father not giving this so great gift, but
to them that be willing and desirous to have it; so that who with a ready will
and godly diligence, deserves to be drawn of the Father, he shall obtain
everlasting life by the Son. No violent drawing in these words, but such as may
be capable of resistance on the part of man, as appears by his descant on that
plain Song of our Savior in Matt. 23. in which he makes him speaking in this
manner unto those of Jerusalem, viz. Nothing is let pass on my behalf, whereby
thou might be saved: but contrariwise thou have done what thou can to
bring destruction upon thy self, Ibid. fol. 90.
and to exclude salvation from thee. But to whom Freewill is once given, he
cannot be saved against his will. Your will ought to be agreeable to my Will,
But behold as miserable calamity, etc. More plainly thus in the like descant on
the same words in Saint Lukes Gospel, viz. How many a time and often have I
assaved to gather thy children together, and to join them to my self, none
otherwise than the Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, that they may
not miscarry! But thy stubbornness has gone beyond my goodness, and as though
thou had even vowed and devoted thy self to utter ruin,so do thou refuse
all things whereby thou might be recovered and made whole. And finally, as
to the possibility of falling from the faith of Christ, he thus declares
himself in the Exposition of our Saviors Parable, touching the Sower and the
seed, viz. There is another sort of men which greedily hear the word of the
Gospel, Ibid. fol. ^.
and set it deep enough in their mind, and keep it long; but their minds being
entangled and choked with troublesome cares of this World, and especially of
Riches (as it were with certain thick thorns) they cannot freely follow that he
loves; because they will not suffer these Thorns which cleave together, and be
entangled one with another among themselves, to be cut away, the fruit of the
seed which is sown does utterly perish. Which being so, either we must conclude
the doctrine of this Church in the book of articles to be the same with that
which is contained in the Paraphrases of this learned man or else condemn the
godly Bishops of this Church, and the religious Princes above mentioned, of a
great imprudence in recommending them to the diligent and careful reading both
of Priest and People.

Historia Quinqu-Articularis: OR, A DECLARATION Of the Judgment of the
WESTERN-CHVRCHES, And more particularly of the CHURCH of ENGLAND, In the Five
Controverted Points.
PART III. Containing the first Breakings out of the Predestinarians, in the
Church of England, and the pursuance of those Quarrels, from the Reign of K.
EDWARD the sixth, to the death of K. JAMES.
CHAP. XVI. Of the first breakings out of the Predestinarians, and their
Proceedings in the same.
1. The Predestinarians called at first by the name of Gospellers. 2. Campneys
a professed enemy to the Predestinarians, but neither Papist nor Pelagian. 3.
The common practices of the Calvinists to defame their Adversaries, the name of
Freewill-men, to whom given, why. 4. The Doctrine of John Knox, in restraining
all men's actions either good or evil, to the determinate Will and Counsel of
God. 5. The like affirmed by the Author of the Table of Predestination; in
whom, and the Genevian Notes, we find Christ to be excluded from being the
foundation of man's Election, and made to be an inferior cause of salvation
only. 6. God made to be the Author of sin, by the Author of a Pamphlet,
entitled against a Privy Papist, and his secret Counsels called in for the
proof thereof both by him and Knox, with the mischiefs which ensued upon it. 7.
The Doctrine of Robert Crowly, imputing all men's sins to Predestination, his
silly defenses for the same, made good by a distinction of John Verons, and the
weakness of that distinction showed by Campneys. 8. The Errors of the former
Authors opposed by Campneys, his book in answer to those Errors, together with
his Orthodoxy in the point of universalRedemption, and what he builds upon the
same. 9. Hissolid Arguments against the imputing of all actions either good or
evil to Predestination; justified by a saying of Prosper of Aquitaine. 10. The
virulent prosecutions of Veron and Crowly, according to the Genius of the sect
of Calvin.


THUS we have seen the Doctrine of the Church of England in the Five
Controverted Points, Enward the sixth, busily stickled in the maintenance of
Calvin's Doctrins. And thinking themselves to be more Evangelical than the rest
of their Brethren, they either took unto themselves (or had given by others)
the name of Gospellers. Of this they were informed by the reverend Prelate, and
right godly Martyr, Bishop Hooper, in the Preface to his Exposition of the Ten
Commandments: Our Gospellers (says he) be better learned than the holy Ghost,
for they wickedly attribute the cause of Punishments and Adversity to Gods
Providence, which is the cause of no ill, as he himself can do no ill: and over
every mischief that is done, they say it is Gods Will. In which we have the men
and their Doctrine too, the name of Gospellers, and the reason why that name
was ascribed unto them. It is observed by the judicious Author of the Book,
called Europae Speculum that Calvin was the first of these latter times who
searched into the Counsels (the Eternal Counsels) of Almighty God. And as it
seems he found there some other Gospel than that which had been written by the
four Evangelists: from whence his followers in these Doctrines had the name of
Gospellers: for by that name I find them frequently called by Campneys also in
an Epistolary Discourse, where he clears himself from the crimes of Popery and
Pelagianism, which some of these new Gospellers had charged upon him; which had
I found in none but him, it might have been ascribed to heat or passion in the
agitation of these Quarrels: but finding it given to them also by Bishop Hooper
(a temperate and modest man) I must needs look upon it as the name of the Sect,
by which they were distinguished from other men.

And now I am fallen upon this Campneys; England in the present points, but of
a sharp and eager spirit. And being not well weaned from some points of Popery
in the first dawning of the day, of our Reformation, he gave occasion unto some
of those whom he had exasperated to inform against him, that they prosecuted
the complaint so far, that he was forced to bear a faggot at St. Paul's Cross
(as the custom was in all such cases) Miles Coverdale, then or not long after
Bishop of Exon, preaching a Sermon at the same. But whatsoever he was then in
other Doctrinals, he has sufficiently purged himself from the crimes of Popery
and Pelagianism, wherewith he had been charged by those of the adverse Party.
Answer to a certain Letter. p. 3.
For whereas one William Samuel had either preached or written in Queen Mary's
times, That a man might deserve God, etc. Campneys beholds it for a Doctrine so
blasphemous and abominable, that neither Papists nor Pelagians, nor any other
Heretic old or new has ever-written or maintained a more filthy and execrable
saying. For it is the flat and manifest denying both of God the Father, and of
his Son Christ Jesus: neither does it require any confutation to him that does
but confess that there is a God. And as for my self, says he, I do not love my
life so dearly, as I hate this vile saying deadly. He gives not long after to
the Popish Pelagians the name of a filthy and detestable Sect. p. 5. mustereth
up all the errors of Pelagius, which had been publicly recanted in the Synod
of Palestine, and falling upon that which teaches, That the grace of God is
given according unto our deserving; he declares it to be vile and abominable,
contrary to the manifest mind and words of the Apostle, p. 12. Finally, Not to
trouble my self with more particulars, encountering with another of the Pelagian
Heresies, he passionately cries out, O blasphemy intolerable! O filthy puddle,
and sink most execrable! full of stinking Errors, full of damnable
presumption, like to the pride of Lucifer, most abominable, p. 15.

This is enough to free this man from being either a Papist or Pelagian
Heretic, Enemy to Gods Predestination, I conceive it will not be regarded as a
matter of moment, considering the Disputes between them, and the usual acts of
the Calvinians to defame their Adversaries. We showed before, how Bogerman,
Paraeus, and the rest of the Calvinian Sect, reproached the Remonstrants with
Pelagianism in their public Writings, though as free from it as themselves. We
showed before, how Cross in the continuation of his Belgic History imposes on
them for some of their detestable Opinions, that they made God to be the Author
of sin, and that he had created the infinitely greatest part of mankind to no
other end, but to burn them in Hellfire for ever: which horrid blasphemies
they both abominated and confuted to their best abilities. The like unworthy
practices, were used by Calvin and Beza, against Sebastian Castle, a man of no
less learning, but of far more modesty and moderation than either of them; whom
they never left persecuting and reviling, till they had first cast him out of
Geneva, and afterward brought him to his grave. And this they did unto a man
both of parts and piety upon no other pretense or provocation whatever, but
because he maintained another way of predestination than that which they had
taught their followers for Gods Truth and Gospel. And therefore it can be no
wonder if the new Gospellers in England pursued the same courses against all
those who opposed their fancies. For being governed by this spirit, they taxed
their opposits sometimes for being haters of Gods Predestination, as before is
said, though entire lovers of the same, Answer to a certain Letter. p. 16.
reviled them by the names of Popish Pelagians, and justifiers of themselves,
imputing to those men the whole mass of Pelagianism, who from their very hearts
and souls abhorred all their wicked Opinions, and have been many years willing
to bestow their lives against all their abominable Errors. And sometimes
finally they call them Free Will men. in contempt and scorn; designing by that
name not the Papist only, but such of their own Mothers Children also, as
taught that Cain was not predestinate to slay his Brother, Id. p. 56.
and that God has not predestinate any man to the committing of Murder, or any
such like wicked abominations.

Which being said, and the credit of the man set right, Knox, that great
Incendiary of the Nation and Kirk of Scotland, who in a book of his published
in the end of King Edward's, or the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, against an
Adversary of Gods Predestination, as the Title tells us. First builds the
Doctrine of Predestination unto Gods absolute Will, without relation to man's
sin, or our Saviors suffering: and then ascribes unto the predeterminate
Counsel and Will of God, all humane actions whatsoever.

In reference to the first he was of their opinion plainly, who building upon
the example of Esau, exclude all that is in man, either original sin or actual,
from the cause of Gods hate, which they lay on his own pleasure only; which
Knox endeavors to make good by this following Argument, p. 141. That if Esau
was hated for his evil deserving, then must needs follow, that Jacob was loved
for his well-deserving, Page 48.
the Argument following, as he says, by the rule of contraries. What
superstructure he has raised upon this foundation? Assuredly no better nor no
worse than this, That the wicked are not only left by Gods suffering, but
compelled to sin by his power, p. 317. More copiously, but not more plainly in
another place, fol. 158. where it is affirmed, That whatsoever the Ethnicks and
Ignorants did attribute unto fortune, we Christians do assign to the Providence
of God, that we should judge nothing of fortune, Id. p. 22.
but that all comes by the determination of his Counsel; and finally, that it
displeases him when we esteem any thing to proceed from any other: so that
(says he) we not only behold and know him to be the principal cause of all
things, but also the Author appointing all things to the one part, or to the
other by his Counsel. In which last, if he make not God the Author of sin (as I
think he does) we shall very shortly find another that will.

So able a Leader as John Knox could not want followers of all Nations to
attend upon him: in the Catalogue or list whereof, Id. p. 36.
we must first look upon the Author of a Treatise written in French, and
published afterward in English, entitled, A brief Declaration of the Table of
Predestination, in which it is affirmed expressly, That seeing God has
appointed the end, it is necessary also that he should appoint the causes
leading to the same end; as if he should have said (says Campneys) that as God
has appointed some man to be hanged, so he has appointed him also to steal,
as a cause leading to the same end, to which by God he is appointed. The same
French English Author lets us know in another place, That by virtue of Gods
Will all things were made; yea, P. 45.
even those things which are evil and execrable: Which execrable saying he
endeavors to palliate with this distinction, That those evil execrable
things which are wrought by the virtue of Gods Will, are not evil and
execrable, in that they are wrought by his divine Counsel: P. 63.
but for as much as they proceed from the Prince of the air And as for the
foundation of Election to eternal life, he lays it not on the free Mercy of
God in Christ, which he affirms to be no other, but an inferior cause thereof;
but teaches us to ascend unto an higher cause, that is to say, to the eternal
purpose and predestination of God, which he determined only in himself. Conform
to which we find in the Genevian Bibles this marginal note, amongst many others
of like nature, viz. As the only Will and purpose of God is the chief cause of
Election and Reprobation; so his free mercy in Christ is an inferior cause of
salvation, etc. Romans 9.

In the next place comes out a Pamphlet, entitled Against a privy Papist; That
all evil springs out of Gods Ordinance, or that Gods Predestination was the
cause of Adams fall, and of all wickedness. Now this man goes to work like a
Logician, and frames his Syllogism in this manner, viz.

That whatsoever was in Adam, Major.
was in him by Gods Will and Ordinance.

But sin was in Adam. Minor.


Ergo, Sin was in him by Gods Will and Ordinance.

Of which Syllogism Campneys very well observes, that if the major of it be
understood of Adam after his fall, (as by the minor it must be) then may it be
affirmed also of any other, that whatsoever execrable wickedness is in him, the
same is in him by Gods Will and Ordinance. But then because it might be asked,
that seeing it is the Decree, Ordinance, and Will of God that man should not
sin; how they should creep into that secret Council, Ibid. p. 43.
where God ordained, decreed, and willed the contrary? The leader will come in
to help his followers in the present plunge; for in his traiterous and
seditious Libel, Against the Regiment of Women (which he calls, The first blast
of the Trumpet) he knows not how to shift off the obedience due by Gods word to
lawful Queens in their several Kingdoms, but by flying to some special
Revelation from his secret will, not publicly communicated to the Sons of men:
And this he speaks not faintly, but with zeal and confidence, telling us who
assured him, that God has revealed to some in our Age, (that is to say,
himself and his Disciples in the holy Presbytery) that it is more than a
Monster in nature, that a Woman should Rule and have Empire against man. And
what could they do less, upon this assurance, upon so plain a Revelation of
Gods secret Will, than take up Arms against the Queen, depose her from her
Throne, expel her out of her native Kingdom, and finally prosecute her to the
very death. The Ladder which Constantine the great commended to Assesius a
Novatian Bishop, for his safer climbing up to Heaven, was never more made use
of than by Knox and Calvin, for mounting them to the sight of Gods secret
Council, which St. Paul calls (...), or things unspeakable, such as are neither
possible nor lawful for a man to utter.

But of all Knox's followers, To. Crowly, a fugitive for Religion in Q. Mary's
days, and the Author of a Book called a Confutation of 13 Articles, Ibid. p. 18.
etc. In which he lays the sin of Adam (and consequently all men's sins from
that time to this) upon the Absolute Decree of Predestination; for seeing
(says he) that Adam was so perfect a Creature that there was in him no lust to
sin; and yet withal so weak of himself, that he was not able to withstand the
assault of the subtle Serpent; no remedy, the only cause of his fall must
needs be the Predestination of God. In other places of this book he makes it to
be a common saying of the Free Will men (as in contempt and scorn he calls
them) that Cain was not Predestinate to slay his Brother; Ibid. p. 2. ^.
which makes it plain that he was otherwise persuaded in his own opinion: That
the most wicked persons that have been, whereof God appointed to be even as
wicked as they were, that if God do predestinate a man to do things rashly and
without any deliberation, he shall not deliberate at all; but run headlong upon
it, Ibid. p. 2. 6.
be it good or evil: That we are compelled by Gods predestination to do those
things for which we are damned: Ibid. 2.7. Ibid. 46.
And finally, finding this Doctrine to be charged with making God more cruel
and unmerciful than the greatest Tyrant, and pressed therewith by some of the
contrary persuasion, he returns his answer in this wise, If God (says he) were
an inferior to any superior power, to the which he ought to render an account
of his doing, or if any of us were not his Creatures, but of another Creation
besides his workmanship, then might we charge him with Tyranny, because he
condemns us, and appointed us to be punished for the things we do by
compulsion, through the necessity of his Predestination. For a Catholicon, or
general Antidote, to which dangerous Doctrines, a new distinction was devised,
Ibid. p. 4. 47.
by which, in all abominations God was expressly said to be the Author of the
fact or deed, but not of the crime; which subtilty appears amongst many
others in a brief Treatise of Election and Reprobation, published by one John
Veron in the English tongue, Ibid. p. 32.
about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; which subtilty, Campneys
not unfitly calls, a mavelous sophistication, a strange Paradox, and a
cautelous Riddle, and he seems to have good reason for it. For by this Doctrine
(as he notes) it must follow, that God is the Author of the very fact and deed
of Adultery, Theft, Murder, etc. but not the Author of the sin; Sin having, as
they say, no positive entity, but being a mere nothing as it were, and
therefore not to be ascribed to Almighty God: And thereup on he does infer,
that when a Malefactor is hanged for any of the facts before said, he is hanged
for nothing, because the fact or deed is ascribed to God, and the sin only
charged on him, which sin being nothing in it self, it must be nothing that the
Malefactor is condemned or hanged for.

By all the Books it does appear what method of Predestination these new
Gospellers drive at, Calvin in case they did not go beyond him. Certain it is
that they all speak more plainly than their Master does; as to the making of
God to be the Author of sin; though none of them speak any thing else, than
what may Logically be inferred from his ground and principles. And by this book
it appears also, now contrary these Doctrins are, to the established by the
first Reformers in the Church of England; how contrary the whole method of
Predestination out of which they flow, is to that delivered in the Articles,
the Homilies, and the public Liturgy, and witnessed too, by so many learned
men and godly Martyrs. Which manifest deviation from the rules of the Church,
as it gave just offense to all moderate and sober men, so amongst others unto
Campneys before remembered; who could not but express his dislike thereof, and
for so doing was traduced for a Pelagian and a Papist, or a Popish Pelagian.
For which being charged, by way of Letter, he was necessitated to return an
Answer to it which he published in the second or third year of Queen Elizabeth.
In which Answer he not only clears himself from favoring the Pelagian Errors
in the Doctrine of Freewill, Justification by Works, etc. but solidly and
learnedly refuteth the Opinions of certain English Writers and Preachers; whom
he accuses for teaching of false and scandalous Doctrine, under the name of
Predestination; Ibid. p. 10. Romans 5.
for his preparation whereunto he states the point of Universal Redemption by
the death of Christ, out of the parallel which St. Paul has made between
Christ and Adam; that by the comparison of condemnation in Adam, and redemption
in Christ, it might more plainly be perceived, that Christ was not inferior to
Adam, nor grace to sin; And that as all the generation of man is condemned in
Adam, so is all the generation of man redeemed in Christ: and as general a
Savior is Christ by Redemption, as Adam is a condemner by transgression. Which
ground so laid, he shows how inconsistent their Opinions are to the truth of
Scripture, who found the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation on Gods absolute
pleasure; by which infinitely the greatest part of all mankind is
precedaniously excluded from having any part or interess in this Redemption,
reprobated to eternal death, both in body and soul: as the examples of his
vengeance, and consequently preordained unto sin, as the means unto it, that so
his vengeance might appear with the face of Justice. Which preordaining unto
sin, as it does necessarily infer the laying of a necessity upon all men's
actions, whether good or bad, according to that predeterminate Counsel and Will
of God; so these good men, the Authors of the books before remembered, do
expressly grant it, acknowledging that God does not only move men to sin, but
compel them to it, by the inevitable rules of Predestination.

But against this it is thus discoursed by the said Campneys: cause of Adams
fall, and filthy sin: Ibid. p. 51.
And consequenty the only cause and worker of all evil: yea even with
compulsion and force (as they shamefully and plainly affirm) then will no man
deny, but that (on the other side) Gods Predestination works as violently in
all things that are good: so then if Gods Predestination work all, without all
exception, both in evil and good; then all other things whatsoever they be,
although they all appear to work and do some things; yet do they indeed utterly
nothing. So that the Devil does nothing, Man does nothing, Laws do nothing,
Doctrine does nothing, Prayer does nothing: but Gods Predestination does all
together, and is the efficient cause, yea and the only cause of all things. He
further proves, that according unto this position, August. Retrac. l. a. c. 9.
and 11.
they hold the Error both of the Stoics, as also of the Manicheans; that is
to say, Ibid. p. 26.
( as St. Augustine declares) that evil has his original of Gods Ordinance,
and not of man's freewill; for if Murderers, Adulterers, Thieves, Traitors, and
Rebels, be of God predestined and appointed to be wicked, (even as they are)
cannot choose but of mere necessity by the Ordinance of God, commit all such
wickedness even as they do: then what is our life but a mere destiny? All our
doing Gods Ordinances; and all our imaginations, branches of Gods
Predestination? And then we must have Thieves by Predestination, Whoremasters,
and Adulterers by Predestination, Murderers, and Traitors by Predestination,
and indeed, what not: if all men's actions are necessitated by the Will of God,
and so necessitated that they can neither do less evil, nor more good than they
do, though they should never so much endeavor it, as some of our Calvinians
teach us, which Opinion, as Campneys has observed, Ibid. p. 45.
is condemned by Prosper of Aquitane in his defense of St. Augustine, in these
following words: Predestinationem dei, sive ad malum, sive ad bonum, etc.
Prosp. 1. Resp. ad Object. Gal. 6.
That the predestination of God (says he) does work in all men either into
good or into evil, is most foolishly said. As though a certain necessity,
should drive men unto both: seeing in good things the evil is not to be
understood wthout grace, and in evil things the evil is to be understood
without grace. And so much touching Campneys, and his performance in the points
against the Gospellers, some passages having before been borrowed from him,
concerning Lambert, Gynnel, and his Adherents. For which see, Chap. 6. Numb. 11.

No sooner was this book come out, Calvinian party within this Realm; which had
been very much increased by the retiring of so many of our learned men to the
Zuinglian and Genevian Churches in Queen Mary's days, amongst which none more
eager, (because more concerned) than Veron, Crowly above mentioned. The first
of these, being reader of the Divinity Lecture in the Church of St. Paul's, and
one of the Chaplains to the Queen, published his Answer shortly after, called,
An Apology or Defense of the Doctrine of predestination and dedicated to the
Queen: in which Answer he gives his Adversary no better Titles, than the blind
guide of the free will men. p. 37. A very Pelagian, and consequently a Rank
Papist, p. 40. Suffering the Devil, by such sectaries as Campneys to sow his
lies abroad, etc. and 41. The Standard Bearer of the free will men; His book he
calls a venomous and Railing book, upbraids him with his bearing of a faggot in
King Edwards days; and challenging him, that if he be able to maintain his own
Doctrine, and oppose that in the answer to it, let him come forth and play the
man. Nor was it long before another Answer came out by the name of Crowly,
called an Apology or defense, of the English Writers and Preachers, with
Cerberus the three headed dog of Hell, Charge with false Doctrine, under the
name of Predestination, printed at London in the year 1566. And by the Title of
this Book, as we may see with what a strange Genius the Gospellers or
Calvinians were possessed from the first beginning, we may well conjecture at
the Gentle usage, which the poor man was like to find in the whole Discourse.
But if it be objected in favor of these two books, that they were published by
Authority and according to Order; when that of Campneys, seems to have been
published by stealth without the Name of Author or of Printer, as is affirmed
in Verons book before remembered; It may be since answered, that the Doctrine of
the Church was then unsettled, the Articles of King Edwards time being generally
conceived to be out of force, and no new established in their place, when Veron
first entered on the cause. And secondly it may be answered, that though
Crowlyes Apology came not out till the year 1566, when the new Articles were
agreed upon, yet his Treatice called a Confutation of thirteen Articles, which
gave occasion to the Quarrel, had been written many years before. And he
conceived himself obliged to defend his Doctrine, and get as good countenance
to it as he could within a time, especially intent on suppressing Popery, might
be no hard matter for him to do. And as to that part of the Objections which
relate to Campneys, and his suppessing of his Name, I look upon it as a high
part of wisdom in him, in regard of the great sway which the Calvinians had at
their first coming over, the prejudice conceived against him for his slips and
sufferings in the Reign of K. Edward, and the Authority of the men against whom
he writ. Veron a Chaplain to the Queen, Crowly of great esteem in London for
his diligent preaching, and Knox the great Directer of the Kirk of Scotland.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Disputes among the Confessors in Prison in Queen Mary's
days, and the Resetling of the Church on her former Principles under Queen
Elizabeth.
1. The Doctrine of Predestination disputed amongst the Confessors in Prison in
Queen Mary's days. 2. The Examination of John Carelese before Dr. Martin, in
reference to the said Disputes. 3. Considerations on some passages in the
Conference betwixt Dr. Martin and the said John Carelese. 4. Review made of the
public Liturgy by the command of Queen Elizabeth, and the Paraphrases of
Erasmus commended to the reading both of Priest and People. 5. The second book
of Homilies how provided for, and of the liberty taken by the Gospellers and
Zuinglian Sectaries, before the reviewing and confirming of the Book of
Articles, by the Queens Authority. 6. Of the reviewing and authority of the
Book of Articles, Anno 1562. and what may be from thence inferred. 7. An answer
from the Agreement drawn from the omitting the ninth Article of King Edwards
Book, the necessity of giving some content to the Zuinglian Gospellers, and
difficulty wherewith they were induced to subscribe the Book, at the first
passing of the same. 8. The Argument taken from some passages in the English
Catechism, set forth by Mr. Alexander Nowel, and the strength thereof. 9.
Several considerations on the said Catechism, and the rest of the Authors
making; and what his being Prolocutor in the Convocation might add to any of
them in point of Orthodoxy. 10. Nothing to be collected out of the first
passage in Mr. Nowels Catechism, in favor of the Calvinian Doctrine of
Predestination, and the points depending thereupon, and less than nothing in
the second, if it be understood according to the Authors meaning; and the
determination of the Church.


MORE calmly, England, were the same points, disputed in Queen Mary's days,
amongst the Confessors in Prison, which coming to the knowledge of the Queen and
her Councli, a Commission was granted to one Dr. Martin (a busy man in all
such matters as appears by the story) to make enquiry, amongst many other
things, into this particular; and he according to the power given by the
Commission, convents before her one John Carelese, born at Coventry, of no
better quality than a Weaver, yet one that was grown very able to express
himself, when the matter came to examination: by which Examination it appears,
that as Carelese somewhat differed in the Doctrine of Predestination, and the
point depending thereupon from the Church assembled, according as it was
established in King Edwards time; so True, another of the Prisoners (but of
what quality or condition, I was yet to seek) seems more inclinable to that
Opinion, if Carelese understood them rightly, which was defended all that time
by the Popish Clergy. And that the Reader may perceive the better how the
difference stood: I shall lay down so much of the Conference, between Dr.
Martin and the Prisoner, as concerns this business, leaving the Reader to
admire at Gods infinite goodness, giving poor unlettered men such a measure of
Christian courage, as might enable them to speak both stoutly and discreetly in
their greatest troubles. Now the said Conference was as follows.

2. The Examination of John Carelese before Dr. Martin.

Martin. Carelese, I could wish that thou would play the Wise man's part, Act.
and Mon. fol. 1742.
thou art a handsome man, and it is pity but that thou should do well, and
save that God has bought.


Carelese, I think your good Mastership most heartily, and I put you out of
doubt, that I am most sure and certain of my salvation by Jesus Christ: so that
my Soul is safe already, what pains soever my body suffer here for a little
time.


Martin. Yea, marry you say truth, for thou art so predestinate to life that
thou can not perish in whatsoever Opinion thou do die.


Carelese, That God has predestinate me to eternal life in Jesus Christ, I am
most certain; and even so I am sure that his holy Spirit (wherewith I am
sealed) will so preserve me from all Heresies and evil Opinions, that I shall
die in none at all.


Martin. Go to, let me hear your faith in Predestination, for that shall be
written also.


Carelese, Your Mastership shall pardon me herein, for you said your self ere
while, that you had no Commission to examine my Conscience.


Martin. I tell thee I have a Commission, yea, and a Commandment from the
Council to examine thee of such things as be in Controversy between thee and
thy fellows in the Kings Bench, whereof Predestination is a part as thy fellow
has confessed, and thy self do not deny it.


Carelese, I do not deny it, but he that first told you that matter, might have
found himself much better occupied.


Martin. Why? I tell thee truth, I may now examine thee of any thing that I
list.


Carelese, Then let your Scribe set his Pen to the paper, and you shall have it
roundly, as the truth is; I believe that Almighty God, our most dear loving
Father, of his great mercy, and infinite goodness (through Jesus Christ) did
elect and appoint in him before the foundation of the Earth was laid, a Church
or Congregation, which he does continually guide and govern by his Grace and
holy Spirit, so that not one of them all ever finally perish. When this was
written, Mr. Doctor took it in his hand, saying.


Martin. Why? who will deny this?


Carelese, If you Mastership do allow it, and other Learned men, when they
shall see it, I have my hearts desire.


Martin. Did you hold no otherwise than is there written?


Carelese, No verily, no never did.


Martin. Write that he says otherwise he holds not; (so that was written) it
was told me also, that thou do affirm that Christ did not die effectually for
all men.


Carelese, Whatsoever has been told you, is not much material, for indeed I do
believe that Christ did effectually die for all those that do effectually
repent and believe, and for none other; so that was written.


Martin. Now Sir, what is Trews faith of Predestination? he believes that all
men be Predestinate, and that none shall be damned, does he not?


Carelese, No forsooth, that he does not.


Martin. How then?


Carelese, I think he does believe as your Mastership, and the rest of the
Clergy do believe of Predestination, that we be elect in respect of our good
works, and so long elected as we do them, and no longer.


Martin. Yet thou can not deny but that you are at a jar amongst your selves
in the Kings Bench, and it is so throughout all your Congregation, for you will
not be a Church.


No, Carelese.
which you call, of the Catholic Church; yea, and that in the Sacrament, for
the which there is so much blood shed now adays. I mean of your later Doctors
and new Writers; as for the old they agree wholly with us.

Now in this conference or examination there are diverse things to be
considered: For first, I consider Carelese as a man unlettered, and not so
thoroughly grounded in the constitution of the Church of England, as not to
entertain some thoughts to which the doctrine of this Church could afford no
countenance. Amongst which, I reckon that strong confidence which he had of his
own salvation, and of the final perseverance of all those who are the chosen
Members of the Church of Christ, which was not taught him by the Church, and
could not be obtained in any ordinary way by the light of that doctrine which
then shined forth unto the People. Secondly, I consider him as one so far
instructed in the knowledge of Predestination, as to lay the foundation of it
on Gods great mercy, and infinite goodness in Christ Jesus; which plainly
crosses with the new Gospellers of those times, who found the same upon his
absolute will and pleasure, without relation to Christ's sufferings for us, or
our faith in him. Thirdly I consider that the Doctrine of Universal Redemption,
by the death of Christ, and the effectuality thereof to the Sons of men, was
then so generally received and taught in the Reformed Church of England, as not
to be known to Artificers, Tradesmen, and Mechanics; and that they were so
well instructed in the niceties of it, as to believe that though Christ died
effectually for all, yet the benefit thereof should be effectually applied to
none but those who do effectually repent. Fourthly, I consider that if the
Popish Clergy of those times did believe no otherwise of Predestination, than
that men be elected in respect of good works, and so long elected as they do
them, and no longer, as Carelese has reported of them; the Doctrine of the
Church has been somewhat altered since those times; there being now no such
Doctrine taught in the Schools of Rome, as that a man continues no longer in
the state of Election, than whilst he is exercised in good works. And finally,
I consider the unfortunate estate of those, who living under no certain rule of
Doctrine or Discipline, lie open to the practices of cunning and malicious men;
by whom they are many times drawn aside from the true Religion. For witnesses
whereof, we have True and Carelese above mentioned; the one being wrought on by
the Papists, the other endangered by the Gospellers or Zuinglian Sectaries: For
that Carelese had been tampered with by the Gospellers or Zuinglian Sectaries,
does appear most clearly, first by the confidence which he had of his own
salvation, and of the final perseverance of all others also, which are the
chosen members of the Church of Christ; and secondly, but more especially, for
giving the scornful title of a Free Will man to one of his fellow Prisoners,
who was it seems of different persuasion from him. For which consult his Letter
to Henry Adlington, in the Act. and Mon. Fol. 1749. which happened unto him as
to many others; when that Doctrine of the Church wanted the countenance of Law,
and the Doctors of the Church here scattered and dispersed abroad, not being
able to assist them. In which condition the affairs of the holy Church
remained, till the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and for some
years after.

But no sooner had that gracious Lady attained the Crown, Edward VI. The men
appointed for which work, were Dr. Parker, after Archbishop of Canterbury; Dr.
Grindal, after Bishop of London; Dr. Pilkington, after Bishop of Durham; Dr.
Cox, after Bishop of Elie; Dr. May, Dean of Paul's; Dr. Bill, Provost of Eaton,
after Dean of Westminster; Mr. Whitehead, (sometimes Chaplain to Queen Anne
Bullen) designed to be the first Archbishp of this new Plantation; and finally,
Sir Thomas Smith, a man of great esteem with King Edw. VI. and the Queen now
Reigning. By thesE men was the Liturgy reviewed, approved, and passed, without
any sensible alteration in any of the Rubricks, Prayers and Contents thereof;
but only the giving of some contentment to the Papists and all moderate
Protestants in two particulars; the first whereof was the taking away of a
clause in the Letany, in which the People had been taught to pray to Almighty
God to deliver them from the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his
detestable enormities. The second was, the adding of the sentences in the
distribution of the Sacrament, viz. The Body of our Lord Jesus, which was given
for thee, preserve thy body and soul to everlasting life. The Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ which was shed for thee, etc. which sentences exclusive of the now
following words of participation, as they were only in the first, so were they
totally left out of the second Liturgy of King Edward VI. Other alterations I
find none mentioned in the Act of Parliament, 1 Eliz. c. 2. but the appointing
of certain Lessons for every Sunday in the year; which made no change at all in
the public Doctrine, before contained in that book; and that the People might
be the better trained up in the same Religion, which had been taught and
preached unto them in the time of King Edward VI. She gave command by her
Injunctions, published in the first year of her Reign, Ann. 1559. that the
Paraphrases of Erasmus should be diligently studied both by Priest and People.
And to that end it was required (as formerly in the Injunctions of the said
King Edward) 1. That the Paraphrases of the said Erasmus, Injunct. 6.
and on the Gospel in the English tongue, should be provided at the joint
charges of the Parson and Parishioners, and being so provided should be set up
in some convenient place of every Church, so as the Parishioners may most
commodiously resort unto the same, and read the same out of the time of common
service. And secondly, Injunct. 16.
that every Parson, Vicar, Curate, and Stipendary Priest, shall provide, and
have of his own within the time therein limited, the New Testament in Latin
and English, with the Paraphrases on the same; conferring the one with the
other. And the Bishops by themselves and other Ordinaries, and their Officers
in Synods and Visitations, shall examine the said Ecclesiastical Priests how
they have profited in the study of holy Scripture. Evident Arguments that there
was no intent of settling any other Doctrine in the Church of England, than such
as was agreeable to the Judgment of that Learned man.

The next care was for making and perfecting those Homilies, Edwards book, for
the necessary edifying of Christian People, and the increase of godly living;
both books sufficiently provided for (besides the confirmation of that first
Article of the year, 1552.) in the Rubric of the second Liturgy, where it is
said, that after the Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall follow one of the
Homilies already set forth, or to be set forth by common authority; which
Rubric being revised with the rest of the Liturgy, put the said books of
Homilies (as well the second as first part of them) into the service of the
Church, and thereby made them no small part of the public doctrine: But who
they were which labored in this second book, whether they were the same that
drew up the first, or those who in Queen Elizabeth's time reviewed the Liturgy;
or whether they were made by the one, and reviewed by the other, I have no
where found, though I have taken no small pains in the search thereof. But
those few doctrinals which were contained in the Book of Common Prayer, or
deducible from it, not being much taken notice of; and the Homilies not
confirmed by that common Authority, which was required in the Rubric, the
Zuinglians or Gospellers took the opportunity to disperse their doctrines,
before the door of utterance should be shut against them, or any public course
be taken to suppress their practices. And this they did with so much diligence
and cunning, that they increased exceedingly both in power and numbers; of
which more hereafter. Notice whereof being taken of those which were of most
Authority in the Government of the Church, it was thought necessary for the
preventing of the mischief which might thence ensue, that the Articles of
Religion, published in King Edwards time, 1552. should be brought under a
Review, accommodated to the use of the Church, and made to be the standing
rule, by which all persons were to regulate and confirm their Doctrines.

And to this end a Convocation was assembled on the 13. of January, Ann. 1562.
which continued till the 14th. day of April; the main business which was acted
in it, being the canvasing and debating of the Articles of King Edwards book,
and passing them in the form and manner in which now they stood, which business
as they took first into consideration on the 19th. of January, and diligently
prosecuted from day to day, by the Bishops and Clergy in their several houses,
they came to an agreement on the 29th. of the same month, on which the said
Articles were publicly recited, generally approved, and subscribed by the
greatest part of the Clergy which were then assembled. And being so subscribed,
presented to the Queen, and ratified by her Royal Authority, were forthwith
published to the same end for which they were made, that is to say, For the
avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the stablishing of consent
touching true Religion, as in the title is declared. In the composing of which
book, though a clause was added to the twentieth Article, and another taken
from the third; though some Articles of King Edwards were totally omitted, and
some new made (as that amongst the rest for confirmation of the second Book of
Homilies) which were not in the book before; yet the five Articles touching the
Doctrine of the Church in the points disputed, as they stand in the eighth
Chapter of this book, were left in that same state in which they found them.
And being left in the same state in which they found them, were to be taken in
the same sense, in which they had been understood at the first making of them,
according to such illustrations as occur in the book of Common Prayer, such
explanations as are found in the book of Homilies, and the judgment of those
Learned men and godly Martyrs, which had a principal hand in the Reformation,
so that the Articles being the same as to these particulars, the paraphrases of
Erasmus state the same; the public Liturgy, and the first book of Homilies, in
all points the same; and the second book of Homilies, agreeing exactly with the
first in the present controversies, as appears by the three first Sections of
the seventh Chapter of this book, and that which follows in the next; there is
no question to be made, but that the doctrine was the same in the said five
points, which had been publicly allowed of in the time of King Edward.

But against this it may be said, Edwards book (in reference to the points
disputed) was totally left out of this; and therefore that there was some
alteration of the Churches judgment, as to the sense and meaning of the present
Articles, which Article being the tenth in number, as it stands in that book,
is there delivered in these words, viz. Gratia Christi seu spiritus sanctus,
qui per eundem datur, etc. The grace of Christ, or the Holy Ghost which is
given by him, does take from man the heart of stone, and gives him a heart of
flesh: And though by the influences thereof, it renders us willing to do those
good works which before we were unwilling to do, and unwilling to do those evil
works which before we did; voluntati tamen nullam violentiam infert; yet is no
violence offered by it to the will of man: nor can any man when he has sinned
excuse himself, quasi volens aut coactus peccaverit, as if he had finned
against his will, or upon constraint, and therefore that he ought not to be
accused or condemned upon that account. For answer whereunto it may first be
said, that the Composers of that Book, thought ir not fit to clog it with any
unnecessary points in which the peace and safety of the Church seems not much
concerned; and therefore as they left out the present Article, so they omitted
the sixteenth, touching the blasphemy against the Holy Chost, together with the
four last of King Edwards Book, touching the general Resurrection, the state of
means souls after death, the Doctrine of the Millinaries, and of a general
salvation to be given to the wicked also, after they had endured the pains of
Hell for a certain time. Secondly, they considered that the doctrine of man's
free Cooperation with the grace of God, had been sufficiently expressed and
provided for by the tenth Article of this Book, and the ninth of which,
illustrated by diverse passages in the public Liturgy, accommodated and applied
to the most increase of piety in the book of Homilies: therefore that there was
no great need to contend about it, or to retain it in the Book. And somewhat
also must be done (the point being so secured and provided for, as before was
said) to content (the Zuinglians, or Calvinians, by which last name they were
afterward more generally called) who were grown strong and numerous in most
parts of the Realm: Insomuch that many of them did not refuse to subscribe the
book, and were complained of for that cause by the Prolocutor to the House of
Bishops; desiring that an order might be presently made to cause them to
subscribe their names to the said Article, either in their own house, or before
their Lordships: which order being made on the fifth of February, the
Prolocutor signified to the Archbishop and Bishops in the name of the lower
House of Convocation; that some of the Refusers had subscribed, and that others
still persisted in their former obstinacy, And thereupon the Bishops ordered
the same day (the tenth of February) quod nomina eorum qui hactenus non
subscripserant, presententur coram iis in proxima sessione; that is to say,
that the names of such who still refused to subscribe, should be presented to
their Lordships at the next Session, which put an end to the dispute, for after
this I hear no more of their refusals; the subscription of the book being
universal, as appears by this memorial in the journal of the Convocation, viz.
universus clerus eosdem etiam unanimiter and recepit and professus est, ut ex
manuum suarum subscriptionibus patet; that is to say, that all the Clergy did
unanimously approve the said Articles, and testified their consent therein, as
by the subscription of their hands does and may appear; so difficult a thing it
was from the first beginning, to bring that violent and headstrong faction
unto any conformity.

In the next place it is objected that Mr. Alexander Nowel Dean of Saint Paul's,
Justif. of the Fath. pref.
maintains in his Catechism a Doctrine contrary to that which the Arminians,
as some call them, do now contend for; and that it is not to be thought that he
and others engaged with them in the same convocation, were either so ignorant,
as not to understand what they put into the Articles, or so infatuated by God,
to put in things quite contrary to their own judgments, which being supposed or
took for granted, we are directed to his Catechism written in the English
tongue, and dedicated from the two Archbishops, from which the Objector has
abstracted these two passages following, viz. To the Church do all they
properly belong, as many as do truly fear, honor, and call upon God,
altogether applying their minds to live holily and godly, and with putting all
their trust in God, do most assuredly look for the blessedness of eternal life.
They that be steadfast, stable and constant in this faith, where chosen and
appointed, and (as we term it) predestinate to this so great felicity, p. 44.
The Church is the body of the Christian Commonwealth, i. e. the universal
number and fellowship of the faithful, whom God through Christ has before all
beginning of time, appointed to everlasting life. Such are the passages in this
Catechism, from which the Objector has concluded, that Mr. Nowel had no
communion with Arminians (as some please to call them.) And to say truth, he
could have no communion with the Arminians (as some please to call them) though
he had desired it; Arminius being not born, or but newly born, when Mr. Nowel
wrote that Catechism; and Mr. Nowel had been dead some years before the name of
an Arminian had been heard in England.

But unto this it has been answered, that looking upon Mr. Nowel, Calvin in
the points disputed, as he was not neither. For had he been of his opinion, the
spirit of that Sect is such as could not be restrained from showing it self
dogmatical, and in terms express; and not occasionally only, and on the by (as
in the Catechism now before us) and that too in full general terms that no
particular conclusion can be gathered from them. Justif. of the Fath. pref.
It has been answered again thus, that the Articles in the five points, being
the same with those in King Edwards book, and so confessed by the Objector; and
no new sense being put upon them by the last establishment, they must be
understood no otherwise than according to the judgment of those learned men,
and godly Maryrs, before remembered, who had before concurred unto the making of
them, from which, if Mr. Nowels sense should differ in the least degree, it is
to be looked upon as his own, not the sense of the Church. And thirdly, it has
been observed that the Catechism to which we are referred for the former
passages, is not the same with that, which is authorized to be taught in the
Grammar Schools in Greek and Latin, nor the same which was published with the
consent of the Author in the English tongue, Ann. 1572. but a Catechism of a
larger size, yet of less authority, out of which the other was extracted; such
points as were superfluous, and not well expressed, not being reduced into the
same. And somewhat certainly there was in it, which rendered it incapable of any
further editions, and not thought fit to be translated into Latin, though such
a translation of it was propounded to the Archbishops, Bishops in the Epistle
Dedicatory, to the shorter English. And though to let us know what Catechism it
is he means, he seems to distinguish it from the other, it being dedicated to
the two Archbishops: Yet that does rather betray the Objectors ignorance than
advance his cause, the Authors own Latin Edition, and the English of it beign
dedicated to the two Archbishops as well as that.

But since he has appealed to the larger Catechism, Predestination, or the
points depending thereupon: and therefore is necessitated to have recourse unto
the Articles of the Catholic Church, the members and ingredients of it, from
whence he does extract the two former passages. And then again, we are to note,
that the first of the two passages not being to be found in the Latin Edition,
nor the English translation of the same, is taken almost word for word out of
Nowels Catechism, therefore to be understood in no other sense than before it
was, when it was perused and approved by the Bishops, and other Learned men of
King Edwards time. And thirdly, there is nothing in all that passage, which
justifies the absolute and irrespective decree of the Predestinarians, or the
restraining of hte benefit of our Saviors sufferings to a few particulars,
nothing of Gods invincible working on the hearts of his chosen ones, or the
impossibility of man's cooperating any further in his resurrection from the
death of sin to the life or righteousness, than in that of his body from the
grave to the life of glory; nothing that teaches any such certainly, or
infallibly of persevering in the faith and favor of God: as all the sins of
the world are not able to deprive them of it, but that they shall, must
necessarily be brought again into the place and station from which they had
fallen. And as for the last of the said two passages being the very same with
that in the Authors Latin, and the English translation of the same, there is
nothing in it, which either a true English Protestant, or a Belgic Remonstrant
may not easily grant, and yet preserve himself from falling into Calvinism in
any of the points disputed. For granting that the Church is the universal
number and fellowship of all the faithful whom God through Christ has before
all beginning of time appointed to everlasting life: Yet must it so be
understood, that either they were appointed to eternal life upon the
supposition of their faith and repentance, which may extend to the including of
all those who are called to the external participation of the Word and
Sacraments: or else that it is meant especially of such as are appointed from
all eternity to life everlasting, without excluding any from the Dignity of
being members of the Church, who have received the outward call, and openly
join with them in all public duties, and thereby pass in common estimate
amongst the faithful Believers: And then this definition will afford no comfort
to our modern Calvinists, or create any inconvenience unto those whom they call
Arminians.

CHAP. XVIII. A Declaration of the Doctrine in the Points disputed under the
new establishment made by Queen Elizabeth.
1. the Doctrine of the second Book of Homilies concerning the wilful fall of
Adam, the miserable estate of man, the restitution of lost man in Jesus Christ,
and the universal redemption of all mankind by his death and passion. 2. The
doctrine of the said second Book concerning universal grace, the possibility of
a total and final falling, and the cooperation of man's will with the grace of
God. 3. The judgment of Reverend Bishop Jewel, touching the universal
redemption of mankind by the death of Christ; Predestination grounded upon
faith in Christ, and reached out unto all them that believe in him, by Mr.
Alexander Poynets. 4. Dr. Harsnet in his Sermon at St. Paul's Cross, Anno 1584.
shows that the absolute decree of Reprobation turns the truth of God into a
lie, and makes him to be the Author of sin. 5. That it deprives man of the
natural freedom of his will, makes God himself to be double minded, to have two
contrary wills, and to delight in mocking his poor Creature, Man. 6. And
finally, that it makes God more cruel and unmerciful than the greatest Tyrant,
contrary to the truth of Scripture, and the constant Doctrine of the Fathers.
7. The rest of the said Sermon reduced unto certain other heads, directly
contrary to the Calvinian Doctrines in the points disputed. 8. Certain
considerations on the Sermon aforesaid, with reference to the subject of it, as
also to the time, place, and persons, in and before which it was first
preached. An Answer to some Objections concerning a pretended Recantation
falsely affirmed to have been made by the said Mr. Harsnet. 10. That in the
judgment of the Right Learned Dr. King, after Bishop of London, the alteration
of Gods denounced judgments in some certain cases infers no alteration in his
Counsels; the difference between the changing of the will, and to will a
charge. 11. That there is something in Gods decrees revealed to us, and
something concealed unto himself, the difference between the inferior and
superior causes, and of the conditionalty of Gods threats and promises. 12.
The accommodating of the former part of this discourse to the case of the
Ninevites. 13. And not the case of the Ninevites to the case disputed.


THese Obstacles being thus removed, Elizabeth. And first, all Arguments
derived from the public Liturgy, and the first book of Homilies being still in
force; we will next see what is delivered in the Homilies of the second part,
established by a special Article, and thereby made a part of the doctrine here
by Law established: And first, as touching the doctrine of Predestination, it
is declared in the Homily of the Nativity, That as in Adam all men universally
sinned; so in Adam all men received the reward of sin; that is to say, became
mortal and subject unto death, having in themselves nothing but everlasting
condemnation, both of body and soul; that man being in this wretched case, ti
pleased God to make a new Covenant with him, namely, that he would send a
Mediator or Messiah into the world which should make intercession, and put
himself as a stay between both parties, to pacify wrath and indignation
conceived against sin, and to deliver man out of the miserable curse, and
cursed misery, whereunto he was fallen headlong, by disobeying the Will and
Commandment of the only Lord and Maker. Nor, secondly, was this deliverance and
redemption partial, intended only for a few, but general and universal for all
mankind; the said Homily telling us not long after, that all this was done to
the end, the promise and covenant of God made unto Abraham and his Posterity,
Hom. p. 172.
concerning the Redemption of the World, might be credited and believed -- to
deliver mankind from the bitter curse of the Law, and make perfect
satisfaction by his death for the sins of all People. -- For the accomplishment
whereof, It was expedient, says the Homily, that our Mediator should be such
an one as might take upon him the sins of Mankind, and sustain the due
punishment thereof, viz. Death -- to the intent he might more fully and
perfectly make satisfaction for mankind: which is as plain as words can make
it, and yet not more plain than that which follows in the Homily of the
worthy receiving of the Sacrament, Fol. 200.

Nor does the Homily speak less plainly in another place concerning Universal
Grace, Hom. 1. part against the peril.
in which it is declared in the way of paraphrase on some passages in the 40.
Chapter of the Prophet Isaiah, That it had been preached to men from the
beginning, and how by the Creation of the World, and the greatness of the work,
they might understand the Majesty of God, the Creator and Maker of all things
to be greater than it should be expressed in any image or bodily similitude.
And therefore by the light of the same instruction (had they not shut their
eyes against it) they might have come unto a further knowledge of the Will of
God; and by degrees to the performance of all moral duties required of them
before Christ coming in the flesh. And in the third part of the same Sermon
there are some passages which do as plainly speak of falling from God, the
final alienation of the Soul of a man once righteous, from his love and favor.
Where it is said, how much better in were that the Arts of Painting, and we had
never been found, than one of them whose Souls are so precious in the sight of
God, should by occasion of Image or Picture, perish and be lost. And what can
here be understood, by the souls which are so precious in the sight of God, but
the souls of the Elect, of justified and righteous persons, the souls of wicked
men being vile and odious in his sight, hated by God, as Esau was, before all
Eternity, as the Calvinians do informs us. And what else can we understand by
being perished and lost, but a total or final alienation of those precious
souls, Hom. of the Resurrection. p. 139.
from his grace and favor: more plainly speaks the Homily of the Resurrection,
in which the Church represents unto us, what shame it should be for us, being
thus clearly and freely washed from our sin to return to the filthiness thereof
again? What a folly it would be for us, being thus endued with Righteousness to
lose in again? What a madness it would be to lose the inheritance we be now set
in, for the vile and transitory pleasure of sins. And what an unkindness it
would be, where our Savior Christ of his mercy is come unto us, to dwell with
us as our guest, to drive him from us, and to banish him violently out of our
souls: And instead of him in whom is all grace and virtue to receive the
ungracious spirit of the Devil, the founder of all naughtiness and mischief;
than which there can be nothing more direct and positive to the point in hand.
And as for the cooperation of man's will with the grace of God, either in
accepting or resisting it, when once offered to him, besides what may be
gathered from the former passages; it is to be presumed as a thing past
question in the very nature of the book, for what else are those Homilies but
so many proofs and arguments to evince that point. For to what purpose were
they made, but to stir up the minds of all men to the works of piety: And what
hopes could the Authors of them give unto themselves of effecting that which
they endeavored, had they not presupposed and taught that there was such a
freedom in the will of man, such an assistance of Gods grace, as might enable
them to perform these works of piety, as in all and every one of the said
Homilies are commended to them. More for the proof of which points, might be
gathered from the said second book of Homilies; established by the Articles of
Queen Elizabeth's time, as before is said, were not these sufficient. Proceed
we therefore from the Homilies, Jewel, then Bishop of Salsbury, thus clearly
speaking in behalf of Universal Redemption, viz. Ceerto animis nostris
persuademus, etc. We do assuredly persuade our minds (says he) that Christ is
the obtainer of forgiveness for our sins; Bishop Jewels Def^n. Apolog. c. 18.
Devis. 1.
and that by his blood all our spots of sins be washed clean: that he has
pacified and set at one all things by the blood of his Cross: that he by the
same one only Sacrifice which he once offered upon the Cross, has brought to
effect, and fulfilled all things: and that for the cause he said, it is
finished. By which word (says he) he plainly signified, persolutum jam esse
pretium, pro peccato humani generis, that the price or ransom was now fully
paid for the sin of mankind. Now as Bishop Jewel was a principal member of the
House of Bishops, so Mr. Nowel was the Prolocutor for the House of the Clergy,
in which the Articles were debated and agreed upon. In which respect his favor
is much sought by those of the Calvinian party, as before was shown. But
finding no comfort for them in his larger Catechism, let us see what may be
found in his Latin Catechism, authorized to be taught in Schools, and published
by his consent in the English Tongue, Anno 1572. And first he shows, that as
God is said to be our Father for some other reasons, Catec. Edition c. 1^54. p.
19
so most specially for this; quod nos divine per spiritum sanctum generavit,
and per fidem in verum suum, atque naturalem filium Jesum Christum nos elegit,
sibique Filios, and regni Coelestis, atque sempiternae vitae heredes per eundem
instituit, that is to say, because he has divinely regenerated us (or begotten
us again) by the Holy Ghost, and has elected us by Faith in his true and
natural Son Christ, Jesus, and through the same Christ has adopted us to be
his Children and Heirs of his heavenly Kingdom and of life everlasting. And if
Election come by our faith in Christ, as he says it does, enither a
Supra-lapsarian, nor a Sub-lapsarian, can find any comfort from this man, in
favor of that absolute and irrespective decree of Predestination, which they
would gladly father on him in his larger Catechism, and then as for the method
of Predestination, he thus sets it forth, viz. Deus Adamum illis honoris
insignibus ornavit, Ibid. 22.
ut ea cum sibi tum suis, id est, toto humano generi, aut servaret, aut
amitteret, etc. God (says he) endued Adam with those Ornaments (that is to
say) those Ornaments of Grace and Nature, which before we spoke of) that he
might have them or lose them for himself and his, that is to say, for all
mankind. And it could not otherwise be, but that as of an evil Tree, evil
fruits do spring: so that Adam being corrupted with sin, all the issue that
came of him, must also be corrupted with that original sin; For delivery from
the which there remained no remedy in our selves, and therefore God was pleased
to proise that the seed of the Woman, which is Jesus Christ, should break the
head of the Serpent, that is, of the Devil, who deceived our first Parents, and
so should deliver them and their posterity that believed the same. Where first
we have man's fall, Secondly, Gods mercy in his restitution. Thirdly, This
restitution to be made by Jesus Christ; and fourthly, to be made to all, which
believe the same.

Proceed we next to a Lermon preached at St. Paul's Cross, October. 27. 1854. by
Samuel Harsnet then fellow of Pembrook Hall in Cambridg, Chichester, from
thence translated unto Norwich, and finally to the Archiepiscopal See of York.
For the Text or subject of his Sermon, he made choice of those words in the
Prophet Ezekiel, viz. As I live (says the Lord) I delight not in the death of
the wicked, Chap. 33. v. 11. In his Discourse upon which Text, he first
discharges God from laying any necessity of sinning on the sons of men, and
then delighting in their punishment because they have sinned: he thus breaks
out against the absolute decree of Reprobation, which by that time had been
made a part of the Zuinglian Gospel, Mr. Harnets Sermon at Paul's Cross bound up
at the end of Dr. Stewards three Sermons, printed 1^58. p. 1^3. etc.
and generally spread abroad both from Press and Puipit. There is a conceit in
the World (says he) speak little better of our gracious God than this, and
that is, that God shoould design many thousands of souls to Hell before they
were, not in eye to their faults, but to his own absolute will and power, and
to get him glory in their damnation. This Opinion is grown high and monstrous,
and like a Goliath, and men do shake and tremble at it; yet never a man reaches
to David's sing to cast it down. In the name of the Lord of Hosts we will
encounter it, for it has reviled not the Host of the living God, but the Lord
of Hosts.

First, That it is directly in opposition to this Text of holy Scripture, and
so turns the truth of God into a lie. For whereas God in this Text does say and
swear, that he does not delight in the death of man; this Opinion says, that
not one or two, but millions of men should fry in Hell; and that he made them
for no other purpose than to be the children of death and hell, and that for no
other cause but his mere pleasure sake; and so say, that God does not only say,
but will swear to a lie. For the Oath should have run thus, As I live (says
the Lord) I do delight in the death of man.

Secondly, it does (not by consequence but) directly make God the Author of
sin. For, if God without eye to sin did design men to hell, then did he say and
set down that he should sin; for without sin he cannot come to hell: And indeed
does not this Opinion say, that the Almighty God in the eye of his Counsel, did
not only see, but say that Adam should fall, and so order and decree, and set
down his fall, that it was no more possible for him not to fall, than it was
possible for him not to eat? And of that when God does order, set down and
decree (I trust) he is the Author, unless they will say, that when the Right
honorable Lord Keeper does say in open Court, We order, he means not to be the
Author of that his Order.

Which said, he tells us Thirdly, Ibid. p. 135.
that it takes away from Adam (in his state of innocence) all freedom of will
and Liberty not to sin. For had he had freedom to have altered Gods designment,
Adams liberty had been above the designment of God. And here I remember a
little witty solution is made, that is, if we respect Adams Will, he had power
to sin, but if Gods Decrees, he could not sin. This is a filly solution; And
indeed it is as much as if you should take a sound, strong man that has power
to walk, and to lie still, and bind him hand and foot, ( as they do in Bedlam)
and lay him down, and then bid him rise up and walk, or else you will stir him
up with a whip; and he tell you, that there be chains upon him, so that he is
not able to stir; and you tell him again, that, that is no excuse, for if he
look upon his health, his strength, his legs, he has power to walk, or to
stand still; but if upon his Chains, indeed in that respect he is not able to
walk. I trust he that should whip that man for not walking, were well worthy to
be whipped himself: Fourthly, As God do abhor a heart, and a heart, and his soul
detesteth also a double minded man: so himself cannot have a mind and a mind: a
face like Janus, to look two ways. Yet this Opinion makes in God two Wills,
the one flat opposite to the other: An Hidden Will by which he appointed and
willed that Adam should sin; and an open Will by which he forbad him to sin.
His open Will said to Adam in Paradise, Adam thou shall not eat of the Tree of
good and evil: His Hidden Will said, Thou shall eat; nay, now I my self cannot
keep thee from eating, for my Decree from Eternity is passed, Thou shall eat,
that thou may drown all thy posterity into sin, and that I may drench them as I
have designed, in the bottomless pit of Hell. Fifthly, Amongst all the
Abominations of Queen Jezabel, that was the greatest (1 Kings 21.) when as
hunting after the life of innocent Naboth, she set him up amongst the Princes
of the Land, that so he might have the greater fall. God planted man in
Paradise, (as in a pleasant Vineyard) and mounted him to the World as on a
stage, and honored him with all the Sovereignty, over all the Creatures; he
put all things in subjection under his feet, so that he could not pass a decree
from all Eternity against him, to throw him down headlong into Hell: for God
is not a Jezabel, Tollere in altum, to lift up a man, ut lapsu graviore ruat,
that he may make the greater noise with his fall.

But he goes on, and having illustrated this cruel Mockery by some further
instances, he tells us, Ibid. p. 140.
that the Poet had a device of their old Saturn, that he eat up his Children
as soon as they were born, for fear least some of them should dispossess him of
Heaven. Pharaoh King of Egypt, had almost the same plea, for he made away all
the young Hebrew Males lest they should multiply too fast: Herod for fear our
Savior Christ should supplant him in his Kingdom, caused all the young
Children to be slain: those had all some color for their barbarous cruelty But
if any of those had made a Law, designing young Children to torments before
they had been born; and for no other cause and purpose, but his own absolute
will; the Heavens in course would have called for revenge, It is the Law of
Nations, that no man innocent shall be condemned; of Reason not to hate, where
we are not hurt; of Nature to like and love her own brood, (...), (says the
holy Ghost) we are Gods Kindred, he cannot hate us when we are innocent, when
we are nothing, when we are not. Now touching Gods Glory (which is to us all as
dear as our life) this Opinion has told us, a very inglorious and shameful
Tale, for it says, the Almighty God would have many souls go to Hell; and that
they may come thither, they must sin, that so he may have just cause to condemn
them. Who does not smile at the Grecians Conceit, that gave their God a
glorious title for killing of flies? Gods Glory in punishing arises from his
Justice in revenging of sin: and for that it tells us, as I said, a very sad
and unpleasant Tale; for who could digest it to hear a Prince say after this
manner? I will beget met a Son, that I may kill him, that I may so get me a
name, I will beget him without both his feet, and when he is grown up, having
no feet, I will command him to walk upon pain of death: and when he breaks my
Commandment, I will put him to death. O beloved, these glorious fancies,
imaginations and shows, are far from the nature of our gracious, merciful and
glorious God, who has proclaimed himself in his Titles Royal, Jehovah, the
Lord, the Lord strong and mighty, and terrible, slow to anger, and of great
goodness: And therefore let this conceit be far from Jacob, and let it not come
near the Tents of Joseph. How much holier and heavenlier conceit had the holy
Fathers of the Justice of God? Non est ante punitor Deus, quam peccator homo,
God put not on the person of a Revenger, before man put on the person of an
Offender, says St. Ambrose. Neminem coronat antequam vincit; neminem punit
antequam peccat; he crowns none before he overcomes, and he punishes no man
before his offense. Et qui facit miseros ut miseratur, crudelem habet
miserecordiam, he that puts man into miseries that he may pity him, has no
kind, but a cruel pity.

The absolute decree of Reprobation being thus discharged, Ibid. 48.
that as God desires not the death of man without relation to his sin, so he
desires not the death of the sinful man, or of the wicked sinful man, but
rather that they shoudl turn from their wickedness and live. And he observes it
is said unto the Goats in St. Matthews Gospel, Ite malidicti in ignem paratum;
he does not say, Maledicti patris, Go ye cursed of the Father; (as it is
Benedicti patris, when he speaks of the sheep) God intituling himself to the
blessing only; and that the fire is prepared, but for whom? Non vobis, sed
Diabolo and Angelis ejus, not for you, but for the Devil and his Angels. So
that God delights to prepare neither Death nor Hell for damned men. The last
branch of his Discourse he resolves into six consequences, as links depending
on his Chain: 1. Gods absolute Will is not the cause of Reprobation, but sin.
2. No man is of an absolute necessity the child of Hell, so as by Gods grace he
may not avoid it. 3. God simply wills every living soul to be saved, and to
come to the Kingdom of Heaven. 4. God sent his Son to save every soul, and to
bring it to the Kingdom of Heaven. 5. God offers Grace effectually to save
every one, and to direct him to the Kingdom of Heaven. 6. The nelgect and
contempt of this Grace, is the cause why every one does not come to Heaven, and
not any privative Decree, Council and Determination of God. The stating and
canvasing of which points, so plainly, curtly to the Doctrines of che old
Zuinglian Gospellers, and the modern Calvinians; as they take up the rest of
the Sermon, so to the Sermon I refer the Reader for his furtehr satisfaction in
them. I note this only in the close, that there is none of the five Arminian
Articles (as they commonly call them) which is not contained in terms express;
or may not easily be found by way of Deduction in one or more of the six
consequences before recited.

Now in this Sermon there are sundry things to be considered, as namely, first,
Zuinglian or Calvinian Gospel in these points, was grown so strong, that the
Preacher calls it their Goliath; so huge and monstrous, that many quaked and
trembled at it, but none, that is to say, but few or none, vel duo, vel nemo,
in the words of Persius, durst take up David's sling to throw it down. Secondly,
That in canvasing the absolute Decree of Reprobation, the Preacher spared none
of those odious aggravations which have been charged upon the Doctrines of the
modern Calvinists by the Remonstrants, and their party in these latter times.
Thirdly, That the Sermon was preached at St. Paul's Cross, the greatest Auditory
of the Kingdom, consisting not only of the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and the
rest of the chief men in the City, but in those times of such Bishops, and
other learned men as lived occasionally in London, and the City of Westminster,
as also of the Judges and most learned Lawyers, some of the Lords of the
Council being for the most part present also. Fourthly, That for all this we
cannot find, that any offense was taken at it, or any Recantation enjoined upon
it, either by the high Commission, or Bishop of London, or any other having
Authority in the Church of England, nor any complaint made of it to the Queen,
or the Council Table, as certainly there would have been, if the matter of the
Sermon had been contrary to the Rules of the Church, and the appointments of
the same. And finally we may observe, that though he was made Archbiship of
York in the Reign of King Charles, 1628. when the times are thought to have
been inclinable, to those of the Arminian Doctrines, yet he was made Master of
Pembrook Hill, Bishop of Chichester, and from thence translated unto Norwich,
in the time of King James. And thereupon we may conclude, that King James
neither thought this Doctrine to be against the Articles of Religion, here by
Law established, nor was so great an Enemy to them, or the men that held them,
as some of our Calvinians have lately made him.

But against this it is objected by Mr. Prin in his book of Perpetuity, London
in the year 1627. 1. That the said Mr. Harsnet was convented for this Sermon,
and forced to recant it as Heretical. 2. That upon this Sermon, Perpetulty,
etc. 304.
and the Controversies that arose upon it in Cambridg between Baroe and
Whitacres, not only the Articles of Lambeth were composed (of which more
hereafter) but Mr. Wotton was appointed by the University to confute the same.
3. That the siad Sermon was so far from being published or printed, that it was
enjoined by Authority to be recanted. For Answer whereunto, it would first be
known, where the said Sermon was recanted, and by whose Authority. Not in or by
the University of Cambridg, where Mr. Harsnet lived both then, and a long time
after; for the Sermon was preached at St. Paul's Cross, and so the University
could take no cognizance of it, nor proceed against him for the same. And if
the Recantation was madea t St. Paul's Cross, where the supposed offense was
given, it would be known by whose Authority it was enjoined. Not by the Bishop
of London, in whose Diocese the Sermon was preached: for his Authority did not
reach so far as Cambridg, whither the Preacher had retited after he had
performed the service he was called unto: and if it were enjoined by the High
Commission, and performed accordingly, there is no question to be made, but
that we should have heard of in the Anti-Arminianism, where there are no less
than eight leaves spend in relating the story of a like Recantation pretended
to be made by one Mr. Barret on the tenth of May 1595. and where it is
affirmed, that the said Mr. Harsnet held and maintained the same errors for
which Barret was to make his Recantation. But as it will be proved hereafter
that no such Recantation wass made by Barret, so we have reason to believe that
no such Recantation was imposed on Harsnet. Nor, secondly, can it be made good,
that the Controversies between Doctor Whitacres and Dr. Baroe were first
occasioned by this Sermon, or that Mr. Wotton was appointed by the University
to confute the same. For it appears by a Letter written from the heads of that
University to their Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer Burleigh. dated March 18.
1595. that Baroe had maintained the same Doctrines, and his Lectures and
Determinations above 14 years before, by their own account, for which see Chap.
21. Numb. 80. which must be three years at the least before the preaching of
that Sermon by Mr. Harsnet. And though it is probable enopugh that Mr. Wotton
might give himself the trouble of confuting the Sermon, yet it is more than
probable that he was not required so to do by that University. For if it had
been so appointed by the University, he would have been rewarded for it by the
same power and authority which had so appointed, when he appeared a Candidate
for the Professorship on the death of Whitacres, but could not find a party of
sufficient power to carry it for him, of which see also Chap. 21. Numb. 4. And
thirdly, as for the not Priting of the Sermon, it is easily answered; the
genius of the time, not carrying men so generally to the Printing of Sermons as
it has done since. But it was Printed at the last, though long first: And
being Printed at the last, has met with none so forward in the Confutation, as
Mr. Wotton is affirmed to be, when at first it was Preached. And therefore
notwithstanding these three surmises which the Author of the Perpetuity, etc.
has presented to us, it may be said for certain, as before it was, that Mr.
Harsnet was never called in question for that Sermon of his, by any having
Authority to convent him for it, and much less, that he ever made any such
Recantation, as by the said Author is suggested.

In the next place we will behold a passage in one of the Lectures upon Jonah,
York, Anno 1594. by the right learned Dr. John King (descended from a Brother
of Robert King, the first Bishop of Oxon) afterward made Dean of Christ
Church, and from thence presented by the power and favor of Archbishop
Bancroft to the Sea of London: A Prelate of too known a zeal to the Church of
England to be accused of Popery, or any other Heterodoxies in Religion, of what
sort soever, who in his Lecture on these words, Yet forty days, and Nineveh
shall be overthrown, cap. 3. verse 4. discoursed on them in this manner.

The only matter of Question herein, Bishop King's Lecture upon Jonath, Lect.
33. p. 450.
is how it may stand with the constancy and truth of eternal God to pronounce a
Judgment against a place which takes not effect within one hundred years: For
either he weas ignorant of his own time, which we cannot imagine of an
omniscient God, or his mind was altered, which is unproble to suspect. Numb.
23. Heb. 13. Rev. 1.
For is the strength of Israel a man that he should lie, or as the Son of man
that be should repent? Is he not yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever?
that was, that is, and that which is to come? I mean not only in substance, but
in Will and Intention? Does he use lightness? Are the words that he speaks,
yea and nay? Does he both affirm and deny too? 2 Cor. 1.
Are not all his Promises, are not all his Threatenings, are not all his
Mercies, are not all his Judgments, are not all his Words, are not all the
titles and jots of his words, yea and amen? so firmly ratified, that they
cannot be broken: Doubtless it shall stand immutable, When the Heaven and the
Earth shall be changed, Mal. 3.
and wax old like a garment, Ego Deus and non mutor, I am God that am not
changed. Aliud mutare voluntatem, aliud velle mutationem. Aquin. 1. qu. 19.
art. 7.
The School in this respect has a wise distinction, It is one thing to change
the will, and another to will a change, or to be willed that a change should
be. God will have the Law and Ceremony at one time, Gospel without Ceremony at
another, this was his Will from Everlasting, constant and unmovable, that in
their several courses both should be. Though there be a change in the matter
and subject, there is not a change in him that disposes it. Our Will is in
Winter to use the fire, in Summer a cold and an open air; the thing is changed
according to the season; but our Will whereby we all decreed and determined in
our selves so to do, remain the same.

Sometimes the Decrees and purposes of God consist of two parts, Abraham, the
purpose of God was twofold: 1. To try his Obedience. 2. To save the Child. A
man may impute it inconstancy to bid and unbid: Mutat seo tentiam non mutat
consilium. lib. 10. mor. cap. 23.
but that the Will of the Lord was not plenarily understood in the first part.
This is it which Gregory expresses in apt terms, God changes his intent
pronounced sometimes, but never his Counsel intended. Sometimes things are
decreed and spoken of according to inferior cause, which by the highest and
overruling cause are otherwise disposed of. One might have said, and said truly
both ways, Lazarus shall rise again, and Lazarus shall not rise again: if we
esteem it by the power and finger of God it shall be; but if we leave it to
nature, and to the arm of flesh, it shall never be. The Prophet Esaias told
Hezekias the King, put thy house in order, Esa. 38.
for thou shall die: considering the weakness of his body, and the extremity of
his disease, he had reason to warrant the same; but if he told him
contrariwise, according to that which came to pass, thou shall not die, looking
to the might and merecy of God, who received the prayers of the King, he had
said as truly. But the best definition is, that in most of these threatening
there is a condition annexed unto them, either expressed or understood, which is
as the hinges to the door, Jer. 18.
and turns forward and backward the whole matter. In Jeremy it is expressed, I
will speak suddenly against a Nation or a Kingdom, to pluck it up, to root it
out, and to destroy it: But if this Nation, Jer. 18.
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will repent of
the plague which I thought to bring upon them. So likewise for his mercy, I
will speak suddenly concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to build it,
and to plant it; but if yet do evil in my sight, and hear not my voice, I will
repent of the good I thought to do for them. Genesis 20. it is expressed, where God
tells Abimeleck, withholding Abraham's Wife, Thou art a dead man, because of
the Woman which thou have taken: the event fell out otherwise, and Abimeleck
purged himself with God, With an upright mind, and innocent hands have I done
this. There is no question but God enclosed a condition with his speech, Thou
art a dead man, if thou restore not the Woman withoput touching her body and
dishonouring her Husband.

Thus we may answer the scruple by all these ways. 1. Yet forty days and
Nineveh shall be overthrown, and yet forty and forty days and Nineveh shall not
be overthrown. Wy? Because Nineveh is changed, and the unchangable will of God
ever was, that if Nineveh showed a change, it should be spared. 2. There were
two parts of Gods purpose, the one disclosed, touching the subversion of
Nineveh, the other of her conversion, kept within the heart of God. Whereupon
he changed the sentence pronounced, but not the counsel whereunto the sentence
weas referred. 3. If you consider Nineveh in the inferior cause, that is in
the deservings of Inineveh, it shall fall to the ground; but if you take it in
the superior cause, in the goodness and clemency of Almighty God, Nineveh
shall escape. Lastly, the judgment was pronounced with a condition reserved in
the mind of the judge, Nineveh shall be overthrown if it repent not. Now he
that speaks with condition, may change his mind without suspicion of
lightness. 2 Cor. 1.
As Paul promised the Corinthians to come to them in his way toward Macedonia,
and did it not: For he evermore added in his soul that condition which no man
must exclude, if it stand with the pleasure of God, and he hinder me not.
Philip threatened the Lacedaemonians, that if he invaded their Country, he would
utterly extinguish them: They wrote him no other answer but this, If, meaning
it was a condition well put in, because he was never like to come amongst them,
Si nisi non esset, perfectum quidlibet esset. If it were not for conditions and
exceptions, every thing would be perfect, but nothing more unperfect than
Nineveh, if this secret condition of the goodness of God at the second hand had
not been.

So far this Reverend Prelate has discoursed of the nature of Gods decrees,
Ninevites. Let us next see how far the principal particulars of the said
discourse, and the case of the Ninevites it self my be accommodated to the
Divine decree of Predestination; concerning which the said Reverend Prelate was
not pleased to declare his judgment, either as being impertinent to the case
which he had in hand, or out of an unwillingness to engage himself in those
disputes which might not suddenly be ended. All that he did herein, was to take
care for laying down such grounds in those learned Lectures, by which his
judgment might be guessed at, though not declared. As Dr. Peter Baroe (of whom
more hereafter) declared his judgment touching the Divine Decrees in the said
case of the Ninevites, before he fell particularly on the Doctrine of
Predestination, as he after did. And first, as for accommodating the case of
the Ninevites to the matter which is now before us, we cannot better do it than
in the words of Bishop Hooper, so often mentioned; who having told us that Esau
was no more excluded from the promise of grace than Jacob was, Pres. to his
Expos. on the ten Commandments.
proceeds thus, viz. By the Scripture (says he) it seems that the sentence
of God was given to save the one, and damn the other, before the one loved God,
or the other hated him. Howbeit, these threatenings of god against Esau (if he
had not of his wilful malice excluded himself from the promise of grace) should
no more have hindered his salvation, than Gods threatenings against Nineveh,
(which notwithstanding that God said should be destroyed within forty days,
stood a great time after, and did penance. Esau was circumcised, and presented
unto the Church of God by his Father Isaac in all external Ceremonies as well
as Jacob. And that his life and conversation was not as agreeable unto justice
and equity as Jacobs was, the sentence of God unto Rebecca was not in the
fault, but his own malice. Out of which words we may observe, first, that the
sentence of God concerning Esau, was not the cause that his conversation was so
little agreeable to justice and equity; no more than the judgment denounced
against the Ninevites could have been the cause of their impenitency, if they
had continued in their sins and wickednesses without repentance; contrary to
the Doctrine of the Gospellers in Queen Mary's days, imputing all men's sins to
Predestination. Secondly, that Gods threatenings against Esau (supposing them to
be tanta-mount to a reprobation) could no more have hindered his salvation, than
the like threatening against the Ninevites could have sealed to them the
assurance of their present destruction; if he had heartily repented of his
sins, as the Ninevites did. And therefore thirdly, as well the decree of God
concerning Esau, as that which is set out against the Ninevites, are no
otherwise to be understood than under the condition tacitly annexed unto them;
that is to say, that the Ninevites should be destroyed within forty days, if
they did not repent them of their sins; and that Esau should be reprobated to
eternal death, if he gave himself over to the lusts of a sensual appetite:
Which if it be confessed for true, as I think it must, then fourthly, the
promises made by God to Jacob, and to all such as are beloved of God, as Jacob
was, and consequently their election unto life eternal, are likewise to be
understood with the like condition; that is to say, if they repent them of
their sins, and do unfainedly believe his holy Gospel. The like may be affirmed
also in all the other particulars touching Gods decrees, with reference to the
Doctrine of Predestination, which are observed or accommodated by that learned
Prelate in the case of the Ninevites, had I sufficient time and place to insist
upon them.

CHAP. XIX. Of the first great breach which was made in the Doctrine of the
Church, by whom it was made, and what was done toward the making of it up.
1. Mary; with the necessity of employing them in the public service, if
otherwise of known zeal against the Papists. 2. Several examples of that kind
in the places of greatest power and trust in the Church of England;
particularly of Mr. Fox the Martyrologist, and the occasion which he took of
publishing his opinion in the point of Predestination. 3. His notes on one of
the Letter of John Bradford Martyr, touching the matter of election therein
contained. 4. The difference between the Comment and the Text, and between the
Author of the Comment and Bishop Hooper. 5. Exceptions against some passages,
and observations upon others, in the said Notes of Mr. Fox. 6. The great breach
made hereby in the Churches Doctrine, made greater by the countenance which was
given to the Book of Acts and Monuments, by the Convocation, An. 1571. 7. No
argument to be drawn from hence, touching the approbation of his doctrine by
touching the approbation of his doctrine by that Convocation, no more than for
the Approbation of his Marginal Notes, and some particular passages in it,
disgraceful to the Rites of the Church, attire of the Bishops. 8. A
counterballance made in the Convocation against Fox his Doctrine, and all other
Novelisms of that kind.


IT was not long that Queen Mary sat upon the Throne,

On this account we find Mr. Pilkington preferred to the Sea of Durham,
Whittingham to the rich Deanery of the Church; of which the one proved a grear
favourer of the Non-conformists, as is confessed by one who challenges a
relation to his blood and family; the other associated himself with Goodman, as
after Goodman did with Knox, for lanting Puritanism and sedition in the Kirk of
Scotland. On this account Dr. Lawrence Humphrey a professed Calvinian, in point
of doctrine, and a Nonconformist, (but qualified with the title of a moderate
one) is made the Queens Professor for Divinity in the University of Oxon;
Thomas Cartwright, that great Incendiary of this Church, preferred to be the
Lady Margarets Professor in the University of Cambridge: Sampson made Dean of
Christ-church, and presently propter Puritanismum Exacutoratus, Godw. in Catal.
Episc. Oxon.
turned out again for Puritanism, as my Author has it: Hardiman made one of
the first Prebends of Westminister of the Queens foundation, and not long after
deprived of it by the high Commissioners for breaking down the Altar there, and
defacing the ancient utepsils and ornaments which belonged to the Church. And
finally upon this account, as Whitehead, who had been Chaplain to Queen Anne
Bullain, refused the Archbishopric of Canterbury, before it was offered unto
Parker and Coverdale to be restored to the Sea of Exon, which he had cheerfully
accepted in the time of K. Edward; so Mr. John Fox of great esteem for his
painful and laborious work of Acts and Monuments (commonly called the Book of
Martyrs) would not accept of any preferment in the Church, but a Prebends place
in Salisbury, which tied him not to any residence in the same. And this he did
especially (as it after proved) to avoid subscription, showing a greater
willingness to leave his place, than to subscribe unto the Articles of
Religion, then by Law established, when he was legally required to do it by
Archbishop Parker. Of this man there remains a short discourse in his Acts and
Monuments of Predestination, occasioned by a Letter of Mr. Bradfords before
remembered, whose Orthodox doctrine in that point he feared might create some
danger unto that of Calvin, which then began to find a more general
entertainment than could be rationally expected in so short a time: And
therefore as a counter-ballance he annexeth this discourse of his own with this
following title, viz.

Notes on the same Epistle, and the manner of Election thereunto appertaining.

As touching the Doctrine of Election (whereof this Letter of Mr. Bradford,
Fox. in Acts and Mon. fol. 1505.
1. What Gods Election is, and what the cause thereof. 2. How Gods Election
proceeds in working our salvation. 3. To whom Gods Election pertains, and
how a Man may be certain thereof. -- Between Predestination and Election this
difference there is, Predestination is as well to the Reprobate as to the
Elect, Election pertains only to them that be saved. Predestination in that
it respects the Rebate, is called Reprobation; in that it respected the
saved, is called Election, and is thus defined. Predestination is the eternal
decreement of God, purposed before in himself, what shall befall all men, either
to salvation or damnation; Election is the free mercy and grace of God, in his
own will through faith in Christ his Son, choosing and preferring to life such
as pleases him. In this definition of Election first goes before (the mercy
and grace of God) as the causes thereof, whereby are excluded all works of the
Law, and merits of deserving, whether they go before faith, or come after; so
was Jacob chosen, and Esau refused before either of them began to work, etc.
Secondly, in that the mercy of God in this Definition is said to be (free)
thereby is to be noted the proceeding and working of God not to be bound to any
ordinary place, or to any succession of choice, nor to state and dignity of
person, nor to worthiness of blood, etc. but all goes by the mere will of his
own purpose, as it is written, spiritus ubi vult spirat, etc. And thus was the
outward race and stock of Abraham, after flesh refused (which seemed to have
the pre-eminence) and another seed after the Spirit, raised by Abraham of the
stones, that is of the Gentiles. So was the outward Temple of Jerusalem, and
Chair of Moses, which seemed to be of price forsaken, and Gods Chair advanced
in other Nations. So was tall Saul refused, and little David accepted: the
Rich, the Proud, and the Wise of this world rejected, and the word of salvation
daily opened to the poor and miserable abjects, the high Mountains cast under,
and the low valleys exalted, etc.

And in the next place it is added (in his own will) by this falls down the
free will and purpose of man, with all his actions, counsels, and strength of
nature; according as it is written, non est volentis, neque currentis, sed
miserentis Dei, etc. It is not him that wills, nor in him that runs, but
in God that shows mercy. So we see how Israel ran long, and yet got nothing.
The Gentile runs, began to set out late, and yet got the game: So they which
came at the first which did labor more, and yet they that came last were
rewarded with the first, Mat. 20. The working will of the Pharisee seemed
better, but yet the Lords Will was rather to justify the Publican, Luke 18.
The elder Son had a better will to tarry by his Father, and so did indeed; and
yet the fat Calf was given to the younger Son that ran away, Luke 15. whereby
we have to understand, how the matter goes not by the will of man, but by the
will of God, as it pleases him to accept, according as it is written, non ex
voluntate carnis, neque ex voluntate viri: sed ex Deo nati sunt, etc. Which are
born not of the will of the flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of God.
Furthermore, as all then goes by the will of God only, and not by the will of
man: So again, here is to be noted, that the will of God never goes without
faith in Christ Jesus his Son.

And therefore, fourthly, is this clause added in the definition, through faith
in Christ his Son; which faith in Christ to usward makes altogether. For
first, it certifieth us of Gods Election, as this Epistle of Mr. Bradford does
well express: For whosoever will be certain of his Election in God, let him
first begin with faith in Christ, which if he find in him to stand firm, he may
be sure, and nothing doubt, but that he is one of the number of Gods Elect.
Secondly, the said faith, and nothing else, is the only condition and means
whereupon Gods mercy, grace, Election, vocation, and all Gods promises to
salvation do stay accordingly: the word of St. Paul, si permanseritis in fide,
and if ye abide in the faith, Col. 1.3. This faith is the mediate and next
cause of our justification simply without any condition annexed: For as the
mercy of God, his grace, Election, vocation, and other precedent causes do save
and justify us upon condition, if we believe in Christ: so this faith only in
Christ without condition, is the next and immediate cause, which by Gods
promise works out justification; according as it is written, creed in dominum
Jesum, and salvus eris, tu, and domus tus. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou
shall be saved, thou and thy whole house. And thus much touching the Definition
of Election, with the causes thereof declared, which you see now to be no
merits or works of man, whether they go before, or come after faith. For like
as all they that be born of Adam, do taste of his Malediction, though they
tasted not of the Apple: so all they that be born of Christ (which is by faith)
take part of the obedience of Christ, although they never did that obedience
themselves which was in him, Romans 5.

Now to the second consideration: Let us see likewise, how and in what order
this Election of God proceeds in choosing and electing them which he
ordains to salvation, which order is this. In them that be chosen to life,
first, Gods mercy and free grace brings forth Election: Election works
Vocation, or Gods holy calling; which Vocation, though hearing brings
knowledge, and faith in Christ: Faith through promise, obtains justification;
justification through hope, waits for glorification: Election is before time,
Vocation and Faith comes in time; Justification and Glorification is without
end. Election depending upon Gods free grace and will, excludes all man's will,
blind fortune, chance, and all peradventures. Vocation standing upon Gods
Election, excludes all man's wisdom, cunning, learning, intention, power, and
presumption. Faith in Christ, proceeding by the gift of the Holy Ghost, and
freely justifying man by Gods promises, excludes all other merits of men, all
condition of deserving, and all works of the Law, both Gods Law, and man's Law,
with all other outward means whatsoever. Justification coming freely by Faith,
stands sure by Promise, without doubt, fear, or wavering in this life.
Glorification appertaining only to the life to come, by hope is looked for.
Grace and Mercy preventeth, Election ordains, Vocation prepares, and
receives the Word, whereby comes Faith; Faith justifies; Justification
brings glory: Election is the immediate and next cause of Vocation; Vocation
(which is the working of Gods Spirit by the Word) is the immediate and next
cause of Faith; Faith is the immediate and next cause of Justification.

And this order and connection of causes is diligently to be observed because of
the Papists, which have miserably confounded and inverted this doctrine; thus
teaching, that Almighty God, so far as he foreseeth man's merits before to come,
so does he dispense his Election. Dominus prout cujusque merita fore praevidet,
ita dispensat electionis gratiam, futuris tamen concedere. That is, that the
Lord recompenseth the grace of Election, not to any merits proceeding, but yet
grants the same to the merits that follow after, and not rather have our
holiness by Gods Election going before. But we following the Scripture, say
otherwise, that the cause only of God, Election, is his own free mercy, and the
cause only of our justification is our faith in Christ, and nothing else. As
for example: first, concerning Election, if the question be asked, why was
Abraham chosen, and not Nathor? why was Jacob chosen, and not Esau? why was
Moses Elected, and Pharaoh hardened? why David accepted, and Saul refused? why
few be chosen, and the most forsaken? It cannot be answered otherwise but thus,
because so was the good will of God. In like manner touching Vocation, and also
Faith, if the question be asked, why this Vocation and gift of Faith was given
to Cornelius the Gentile, and not to Tertullus the Jew? why to the Poor, the
Babes, and the little ones of the world (of whom Christ speaks, I thank the
Father which have hid these from the wise, etc. Matthew. 11.) why to the unwise,
the simple abjects and outcasts of the world? (of whom speaks Saint Paul, 1
Cor. 1. You see your calling my Brethren, why not many of you, etc. Why to the
sinners and not to the just? why the Beggars by the highways were called, and
the bidden guests excluded? We can ascribe no other cause, but to Gods purpose
and Election, and say with Christ our Savior, quia Pater sic complacitum est
ante te; Yea Father for that it seemed good in thy sight, Luke 10.

And so it is for Justification likewise, if the question be asked why the
Publican was justified and not the Pharisee, Luke 18. Why Mary the sinner, and
not Simon the inviter? Luke 11. Why Harlots and Publicans go before the Scribes
and Pharisees in the Kingdom? Matthew. 21. why the Son of the Freewoman was
received? and the Bond-womans Son being his elder, rejected, Gen? 21. why
Israel, which so long sought for righteousness, found it not? and the Gentiles
which sought it not, found it? Romans 9. We have no other cause hereof to render,
but to say with Saint Paul, because they sought for it by works of the Law, and
not by Faith; which Faith, as it comes not by man's will (as the Papists falsely
pretend) but only by the Election and free gift of God; so it is only the
immediate cause whereto the promise of our salvation is annexed, according as
we read. And therefore of faith is the inheritance given, as after grace, that
the promise might stand sure to every side, Romans 4. and in the same Chapter.
Faith believing in him that justifies the wicked, is imputed to righteousness.
And this concerning the causes of our salvation, you see how Faith in Christ
immediately and without condition does justify us, being solicited with Gods
mercy and Election, that wheresoever Election goes before, Faith in Christ
must needs follow after. And again, whosoever believes in Christ Jesus,
through the vocation of God, he must needs be partaker of Gods election:
whereupon resulteth the third note or consideration, which is to consider
whether a man in this life may be certain of his election. To answer to which
question, this first is to be understood, that although our election and
vocation simply indeed, be known to God only in himself, a priore: yet
notwithstanding it may be known to every particular faithful man, a posteriore,
that is, by means, which means is Faith in Christ Jesus crucified. For as much
as by Faith in Christ a man is justified, and thereby made the child of
salvation; reason must needs lead the same to be then the child of election,
chosen of God to everlasting life. For how can a man be saved, but by
consequence it follows that he must also be elected.

And therefore of election it is truly said: de electione judicandum est a
posteriore; that is to say, we must judge of election by that which comes
after, that is, by our faith and belief in Christ: which faith, although in
time it follows after election, yet this the proper immediate cause assigned
by the Scripture, which not only justifies us, but also certifieth us of this
election of God; whereunto likewise well agrees this present Letter of Mr.
Bradford, wherein he says, Election, albeit in God it be the first, yet to us
it is the last opened. And therefore beginning first (says he) with Creation,
I come from thence to Redemption, and Justification by faith; so to election,
not that faith is the cause efficient of election, being rather the effect
thereof, but is to us the cause certificatory, or the cause of our
certification, whereby we are brought to the feeling and knowledge of our
election in Christ. For albeit, the election first be certain in the knowledge
of God, yet in our knowledge Faith only that we have in Christ, is the thing
that gives to us our certificate and comfort of this election. Wherefore
whosoever desires to be assured that he is one of the Elect number of God, let
him not climb up to Heaven to know, but let him descend into himself, and there
search his faith in Christ, the Son of God; which if he find in him not
feigned, by the working of Gods Spirit accordingly: thereupon let him stay, and
so wrap himself wholly both body and soul under Gods general promise, and
cumber his head with no further speculations: knowing this, that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, Joh. 3. shall not be confounded, Romans 9.
shall not see death, Joh. 8. shall not enter into judgment, Joh. 5. shall have
everlasting life, Joh. 3.7. shall be saved, Matthew. 28. Act. 16. shall have
remission of all his sins, Act. 10. shall be justified, Romans 3. Gal. 2. shall
have floods flowing out of him of the water of life, Joh. 7. shall never die,
Joh. 11. shall be raised at the lest day, Joh. 6. shall find rest in his soul,
and be refreshed, Matthew. 11. etc.

Such is the judgment and opinion of our Martyrologist, etc. as nothing
pertinent to the business which we have in hand. But between the Comment and
the Text there is a great deal of difference, the Comment laying the foundation
of Election on the Will of God, according to the Zuinglian or Calvinian way;
but the Text laying it wholly upon faith in Christ (whom God the Father has
Predestinate in Christ unto eternal life) according to the doctrine of the
Church of England. The Text first presupposes an estate of sin and misery,
into which man was fallen, a ransom paid by Christ for man and his whole
Posterity, a freedom left in man thus ransomed, either to take, or finally to
refuse the benefit of so great mercy: and then fixing or appropriating the
benefit of so great a mercy (as Christ and all his merits do amount to) upon
such only as believe. But the Comment takes no notice of the fall of man,
grounding both Reprobation and Election on Gods absolute pleasure, without
relation to man's sin, or our Saviors sufferings, or any acceptance or refusal
of his mercies in them. As great a difference there is between the Author of
the Comment and Bishop Hooper, as between the Comment and the Text: Bishop
Hooper tells us, cap. 10. number. 2. that Saul was no more excluded from the
promise of Christ, than David; Esau than Jacob; Judas than Peter, etc. if they
had not excluded themselves: quite contrary to that of our present Author, who
having asked the question, why Jacob was chosen, and not Esau; why David
accepted, and Saul refused, etc. makes answer, that it cannot otherwise be
answered, than that so was the good will of God.

And this being said, Nachor amongst the Reprobates, in the same rank with
Esan, Pharaoh and Saul; all which he has marked out to reprobation; the
Scripture laying no such censure on Nachor, or his Posterity, as the Author
does: Or else the Author must know more of the estate of Nachor than Abraham
his Brother did; who certainly would never have chosen a Wife for his Son Isaac
out of Nachors line, if he had looked upon them as reprobated and accursed of
God. I observe, secondly, that plainly God is made an accepter of persons by
the Authors doctrine. For first, he tells us that the elder Son had a better
will to tarry by his Father, and so did indeed, but the fatted Calf was given
to the younger Son that ran away; and thereupon he does infer, that the matter
goes not by the will of man, but by the will of God, as it pleases him to
accept. I observe, thirdly, that Vocation, in the Authors judgment, stands
upon Gods Election, as the work thereof; whereas Vocation is more general, and
is extended unto those also whom they call the Reprobate, and therefore
stands not on Election, as the Author has it. For many are called, though
out of those many which are called, but a few are chosen. Fourthly, I observe,
that notwithstanding the Author builds the doctrine of Election on Gods
absolute will and pleasure, yet he is fain to have recourse to some certain
condition, telling us, that though the mercy of God, his Grace, Election,
Vocation, and other precedent Causes do justify us; yet this is upon condition
of believing in Christ. And finally, it is to be observed also, that after all
his pains taken in defending such a personal and eternal Election, as the
Calvinians now contend for; he advises us to wrap up our selves wholly, both
body and soul under Gods general promise, and not to cumber our heads with any
further speculations, knowing that whosoever believes in him shall not perish.
etc.

And so I take my leave of our Martyrologist, Ann. 1562. the brables raised by
Crowley in his Book against Campneys, though it came out after the said
Articles were confirmed and published, being but as hail-shot in comparison of
this great piece of Ordnance. Not that the Arguments were so strong as to make
any great breach in the public Doctrine, had it been published in a time less
capable of innovations, or rather if the great esteem which many had of that
man, and the universal reception which his Book found with all sorts of People,
had not gained more authority unto his discourse, than the merit or solidness
of it could deserve. The inconveniences whereof, as also the many marginal
Notes and other passages, visibly tending to faction and sedition in most parts
of that Book, were either not observed at first, or winked at in regard of the
great animosities which were engendered by it in all sorts of People, as well
against the persons of the Papists, as against the doctrine; Insomuch that in
the Convocation of the year, 1571. there passed some Canons, requiring that not
only the Deans of all Cathedrals should take a special care that the said Book
should be so conveniently placed in their several Churches, that people of all
conditions might resort unto it; but also, that all and every Archbishop,
Bishops, Deans, Residentiaries, and Archdeacons should choose the same to be
placed in some convenient public room of their several houses, not only for
the entertainment and instruction of their menial servants, but of such
strangers also as occasionally repaired unto them.

If it be hereupon inferred that Fox his doctrine was approved by that
Convocation, England; besides what has been said already by Anticipation, it
may as logically be inferred, that the Convocation approved all his marginal
Notes; all the factious and seditious passages; and more particularly the scorn
which he puts upon the Episcopal habit, and other Ceremonies of the Church.
Touching which last (for the other are too many to be here recited) let us
behold how he describes the difference which happened between Hooper, Bishop of
Gloucester on the one side, Cranmer and Ridley on the other, about the ordinary
habit and attire then used by the Bishops of this Church, we shall find it
thus, viz. Acts and Mon. so. 1366, 1367.
For notwithstanding the godly reformation of Religion that was begun in the
Church of England, besides other ceremonies that were more ambitious than
profitable, or tended to edification, they used to wear such garments and
apparel as the Romish Bishops were wont to do. First a Chimere, and under that
a white Rocket, then a Mathematical cap with four Angles, dividing the whole
world into four parts. These trifles being more for superstition than
otherwise, as he could never abide; so in no wise could he be persuaded to wear
them. But in conclusion, this Theological contestation came to this end, that
the Bishops having the upper hand, Mr. Hooper was fain to agree to this
condition, that sometimes he should in his Sermon show himself apparalled as
the Bishops were. Wherefore appointed to preach before the King, as a new
Player in a strange apparel he comes forth on the stage: His upper garment was
a long skarlet Chimere down to the foot, and under that a white linen Rocket,
that covered all his shoulders; upon his head he had a Geometrical, that is a
square cap, albeit that his head was round. What case of shame the strangeness
hereof was that day to the good Preacher, every man may easily judge. But this
private contumely and reproach, in respect of the public profit of the Church,
which he only sought, he bare and suffered patiently.

Here have we the Episcopal habit affirmed to be a contumely and reproach to
that godly man, Popish attire; the other ceremonies of the Church being
censured as more ambitious than profitable, and tending more to superstition
than to edification; which as no man of sense or reason can believe to be
approved and allowed of by that Convocation; so neither is it to be believed
that they allowed of his opinion in the present point. For a counterballance
whereunto there was another Canon passed in this Convocation, by which all
Preachers were enjoined to take special care, ^ne quid unquam doceant, pro
concione; quod a populo religiose, teneri, and credi velint, nisi quod
consentaneum sit doctrinae veteris aut novi testamenti quodque ex'illa ipsa
doctrina Cathotici Patres and veteres Episcopi Collegerint; that is to say,
that they should maintain no other doctrine in their publicki Sermons to be
believed of the People, but that which was agreeable to the doctrine of the Old
and New Testament, and had from thence been gathered by the Catholic (or
Orthodox) Fathers, and ancient Bishops of the Church. To which rule, if they
held themselves as they ought to do, no countenance could be given to Calvines
Doctrines, or Fox his judgment in these points maintained by one of the
Catholic Fathers, and ancient Bishops of the Church, but St. Augustine only,
who though he were a godly man, and a learned Prelate, yet was he but one
Bishop, not Bishops in the plural number, but one father, and not all the
fathers, and therefore his opinion not to be maintained against all the rest.

CHAP. XX. Of the great Innovation made by Perkins in the public Doctrine, the
stirs arising thence in Cambridge, and Mr. Barrets carriage in them.
1. Of Mr. Perkins and his Doctrine of Predestination, which his recital of the
four opinions, which were then maintained about the same. 2. The sum and
substance of his Doctrine according to the Supralapsarian, or Supracreatarian
way. 3. The several censures past upon it, both by Papists and Protestants, by
none more sharply than by Dr. Rob. Abbots, after Bishop of Sarum. 4. Of Dr.
Baroe, the Lady Margarets Professor in the University, and his Doctrine
touching the divine Decrees, upon occasion of Gods denounced Judgment against
the Ninevites. 5. His constant opposition to the Predestinarians, and the great
increase of his Adherents. 6. The Articles collected out of Barrets Sermon,
derogatory to the Doctrine and persons of the chief Calvinians. 7. Barret
convented for the same, and the proceedings had against him at his first
conventing. 8. A form of Recantation delivered to him, but not the same which
does occur in the Anti-Arminianism to be found in the Records of the
University. 9. Several Arguments to prove that Barret never published the
Recantation imposed upon him. 10. The rest of Barrets story related in his own
Letter to Dr. Goad, being then Vice Chancellor. 11. The sentencing of Barret to
a Recantatation, no argument that his Doctrine was repugnant to the Church of
England, and that the body of the same University differed from the heads in
that particular.


THIS great breach being thus made by Fox in his Acts and Monuments, William
Perkins, an eminent Divine of Cambridge, of great esteem amongst the Puritans
for his zeal and piety, but more for his dislike of the Rites and Ceremonies
here by Law established; of no less fame among those of the Calvinian party,
both at home and abroad for a Treatise of Predestination, published in the year
1592. entitled, Armilla Aurea, or the Golden Chain, containing the order of
the causes of salvation and damnation according to Gods Word. First written by
the Author in Larin for the use of Students, and in the same year translated
into English at his Request by one Robert Hill, who afterward was Dr. of
Divinity, and Rector of St. Bartholomews Church near the Royal Exchange. In the
Preface unto which discourse, the Author tells us, that there was at that day
four several Opinions of the order of Gods Predestination. The first was of the
old and new Pelagians, who placed the cause of Gods Predestination in than, in
that they hold, that God did ordain men to life or death, according as he did
foresee, that they would by their natural freewill, either reject or receive
Grace offered. The second of them, who (of some) are termed Lutherans, which
taught, that God foreseeing that all mankind being shut under unbelief, would
therefore reject Grace offered, did hereupon purpose to choose some to
salvation of his mere mercy, without any respect of their faith or good works,
and the rest to reject, being moved to do this, because he did eternally
foresee, that they would reject his Grace offered them in the Gospel. The
third of Semi-palagian Papists, which ascribe Gods Predestination partly to
mercy, and partly to men's foreseen Preparations and meritorious works. The
fourth, of such as teach, that the cause of the execution of Gods
Predestination, is his mercy in Christ in them which are saved, and in them
which perish, the fall and corruption of man; yet so as that the Decree and
Eternal Counsel of God concerning them both, has not any cause besides his
will and pleasure. In which Preface, whether he has stated the opinions of the
parties right, may be discerned by that which has been said in the former
Chapters: and whether the last of these opinions ascribe so much to Gods mercy
in Christ, in them that are saved, and to man's natural Corruption in them that
perish, will best be seen by taking a brief view of the opinion it self. The
Author taking on him to oppugn the three first as erroneous, and only to
maintain the last as being a truth, which will bear weight in the balance of
the Sanctuary, as in his Preface he assures us.

Now in this book Predestination is defined to be the Decree of God, Golden
chain.
either to salvation or condemnation to his own Glory. He tells us secondly,
that the means for putting this decree in execution, were the creation and the
fall. 3. Ibid. p. 52.
That man's fall was neither by chance, or by Gods not knowing it, or by his
bare permission, or against his will; but rather miraculously, not without the
Will of God, but yet without all approbation of it. Which passage being
somewhat obscure, may be explained by another, some leases before. In which the
Question being asked, Whether all things and actions were subject unto Gods
Decree? He answers, Yes surely, and therefore the Lord according to his good
pleasure has most certainly decreed every both thing and action, whether past,
present, or to come, together with their circumstances of place, time, means,
and end: And then the Question being pressed to this particular, what even the
wickedness of the wicked? The answer is affirmative, Yes, he has most justly
decreed the wicked works of the wicked. Ibid. 29.
For if it had not pleased him, they had never been at all: And albeit they of
their own natures are, and remain wicked, yet in respect of Gods decree they
are to be accounted good. Which Doctrine, though it be no other than that which
had before been taught by Beza; yet being published, more copiously insisted
on, and put into a more methodical way, it became wondrous acceptable amongst
those of the Calvinian party, both at home and abroad, as before was said.
Insomuch that it was Printed several times after the Latin edition, with the
general approbation of the French and Belgic Churches, and no less than 15.
times within the space of twenty years in the English tongue. At the end of
which term, in the year 1612. the English book was turned by the Translator
into Questions and Answers, but without any alteration of the words of the
Author, as he informs us in the last page of his Preface, after which it might
have sundry other impressions; that which I follow, being of the year 1621. And
though the Supra-lapsarians or rigid Calvinists (or Supra-creatarians rather,
as a late judicious Writer calls them) differ exceedingly in these points, from
many of their more moderate Brethren, distiguished from them by the name of
Sub-lapsarians; yet in all points touching the specifying of their several
supposed Degrees, they agree well enough together, and therefore wink at one
another, as before was noted.

Notwithstanding the esteem wherewith both sorts of Calvinists entertained the
book, (...). Dedi.
nor from all men's hands. Amongst other Parsons the Jesuit gives this censure
of him, viz. That by the deep humor of fancy he has published and written
many books with strange Titles, which neither he nor his Reader do understand,
as namely about the Concatenation or laying together of the causes of man's
Predestination and Reprobation, etc. Jacob van Harmine, (afterward better
known by the name of Arminius) being then Preacher of the Church of Amsterdam,
not only censured in brief as Parsons did, but wrote a full discourse against
it, entitled, Examen Predestinationis Perkinsanae, which gave the first
occasion to these controversies (many appearing in defense of Perkins and his
Opinions) which afterward involved the Sublapsarians in the self same quarrel.
Hal. in Holy State, p. 50.
Amongst our selves it was objected, That his Doctrine referring all to an
absolute decree, ham-string'd all industry, and cut off the sinews of men's
endeavors toward salvation, for ascribing all to the wind of Gods Spirit
(which blows where it lists) he leaves nothing to the cares of men's
diligence, either to help or hinder to the attaining of happiness, but rather
opens a wide door to licentious security. Absolv. contr. Tompsoni Diatrib.
But none of all our English was so sharp in their censures of him, as Dr.
Robert Abbot, then Dr. of the Chair in Oxon, and not long after Bishop of
Sarum, who in his book against Thompson (though otherwise inclined too much to
Calvin's Doctrines) gives this judgment of Mr. Perkinsius, viz. Alioqui
eruditus, and pius in discriptione Divinae Praedestinationis, quam ille contra
nostram, contra veteris Ecclesiae, fidem citra lapsum Adami absolute decretum
constituit, erravit errorem non levem, cujus adortis quibusdam viris inita
jamdudum and suscepta defensio, turbas ecclesiis non necessarias dedit, quas
etiamnum non sine scandalo and periculo haerere videmus, dum viam quisque quam
ingressus est sibi ante tenendum judicat, quam ductam sacrarum literarum
authoritate lineam veritatis, tanquam filum Ariadnaeum sibi ducem faciat, that
is to say, Perkins, though otherwise a godly and learned man in his description
of Divine Predestination, which contrary not only to the Doctrine of the
primitive times, but also unto that of the Church of England, he builds upon an
absolute decree of Almighty God, without reference to the Fall of Adam, ran
himself into no small error: The defense whereof being undertaken by some
learned men, has given the Church some more than necessary troubles, which
still continued not without manifest scandal and danger to it; whilst every one
does rather choose to follow his own way therein, than suffer himself to be
guided in the Labyrinth by the line of truth (as by the Clew of Ariadne) drawn
from the undeniable Authority of holy Scriptures. And so I leave the man with
this observation, that he who in his writings had made the infinitely greatest
part of all mankind incapable of Gods grace and mercy, by an absolute and
irrespective decree of Reprobation; who in expounding the Commandments, when he
was Catechist of Christ's College in Cambridge, did lay the Law so home in the
ears of his Auditors, that it made their hearts fall down, Holy State, p. 90.
and yea their hair to stand almost upright; and in his preaching use to
pronounce the word Damned, with so strong an Emphasis, that it left an echo in
the ears of his hearers a long time after; this man scarce lived out half his
days, being no more than forty-four years of age, from the time of his death,
at the pangs conducing unto which, he was noted to speak nothing so
articulately, as Mercy, Mercy; which I hope God did graciously vouchsafe to
grant him in that woeful Agony.

But to proceed, Whitacres himself then Dr. of the Chair in Cambridge,
concurring in opinion with him, it might have quickly overspread the whole
University, had it not been in part prevented, and in part suppressed by the
care and diligence of Dr. Baroe, and his Adherents, who being a French man
born, of eminent piety and learning, and not inclinable at all unto Calvin's
Doctrines, had been made the Lady Margarets Professor for the University
somewhat before the year 1574. For in that year he published his Lectures on
the Prophet Jonah. In one of which being the 29th. in number, he discourses on
these words of the Prophet, viz. Baroe Fraelect. 29. p. 216.
Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, cap. 3. ver. 4. where we find
it thus, Haec denunciatio non est quasi Proclamatio decreti divini absoluti,
sed quaedam patio praeponendae divinae voluntatis, qua Deus eorum animos
flectere voluit: quare haec oration, etsi simplex and absoluta videatur, tacitam
tamen habet conditionem (nisi rescipiscant) namque hanc in esse conditionem
eventus comprobavit; The denouncing of this Judgment (says that learned man)
is not to be beheld as the publication of one of Gods absolute Decrees, but
only as a form observed in making Gods Will known unto them, by which he meant
to put them to it, and rouse their spirits to Repentance. Therefore (says he)
although the Denunciation of the following Judgment seem to be simply positive
and absolute, yet has it notwithstanding this Condition, (that is to say,
unless they do repent) included in it, for that such a Condition was included
in it, the event does show; which said, he leads us on to the denouncing of the
like Judgment on the house of Abimelech, which he had before in Dr. King, Chap.
18. Number. 11. who herein either followed Baroe, or at the least concurred in
Opinion with him. And in the next place he proceeds a little further than the
case of the Ninevites, Baroe Prael ^i. 32. p. 217.
touching upon the point of Election unto life Eternal, by the most proper
superstructure could be laid upon such a foundation, Dei voluntas non erat ut
perirent, si rescipiscerent, non vult enim mortem preccatoris, sed ut
convertatur: Et rursus Dei erat voluntas, ut perirent, nisi rescipiscerent.
Haec enim duo unum sunt; ut Dei voluntas est ut vitam habeamus si credamus; Et
Dei voluntas non est ut vitam habeamus, nisi credamus; aut si credentes,
perseveremus, non autem si aliquandiu credentes non perseveremus, that is to
say, It was not the Will of God that they should perish, if they did repent,
(For God desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he be converted
and live) and yet it was his will that they should perish if they did not
repent: for these two are one, as for Example: It is the Will of God, says he,
that we should have eternal life, if we believe, and constantly persevere in
the faith of Christ. And it it is not the will of God that we should have
eternal life, if we do not believe, or believing only for a time, do not
persevere therein to the end of our lives; which point he further proves by the
condition of the Message sent from God to Hezekiah by the Prophet Isaiah, 2
Kings 20.1. as before was said in Dr. King: For which, together with the rest
of his discourse upon that occasion, concerning the consistency of these
alterations with the immutability or unchangeableness of Almighty God; I shall
refer the Reader to the book it self.

So far that learned man had declared himself upon occasion of that Text,
Ninevites before the year 1574. being ten years before the preaching of
Harsnets Sermon at St. Paul's Cross, and more than twenty years before the stirs
at Cambridge betwixt him and Whitacres. In all which time, or at lest the
greatest part thereof, he inclined rather unto the Melancthonian way,
(according to the Judgment of the Church of England) in laying down the
Doctrine of Prodestination than to that of Calvin. For fifteen years it is
confessed in a Letter sent by some of the heads of Cambridg to William Lord
Burleigh, then Chancellor of the University, Anti-Arminian. p. 256.
bearing date March the 8. 1595. That he had taught in his Lectures, preached
in Sermons, determined in the Schools, and printed in several books, a contrary
Doctrine unto that, which was maintained by Dr. Whitacres, and had been taught
and received in the University ever since the beginning of her Majesty's Reign:
which last, though it be gratis dictum, without proof or evidence, yet it is
probable enough that it might be so: Cartwright that unextinguished Firebrand
being Professor in that place before him, and no greater care taken in the
first choice of the other before recited to have had the place, than to supply
it with a man of known aversness from all points of Popery. And it seems also
by that Letter, that Baroe had not sown his seed in a barren soil, but in such
as brought forth fruit enough, and yielded a greater increase of Followers,
than the Calvinians could have wished. For in one place the Letter tells us,
that besides Mr. Barret (of whom we shall speak more anon) There were diverse
others who there attempted publicly to teach new and strange Oinions in
Religion, as the Subscribers of it call them. And in another place it tells us
of Dr. Baroe, that he had many Disciples and Adherents, whom he emboldned by
his Example to maintain false Doctrine. And by this check it may be said of
Peter Baroe in reference to that University, endangered to be overgrown with
outlandish Doctrines, as the Historian does of Caius Marius, with reference to
the state of Rome in fear of being overrun by the Tribes of the Cymbri, which
were then breaking in upon it, Actum esset de repub. nisi Marius isti seculo
contigisset, the Commonwealth had then been utterly overthrown, if Marius had
not been then living.

Now as for Barret before mentioned, Anti-Armini. p. 56.
That no man in this transitory life is so strongly underpropped, at lest by
the certainty of says; that is to say, (as afterward he explained himself) by
Revelation, that he ought to be assured of his own salvation. 2. That the faith
of Peter could not fail, but that the faith of other men might fail, our Lord
not praying for the faith of every particular man. 3. That the certainty of
perseverance for the time to come is a presumptuous and proud security,
forasmuch as it is in its own nature contingent, and that it was not only a
presumptuous but a wicked Doctrine. 4. There was no distinction in the faith,
but in the persons believing. 5. That the forgiveness of sins is an Article of
the Faith, but not the forgiveness of the sins particularly of this man or
that; and therefore that no true Believer, either can or ought believe for
certain, that his sins are forgiven him. 6. That he maintained against Calvin,
Peter Martyr, and the rest, (cencernthose that are not saved) that sin is the
true proper and first cause of Reprobation. 7. That he had taxed Calvin for
lifting up himself above the high and Almighty God: And 8thly, That he had
uttered many bitter words against Peter Martyr, Theodore Beza, Jerome, Zanchius,
and Francis Junius, etc. calling them by the odious names of Cavinists, and
branding them with a most grievous mark of Reproach, they being the Lights and
Ornaments of our Church, as is suggested in the Articles which were exhibited
against him.

For having insisted, Mary's on the ^9. of April, Anno 1595. all the Calvinian
heads of that University being laid together by Whitacres, and inflamed by
Perkins, took fire immediately. And in this Text he was convented on the fifth
of May next following at nine of the clock in the morning, before Dr. Some,
then Deputy Vice Chancellor to Dr. Duport, Dr. Goad, Dr. Tyndal, Dr.
Whitacres, Dr. Barwell, Dr. Jegon, Dr. Preston, Mr. Chatterton, and Mr. Claton
in the presence of Thomas Smith public Notary, by whom he was appointed to
attend again in the afternoon. At which time the Articles above mentioned were
read unto him, which we alleged to be erroneous and false, Et repugnantes esse
religioni, in regno Angliae and legitima Authoritate receptae ac stabilitae,
that is to say, contrary to the Religion received and established by public
Authority in the Realm of England. To which Articles being required to give an
Answer, he confessed that he had published in his Sermon all these positions,
which in the said Articles are contained, sed quod contenta in iisdem Religioni
Ecclesiae Angelicanae, ut praefertur, omnino non repugnant, but denied them to
be any way repugnant to the Doctrine of the Church of England. Whereupon the
Vice Chancellor and the forenamed heads entering into mature deliberation, and
diligently weighing and examining these Positions, because it did manifestly
appear, that the said Positions were false, erroneous, and likewise repugnant
to the Religion received and established in the Church of England, adjudged and
declared, that the said Barret had incurred the Penalty of the 45. Statute of
the University de concionibus: And by virtue and tenor of that Statute they
decreed and adjudged the said Barret to make a public Recanation, in such
words and form, as by the Vice Chancellor, and the said heads, or any three or
two of them should be tendered to him, or else upon his refusal to recant in
that manner, to be perpetually expelled both from his College and the
University: binding him likewise in an Assumpsit of 40 l. to appear personally
upon two days warning before the Vice Chancellor or his Deputy, at what time
and place they should require.

It appears afterward by the Register of the University, Barret being
resummoned to appear before him, though none but Goad, Tyndal, Barwell and
Preston, were present at that time with the Vice Chancellor or his Deputy (for
I know not which) a Recantation ready drawn was delivered to him, which he was
commanded to publish solemnly in St. Mary's Church on Saturday, the 10th of May
then next ensuing. And it is confidently affirmed by the Author of the
Arminianism, and his Echo too, that the said Recantation was publicly made by
the said Barret at the time and place therein appointed. Anti-Arminian, p. 61.
And hereof the first Author seems to be so confident, that he does not only
tell us, that this Recantation was made accordingly, but that it was not made
with that Humility and Remorse which was expected; it being said, that after
the reading thereof, he concluded thus, Haec dixi; intimating thereby, that he
consented not in his heart to that which he had delivered by his tongue. This
is the total of the business concerning Barret in the Anti-Arminianism, in
which there is somewhat to be doubted, and somewhat more to be denied. And
first it is to be doubted, whether any such Recautation, consisting of so many
Articles, and every Article having his abjuration or Recantation subjoined unto
it, was ever enjoined to be made: for though the Author of the book affirms
in one place, that the whole Recantation, in the same manner and form as there
we find it, was exemplified, and sent unto him under the hand of the Register
of the University, page 62. yet he contesseth within few lines after, that no
such matter could be found, when the heads of Houses were required by an Order
from the House of Commons in the last Session of Parliament, Anno 1628. to make
certificate to them of all such Recantations as were recorded in their
University Register, and of this Recantation in particular. And though it be
hereupon inferred, that this Precantation was imbezilled and razed out of the
Records of the University by some of the Arminian party, the better to suppress
the memory of so great a foil; yet it may rather be believed, that many false
Copies of it were dispersed abroad by those of the Calvinian faction, to make
the man more odious, and his Opinions more offensive than might stand with
Truth.

The truth is that a Recantation was enjoined, and delivered to him, Barret
confessing in his Letters of which more anon, that a Recantation was imposed on
him and expected from him: But then it is to be denied as a thing most false,
that he never published the Recantation, whatsoever it was, which the Heads
enjoined and required at his last Convention. For, first, It is acknowledged in
the Authors own Transcript of the Acts, that though he did confess the
Propositions wherewith he was charged to be contained in his Sermon; yet he
would never grant them to be contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England,
and therefore was not likely to retract the same. Secondly, It is plain by
Barrets said Letters, the one to Dr. Goad Master of Kings, the other to Mr.
Chadderton Master of Emanuel College, that neither flattery, nor threatenings,
nor the fear of losing his subsistence in the University, should ever work him
to the publishing of the Recantation required of him. And thirdly, It appears
by the Letters from the heads above mentioned to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
that Barret had not made the Recantation on the 8th of March, which was full
ten months after the time appointed for the publishing of it. And on these
terms this business shows the Author his Error, to affirm with all
confidence, (for if the one does, the other must) that Barret made this
Recantation in St. Mary's Church on the tenth of May, Anno 1595. Barret
declaring in his Letter to Dr. Goad, about nine months after, that he would
never make it; And the Heads signified to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, on the
eighth of March, heing ten months after, that at that time he had not made. And
who should believe in the present case, Barret that says he would never do it,
and the Heads, who say, he had not done it on the eighth of March: or that they
say upon the credit of a false and malicious Copy, (purposely spread abroad by
the Puritan faction to defame the man) that he had published it on the 10th of
May, ten months before. I find also in the Title to this Recantation, as it
stands in the Anti-Arminianism, (p. 46.) that Mr. Harsnet of Pembrook Hall, is
there affirmed to have maintained the supposed Errors, for which Barret was
condemned to a Recantation: and it is strange that Harsnet should stand charged
in the Title of another man's sentence, for holding and maintaining any such
points as had been raked out of the dunghill of Popery and Pelagianism, as was
there affirmed; for which he either was to be questioned in his own person, or
not to have been condemned, to the Title of a sentence passed on another man.
Which circumstance as it discredits the Title, so the Title does as much
discredit the reality of the Recantation. adeo mendaciorum natura est, ut
cohaerere non possint, says Lactantius truly. The rest of Barrets story shall
be told by himself, according as I find it in a Letter of his to Dr. Goad, then
being Vice Chancellor, written about nine months after the time of his first
conventing: as by the Letter does appear, which is this that follows.

A copy of Mr. Barret's Letter to Dr. Goad.
MY Duty remembered to your Worship, etc. Sir, according to your appointment,
Overald and Mr. Chadderton. Mr. Overald after once Conference, refused to talk
of these points any more, saying it needed not: For Mr. Chadderton he is a
learned man, and one whom I do much reverence, yet he has not satisfied me in
this point. For I required proof but of these two things at his hands, viz.
That una fides did differ specie ab alia; and that it was aliud donum ab
alio, but he did neither. But for the first, whereas he should have proved it
did differ specie, he proved it did differ numero, and that but out of the
Master of the Sentences, whose Authority notwithstanding I do not impugn. And
for the other, that it should be Aliud donum, he proves out of St. Augustine,
that fides daemonum is not alia a fide Christianorum, which no man ever denied:
for fides Daemonum is not Donum at all, so that it comes not in Question; so
that I being here unsatisfied of one party, meaning Mr. Chadderton, and rather
confirmed of the other party, I do hold my Positions as before. And for the
Retractation, I purpose not to perform it: Yet that the peace of the
University, and the Church may be preserved, I do solemnly promise to keep my
Opinion to my self: so that in this regard my humble suit unto your Worship
(and hearty prayer to God) is this, that you would suffer me to continue in the
University without molestation, though I live but in disgrace amongst you, yet
I regard it not, so I may be quiet. For my intent is to live privately at my
Book, until such times as by continual Conference with those that are of
contrary Judgment, I may learn the truth of your Assertions: which when I have
learned, I promise before God and your Worship not to conceal. But if you and
the rest of your Assistants (whom I reverence) do purpose to proceed in
disquieting and traducing me as you have done by the space of three quarters of
this year, and so in the end mean to drive me out of the University, I must
take it patiently, because I know not how to redress it; but let God be judge
between you and me. These things I leave to your Worships favorable
consideration; for this I must needs say, (and peradventure it may tend to your
credit, when I shall report it) that above the rest hitherto I have found you
most courteous and most just. I leave your Worship to Gods Direction and holy
tuition, expecting a gracious Answer.

Your daily Beadsman WILLIAM BARRET.


But here perhaps it may be said, Barret might be as obstinate in refusing to
publish the Recantation, as this Letter makes him; yet it appears by the whole
course of those proceedings, that his Doctrines were condemned by the heads of
the University, as being contrary to that which was received and established in
the Church of England. And that it was so in the Judgment of those men, who
either concurred in his Censure, or subscribed the Letter to the Lord Treasurer
Burleigh abovementioned, is a thing past question. But this can be no
Argument, that Barrets Doctrines were repugnant to the Church of England,
because these Heads either in favor of Dr. Whitacres, or in respect to Mr.
Perkins, were pleased to think no otherwise of them: for if it be, we may
conclude by the same Argument, that the Church of Rome was in the right, even
in the darkest times of ignorance and superstition, because all those who
publicly opposed her Doctrines, were solemnly enjoined by the then prevailing
party to a Recantation; and which is more, it may be also thence concluded that
the Doctrine maintained by Athanasius touching Christ's Divinity, was contrary
to that which had been taught by the Apostles, and men of Apostolical spirits,
because it was condemned for such, by some Arrian Bishops in the Council (or
rather Conventicle) of Tire, which was held against him.

2. It cannot be made apparent that either Dr. Duport, the Vice Chancellor who
was most concerned, or Dr. Baroe, the Lady Margarets Professor for Divinity
there had any hand in sentencing this Recantation. Not Dr. Baroe, because by
concurring to this Sentence he was to have condemned himself: Nor Dr. Duport,
for I find his place to be supplied, and the whole action governed by Dr. Some
(which shows him to be absent at that time from the University) according to
the style whereof, the Title of Procancellarius is given to Dr. Some in the
Acts of the Court, as appears by the Extract of them in the Anti-Arminianisin,
p. 64. compared with p. 63.

But thirdly, admitting that the Heads were generally thus inclined, yet
probably the whole body of the University might not be of the same Opinion with
them: those Heads not daring to affirm otherwise of Barrets Doctrine in their
Letter to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, than that it gave just offense to many.
And if it gave offense unto many only, it may be thought that it gave no
offense to the Major part, or much less to all; for if it had, the writers of
the Letter would not have been so sparing in their expressions, as to limit the
offense to many, if they could have said it of the most. But of this we shall
speak more in the following Chapter, when we shall come to feel the pulse of
the University in the great competition between Wotton and Overald after
Whitacres death. Of which Opinion Harsnet was, we have seen before. And we have
seen before that Baroe had many Disciples and Adherents which stood fast unto
him. And thereupon we may conclude, that when Dr. Baroe had for fourteen or
fifteen years maintained these Opinions in the Schools (as before was showed)
which are now novelized by the name of Arminianism; and such an able man as
Harsnet had preached them without any Control, when the greatest audience of
the Kingdom did stand to him in it; There must be many more Barrets who
concurred with the same Opinions with them in the University, though their
names through the Envy of those times are not come unto us.

CHAP. XXI. Of the proceedings against Baroe, the Articles of Lambeth, and the
general calm which was in Oxon, touching these Disputes.
1. The differences between Baroe and Doctor Whitacres, the addresses of
Whitacres and others to Archbishop Whitgift, which drew on the Articles at
Lambeth. 2. The Articles agreed on at Lambeth, presented both in English and
Latin. 3. The Articles of no authority in themselves, Archbishop Whitgift
questioned for them, together with the Queens command to have them utterly
suppressed. 4. That Baroe neither was deprived of his Professorship, nor
compelled to leave it, the Anti-Calvinian party being strong enough to have
kept him in if he had defired it. 5. A Copy of the Letter from the Heads in
Cambridg to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, occasioned as they said by Barret and
Baroe. 6. Dr. Overalds encounters with the Calvinists in the point of falling
from the Grace received; his own private judgment in the point, neither for
total, nor for final, and the concurrence of some other learned men in the same
Opinion. 7. The general calm which was at Oxon at that time touching these
Disputes, and the Reasons of it. 8. An answer to that Objection out of the
Writings of judicious Hooker, of the total and final falling. 9. The
disaffections of Dr. Bukeridge, and Dr. Houson to Calvin's doctrines: an Answer
to the Objection touching the paucity of those who opposed the same. 10.
Possession of a Truth maintained but by one or two, preserves it sacred and
inviolable for more fortunate times; the case of Liberius Pope of Rome; and
that the testimonies of this kind are rather to be valued by weight than tale.


FROM Barret pass we on to Baroe, Whitacres there had been some clashings,
touching Predestination and Reprobation, the certainty of Salvation, and the
possibility of falling from the Grace received. And the heats grew so high at
last that the Calvinians thought it necessary in point of prudence to effect
that by power and favor, which they were not able to obtain by force of
Argument. To which end they first addressed themselves to the Lord Treasurer
Burleigh then being their Chancellor, acquainting him by Dr. Some, then Deputy
Vice Chancellor, with the disturbances made by Barret, thereby preparing him to
hearken to such further motions, as should be made unto him in pursuit of that
Quarrel. But finding little comfort there, they resolved to steer their course
by another compass. And having prepossest the most Reverend Archbishop
Whitgift, with the turbulent carriage of those men, the affronts given to Dr.
Whitacres, whom (for his learned and laborious Writings against Cardinal
Bellarmine) he most highly favored, and the great inconveniences like to grow
by that public discord; they gave themselves good hopes of composing those
differences, not by the way of an accommodation, but an absolute conquest; and
to this end they dispatched to him certain of their number in the name of the
rest, such as were interessed in the Quarrel, (Dr. Whitacres himself for one,
and therefore like to stickle hard for the obtaining their ends;) the Articles
to which they had reduced the whole state of the business being brought to them
ready drawn, and nothing wanting to them but the face of Authority, wherewith,
as with Medusa's head to confound their Enemies, and turn their Adversaries
into stones. And that they might be sent back with the face of Authority, the
most Reverend Archbishop Whitgift, calling unto him Dr. Flecher, Bishop of
Bristol, then newly elected unto London, and Dr. Richard Vaughan Lord Elect of
Bangor, together with Dr. Tyndal Dean of Ely, Dr. Whitacres and the rest of the
Divines which came from Cambridg, proposed the said Articles to their
consideration at his House in Lambeth, on the tenth of November. Anno 1595. by
whom those Articles were agreed on in these following words.

1. Deus ab aeterno praedestinavit quosdam ad vitam: quosdam reprobavit ad
mortem. 2. Causa movens aut efficiens praedestinationis ad vitam non est
praevisio fidei, aut perseverantiae, aut bonorum operum, aut ullius rei quae
insit in personis Praedestinatis, sed sola voluntas beneplaciti Dei. 3.
Praedestinatorum praefinitus and certus est numerus, qui nec augeri, nec minui
potest. 4. Qui non sunt Praedestinati ad salutem, necessario, propter peccata
sua damnabuntur. 5. Vera, viva and justificans fides, and spiritus Dei
justificantis, non extinguitur, non excidit, non evanescit in Electis, aut
finaliter, aut totaliter. 6. Homo vere fidelis, id est, fide justificante
praeditus, certus est plerophoria Fidei de Remissione peccatorum suorum, and
salute sempiterna sua per Christum. 7. Gratia salutaris, non tribuitur, non
incommunicatur, non conceditur universis hominibus, qua servari possint si
velint. 8. Nemo potest venire ad Christum, nisi datum ei fuerit, and nisi pater
eum traxerit, and omnes homines non trahuntur a patre, ut veniant ad filium. 9.
Non est positum in arbitrio, aut potestate uniuscujusque hominis servari.
1. God from Eternity has predestinate certain men unto life, certain men he
has reprobate. 2. The moving or efficient cause of predestination unto life,
is not the foresight of Faith, or of perseverance, or of good works, or of any
thing that is in the person predestined, but only the good will and pleasure
of God. 3. There is predetermined a certain number of the Predestinate, which
can neither be augmented or diminished. 4. Those who are not predestined to
salvation, shall be necessarily damned for their sins. 5. A true living and
justifying Faith, and the Spirit of God justifying, is not extinguished,
falls not away, it vanishes not away in the Elect, either totally or
finally. 6. A man truly faithful, that is, such an one who is endued with a
justifying faith, is certain with the full assurance of faith, of the remission
of his sins, and of his everlasting salvation by Christ. 7. Saving Grace is not
given, is not granted, is not communicated to all men, by which they may be
saved if they will. 8. No man can come unto Christ, unless it be given unto
him, and unless the Father shall draw him, and all men are not drawn by the
Father, that they may come to the Son. 9. It is not in the will or power of
every one to be saved.
Now in these Articles there are these two things to be considered, Westminster
Hall, can be affirmed to be in a capacity of making Orders which must be looked
on by the Subject, as Acts of Parliament. A Declaration they might make of
their own Opinions, or of that which they thought fittest to be holden in the
present case, but neither Articles nor Canons to direct the Church: for being
but Opinions still, and the Opinions of private and particular persons, they
were not to be looked upon as public Doctrines. And so much was confessed by
the Archbishop himself, when he was called in question for it before the Queen,
who being made acquainted with all that passed by the Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
who neither liked the Tenants, nor the manner of proceeding in them, was most
passionately offended that any such Innovation should be made in the publicck
Doctrine of this Church; and once resolved to have them all attainted of a
Praemunire. But afterward upon the interposition of some Friends, and the
reverend esteem she had of the excellent Prelate, the Lord Archbishop (whom she
commonly called her Black Husband) she was willing to admit him to his defense:
and he accordingly declared in all humble manner, that he and his Associates
had not made any Articles, Canons or decrees with an intent, that they should
serve hereafter for a standing Rule to direct the Church, but only had resolved
on some Propositions to be sent to Cambridge, for the appeasing of some unhappy
differences in the University; with which Answer her Majesty being somewhat
pacified, commanded notwithstanding that he should speedily recall and suppress
those Articles; which was performed with such care and diligence, that a Copy
of them was not to be found for a long time after. And though we may take up
this relation upon the credit of History of the Lambeth Articles printed in
Latin, 1651. or on the credit of Bishop Mountague, who affirms the same in his
Appeal, Appeal. p. 71. Resp. Nec. p. 146,
Anno 1525. yet since the Authority of both has been called in question, we
will take our warrant for this Narrative from some other hands. And first we
have it in a book called Necessario Responsio, published by the Remonstrants,
Anno 1618. who possibly might have the whole story of it from the mouth of
Baroe, or some other who lived at that time in Cambridge, Cabul. p. 117.
and might be well acquainted with the former passages. And secondly, We find
the same to be affirmed by the Bishops of Rochester, Oxon, and St. David's in a
Letter to the Duke of Buchingham, August 2. 1625. In which they signify unto
him, that the said Articles being agreed upon, and ready to be published, it
pleased Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, upon notice given how little they
agreed with the practice of piety and obedience to all Government, to cause
them to be suppressed, and that they had so continued ever since, till then of
late some of them had received countenance at the Synod of Dort.

Next touching the effect produced by them in order to the end so proposed,
Baroe, and his party, that his disciples and Adherents became more united, and
the breach wider than before. And though Dr. Baroe not long after, deserted his
place in the University, yet neither was he deprived of his Professorship, as
some say, not forced to leave it on a fear of being deprived, as is said by
others: For that Professorship being chosen from two years to two years,
according to the Statutes of the Lady Margaret, he kept the place till the
expiring of his term, and then gave off without so much as showing himself a
Suitor for it: Which had he done, it may be probable enough, that he had
carried it from any other Candidate or Competitor of what rank soever. The
Anti-Calvinian party being grown so strong, as not to be easily overborn in a
public business by the opposite faction. And this appears plainly by that
which followed on the death of Dr. Whitacres, who died within few days after
his return from Lambeth, with the nine Articles so much talked of. Two
Candidates appeared for the Professorship after his decease, Wotton of Kings
Collegd a professed Calvinian, and one of those who wrote against Mountague's
Appeal, Anno 1626. Competitor with Overald of Trinity College almost as far
from the Calvinian doctrine in the main Platform of Predestination, as Baroe,
Harsnet or Barret are conceived to be. But when it came to the Vote of the
University, the place was carried for Overald by the Major part: which as it
plainly shows, that though the doctrines of Calvin were so hotly stickled here
by most of the Heads, yet the greater part of the learned Body entertained them
not; so does it make it also to be very improbable, that Baroe should be put
out of his place by those who had taken in Overald, or not confirmed therein,
if he had desired. And therefore we may rather think, as before is said, that
he relinquished the place of his own accord; in which he found his Doctrine
crossed by the Lambeth Articles, and afterward his peace distracted die several
Informations brought against him, by the adverse faction; and thereupon a
Letter of Complaint presented to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, subscribed by
most of those who before had prosecuted Barret to his Recantation. Which Letter
giving very great light to the present business, as well concerning Barret as
Baroe; though principally aimed at the last, I think worthy of my pains, and
the Readers patience: and therefore shall subscribe it as hereafter follows.

A Copy of the Letter sent from some of the Heads in Cambridge to the Lord
Burleigh, Lord High Treasurer of England, and Chancellor of the University.
RIGHT HONORABLE, our bounden duty remembered; we are right sorry to have such
occasion to trouble your Lordship; but the peace of this University and Church
(which is dear unto us) being brought into peril, by the late reviving of new
Opinions and troublesome Controversies amongst us, has urged us (in regard of
the places we here sustain) not only to be careful for the suppressing the same
to our power, but also to give your Lordship further information hereof as our
honorable Head and careful Chancellor.

About a year past (amongst diverse others who here attempted publicly to teach
new and strange Opinions in Religion) one Mr. Barret more boldly than the rest,
did preach diverse Popish Errors in St. Mary's to the just offense of many,
which he was enjoined to retract, but has refused so to do in such sort as
has been prescribed: with whose fact and Opinions, your Lordship was made
acquainted hy Dr. Some the Deputy Vice Chancellor. Hereby offense and division
growing as after by Dr Baroes public Lectures and determinations in the
Schools, contrary, (as his Auditors have informed) to Dr. Whitacres, and the
sound received Truth ever since her Majesty's Reign; we sent up to London by
common consent in November last, Dr Tyndal, and Dr. Whitacres (men especially
chosen for that purpose) for conference with my Lord of Canterbury, and other
principal Divines there, that the Controversies being examined, and the truth
by their consents confirmed, the contrary Errors and contentions thereabouts
might the rather cease. By whose good travel with sound consent in Truth, such
advice and care was taken by certain Propositions (containing certain
substantial points of Religion, taught and received in this University and
Church, during the time of her Majesty's Reign, and consented unto, and
published by the best approved Divines both at home and abroad) for the
maintaining of the same truth and peace of the Church, as thereby we enjoyed
here great and comfortable quiet, until Dr. Baroe (in January last in his
Sermon Ad Clerum in St. Mary's, contrary to restraint, and Commandment from the
Vice Chancellor and the Heads) by renewing again these Opinions, disturbed our
peace, whereby his Adherents and disciples were and are too much emboldned to
maintain false doctrine to the corrupting and disturbing of this University,
and the Church, if it be not in time effectually prevented. For remedy whereof
we have with joint consent and care (upon complaint of diverse Batchelors of
Divinity) proceeded in the examination of the cause, according to our Statutes,
and usual manner of proceeding in such causes, whereby it appears by
sufficient Testimonies, that Dr. Baroe has offended in such things as his
Articles had charged him withal.

There is also since the former, another Complaint preferred against him by
certain Batchelors in Divinity, that he has not only in the Sermon, but also
for the space of this fourteen or fifteen years taught in his Lectures,
preached in his Sermons, determined in the Schools, and printed in several
books, diverse points of doctrine not only contrary to himself, but also
contrary to that which has been taught and received ever since her Majesty's
Reign; and agreeable to the Errors of Popery, which we know your Lordship has
always disliked and hated: so that we (who for the space of many years past
have yielded him sundry benefits and favors here, in the University, being a
stranger, and forborne him when he has often heretofore (busy and curious in
aliena Republica) broached new and strange questions in Religion) now unless we
should be careless of maintaining the truth of Relgiion established, and of our
duties in our places cannot (being resolved and confirmed in the truth of the
long professed and received doctrine) but continue to use all good means, and
seek at your Lordships hands some effectual Remedy hereof, lest by petmitting
passage to these Errors, the whole body of Popery should by little and little
break in upon us, to the overthrow of our Religion, and consequently the
withdrawing of many here and elsewhere from true obedience to her Majesty.

May it therefore please your Lordship to have an honorable consideration of
the premises, and (for the better maintaining of peace, and the truth of
Religion so long received in this University and Church) to vouchsafe your
Lordships good aid and advice, both to the comfort of us, (wholly consenting
and agreeing in judgment) and all others of the University truly affected, and
to the suppression in time, not only of these errors, but even of gross Popery,
like, by such means, in time easily to creep in amongst us (as we find by late
experience it has dangerously begun). Thus craving pardon for troubling your
Lordship, and commending the same in praise to Almighty God, we humbly take our
leave,

From Cambridge, March. 8th. 1595. Your Lordships humble and bounden to be
commanded, Roger Goad, Procan. R. Some, Tho. Leg, John Jegon, Thomas Nevil,
Thomas Preston, Hump. Tyndal, James Mountague, Edmond Barwel, Laurence
Cutterton.


Such was the condition of Affairs at Cambridge at the expiring of the year,
1595. Calvinism, wherewith it was before obscured, and to shine forth again in
its former luster. To the advancement of which work, as the long continuance of
Baroe in the University, for the space of 20 years and upwards, the discreet
activity of Dr. Harsnet, Fellow and Master of Pembrook College for the term of
40 yeaas and more, gave a good encouragement; so the invincible constancy of
Mr. Barret, and the slender opposition made by Overald, contributed to the
confirmation and increase thereof. For scarce had Overald warmed his Chair,
when he found himself under a necessity of encountering some of the remainder of
Baroes Adversaries, though he followed not the blow so far as Baroe did; for
some there were of the old Predestination Leven, who publicly had taught (as
he related it in the conference at Hampton Court) all such persons as were once
truly justified, though after they fell into never so grievous sins, yet
remained still just (or in the state of Justification) before they actually
repented of those sins; yea, though they never repented of them through
forgetfulness, or sudden death, yet they should be justified and saved without
Repentance. Against which Overald maintained, that whosoever (although before
justified) did commit any grievous sin, as Adultery, Murder, Treason, or the
like, did become ipso facto, Conf. at Ham. C. p. 42.
subject to Gods wrath, and guilty of damnation (or were in the state of
damnation, quoad presentem statum) until they repented: And so far he had
followed Baroe, but he went no further, holding (as he continued his own story)
that such persons as were called and justified according to the purpose of Gods
Election, did neither fall totally from all the graces of God (though how a
justified man may bring himself into a present state of Wrath and Damnation,
without a total falling from all the graces of God, is beyond my reason) and
that they were in time renewed by the Spirit of God unto a lively faith and
repentance, and thereby justified from those sins (with the guilt and wrath
annexed unto them) into which they had fallen: nor can it be denied, but that
some other Learned men of those times were of the same opinion also. Amongst
which I find Dr. John Bridges Dean of Sarum, Anti-Armini. page 202.
and afterward Lord Bishop of Oxon, to be reckoned for one, and Mr. Richard
Hooker (of whom more anon) to be accounted for another. But being but the
compositions of private men, they are not to be heard against the express words
of the two Homilies touching falling from God, in case the point had not been
positively determined in the sixteenth Article. But so it happened,
notwithstanding that Overald not concurring with the Calvinists concerning the
estate of such justified persons as afterward fell into grievous sins; there
grew some diffidences and distrust between them, which afterward widned
themselves into greater differences. Insomuch, that diffenting from them also
touching the absolute decree of Reprobation, and the restraining of the benefit
of Christ's death, and Gods grace unto a few particulars, and that too in Gods
primitive purpose and intent, concerning the salvation and damnation of
mankind; those of the Anti-Calvinian party went on securely, with little or no
opposition and less disturbance.

At Oxford all things in the mean time were calm and quiet, Rome, than unto
those which were disputed against the Calvinists in these points of Doctrine;
for witness whereof, we may call in the works of Sanders, Stapleton, Allyns,
Parsons, Campian, and many others of that sid; as those of Bishop Jewel, Bishop
Bilson, Dr. Humphreys, Mr. Nowel, Dr. Sparks, (...) Hist. l. 9.
Dr. Reynolds, and many others which stood firm to the Church of England. And
secondly, though Dr. Humphreys, the Queens Professor for Divinity was not
without cause reckoned for a Non conformist, yet had he the reputation of a
moderate man, ( a moderate Nonconformist, as my Author calls him) and
therefore might permit that liberty of opinion unto other men which was
indulged unto himself; neither did Dr. Holland, who succeeded him, give any
such countenance to the propagating of Calvin's doctrines, as to make them the
subject of his Lectures and Disputations. Insomuch that Mr. Prin, with all his
diligence, can find but seven men who publicly maintained any point of
Calvianism in the Schools of Oxon, from the year 1596. to the year 1616. and
yet to make that number also, he is fain to take in Dr. George Abbot, and Dr.
Benfield, on no other account, but for maintaining, Deum non esse authorem
peccati, that God is not the Author of sin, which any Papist, Lutheran, or
Arminian, might have maintained as well as they.

And yet it cannot be denied, Calvin had attained to in both Universities, and
the extreme diligence of his followers for the better carrying on of their own
designs, there was a general tendency unto his opinions in the present
controversies; so that it is no marvel, if many men of good affection to that
Church in government and forms of worship, might unawares be seasoned with his
Principles in point of Doctrine; Instit. fathers in the Pref.
his book of Institutes being for the most part the foundation on which the
young Divines of those times did build their studies; and having built their
studies on a wrong foundation, did publicly maintain some point or other of
his Doctrines, which gave least offense, and out of which no dangerous
consequence could be drawn (as they thought and hoped) to the dishonor of God,
the disgrace of Religion, the scandal of the Church, or subversion of
godliness: amongst which, if judicious Mr. Hooker be named for one, (as for one
I find him to be named) yet is he named only for maintaining one of the five
points, that namely of the not total or final falling away of Gods Elect, as
Dr. Overald also did in the Schools of Cambridge, though neither of them can be
challenged for maintaining any other point of Calvin's Doctrine, touching the
absolute decree of Reprobation, Election unto life, without reference to faith
in Christ, the unresistible workings of Grace, the want of freedom in the will
to concur therewith, and the determining of all men's actions unto good or evil,
without leaving any power in men to do the contrary. And therefore, secondly,
Mr. Hookers discourse of Justification, as it now comes into our hands, might
either be altered in some points after his decease, by him that had the
publishing of it; or might be written by him as an essay of his younger years,
before he had consulted the Book of Homilies, and perused every clause in the
public Liturgy (as he after did) or had so carefully examined every Text of
Scripture, upon which he lays the weight of his judgment in it, as might
encourage him to have it printed when he was alive.

Of any men who publicly opposed the Calvinian tenants in this University till
after the beginning of King James his Reign, Baroe dyed in London (which was
about three or four years after he had left his place in Cambridge) his Funeral
was attended by most of the Divines then living in and about the City; Dr.
Bancroft then Bishop of London, giving order in it, which plainly shows that
there were many of both Universities which openly favored Baroes Doctrines,
and did as openly dislike those of the Calvinians, though we find but few
presented to us by their names. Amongst which few I first reckon Dr. John
Buckridge, President of St. John's College, and Tutor to Archbishop Laud, who
carried his Anti-Calvinian doctrines with him to the Sea of Rochester, and
publicly maintained them at a conference in York House, Ann. 1626. And
secondly, Dr. John Houson, one of the Canons of Christ Church, and
Vice Chancellor of the University. Ann. 1602. so known an enemy to Calvin his
opinions, that he incurred a suspension by Dr. Robert Abbots then Vice
Chancellor. And afterward being Bishop of Oxon, subscribed the letter amongst
others to the Duke of Buckingham in favor of Mountague, and his Book called
Appello Cesarem, as before was said. And though we find but these two named for
Anti-Calvinist, in the five controverted points, yet might there be many
houses, perhaps some hundreds, who held the same opinions with them, though
they discovered not themselves, or break out in any open opposition, 1 King.
19, 18. 1 King. 19.1^.
as they did at Cambridge; God had 7000. Servants in the Realm of Israel, who
had not bowed the knee to Baal, though we find the name of none but the Prophet
Eliah, the residue keeping themselves so close for fear of danger, that the
Prophet himself complained to God, that he alone was left to serve him. A
parallel case to which may be that the Christians during the power and
prevalency of the Arian Heretics, St. Jerome giving us the names of no more
than three, who had stood up stoutly in defense of the Nicene council, and the
points of Doctrine there established, viz. 1. St. Athanasius Patriark of
Alexandria in Egypt, St. Hillary Bishop of Poictious in France, and St.
Eusebius Bishop of Vevelli in Italy, of which thus the Father, Siquidem Arianis
victis triumphatorem Athanasium suum Egyptus excepit; Hillarium e prelio
revertentem galliarum ecclesia complexa est, ad reditum Eusebii sui lugubres
vestes Italia mutavit; that is to say, upon the overthrow of the Arians Egypt
received her Athanasius, now returned in triumph; the Church of France embraced
her Hillary coming home with victory from the battle; and on the return of
Eusebius, Italy changed her mourning garments. By which it is most clear, even
to vulgar eyes, that not these Bishops only did defend the truth, but that it
was preserved by many others as well of the Clergy as of the People, in their
several Countries; who otherwise never had received them with such joy and
triumph, if a great part of them had not been of the same opinions, though no
more of them occur by name in the records of that age.

But then again, Arian Heretics, yet had that been sufficient to preserve the
Church from falling universally from the faith of Christ, or deviating from the
truth in those particulars; Deuteronomy. 17.6. Mat. 18, 19.
the word of truth being established (as say both Law and Gospel) if there be
only two or three witnesses to attest unto it; two or three members of the
Church may keep possession of a truth in all the rest, and thereby save the
whole from error; even as a King invaded by a foreign Enemy, does keep
possession of his Realm by some principal fortress, the standing out whereof
may in time regain all the rest, which I return for answer to another objection
touching the paucity of those Authors whom we have produced in maintenance of
the Anti Calvinian or old English doctrines, since the resetling of the Church
under Queen Elizabeth; for though they be but few in number, and make but a
very thin appearance: Apparent rari nautes in gurgite vasto, in the Poets
language, yet serve they for a good assurance that the Church still kept
possession of her primitive truths, not utterly lost, though much endangered by
such contrary Doctrines as had of late been thrust upon her, there was a time
when few or none of the Orthodox Bishops durst openly appear in favor of St.
Athanasius, but only Liberius Pope of Rome, Theod. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap.
15.
who thereupon is thus upbraided by Constantius the Arian Emperor, Quota pars
tu es orbis terrarum, qui solus, etc. How great a part (says he) art thou of
the whole world, that thou alone should show thy self in defense of that
wicked man, and thereby overthrow the peace of the Universe. To which Liberius
made this answer, non diminuitur solitudine mea, verbum dei, nam and olim tres
solum inventi fuere qui edicto resisterint; that is to say, the Word of God is
not made the weaker by my sole appearing in defense thereof no more than when
there were but three, (he means the three Hebrew Children in the Book of
Daniel) which durst make open opposition to the Kings Edict. Liberius thought
himself sufficient to keep possession of a truth in the Church of Christ, till
God should please to raise up more Champions in all places to defend the same,
not thinking it necessary to return any other answer, or to produce the names
of any others of his time, who turned Athanasius as much as he, which brings
into my mind a passage in the conference betwixt Dr. Ban, Featly and Sweat the
Jesuit, in which the Jesuit much insisted on that threadbare question, viz.
where was your Church before Luther? which when the Doctor went to show out of
Scriptures and Fathers, some of the Papists standing by, cried out for names,
those which stood further of ingeminating nothing but Names Names, whereupon
the Dr. merrily asked them, if nothing would content them but a Buttery book.
And such an Answer I must make in the present case to such as take up testimony
by tale, not weight, and think no truth is fairly proved, except it come
attended with a cloud of witnesses. But what we want in number now, he shall
find hereafter, when we shall come to take a view of King James his Reign, to
which now we hasten.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Conference at Hampton Court, and the several encouragements
given to the Anti-Calvinians in the time of King James.
1. The occasion of the conference at Hampton Court, and the chief persons
there assembled. 2. The nine Articles of Lambeth rejected by King James. 3.
Those of the Church being left in their former condition. 4. The Calvinian
Doctrine of Predestination decryed by Bishop Bancroft, and disliked by King
James; and the reasons of it. 5. Bishop Bancroft and his Chaplain both abused;
the inserting the Lambeth Articles into the confession of Ireland no argument
of King James, his approbation of them, by whom they were inserted, and for
what cause allowed of in the said Confession. 6. A pious fraud of the
Calvinians in clapping their predestinarian Doctrines at the end of the Old
Testament, An. 1607. discovered, censured and rejected, with the reasons for
it. 7. The great encouragement given by King James to the Anti-calvinians, and
the increasing of that party both in power and number by the stirs in Holland.
8. The offense taken by King James at Conradus Vorstius, animateth the Oxon.
Calvinists to suspend Dr. Houson, and to preach publicly against Dr. Laud. 9.
The like proceedings at Cambridge against Mr. Simpson, first prosecuted by King
James, and on what account, that the King was more incensed against the party
of Arminius, than against their persuasions. 10. Instructions published by King
James in order to the diminishing of Calvin's Authority, the defense of
universal Redemption, and the suppressing of his Doctrines in the other points,
and why the last proved so unuseful in the case of Gabriel Bridges. 11. The
publishing of Mountagues answer to the Gagger, the information made against it:
the Author and his Doctrine taken by King James into his protection, and his
appeal licensed by the Kings appointment. 12. The conclusion of the whole
discourse, and the submission of it to the Church of England.


NOw we come unto the Reign of King James of happy memory, Scotland had given
some hopes of seeing better days to the English Puritans than those which they
enjoyed under Queen Elizabeth. Upon which hopes they presented him at his first
coming to the Crown with a supplication, no less tedious than it was
impertinent, given out to be subscribed with a thousand hands, though it wanted
many of that number, and aiming at an alteration in many points, both of
Doctrine and Discipline: But they soon found themselves deceived. For first the
King commanded by public Proclamation, that the divine service of the Church
should be diligently officiated and frequented as in former times, under pain
of suffering the severest penalties by the Laws provided in that case. And that
being done, instead of giving such a favorable answer to their supplication,
as they had flattered themselves withal, he commended the answering of it to
the Vice Chancellor, Heads, and other Learned men of the University of Oxon,
from whom there was nothing to be looked for toward their contentment. But
being, thirdly, a just Prince, and willing to give satisfaction to the just
desires of such as did apply themselves unto him; as also to inform himself in
all such particulars as were in difference betwixt the Petitioners and the
Prelates; he appointed a solemn Conference to be held before him at Hampton
Court on Thursday the 12th. of January, Anno 1603. being within less than ten
months after his entrance on the Kingdom. To which Conference were called by
several Letters on the Churches part, the most Reverend and right renowned
Fathers in God, Dr. John Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Richard
Bancroft Bishop of London, Dr. Tobie Matthews Bishop of Durham, Dr. Thomas
Bilson Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Gervase Babbinton Bishop of Worchester, Dr.
Anthony Rudd Bishop of David's, Dr. Anthony Walson Bishop of Chichester, Dr.
Henry Robbinson Bishop of Carlisle, and Dr. Thomas Dove Bishop of Peterborough,
as also Dr. James Mountague Dean of the Chapel, Dr. Thomas Ravis Dean of
Christ Church, Dr. John Bridges Dean of Sarum, Dr. Lancelot Andrews Dean of
Westminster, Dr. John Overald Dean of Saint Paul's, Dr. William Barlaw Dean of
Chester, Dr. Giles Tompson Dean of Windsor, together with Dr. Joh: King
Archdeacon of Nottingham, and Dr. Richard Field after Dean of Gloucester; all
of them habited and attired according to their several ranks and stations in
the Church of England. And on the other side, there appeared for the Plantiff
or Petitioner Dr. Reynolds, Dr. Spark, Mr. Knewstubs, and Mr. Chatterton; the
two first being of Oxon, and the other of Cambridge, Con. at H. C. p. 27.
apparelled in their Turkey Gowns to show (as Bishop Bancroft tartly noted) they
desired rather to conform themselves in outward Ceremonies with the Turks than
they did with the Papists.

The first day of the Conference being spent betwixt the King and the Bishops;
Reynolds, Con. at H. C. p. 24.
(as the mouth of the rest) That the nine Assertions Orthodoxal as he termed
them) concluded upon at Lambeth, might be inserted into the Book of Articles,
which when King James seemed not to understand, as having never heard before of
those nine Assertions. Page 40. etc.
He was informed that by reason of some Controversies arising in Cambridge
about certain points of Divinity, my Lords Grace assembled some Divines of
especial note to set down their opinions, which they drew into nine Assertions,
and sent so them to the University for the appeasing of those quarrels; and
thereupon his Majesty resolved thus, that when such questions arise amongst
Scholars, the quietest proceeding were to determine them in the University, and
not to stuff the Book with all Conclusions Theological. Out of which passage I
observed, First, that the Attribute of Orthodoxal is ascribed to the said nine
Assertions by none but Dr. Reynolds, who termed them so, and not by Dr. Barlow
then Dean of Chester, who related the conference, and had been present at the
making of the said Assertions, being at that time one of the domestic
Chaplains of Archbishop Whitgift. And secondly, That they were not made to be a
standing Rule to the Church of England, but only for the present pacifying of
some differences which arose in Cambridge, as is here acknowledged. I observe
thirdly, that King James did utterly eject the motion, as to the inserting of
the said nine Assertions amongst the Articles of the Church, leaving them to be
canvased and disputed in the Schools, as more proper for them. And fourthly,
That being left to be disputed in the Schools, they might be held in the
Affirmative, or in the Negative, as best pleased the Respondent.

It was also moved by Dr. Reynolds, Ibid. p. 24.
and enlarged where some things were defective. And in particular he desired,
Page 25.
that an explanation might be made of the 23d. Article for ministering in the
Congregation, of the 25th. touching Confirmation, Page 37.
and of the 37th. concerning the Authority of the Pope of Rome, Page 38.
as also that these words, Page 24.
viz. That the intention of the Minister is not of the Essence of the
Sacrament, might be added in some fit place to the book of Articles. But that
which Dr. Reynolds did most insist upon, was the 16th. Article, where it is
said, That after we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace. The
meaning whereof, though he acknowledged to be sound, yet he desired, that
because they may seem to be contrary to the Doctrine of Election and
Predestination in the 17th. Article, those words may seem to be explained with
this or the like addition, viz. That neither totally nor finally. Which motion
or proposal concerning Dr. Overald more than any other, he took occasion
thereupon to acquaint his Majesty with that which had happened to him at
Cambridge, concerning the Estate of a justified man, fallen into any grievous
sin, as Murder, Treason, Adultery, and the like, as has been shown at large in
the former Chapter. But the result of all was this, that after a full debate
and consideration concerning every one of the said Articles, and the doubts
moved about the same, there was no cause found for altering any thing in any of
them, Page 41.
and as little for the 16th. as for any other. For though the said Dr. Overald
had declared it for his own opinion, that he who was called and justified
according to the purpose of Gods Election, being brought into a state of wrath
and damnation, did neither fall totally from all the graces of God, not finally
from the possibility of being renewed again by Gods holy Spirit, as before is
said, and that King James himself had left it to be considered, whether the
word Often might not be added to the 16th. Article, as thus, viz. We may often
depart from Grace, etc. yet being left to the consideration of the Prelates, as
were all the rest, the said Article remained without any alteration, as before
they found it, and as it still continues to this very day.

But here is to be observed, the Bishop of London took occasion to signify to
his Majesty, how very many in these days neglecting holiness of life, presumed
too much of persisting in Grace, laying all their Religion upon Predestination,
If I shall be saved, I shall be saved, which he termed a desperate Doctrine,
showing it to be contrary to good Divinity, and the true doctrine of
Predestination, wherein we should rather reason Ascendendo than Descendendo;
thus, I live in obedience to God, in love with my Neighbor, I follow my
occasion, etc. Therefore I trust God has elected me, and predestined me to
salvation; not thus which is the usual course of Argument, God has
predestinate and chosen me to life, therefore though I sin never so grievously,
yet I shall not be damned, for whom he once loves, he loves to the end.
Whereupon he showed his Majesty out of the next Article, what was the doctrine
of the Church of England touching Predestition in the very last Paragraph,
scilicet, We must receive Gods promises in such wise as these be generally set
forth to us in holy Scripture, and in all our doings the Will of God to be
followed which we have delivered to us in holy Scripture. Which part of the
Article his Majesty very well approved, and after he had, (according to his
manner) very singularly discoursed on that place of Paul, Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling: he left it to be considered, whether any
thing were not to be added for the clearing of the Doctors doubt, by putting in
the word often, or the like: as thus, We may often depart from Grace, but in
the mean time wished that the Doctrine of Predestination might be very tenderly
handled, and with great discretion, left on the one side Gods omnipotency might
be called in question, by impeaching the doctrine of his Eternal
Predestination, or on the other a desperate Resumption might be arreared, Ibid.
p. 43.
by inferring the necessary certainty of standing and persisting in Grace.
After which, upon occasion of Dr. Overals discourse concerning his affairs at
Cambridg, his Majesty entered into a longer discourse of Predestination and
Reprobation than before, and of the necessary enjoining Repentance and holiness
of life with true Faith; concluding that it was Hypocrisy; and not true
justifying faith which was severed from them. For although Predestination and
Election depend not upon any Qualities, Actions, or works of men, which be
mutable, but upon Gods eternal and immutable decree and purpose; yet such is
the necessity of Repentance after known sins committed, as that without it
there could not be either Reconciliation with God, or remission of those sins.

But here methinks I hear it said, that though the King being then unacquainted
with the Lambeth Articles, Justific. of the Fathers, etc. in pref.
thought not meet to put them amongst the Articles of this Church, yet he liked
it well enough in his Clergy of Ireland, that they took them into their
Confession, and Bishop Bancroft had agreed to them before the Conference, and
that when he was Archbishop, his Chaplain with his good liking and approbation
published the Exposition or Analysis of our Articles, in which he gives the
Calvinist as fair quarter as can be wished. But first (beginning with the last)
so much of the Objection as concerns Bishop Bancrost is extremely false, not
agreeing to the Lambeth Articles, not being Bishop of London when those
Articles were agreed unto as is mistakingly affirmed; and that Analysis of
Explication of our English Articles related to in the Objection being published
in the year 1585. which was ten years before the making of the Lambeth
articles; and eighteen years before Bancroft had been made Archbishop. And
secondly, It is not very true, that King James liked, (that is to say, was well
pleased with) the putting of those Articles into the confession of the Church
of Ireland, though the said Confession was subscribed in his name by the Lord
Deputy Chichester, is plainly enough not without his consent: for many other
things were in the Confession to which the Lord Deputy subscribed, and the King
consented as affairs then stood, which afterward he declared no great liking
to, either of the Tenor or effect thereof. For the truth is, that the drawing
up of that Confession being committed principally to the care of Dr. Usher, and
afterward Lord Primate of Ireland, a professed Calvinian, he did not only
thrust into it all the Lambeth Articles, but also many others of his own
Opinions: as namely, That the Pope was Antichrist, or that man of sin, that the
power of sacerdotal Absolution is no more than declaratory, as also touching
the morality of the Lords day Sabbath, and the total spending of it in
religious Exercises: Which last how contrary it is to King James' Judgment, how
little cause he had to like it, or rather how much reason he had to dislike it,
his declaration about lawful Sports, which he published within three years
after, does express sufficiently; so that the King might give confent to the
confirming of these Articles amongst the rest, though he liked as little of the
one as he did of the other: And he might do it on these Reasons. For first, The
Irish Nation at that time were most tenaciously addicted to Errors and
corruptions of the Church of Rome, and therefore must be bended to the other
extreme before they could be sireight, and Orthodox in these points of
doctrine. Secondly, It was an usual practice with the King in the whole course
of his Government, to balance one extreme by the other, countenancing the
Papist against the Puritan, and the Puritan sometimes against the Papist, that
betwixt both the true Religion and Professors of it might be kept in safety.

With greater Artifice but less Authority have some of our Calvinians framed
unto themselves another Argument, Rob. Barker his Majesty's own Printer in the
year 1607. from whence it is inferred by the Author of the Anti-Arminianism,
Anti-Armin. p. 54.
and from him by others, that the said Questions and Answers do contain a
punctual Declaration of the received doctrine of this Church in the points
disputed. But the worst is, they signify nothing to the purpose for which they
were produced. For I would fain know by what Authority those Questions and
Answers were added to the end of the Bible? If by Authority, and that such
Authority can be produced, the Argument will be of force which it takes from
them, and then no question but the same Authority by which they were placed
there at first, would have preserved them in that place for a longer time than
during the sale of that Edition: The not retaining them in such Editions as
have followed since the sale of that, shows plainly that they were of no
anthority in themselves, nor intended by the Church for a rule to others: and
being of no older standing than the year 1607. (for ought appears by Mr. Prin,
who first made the Objection) they must needs seem as destitute of antiquity as
they are of authority, so that upon the whole matter the Author of the Book
has furnished those of different Judgment with a very strong argument, that
they wrre foisted in by the fraud and practice of some of the Emissaries of the
Puritan Faction: who hoped in time to have them pass as current amongst the
people as any part of Canonical Scripture. Such Piae frauds as these are, we
should have too many, were they once allowed of: Some prayers were also added
to the end of the Bible in some Editions, and others at the end of the public
Liturgy. Which being neglected at the first, and afterward beheld as the
authorized prayers of the Church, were by command left out of those Books and
Bibles, as being the compositions of private men, not the public acts of the
Church, and never since added, as before.

But to return unto King James, Calvinians by the fraud of his Printer, as
their opposites received by his grace and favor by which they were invested in
the chief preferments of the Church of England, conferred as openly and freely
upon the Anti-Calvinians, as those who had been bread up in the other
persuasions, Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine habentur, as we know who
said. For presently upon the end of the Conference he prefers Bishop Bancroft
to the Chair of Canterbury, and not long after Dr. Barlow to the Sea of
Rochester. On whose translation unto Lincoln, Dr. Richard Neil then Dean of
westminster succeeds at Rochester, and leaves Dr. Buckridge there for his
successor at his removal unto Lichfield in the year 1609. Dr. Samuel Harsnet
is advanced to the Sea of Chichester, and about ten years after unto that of
Norwich. In the beginning of the year 1614. Dr. Overald succeeds Neil (then
translated to Lincoln) in the Sea of Coventry and Lichfield, Dr. George
Mountein succeeded the said Neil (then translated to Durham) in the Church of
Lincoln. In the year 1619. Dr. John Houson one of the Canons of Christ's Church,
a professed Anti-Calvinist is made Bishop of Oxon. And in the year 1621. Dr.
Valentine Carry Successor unto Overald in the Deanery of St. Paul, is made Bishop
of Exon, and on the same day Dr. William Laud who had been Pupil unto Buckridge
as before said, is consecrated Bishop of St. David's. By which encouragements
the Anti-Calvinians or old English Protestants took heart again, and more
openly declared themselves than they had done formerly; the several Bishops
abovenamed finding so gracious a Patron of the learned King, are, as being
themselves as bountiful Patrons (respect being had to the performants in their
nomination) to their Friends and followers. By means whereof, though they found
many a Rub in the way, and were sometimes brought under censure by the adverse
party; yet in the end they surmounted all difficulties, and came at last to be
altogether as considerable both for power and number, as the Calvinists were.
Toward which increase the differences betwixt the Remonstrants and the
Contra-Remonstrants in the Belgic Provinces did not help a little, who
publishing their discourses one against the other, sharpened the Appetite of
many Students in both Universities to feed more heartily on such Dishes are
were now plentifully set before them, than they had done in former times; which
they either were not to be had, or not to be fed upon without fear of surfeit,
without ^^edanger of dilgorging what before they had eaten.

But so it (...) that while matters went thus fairly forwards, Condradus
Vorstius, suspected for a Sain^setenian, or Socinian Heretic; and one who had
derogated in his writings from the Pur^y, the Immensity, the Omniscience, and
immutability of Almighty God, was chosen by the Curators of Leiden, Anno 1611.
to succeed Arminius in that place. Wherewith King James being made acquainted
inflamed as well with a pious ^^al to the honor of God, as a just fear lest
the Contagion of his Errors might cross the Seas and infect his own Sujects
also, he first solicited the States not to suffer such a man to be placed
amongst them, and afterward to send him back, when they had received him. But
finding no success in either, and having sent many sruitless Messages and
Letters to the States about it, he published his Declaration against the said
Vorstius, and therein used many harsh and bitter Expressions against Arminius
and his followers (of which see Cap. 6. Number. 37. as if they had been guilty of
the same impieties. This put the Calvinists again upon such a Gog that none of
their Adversaries in either of the Universities (of what eminent parts and name
soever) could escape their hands. During which heats, the reverend Dr. Houson,
who had been Vice Chancellor of the University ten years before, was called in
question and suspended by Dr. Reb. Abbot, then Dr. of the Chair and
Vice Chancellor also, Propter conciones publicas, minus Orthodoxas and plenas
offensionis: for preaching certain Sermons less Orthodox and fuller of offense
than they should have been. He was sufficiently known for an Anticalvinist; and
had preached somewhat tending to the disparagement of the Genevian Annotations
on the Holy Scriptures (censured more bitterly by none than King James himself)
which brought him under this displeasure. And about two years after, Anno 1614.
the said Dr. Abbot fell violently soul on Dr. William Laud, then President of
St. John's College, whom in his Sermon at St. Peter's on Easter Sunday, he
publicly exposed to contempt and scorn under the notion of a Papist, as
Barrets d^ctri^es had been formerly condemned at Cambridge by the name of
Popery, for which consult the Anti-Armin. p. 66.

But there was something more peculiar in the case of Mr. Edward Sympson than
in that of the two great Doctors before remembered; James himself being both the
Informer and the Prosecutor against this man, as it is thus related by the
Church Historian viz. Chapter Hist. l. 6. Hist. of Camb. p. 10^.
It happened in the year 1616. that Mr. Edward Sympson, (a very good Scholar)
fellow of trinity College, preached a Sermon before King James at Royston,
taking for his Text John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh: Hence
he endeavored to prove that the committing of any great sin does extinguish
Grace and Gods Spirit for the time in the man. He added also that S. Paul in
the seventh Chapter to the Remans spoke not of himself as an Apostle and
Regenerate, but sub statu legis: Hereat his Majesty took (and publicly
expressed) great distaste; because Arminius had lately been blamed for
extracting the like Exposition out of the works of Faustus Socinus. Whereupon
he sent to the two Professors in Cambridg for their Judgment herein, who proved
and subscribed the place ad Romans 7. to be understood of a Regenerate man,
according to St. Augustines latter Opinion in his Retractations; and the
Preacher was enjoined a public Recantation before the King, which accordingly
was performed by him. In which it is first to be observed, that no offense was
taken at the first part of his Sermon, in which he went no further than Dr.
Overald had gone before, as in our last Chap. Number. 6. Secondly, That the latter
part thereof might have given as little, if his Exposition on the 13. Chap of
St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, had not been fathered on Arminius, against
whom the King had openly declared in his book against Vorstius, and likewise
upon his followers in the Belgic Provinces himself as a dangerous party, which
he then labored to suppress as before was noted. And therefore, thirdly, I
observe that the two Professors in Cambridg did neither more wholly or
originally of their own authority, but as they were set on by the King, who
could nor otherwise be satisfied than by some such censure on Arminius, and
consequently for his sake on the Preacher too. For that King James condemned
not the Arminian doctrines in themselves, though he had taken some displeasure
against their persons, as is said before, appears not only by rejecting the
Lambeth Articles, and his dislike of the Calvinian doctrine of Predestination,
in the conference at Hampton Court, but also by instructing his Divines
commissionated for the Synod of Dort, not to oppose the Article of Universal
Redemption, which they accordingly performed. Nor were the said Professors at
that time so forward as to move in it of themselves, as may appear by their not
answering of Tompsons book, entitled de Intercrsione Gratiae and
Justificationis, though the Author of it was a member of that University: but
leaving it to be confuted by Dr. Abbot, their Brother in the Chair at Oxon. So
great an alteration had been made in the Affections of the University since the
first striking up of their heats against Baroe and Barret, which presently
began to cool on the death of Whitacres, and seemed to have been utterly
quenched in the death of Perkins. The hammering of the Golden Chair gave the
first blow in it.

But though the passions of the King inflamed by holy indignation, Arminius;
yet did his passions calm, and subside at last giving him leave to look about
him, and to discern the dangers which did seem to threaten him on the other
side: considering therefore with himself, or being informed by such of the
Bishops and Divines, as were then about him, how great an adversary was
Calvinius to Monarchical interesse, how contrary the Predestination doctrines
were to all rules of Government, he found it necessary to devise or admit some
course of the preventing of the mischief. To which end he issued certain
directions to the Vice Chancellor and Heads of both Universities bearing date,
Jan. 18. 1619. Requiring them to take special order among other things, that
all that took any degree in the Schools should subscribe to the three Articles
in the thirty sixth Canon; Directions to the Vice Chancellor and Heads. etc.
Jan. 18. 1616.
that no man in the Pulpit or Schools be suffered to maintain Dogmatically any
point of doctrine that is not allowed by the Church of England, that none be
suffered to preach or lecture in the Towns of Oxon, or Cambridg, but such as
were every way conformable to the Church hoth in doctrine and discipline; and
finally ( which most apparently conduced to the ruin of Calvinism) that young
Students in Divinity be directed to study such books as be most agreeable in
doctrine and discipline to the Church of England, and excited to bestow their
time in the fathers, and Councils, Schoolmen, Histories and Controversies, and
not to insist too long upon Compendiums and abbreviations, making them the
grounds of their study in Divinity. This seemed sufficient to brute these
doctrines in the shell, as indeed it was, had these directions been as
carefully followed, as they were piously prescribed. But little or nothing
being done in pursuance of them, the Predestinarian doctrines came to be the
ordinary Theme of all Sermons, Lectures and Disputations, partly in regard that
Dr. Prideaux, who had then newly succeeded Dr. Rob. Abbot in the Chair at Oxon,
had very passionately exposed the Calvinian Interest; and partly in regard of
the Kings declared aversness from the Belgic Remonstrants, whom for the
reasons before mentioned, he labored to suppress to his utmost power. And yet
being careful that the Truth should not fear the worse for the men that taught
it, he gave command to such Divines as were commissionated by him to attend in
the Synod of Dort, An. 1618. not to recede from the doctrine of the Church of
England in the point of Universal Redemption by the death of Christ. A point so
inconsistent with that of the absolute and irrespective decree of Reprobation,
and generally of the whole Machina of Predestination, and the points depending
thereupon as they are commonly maintained in the Schools of Calvin, that fire
and water cannot be at greater difference. But this together with the rest
being condemned in the Synod of Dort, and that Synod highly magnified by the
English Calvinists, they took confidence of making those disputes the Subject
of their common discourses, both from the Pulpit and Press without stint or
measure. and thereupon it pleased his Majesty, having now no further fear of
any dangers from beyond the Seas, to put some water into their Wine; or rather
a Bridle into their mouths by publishing certain Orders and directions touching
Preachers and preaching, bearing date the 4th of August 1622. In which it was
enjoined, amongst other things, Directions of preaching and Preachers.
That no Preacher of what Title soever (under the degree of a bishop or Dean at
least) do from henceforth presume to teach in any popular Auditory the deep
points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or of the Universality,
Efficacy, Resistability, or Irresistability of Gods Grace, but rather leave
those Theams to be handled by learned men, and that modestly and moderately by
use and application, rather than by way of positive Doctrine, as being fitter
for Schools and Universities than for simple Auditors. The violating of which
Order by Mr Gabriel Bridges of Corpus Christi College in Oxon, by preaching on
the 19. of January then next following against the absolute decree, in
maintenance of universal Grace, and the cooperation of man's free will
prevented by it (though in the public Church of the University) laid him more
open to the prosecution of Dr. Prideaux, and to the censure of the
Vice Chancellor, and the rest of the Heads, than any preaching on those points,
or any of them could possibly have done at mother time.

Much was the noise which those of the Calvinian party were observed to make on
the publishing of this last Order, Mountagues answer to the Gagger, in which he
asserted the Church to her primitive and genuine doctrines, disclaimed all the
Calvinian Tenants as disowned by her, and left them to be countenanced and
maintained by those to whom they properly belonged. Which book being published
at a time, when a Session of Parliament was expected in the year 1624. The
opportunity was taken by Mr. Yates and Mr. Ward, two of the Lecturers or
Preachers of Ipswich, to prepare an Information against him, with an intent to
prosecute the same in the following Session. A Copy whereof being come into
Mountagues hands, he flies for shelter to King James, who had a very great
estimation of him for his parts and learning, in which he had over-mastred,
they then though much less Seldom at his own Philologie. The King had already
served his own turn against the Remonstrants by the Synod of Dort, and thereby
freed the Prince of Orange his most dear Confederate from the danger of
Barnevelt, and his faction. Archbishop Abbot came not at him since the late
deplorable misfortune which befell him at Branzil, and the death of Dr. James
Mountague Bishop of Winton left him at liberty from many importunities and
solicitations with which before he had been troubled; so that being now master
of himself, and governed by the light of his own most clear and excellent
Judgment, he took both Mountague, and his dectrines into his Protection, gave
him a full discharge, or quietus est, from all those Calumnies of Popery or
Arminianism, which by the said Informers were laid upon him; iucouraged him to
proceed in finishing his just Appeal, which he was in hand with; commanded Dr.
Francis White, then lately preferred by him to the Deanery of Carlisle, and
generally magnified not long before for his zeal against Popery, to see it
licensed for the Press, and finally gave order unto Mountague to dedicate the
book (when printed) to his Royal self. In obedience unto whose Command the Dean
of Carlisle licensed the book with this approbation, That there was nothing
contained in the same, but what was agreeable to the public Faith, Doctrine
and Discipline established in the Church of England. But King James dying
before the book was fully finished at the Press, it was published by the name
of Appello Caesarem, and dedicated to King Charles, as the Son and Successor to
whom it properly belonged; the Author touching in the Epistle Dedicatory, all
the former passages; but more at large than they are here discoursed of in this
short Summary.

And thus far we have prosecuted our Discourse concerning the Five Points
disputed between the English Protestants, Belgic Remonstrants, the
Melancthonian Lutherans, together with the Jesuits and Franciscans on the one
side, the English Calvinists, the Contra Remonstrants, the Rigid Lutherans, and
the Dominican Friars on the other side. In the last part whereof we may
observe, how difficult a thing it is to recover an old doctrinal Truth, when
overborn and almost lost by the continual Prevalency of a busy faction. And I
have carried it on no further, because at this time Bishop Laud (to whom the
raising and promoting of the Arminian doctrines, as they call them, is of late
ascribed) was hardly able to promote and preserve himself, oppressed with a hard
hand by Archbishop Abbot, secretly traduced unto the King for the unfortunate
business of Early of Devonshire, attaining with great difficulty to the poor
Bishopric of St. David's, after ten years service, and yet but green in favor
with the Duke of Buckingham. What happened afterward toward the countenancing
of these Doctrines by the appearing of King Charles in the behalf of Mountague,
the Letter of the three Bishops to the Duke in defense of the man and his
Opinion, his questioning and impeachment by the House of Commons, and his
preferment by the King to the Sea of Chichester, are all of them beyond the
bounds which I have prescribed unto my self in this Narration. Nor shall I now
take notice of his Majesty's Proclamation of the 14. of June, Anno 1626. For
establishing the peace and quiet of the Church of England: by which he
interdicted all such preaching and printing as might create any fresh
disturbance to the Church of England: or for his smart Answer to that part of
the Remonstrance of the House of Commons, Anno 1628. which concerned the danger
like to fall on this Church and Kingdom, by the growth of Arminianism, or of
the Declaration prefixed before the book of Articles in the same year also, for
silencing the said Disputes, or finally of his Majesty's Instructions, bearing
date, December. 30. 1629. for causing the Contents of the Declaration to be put
in execution, and punctually observed for the time to come. By means whereof,
and many fair encouragements from many of our Prelates, and other great men of
the Realm, the Anti-Calvinist party became considerable both for power and
number.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER, Concerning some particulars in a scurrilous
Pamphlet entitled, A Review of the Certamen Epistolare, etc.
PRima dicta mihi summa dicenda camaena, with thee good Reader I began, and
with thee I must end. I gave thee notice in the Preface of a scurrilous Libel,
the Author whereof had disgorged his foul stomach on me, and seemed to glory in
the shame. But whether this Author be a Cerberus with three heads, or a
Smectymnuus with fire, or but a single Shimei only (for it is differently
reported) is all one to me, who am as little troubled with the noise of
Billings-gate, as the cry of an Oyster-wife. It is my confidence that none of
the dirt which he most shamefully confesses himself to have thrown in my face
will be found upon it, P. 175.
notwithstanding that necesse est ut aliquid haereat may be sometimes true.
Omitting therefore the consideration of his many Obscenities which every where
are intermingled for the flowers of his Rhetoric, I cannot but do my self so
much justice as to satisfy the Reader in the truth of some things, which
otherwise may be believed to my disadvantage. I am content to suffer under as
much obloquie as any foul-mouthed Presbyterian can spit upon me; but I am not
willing to be thought a slanderer, a profane person, or ungrateful for the
sinallest favors; all which the Author of that scurrilous Pamphlet has
imposed upon me.

In the first place it is much labored to make me guilty of ingratitude and
disaffection to Magd. Coll. of which I had the honor to be once a member, P.
22.
and do retain so high an estimation of it, that whenever I shall write or
speak any thing to the reproach of that foundation, let my tongue cleave unto
the roof of my mouth, and my right hand forget its cunning. But I am able to
distinguish between the duty I own to the House it self, and that which every
member of it is to challenge from me, ( quid civitati, and quid civibus debeam
in the Orators Criticism.) And therefore I would not have the Libeller or his
Partners think that his or their taking Sanctuary under the name of Magdalen
College, shall so far privilege them in their actings (either against the
Church in general, or my own particular) but that I shall as boldly venture to
attacque them there, without fear of sacrilege, as Joab was smitten by Benaiah
at the horns of the Altar.

But the best is that I am made to have some ground for my disaffection, though
there be no less falsehood in the fundamentals than the superstructure. And a
fine tale is told of some endeavors by me used for bringing one of my own
brood into that foundation; the failing of which hopes must of necessity
occasion such an undervaluing of that College as to change it from a nest of
Sparrows to a nest of Cucknes. P. 22.
But the truth is, that the party for whom I was a suitor, was so far from
being one of my own brood, as not to be within the compass of my Relations; so
much a stranger to my blood, that he was no otherwise endeared unto me, than by
the extraordinary opinion which I had of his parts and industry. And therefore
I commended him no further unto Dr. Goodwin, than that it was not my desire to
have him chosen, if any abler Scholar should appear for the place. And it was
well for the young man that I sped no better; Periisset nisi periisset, as we
know who said. For within less than two years after he was elected into the
Society of Merton College (to their great honor be it spoken) upon no other
commendation than his own abilities.

In the next place I am made a slanderer for saying, that the new Sabbath
speculations of Dr. Bound and his adherents had been embraced more passionately
of late than any one Article of Religion here by Law established. How so?
Because says he (or they it is no matter which) it is well known that they do
more passionately embrace the great truths of Christ's Divinity, and the Divine
Authority of Scripture, etc. than any opinion about the Sabbath. What may be
meant by the, etc. it is hard to say, perhaps the Presbyterian Discipline, or
the Calvinian Doctrines of Predestination; the two dear Helena's of the Sects
as sacred and inviolable in their estimation as any of their new opinions about
the Sabbath. But whether the great truths of Christ's Divinity, the Divine
Authority of Scripture, or any Article of Religion here by Law established, be
embraced by them with the like passion as their new Saint Sabbath, may be
discerned by that impunity which is indulged by them to all Anabaptists,
Familists, Ranters, Quakers, and all other Sectaries, by whom the great Truths
of Christ's Divinity, and the Divine Authority of holy Scripture. and almost all
the Articles of the Christian Faith have been called in question. And yet we
cannot choose but know with what severity they proceeded when they were in
power against all persons whatsoever, whom they found traveling on the Sunday,
though their business was of more concernment to them than the lifting of the
Ox or Ass out of the ditch. With what a cursed rigor a Victualler has been
forced to pay ten shillings for selling a halfpenny loaf to a poor man in the
time of Sermon: What penalty they procured to be ordained against Vintners,
Tailors, Barbers, for selling but a pint of Wine, or carrying home a new suit
of Clothes, or trimming the man that was to wear them on their Sabbath day: And
finally, against all persons whatsoever for walking in the fields or streets
after all the public duties of the day were ended. They may tell me what they
will of their giving the right hand of Fellowship to some Divines of
Transmarine Churches, who differ in that Doctrine from them. But quid verba
audiam cum facta videam, Ibid.
the bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen will not out of my ears,
though preferred under a pretense of making them an acceptable Sacrifice to the
Lord their God.

But the main ondeavour of the Pamphlet is to bring me under the reproach of a
Profanation, in using such words unto the King in a Petition of mine presented
to him, as it could not without sin be applied unto any but to Cod. A greater
crime than any of the other two, and as falsely charged. It is suggested in the
Libel, that upon the sense of some indignity which was offered to me, in being
disturbed in my possession of a Lodging in Magdalen College, I made complaint
unto the King of the great wrong which bad been done his Majesty's creature,
and the workmanship of his hands, and that for this expression I was checked by
the Marquess of Hertford, who was then Chancellor of that University; for proof
whereof we are referred to somewhat which was said in the Bursery of that
College before two of the fellows.

But first I hope that all things which we said in the Bursery before any two
or more of the fellows ( -- Ecce inter pocula quaerant
Romalides Saturi, etc. --)
must not pass for Gospel, nor that all Table-talk, fit only for the Voider,
when the meal is done, is to be preserved upon Record for undoubted Truths.
Secondly, I am confident as I can be of any thing so long since done, that no
such expression ever passed my pen, there being no visible necessity to enforce
me to it. I conceive, Thirdly, that the Libeller cannot be so much a Stranger
to the Assembly Notes on Genesis 1.6. as not to know (if he had learnt it no where
else) that it is a familiar phrase in the style of the court, to say such an
one was created Earl, Marquess, or Duke, etc. upon which ground the Members of
the House of Peers were looked upon by our Republicans or Commonwealths men
(not without some contempt) as his Majesty's Creatures, Creatures of the
Prerogative, as they commonly called them. And therefore, Fourthly, that the
Marquess of Hertford was not likely to reprove me for calling my self his
Majesty's Creature, or the workmanship of his hands, in reference to my
temporal fortunes, and the place I held about the King; that Noble person,
acknowledging with a loyal gratitude that he received his Creation to the
Honorable Title of Lord Marquess from the hands of his Majesty; and that his
being made Governor to the Princes Highness was the Kings sole Workmanship.
Finally, if all expressions of this nature must be laid aside, and that we must
be taught a new Court-Dialect, because some Divines of the Assembly, and other
professed enemies of Monarchical Government do not like the old; we must
discharge the Titles of most High and Mighty, of Majesty, and Sacred Majesty,
because disliked by Buchanan in his most seditious book de Jure Regni. By whom
such adjuncts are reputed inter Barbarismos and Solecismos Aulicos, amongst the
Barbarisms and extravagancies of the Courts of Princes.

But for the clearer satisfaction of all equal and unbyassed persons, I shall
lay down the truth, the whole truth, and nothign but the truth, as to that
particular. In which the Reader is to know, that at his Majesty's first making
choice of Oxon for his Winter Quarters, Anno 1642. The course of my attendance
carried me to wait upon him there as a Chaplain in ordinary. Where I had not
been above a week, when I received his Majesty's command by the Clerk of the
Closet, for attending Mr. Secretary Nicholas on the morrow morning, and
applying my self from time to time to such directions as I should receive from
him in order to his Majesty's service. Which command was afterward reinforced
upon me, when the time of my ordinary attendance of the Court was at an end for
that year (as can be proved by two several intimations of it under his own most
Royal hand) with this charge super-added to it, that I was not to depart the
Town without special leave. I found by this that my attendance at the Court was
like to last as long as the War, and therefore that it did concern me to
accommodate my self with Lodging and such other necessaries as might both
encourage and enable me to perform those services which were required at my
hands. A Chamber in the College being vacant within few months after by the
absence of one of the Fellows, and the death of the other, I gained the free
consent of the absent party (Master Hobs by name, in whom the sole right of it
then remained) to make use of it for my self, and my little company.

Five months I quietly enjoyed it without interruption. But coming from the
Court on Alhallow-day, I found some Soldiers in the Room, who told me that
they came to take possession of it for Master D. who had succeeded in the
Rights of the man deceased, and that they meant to keep it for him until
further order. This carried me back unto the Court, where I acquainted Master
Secretary with the indignity and affront which was put upon me; desiring him
either to defend me from contempt and scorn, or that he would get me a
discharge from that employment which had lain so long and heavy on me. By his
advice a short Petition was drawn up to this Sacred Majesty, briefly containing
the particulars before laid down, and humbly praying in the close, that he
would graciously be pleased to extend unto me such a measure of his power and
favor in the case before him, as might preserve me in a fit capacity to
proceed in those services, which otherwise I could not be able to perform as I
had done formerly. His Majesty thereupon gave order to the now Lord Bishop of
Lichfield, being then President of the College, to fee me resetled for the
present; and to Sir Arthur Aston, who was then Governor of the Town, to take
some strict course with his Soldiers, for not giving me the like disturbance
for the time to come; which was the least I could expect from his Majesty's
goodness.

And here I thought my troubles had been at an end. But so it happened that the
Lord Marquess of Hertford was at the same time chosen Chancellor of the
University; and some of his Servants must be dealt with to espouse the quarrel.
By whose solicitation I was required to attend his Lordship within few days
after, and I went accordingly. But when I came, and that his Lordship saw how
far his Majesty had already appeared in the business, he could not but perceive
wital how unfit it was for him to take any cognizance of that cause which by
his Majesty had been heard and predetermined. He thereupon presently declined
the business, seemed much offended at the trouble which was given me in it, and
having dismissed the rest of the company, retained me with him for some time,
held some discourse with me about the quality and estate of the Kings affairs,
and finally called for Ale and Wine for my entertainment. But notwithstanding
those indignities which were put upon me on the one side, and those many
advantages which I had on the other, I carried my self fairly all along to my
troublesome Landlord, gave him a civil treatment in the Christmas Holidays,
presented him with no inconsiderable New Years gift, as the times then were;
and promised him that as soon as otherwise I could provide my self of
convenient Lodging, I would give him the contentment he so much desired. Nor
was it long before I did make good that promise. Since which time all fair
offices and friendly correspondences have past between us, there being nothing
(I thank God) which I can more easily forget than the sense of Injuries.

Hie status, haec Rerum suerat fortuna mearum,
Such was the state of these affairs,
And such the issue of my cares.
And thus good Reader thou have seen those horrible prophanations, slanders and
ingratitudes for which I stand arraigned in that scurrilous Libel, for by that
name I shall take leave to call that Pamphlet, which for the Ribauldry thereof
was stopped by the Vice Chancellor at the Press in Oxon, and being at last
brought forth in the dark at London, is neither justified by the name of the
Author, nor otherwise offered unto sale than by an underhand promoting of it
amongst those of that Faction. But there is still a race of men, as anciently
there was in Saint Hieroms time; qui aliorum tituperatione laudabile se videri
cupiunt, which hope to get themselves a name by defaming others. And for my
part I am content they should enjoy the ignominy of that Peccant humor (which
is so proper to the Text) without other censure than that which Michael the
Archangel passed upon the Devil, when he contended with him for the body of
Moses, of whom it is written by Saint Jude, that he durst not bring a railing
accusation against that Accuser of the Brethren, but left him to the judgment
of Almighty God, with (...); the Lord rebuke thee.

I have but one thing more to add, and that relates to the Integrity of Doctor
Barloe, who stands defamed by the Libeller and his alter idem, for using some
unjust dealing toward Doctor Reynolds, Doctor Sparks, etc. in his relation of
the conference at Hampton Court. For proof whereof one Master Sparks (affirmed
to be a man of en^^ent Learning) must be disquieted at his death, (if not
rather raised up from the dead) to declare his knowledge; who signified by his
friend I. M. what he once heard from H.G. an aged Minister concerning Doctor
Barloe's sorrow at his deathbed, for the wrong he had done to Doctor Reynolds,
and the rest in relating that conference with H. I. is reported to have added
further, that being at a Table with Master Sparks, the Son of Doctor Sparks, he
found him very sensible of the abuse (of which he could not speak without great
indignation) which had been put upon his Father and Doctor Reynolds, by the
said Relator. But first the man himself is dead, from whom we are to take our
greatest light in so dark a business. And who can tell but that this whole
narration may be one of those pious frauds devised by the Pamphleter, or his
Alter Idem) nec enim nuno fallere primum, Incipit a nobis -- for imposing as
well upon the dead as upon the living. Secondly, the principal witness being
dead, the credit of the figment rests on two common vouchers; that is to say
I. M. and H. I. as easy to be found, and as honest folk as Nicolas Nemo, in
Vtopia, or Madam Charity of the Oudemeon street in Mantinea, or Doctor H. H. in
the Margin of the Libel which is now before us. Thirdly, it must needs seem
exceeding strange to a sober Reader, that this great truth should lie concealed
(like a spark raked up in ashes) five and fifty years, and then blaze out upon
a sudden, when it was not thought of. And, fourthly, I had once the happiness
to be exceeding well acquainted with Master Thomas Sparks of Candover, in the
County of South-hampton, and Master William Sparks of Bleckly, in the County of
Buckingham, sometime Divinity-reader in Magdalen College, the only Sons of
Doctor Sparks before remembered, and having had many opportunities of
discoursing with them about that conference, and their Fathers acting in the
same, I never heard the least word from either of them of any wrong done, or
supposed to be done by Doctor Barlow, in drawing up the substance and
abridgment of it, so that I doubt not but it will appear on the full debate
that Doctor Barlow is more wronged in his same by these Libellers Pamphlets,
than ever Doctor Reynolds had been injured by that Learned Prelate.

I have now done with these polemical discourses, and shall not easily engage
in a new adventure, unless invincible necessity, or some unsufferable
provocation shall enforce me to it. In which case only it is possible that I
may be tempted to the resuming of those arms which otherwise I would willingly
hang up in the Temple of Concerd: that I may spend the whole remainder of my
time in more peaceful studies. I have already done my part in vindicating the
Doctrine, Government, and Forms of Worship, established in the Church of
England. And it is time to leave the Stage to more able Actors: To whom I
recommend the care of that weighty business; not doubting but that my
endeavors in the Churches service will find acceptance with all equal and
indifferent men. And for the rest who are so far engaged in the adverse party,
that possibly they may hate to be reformed in the Psalmists language, I neither
fear their censures, nor court their favors, but leave them to enjoy the
happiness of these open times, in quibus non modo libertas, sed etiam loquendi
libido impunita est, as my Author has it. And thus good Reader, I bid thee
once again farewell in the Lord, to whose unspeakable mercies in Christ Jesus,
thou art most heartily recommended by

Thine always to be commanded, in the Churches service, P. H.
Lacies Court in Abingdon; December. the 29th. 1659.
FINIS.
THE STUMBLING BLOCK OF DISOBEDIENCE AND REBELLION: Cunningly laid by Calvin in
the Subjects way, Discovered, Censured, and Removed.

By PETER HEYLYN, D. D.

ROMANS xiv. 13. Offendiculum fratri tuo ne ponas.

Let no man put a Stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall, in his brothers way.

ISAM. xxiv. 6. And David said to his men, The Lord forbid that I should do
this thing unto my Master the Lords anointed. to stretch forth my hand against
him, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, for C. Harper. 1681.

THE PREFACE.
IT will appear to any who shall read this Treatise, that it was written in the
time of Monarchical Government, but in the later and declining times thereof,
when the change of that Government was in agitation, and in part effected. In
which respect I doubt not but the publishing of this Discourse at this present
time may seem unseasonable unto some, and yet it may be thought by others to
come out seasonably enopugh for these following Reasons.

1. To give warning to all those that are in Supreme Authority to have a care
unto themselves, and not to suffer any Popular and Tribunitian Spirits to grow
amongst them; who grounding upon Calvin's Doctrine, both may, and will upon
occasion, create new disturbances.

2. To preserve the Dignity of the Supreme Power in what Person soever it be
placed, and fix his Person in his own Proper Orb, the Primum Mobile of
Government, brought down of late, to be but one of the three Estates, and move
in the same Planetary Sphere with the other two.

3. To keep on foot the claim and Title of the Clergy unto the Reputation,
Rights, and Privileges of the Third Estate, which does of right belong unto
them; and which the Clergy have anciently enjoyed in all, and to this day in
most Christian Kingdoms.

4. To show unto the World, on whose authority the Presbyterians built their
damnable Doctrine, not only of curbing and restraining the power of Princes,
but also of deposing them from their Regal Dignity, whenever they shall
please to pretend cause for it. For when the Scotch Commissioners were
commanded by Queen Elizabeth to give a reason of their proceedings against
their Queen, whom not long before they they had deposed from the Regal Throne;
they justified themselves by those words of Calvin, which I have chosen for the
Argument of this Discourse. By the Authority of Calvin (as my Author has it)
they endeavored to prove, that the Popular Magistrates are appointed and made
to moderate and keep in order the excess and unruliness of Kings; and that it
is lawful for them to put the Kings that be evil and wicked into prison, and
also to deprive them of their Kingdoms. If these reasons shall not prove the
seasonableness of this Adventure, I am the more to be condemned for my
indiscretion, the shame whereof I must endure as well as I can. This being said
in order to my Justification, I must add somewhat of the Book or Discourse it
self; in which the canvasing and confuting of Calvin's Grounds about the Ephori
of Sparta, the Tribunes of Rome, and the Demarchi of Athens, has forced me
upon many Quotations both Greek and Latin; which to the Learned Reader will
appear neitehr strange nor difficult. And for the sake of the Unlearned, which
are not so well verst and studied in foregin Languages, I have kept my self to
the direction of St. Paul, not speaking any where in a strange Tongue without
an Interpreter, the sense of every such Quotation being either declared before,
or delivered after it. Lastly, whereas the Name of Appius Claudius does many
times occur in the History of the Roman Tribunes, it is not always to be
understood of the same Man, but of diverse men of the same Name, in their
several Ages; as the name of Caesar in the New Testament signifies not one man
but three, that is to say, the Emperor Tiberius in the Gospels, Claudius in
the Boo of the Acts, and that most bloody Tyrant Nero in the Epistle to the
Philippians. Which being premised, I shall no longer keep the Reader in Porch
or Entrance; but let him take a view of the House it self the several Rooms,
Materials, and Furniture of it; long Prefaces to no long Discourses, being like
the Gates of Mindum amongst the Ancients, which were too great and large for so
small a City.

The Argument and occasion of this following Treatise.
Joh. Calvini Institution. Lib. 4. cap. 20^. Sect. 31.
NEQVE enim si ultio Domini est effrenatae dominationis correctio, ideo
protinus demandatam nobis arbitremur; quibus nullum aliud quam parendi and
patiendi datum est Mandatum. De privatis hominibus semper loquor. Nam siqui
nunc sint Populares Magistratus ad moderandum Regum libidinem constituti
(quales olim erant qui Lacedaemoniis Regibus oppositi erant Ephori; aut Romany
Consulibus Tribuni Plebis, aut Atheniensium Senatui Demarchi; and qua etiam
forte potestate, ut nunc res habent, funguntur in singulis Regnis tres Ordines,
cum primarios Conventus peragunt) adeo illos ferocienti Regum licentiiae, pro
officio, intercedere non veto, ut si Regibus impotenter grassantibus, and
humili plebeculae insultantibus conniveant; little dissimulationem nefaria
perfidia non carere affirmem, qua populi liberiatem (cujus se, Dei ordinatione,
tuiores positos norunt) fraudulenter produnt.

NOR may we think because the punishment of licentious Princes does belong to
God, that presently this power is devolved on us, to whom no other warrant has
been given by God but only to obey and suffer. But still I must be understood
of private persons. For if there be now any popular Officers ordained to
moderate the licentiousness of Kings (such as were the Ephori, set up of old
against the Kings of Sparta; the Tribunes of the people against the Roman
Consuls, and the Demarchi against the Athenian Senate; and with which power
perhaps, as the World now goes, the three Estates are seized in each several
Kingdom, when they are solemnly assembled) so far am I from hindering them to
put restraints upon the exhorbitant power of Kings, as their Office binds them;
that I conceive them rather to be guilty of a perfidious dissimulation, if they
connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the common
people, in that they treacherously betray the Subjects Liberties; of which they
knew they were made Guardians by Gods own Ordinance.

THE STUMBLING BLOCK OF Disobedience and Rebellion, etc.
CHAP. I. The Doctrine of Obedience laid down by CALVIN, and of the Popular
Officers supposed by him, whereby he overthrows that Doctrine.
1. The purpose and design of the Work in hand. 2. The Doctrine of Obedience
unto Kings and Princes, soundly and piously laid down by Calvin. 3. And that
not only to the good and gracious, but even to cruel Princes and ungodly
Tyrants. 4. With Answer unto such Objections as are made against it. 5. The
Principles of Disobedience, in the supposal of some popular Officers ordained
of purpose, te regulate the power of Kings. 6. How much the practice of
Calvin's followers does differ from their Masters Doctrine in the point of
Obedience. 7. Severasl Articles and points of Doctrine, wherein the Disciples
of Calvin are departed from him. 8. More of the differences in point of
Doctrine betwixt the Master and his Scholars. 9. The dangerous consequences
which arise from his faulty Principles, in the point or Article of
Disobedience. 10. The method and distribution of the following Work.


SOME Writers may be likened unto Jeremies Figs, good, they were very good;
Jerem. 24.4.
if evil, very evil, such as could not be eaten they were so evil. Of such a
tempera nd esteem was Origin amongst the Ancients, of whom it was observed (not
without good cause) that in his Expositions of the Book of God and other
learned Tractates which he writ and published, where he did well, none could do
it better, and where he failed at all, no man erred more grossly. And of this
sort and composition was Mr. Calvin of Geneva, than whom there is not any
Minister of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, who has more positively
expressly laid down the Doctrine of Obedience unto Kings and Princes, and the
unlawfulness of Subjects taking Arms against their Sovereign; nor opened a more
dangerous gap to disobedience and rebellions in most States of Christendom. In
which it is most strange to see how prone we are (such is the frailty and
corruption of our sinful nature) to refuse the good, and choose the evil; to
take no notice of his words when it most concerns us, when we are plainly told
our duties both to God and man; and on the other side to take his words for
Oracles, his Judgment for infallible, all his Geese for Swans, when he says
any thing which may be useful to our purposes, or serve to the advancement of
our lewd designs. The credit and authority of the man was deservedly great
amongst the people where he lived; and in short time of such authority and
esteem in the World abroad, that his works were made the only Rule to which
both Discipline and Doctrine was to be conformed: and if a Controversy did
arise either in points Dogmatical, or a case of Conscience, his (...) was
sufficient to determine in it, at least to silence the gainsayers. And as it is
observed in the works of Nature, that corruption optimi est pessima, and that
the sweetest meats make the sourest exrements; so the opinion and esteem which
some of the Reformed Churches and conceived of him (which to say the truth was
great and eminent) and the ill use they made of some words and passages in his
Writings, which most unfortunately served to advance their purposes in his
Writings, which most unfortunately served to advance their purposes, have been
the sad occasion of those Wars and miseries, which almost all the Western parts
of Christendom, have been so fatally involved in since the times he lived.
Which words and passage as they are cautelously laid down, and compassed round
with many fair expressions of affection to the Supreme Powers, that they might
pass without discovery, and be the sooner swallowed by unwary men: so by his
followers (who are exceeding wise in their Generations) have they been hidden
and concealed with all art that may be. For though they build their dangerous
Doctrines upon his foundation, and toss this (...), this ball of discord and
dissension from one hand to another; yet do they very cunningly conceal their
Author, and never use his name to confirm their Tenets. And this they do upon
this reason, that if their Doctrine give offense unto Christian Princes, and
any of their Pamphlets be to feel the fire, or otherwise come under any public
censure, (as not lonce since happened to Paraeus) the Patron of their Sect might
escape untouched, and his authority remain unquestioned, to give new life unto
their hopes at another time. In which respects, and withal seeing that the
heads of this monstrous Hydra of sedition do grow the faster for the cutting,
and that the lopping off the Branches keeps the Trunk the fresher; I shall pass
by the petit Pamphleters of these times, and strike directly at the head, and
without meddling with the boughs or branches, will lay my Ax immediately to the
root of the Tree, and bring the first Author of these factious and
Antimonarchical Principles (which have so long disturbed the peace of
Christendom) to a public trial. A dangerous and invidious undertaking I must
needs confess; but for my Countries and the truths sake, I will venture on it:
and in pursuance of the same will first lay down the doctrine of Obedience as
by him delivered, which I shall faithfully translate without gloss or descant;
and next compare his Doctrine with our present practice, noting wherein his
Scholars have forsaken their Master, with application unto those who do most
admire him: and finally I shall discover and remove that Stumbling Block which
he has cunningly laid before us, (but hid so secretly that it can hardly be
discerned) at which so many a man has stumbled, both to the breaking of his
own neck and his Neighbors too. This is the race that I am to run; the prize I
aim at is no other, than forasmuch as in me lies to do good to all men, to
those especially who think themselves to be of the household of Faith. And
therefore (...). Let us on in Gods Name.

Subditorum erga suos Magistratus Officium primum est, de eorum functione quam
honorificientissime sentire, Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 20. fect. 22.
etc. the first duty of the Subjects toward their Magistrates, is to think
wondrous honorably of their place and function, which they acknowledge to be a
jurisdiction delegated by Almighty God; and therefore are by consequence to
respect and reverence them, as the Ministers and Deputies of God. For some
there are, who very dutifully do behave themselves toward their Magistrates,
and would have all men do the like, because they think it most expedient for
the Commonwealth, and yet esteem no otherwise of them than of some necessary
evils which they cannot want. 1 Pet. 2.17. Prove. 24.21.
But St Peter looks for more than this, when he commands us to honor the
King; and so does Solomon also where he requires us to fear God and the King.
For the first under the term of honoring, comprehends a good esteem, a fair
opinion; the other joining God and the King together, shows plainly that in the
person of a King there is a Ray of sacred majesty. And that of Paul is richly
worth our observation, Romans 13.5.
where he commands us to obey, not for wrath only, but for Conscience sake. By
which he means, that Subjects are not only to contain themselves within the
bounds of their obedience, for fear they should incur the anger and displeasure
of their Prince or Governor (as men submit themselves to an armed Enemy, whom
they see ready to chastise them, if they should resist); but also to persuade
themselves that the expressions of their duties which they make to them, are
made indeed to God himself, from whom whatever power they have is devolved upon
them. Nor speak I of the men themselves, as if the Vizard of Authority were
enough to hide either their follies or their sloth, on their lusts or
cruelties, or gun the name of Virtues to their filthiest Vices, but that the
function is so venerable and so full of honor, that they who execute the same
and bear rule over us, are to be worthily esteemed and reverenced for their
Office sake.

The second duty of the Subjects does arise from this, which is, SECT. 23.
that we express the reverence and respect which we owe unto them by the
actions of Obedience; whether it be in yielding obedience to their Laws, or in
paying Tributes, or undergoing such public services and burdens, as do related
unto the preservation of there public, or executing such commands as are laid
upon us. Romans 13.1. Tit. 3.1.
Let every soul (says Paul) be subject to the highers Powers; for he that does
resist the power resists the Ordinance of God. Put them in mind (says he to
Titus) to be subject to Principalities, and Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to
be ready to every good work. And Peter thus, Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as to those which are sent by him for the punishment of evil
doers, 1 Pet. 2.13.
and for the praise of them that do well. and to the end the Subject may not
think that it is sufficient to counterfeit or pretend obedience in the outward
thew, but to perform it truly and sincerely from the very heart, Paul adds that
we commend the health and flourishing estate of those under whom we live, in
our prayers to God I exhort (says he) that first of all supplications,
prayers, intercessions, 1 Timothy 2.1.
and giving of thanks be made for all men; for Kings, and for all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty: Let no man here deceive himself. For seeing the Magistrate cannot be
resisted, but that God is resisted alos; though the unarmed Magistrate may
possibly be contemned and slighted without fear of punishment, yet God is armed
sufficiently to revenge those insolences, which are thus offered to himself in
them. Now under this obedience, I also do include that moderation and
discretion, which private persons ought to have and to impose upon themselves
as a Rule or Law, that so they neither intermeddle in affairs of State, nor
invade the Office of the Magistrate, nor put themselves on any public
undertakings;if any thing be amiss in the public Government, which stands in
need of Reformation, it appertains not unto them to be tumultuously active in
it, or to put their hands unto the work, whose hands are tied (and to be tied)
on all such occasions; but that they make it known unto the Magistrate, whose
hands are only left at liberty to effect the same. My meaning is, that they do
nothing uncommanded. For when the power or precept of the Governor does
intervene, they are then armed with just authority, and may do accordingly. For
as the Princes Privy Council are said to be his Ears, and Eyes; so those
inferior Ministers, by whom he executes his commands or mandates, are not
unfitly called his Hands.

The Magistrate being such as he ought to be, and as before we have described
him, SECT. 24.
the preserver of the public peace, the great distributer of Justice, and the
avenger of the innocent; he must be somewhat more than mad who is not pleased
with such a Government. But seeing that all Ages do afford Examples of
negligent and slothful Princes, who have no care at all of the public safety;
of others who are so in intent of their private profit, as to make markets of
all Laws and privileges, and to expose their justice and their favors both
unto open sale: of some who drain their peoples Purses to no other end, but to
maintain a vain and wastful prodigality, and some who spend their time in
nothing more, than either the rifling of the Subjects Houses, the deflouring of
their Wives and Daughters, or in the slaughter of the innocent: that these
should be received for Princes, and their commands obeyed at all, even in
lawful matters, it such a thing, as some will hardly bepersuaded to consent
unto. For where men find so much unworthiness, and such filthy facts, as do not
only mis-become a Magistrate, but a private person; when they see no
resemblance of that Image of God, which ought to shine most brightly in a
Christian Magistrate; when they behold no Tract or Footstep of such a Minister
of God, as is ordainedfor the encouragement and praise of those that do well,
and for the punishment of those that are evil doers: they take hom not for such
a Governor whose Office and Authority is extolled so highly in the Scriptures.
And to say truth, it has been always naturally implanted in the souls of men,
not more to love and reverence a just virtuous Prince, than to abominate and
detest an ungodly Tyrant.

But if we look into Gods Book, SECT. 25.
we shall there be taught not only to submit our selves to the command of those
Princes, who faithfully and as they ought do discharge their office; but of all
those who are advanced unto the highest place of Government, though they do
nothing less than perform their duties. For though the Magistrate be one of the
greatest blessings given by God for the good of mankind; and that he has
confined the Magistrate within certain limits: yet he declares, that whatsoever
they are they do receive their power from no hand but his; that if they
principally do intend the public good, they are the greatest restimonies and
Examples of his goodness to us; if they prove insolent and unjust, they are the
Executioners of his wrath and judgment for the sins of the people; that all are
equally invested with that sacred Majesty wherewith he has apparelled the most
lawful powers. I shall proceed no further in this present business, till I have
made foam proof of that which is said before. Not that I mean to spend my time
in the proof of this, that a wicked King is one of Gods curses on the earth:
for besides that there is none who gainsay the same, we should say no more in
this of Kings, than of the Thief that steals thy goods, or the Adulterer that
defiles thy marriage bed, or the Murderer that seeks thy life, all which are
reckoned for Gods curses in the holy Scripture. The point we purpose to make
proof of, goes not down so easily; that is to say, That in the vilest men, and
most unworthy of all honor, if they be once advanced to the public
Government, there does reside that excellent and divine Authority, which God
has given in holy Scripture to those who are the Ministers of his heavenly
Justice: who therefore are to be reverenced by the Subject, for as much as does
concern them in the way of their public duties, with as much honor and
obedience, as they would reverence the best King, were he given unto them.

And first the Reader must take notice of the especial Act and Providence of
Almighty God, SECT. 26.
(not without cause so often remembered in the Scriptures) in disposing Kingdoms,
Dan. 2, 21, 37.
and segging up such Kings as to him seems best. The Lord (says Danicl)
changes the times and the seasons; he removes Kings, and sets up Kings.
And in another place, That the living may know that the most High rules in the
Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever he will. Which kind of sentences
as they are very frequent in the Scriptures, so is that Prophecy most
plentiful and abundant in them. No man is ignorant that Nebuchadnezzar who
destroyed Jerusalem, was a great spoiler and oppressor, yet the Lord tells us
by Ezechicl, that he had given unto him the land of Egypt, for the good service
he had done in laying it waste on his Commandment. Dan. 2.37.
And Daniel said unto him thus; Thou O King art a King of Kings, for the God of
Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, power and strength and glory; And wheresoever
the children of men dwell, the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven,
has he given into thy hand, and has made thee Ruler over them all. Again to
Belshazzer his son. Dan. 5.18.
The most high God gave unto Nebuchadnezzar thy father a Kingdom, and majesty
and glory and honor; and for the majesty that he gave him, all people,
nations, and languages trembled and feared before him. Now when we hear that
Kings are placed over us by God, let us be pleased to call to mind those
several precepts to fear and honor them, which God has given us in his Book,
holding the vilest Tyrant in as high account, as God has graciously vouchsafed
to estate him in. When Samuel told the people of the house of Israel what they
should suffer from their King, 1 Samuel 8.11.
he expressed it thus, This will be the manner of the King which shall reign
over you, he will take your sons and appoint them for himself, for his
Chariots, and to be his Horsemen, and some shall run before his Chariots; And
he will appoint him Captains over thousands, and Captains over fifties, and
will set them to ear his ground and to reap his harvest, and to make his
instruments of War, and instruments of his Chariots; And he will take your
daughters to be his Confectionaries, and to be Cooks, and to be Bakers, And he
will take your fields, and your Vineyards, and your Olive-yards, even the best
of them, and give them to his servants; And he will take the tenth of your
seed, and of your Vineyards, and give to his Officers, and to his Servants; And
he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest
young men and your Asses, and put them to his work; He will take the tenth of
your sheep, and ye shall be his Servants. Assuredly their Kings could not do
this lawfully, whom God had otherwise instructed in the Book of the Law: but it
is therefore called Jus Regis, the right of Kings upon the Subject, which of
necessity the Subjects were to submit unto and not to make the least
resistance. As if the Prophet had thus said, So far shall the licentiousness of
your Kings extend it self, which you shall have no power to restrain or remedy,
to whom there shall be nothing left but to receive the intimation of their
pleasures, and fulfill the same.

But most remarkable is that place in the Prophet Jeremy, SECT. 27.
which (though it be somewhat of the longest) I will here put down, because it
does so plainly state the present question. Jer. 27.^.
I have made the earth (says the Lord) the man and the beast that are upon the
ground, by my great power, and by my outstretched Arm, and have given it unto
whom it seemed meet unto me: And now have I given all these Lands into the hand
of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon my Servant, and the Beasts of the field have
I given him also to serve him; and all Nations shall serve him, and his Son,
and his Sons Son, until the very time of his Land come; and it shall come to
pass that the Nation and Kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar
King of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the King of
Babylon, that Nation will I punish, says the Lord, with the sword, and with
the famine, and with the pestilence; wherefore serve the King of Babylong, and
live. We see by this how great a measure of obedience was required by God
toward that fierce and cruel Tyrant, only because he was advanced to the
Kingly Throne, and did by consequence participate of that Regal Majesty, which
is not to be violated without grievous sin. Let us therefore have this always
in our mind, and before our eyes, that by the same decree of God, on which the
power of Kings is constituted, the very wickedest Princes are established: and
let not such seditious thoughts be admitted by us; that is to say, that we must
deal with Kings no otherwise than they do deserve; and that it is no right nor
reason that we should show our selves obedient subjects unto him, who does not
mutually perform the duty of a King to us.

It is a poor objection which some men have made, viz. that that command was
only proper to the Israelites; for mark upon what grounds the command was
given. SECT. 28.
I have given (says the) the Kingdom unto Nebuchadnezzar, wherefore serve him,
and ye shall live: and thereupon it needs must follow, that upon whomsoever God
bestows a Kingdom, to him we must address our service; and that as soon as God
has raised any to the Regal Throne, he does sufficiently declare his will to
be, that he would have that man to reign over us. Some general testimonies of
this truth are in holy Scripture: For thus says solomon, For the transgression
of a Land many are the Princes thereof; Prove. 24.2.
and job, He loses the band of Kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdly.
Job 12.18.
Which if confessed, there is no remedy at all, but we must serve those Kings,
if we mean to live. There is another Text in the Prophet Jeremy, by which the
People are commanded to seek the peace of Babylon, Jer. 29.7.
whither God had caused them to be carried away captive, and to pray unto the
Lord for it, for in the peace thereof was their peace to be. Behold the
Israelites being despoiled of their Estates, driven from their houses, carried
into exile, and plunged in a most miserable thraldom, are yet required to pray
for the prosperity of the Conqueror; not only as we are commanded in another
place to pray for them that persecute us, but that his Empire might continue in
peace and safety, that they themselves might quietly enjoy the protection of
it. Thus David being appointed King by the Lords own Ordinance, and anointed
with his holy Oil, when undeservedly he was persecuted and pursued by Saul,
would not give way that any corporal hurt should be done to that sacred person,
whom God had raised unto the Kingdom. The Lord forbid, says he, 1 Samuel 24.6.
that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch
forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord. Again, But
mine eye spared thee, and I said, I will not put forth my hand against my Lord,
for he is the Lords Anointed. And again, who can stretch forth his hand against
the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? As the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite
him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into battle and perish.
The Lord forbid that I should stretch my hand against the Lords Anointed.

This reverence and dutiful regard we ought to carry toward our Governors,
SECT. 29.
to the very end, however they may chance to prove. Which therefore I repeat
the oftener, that we may learn not to enquire too narrowly into the men, but to
rest our selves content with this, that they sustain that place or person by
the Lords appointment, in which he has imprinted and ingraved a most
inviolable character of sacred Majesty. But some will say that Rulers owe a
mutual duty to their Subjects. That has been formerly confessed: from which if
any should infer, that no obedience must be yielded but to their just and legal
power, he were a very sorry disputant. Husbands are bound in mutual bonds unto
their Wives, and so are Parents to their Children. Suppose that both neglect
their duties, that Parents who are prohibited by God to provoke their Children
unto wrath, be so untractable and harsh to them, that they do grieve them above
measure with continual sourness; and that Husbands who are commanded to love
their Wives, and to give honor to them as the weaker vessel, should use them
with contempt and scorn: should therefore Children be the less obedient to
their Parents, or Wives less dutiful to their Husbands? We see the contrary,
that they are subject to them, though both lewd and froward. Since therefore
nothing does concern us more, than that we trouble not our selves with looking
into the defects of other men, but carefully endeavor to perform those duties
which do belong unto our selves; more specially ought they to observe this
rule, who live under the authority and power of others. Wherefore if we are
inhumanely handled by a cruel Prince, or by a covetous and luxurious Prince
dispoiled and rifled; if by a slothful one neglected, or vexed for our Religion
by a lewd and wicked; let us look back upon our sins, which God most commonly
corrects with this kind of scourges; the thought whereof will humble us, and
keep down the impatience of our angry spirits. Let us consider with our selves,
that it appertains not unto us to redress these mischiefs; that all which does
belong to us is to cry to God, Prove. 21.1.
in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, and be turns them whithersoever he
will. He is that God which stands in the Congregation of the mighty, and
judges amongst the Gods: before whose face all Kings shall fall and be
confounded, and all the Judges of the earth who do not reverence his Christ,
but make unjust Laws to oppress the Poor, and offer violence to the man of low
condition, and make a spoil of Widows, and a prey of Orphans.

And here we may as well behold his goodness, SECT. 30.
as his power and providence. For sometimes he does raise Avengers from amongst
his servants, and furnishes them with power sufficient as well to execute
vengeance on such wicked Rulers, as to redeem his People so unjustly vexed from
the house of bondage: and sometimes uses to tht end, the fierce wrath of
others, who think of nothing less than to serve his turn. Thus he redeemed his
People Israel from the Tyranny of Pharaoh, by the hand of Moses, from Cushan
King of Syria, by Othoniel; from other thraldoms by some other of their Kings
and Judges. Thus did he tame the pride of Tire by the arms of Egypt, the
insolence of Egypt by the Assyrians, the fierceness of Assyriah by the
Chaldeans, the confidence of Babylon by the Medes and Persians, after that
Cyrus had before subdued the Medes. Thus did he sometimes punish the
ingratitude of the Kings of Judah and Israel, and that ungodly contumacy which
they carried toward him, notwithstanding all his benefits conferred upon them,
by the Assyrians first, the Babylonians after. But we must know that though
these several instrunents did the self same work, yet they proceeded not in the
self same motives. For the first sort being thereto lawfully authorized and
called by Almighty God, by taking up Arms against their Kings, did nothing less
than violate that sacred Majesty, which is inherent in King by Gods holy
Ordinance, but being armed from Heaven, did only regulate and chastise the
lesser power by the help of the greater; as Princes use sometimes to correct
their Nobles. The later sort, though guided by the hand of God as to him seemed
best, so that they did unknowingly effect what he had to do, intended only the
pursuit of their own designs.

But what soever their designs and intentions were, SECT. 31.
when by their means he broke the bloody Scepters of those insolent Kings, and
overthrew their wicked and tyrannical Empires. Hear this ye Princes, and be
terrified at the hearing of it. But let not this afford the least encouragement
unto the Subject, to violate or despise the Authority of the Magistrate, which
God has filled so full of majesty, and fortified by so many Edicts from the
Court of Heaven, though sometimes an unworthy person does enjoy the same, and
such a one as does dishonor it by his filthy life. Nor may we think because
the punishment of licentious Princes does belong to God, that presently this
power of executing vengeance is devolved on us, to whom no other precept has
been given by God, but only to obey and suffer. De privatis hominibus semper
loquor. Nam si qui nunc sint populares magistratus ad moderandum Regum
libidinem constituti (quales olim erant, qui Lacedaemoniis Regibus oppositi
erant Ephori; aut Romany Consulibus Tribuni Plebis; aut Atheniensium Senatui
Demarchi: and qua etiam foric potestate, ut nune res habent, funguntur in
singulis Regnis tres Ord^nes, quunt primarios conventus peragunt): adeo illos
ferocienti Reguin licentiae pro officio intercedere non veto, ut si Regibus
impotenter grassanttbus, and humili plebeculae insultantibus conniveant, eorum
dissimulationem nefaria perfidia non carere affirmem; quia populi libertatem
cujus se Dei Ordinatione tutores positos norunt, fraudulenter produnt.
But still I must be understood of private persons. For if there be now any
Popular Officers, ordained to moderate the licentiousness of Kings, (such as
the Ephori of old set up against the Kings of Sparta, the Tribunes of the
people against the Roman Consuls, and the Demarchi against the Athenian Senate,
and with which power, perhaps, as the World now goes, the three Estates are
furnished in each several Kingdom, when they are solenmly assembled): sofar am
I from hindering them from putting a restraint on the exorbitant power of
Kings, as their Office binds them, that I conceive them guilty rather of a
persidious dissimulation, if they connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants,
or wantonly insult on the common people; in that they treacherously betray the
Subjects Liberty, of which they know they were made Guardians by Gods own
Ordinance and appointment.

But this must always be excepted, in the obedience which we have determined to
be que to the commands of our Governors, and first of all to be observed, that
it draw us not from that obedience which is due to him, to whose will all the
commands of Kings must be subordinate, to whose decrees their strongest
mandates must give place, and before whose Majesty they are bound to lay down
their Scepters. For how preposterous were it to incur his anger, by our
compliance with those men, whom we are bound no otherwise to obey, than for his
sake only? The Lord is King of Kings, who when he speaks, is to be heard for
all, and above them all. We must be subject to those men who have rule over us,
but in him alone. If against him they do command us any thing, it is to be of
none account. Nor in such cases is the dignity of the Magistrate to be stood
upon, to which no injury is done, if in regard of the more eminent and supreme
power of God, it be restrained within its bounds. Dan. 6.22.
In this respect Daniel denied that he had trespassed any thing against the
King, in not obeying his profane and ungodly Edict, because the King had gone
beyond his proper limits, and being not only injurious against men, but lifting
up his horns against God himself, had first deprived himself of all Authority.
The Israelites are condemned on the other side, for being so ready to obey
their King, in a wicked action, when to ingratiate themselves with Jeroboam,
who had newly made the Golden Calves, they left the Temple of the Lord, and
betook themselves to a new superstitious worship. And when their Children and
posterity with the like facility applied themselves unto the humors of their
wicked Kings, the Prophet does severely rebuke them for it. So little praise
does that pretense of mode^ly deserve to have, with which some Court parasites
do disguise themselves and abuse the simple, affirming it to be a crime not to
yield obedience to any thing that Kings command: as if God either had resigned
all his rights and interess into the hands of mortal men, when he made them
Rulers over others; or that the greatest earthly power were a jot diminished,
by being subjected to its Author, before whom all the powers of Heaven do
trembling supplicate. I know that great and imminent danger may befall those
men, who dare give entertainment to so brave a constancy; considering with what
indignation Kings do take the matter, when they once see themselves neglected,
whose indignation is as the messenger of death, says the Wise man Solomon. But
when we hear this Proclamation made by the heavenly Crier, that we ought to
obey God rather than men;let this consideration be a comfort to us, Acts 5.29.
that when we yield that obedience unto God which he looks for from us, when we
rather choose to suffer any thing, than to deviate from the way of godliness.
And lest our hearts should fail us in so great a business, St. Paul subjoyns
another motive, 2 Cor. 7.2^.
that being bought by Christ at so great a price, we should not re-inthral our
selves to the lusts of men, much less addict our selves to the works of
wickedness.

These are the very words of Calvin, Calvin requires that we should reverence
and respect the Magistrate for his Office sake; and that we entertain no other
than a fair esteem, an honorable opinion both of their actions, Sect. 2^.
and their Counsels. His followers (like silthy dreamers as they are) do not
only despise dominion, but speak evil of dignities; that is to say, Jude 8.
they neither reverence the persons of their Supreme Magistrate, nor regard
their Office: and are so far from cherishing a good opinion of those higher
powers to which the Lord has made them subject, that their hearts imagine
mischief against them all the day long; and though they see no cause to condemn
their actions, they will be sure enough to misconstrue the end. Calvin requires
that we should manifest the reverence and respect we bear them by the outward
actions of obedience; Sect. 23.
and to the end, that this obedience should proceed from the very heart and not
to be counterfeit and false; he adds that we commend there health and
flourishing estate in our prayers to God. Ibid.
His followers study nothing more than to disobey them, in every one of those
particulars which their Master speaks of, refusing to obey their laws, and to
pay them tribute, and to undergo such services and burdens as are laid upon
them in reference to the public safety, and spare not as occasion serves to
manifest the disaffection of their hearts, by such outward acts as dis^bedience
and disloyalty can suggest unto them: and are so far from praying for them,
that many times they pray against them, blaspheming God because he will not
curse the King, and making that which they call Prayer so dangerous and lewd a
Libel, that their very prayers are turned to sin. Calvin requires such
moderation in the Subject, that they neither intermeddle in affairs of State,
nor invade the Office of the Magistrate, and that if any thing be amiss in the
public Government which stands in need of Reformation, they presume not to put
their hands unto the work, Sect. 23.
or be tumultuously active in it. His followers will not trust the Magistrates
in the performance of their own Office, but are all Counselors and Statesmen;
and think that nothing is done well, but what is done as they would have it,
and by their own hands too, ^ one other. Whether things be amiss or not, they
must needs be doing. Not by presenting their desires for a Reformation, and
making known the fault (if such fault there be) to their Supreme Magistrates,
which was the way their Master taught them;but by raising tumults to affright
them: The attempt of the French Hugonots at Ambois upon Charles the ninth, and
the two tumults at Edinburgh, the one about the year 1593. against the person
of King James, and the other in the year 1637. against the Ministers of King
Charles, whill not be forgotten whilst Calvin and his Institutions are in print
amongst us. Calvin requires that we should yield obedience not only to such
Kings and Princes, Sect. 25.
which faithfully and as they ought do discharge their Office, but even to all
those also which do nothing less than perform their duties, not only to the
meek and gentle, but even unto the fiercest and most cruel Tyrant, if any such
be raised by God to the Kingly Throne. Sect. 27.
His followers resolve not to yield obedience to their Kings and Princes,
though they can charge them with no fault but their too much lenith; unless it
be that they have caused them to surfeit upon peace and plenty, or that the
people grew too rich, and lived too happily, and drove too great a Trade, under
their command: and are so far from yielding obedience to a Tyrant, or a severe
and cruel Prince, call him which you will, that neither the innocent minority
of Charles the ninth, nor the moderate Government of the Duchess of Parma in
the Netherlands; nor the mild peaceable temper of King James when he reigned in
Scotland, could save them from their insolences and insurrections. Finally
Calvin does declare that though we be inhumanly handled by a cruel Prince, or
by a covetous or luxurious Prince dispoiled and rifled; though by a slothful
one neglected, or vexed for our Religion by a lewd and wicked, yet it pertains
not unto us to redress these mischiefs; that all the remedy that we have is to
cry to God; Sect. 29. Sect. 31. Sect. 27.
and till God takes the work in hand, to obey and suffer: and absolutely
condemns those seditious thoughts, (which some men are too apt to harbor) that
we must deal with Kings no otherwise than they shall deserve: His Followers, if
they think themselves oppressed, though indeed they are not; or that Religion
is in danger, though indeed it be not; or the honor of the State neglected,
though never of so much repute, nor so bravely managed: will not descend so low
as to cry to God, or be so pusillanimous and so poorly minded, as only to obey
and suffer (that were a weakness fit for none but the primitive Christians) but
take the Sword into their hands (be it right or wrong) to force their Kings to
come unto a reckoning with them, as if they would have reparation from them for
their former sufferings, and would have reparation no way but that. And as for
dealing with their Kings no otherwise than they do deserve, although the maxim
be unsafe, and the very though thereof seditious, as their Master tells them;
would they would hold themselves to that; which had they done, so many Kings in
Christendom had not been so unjustly handled, driven from their Palaces,
expelled their Cities, robbed of their Fortresses and Revenues, assaulted in
the open Fields, and forced sometimes to change both their Council and their
Guards, (the ordinary practice by the Hugonots in France, the Presbyterians in
Scotland, the Calvinists in the Netherlands, and indeed where not?) had they
been dealt withal no otherwise than they deserved.

Next let us look upon them in their points of Doctrine, Calvin determines very
soundly that Kings h ave their Authority from none but God, non nisi a se
habere imperium, Sect. 2^.
that the supreme Magistracy is a jurisdiction devolved from God upon the
person of the Magistrate or delegata a Deo jurisdictio, Sect. 22.
that it is the singular work or act of God to dispose of Kingdoms, and to set
up such Kings as to him seems meet, which he calls Singularem Dei actionem in
distribuendis Regnis statuendisque QVOS ILLI VISVM FVERIT REGIBVS, and finally
that in every King or Supreme Governor, there is inviolabilis majestas, Sect. 2^.
and indelible character of Majesty imprinted by the hand of God. His Scholars
tell us that Kings are only creatures of the peoples making; and that whatever
power they have, is derived from them. The Observator, and the Fuller Answer
unto Dr. Fern, and almost all our later Scriblers do resolve it so. They tell
us secondly, (which must needs follow from the former) that the people have the
sole power of disposing Kingdoms, and setting up such Kings as they list
themselves; and being so set up, that there is no more Majesty, no brighter
beam of Gods divinity in them, than in other men. Buchanan so affirms for
certain, Populo jus est, imperium cui velit deferat; Buchanan de jure regni.
and confidently reckons those reverend Attributes of Majesty and Highness,
which usually are given to Kings and Princes, inter soloecissimos and
barbarismos Aulicos, Id. in Epist. ad
amongst the Solecisms and absurdities of Princes Courts. Calvin determins very
Orthodoxly, that though the King degenerate and become a Tyrant, though he
infringe the Subjects liberties, and invade their fortunes, persecute them for
their piety, and neglect their safety, and be besides a vicious and libidinous
person; yet still his Subjecs ae to look upon him, in all things which pertain
to their public duties, was as much honor and obedience, as they would do the
justest and most virtuous Prince that was ever given unto a people. Eadem in
reverentia and dignatione habendum, Sect. 25.
quantum ad publican obedientiam attinet, qua optimum Regem si daretur habituri
essent. His Scholars sing another Song, and use all arts imaginable to excite
the people to rise against them and destroy them. The Author of that scandalous
and dangerous Dialogue, entitled Eusebius Philadelphus does expressly say, that
of all good actions the murder of a Tyrant is most commendable. Buchanan
accounts it a defect in Polities, Eusebius. Philadelph. Dial. Buchanan de jure
regni.
proemia eorum interfecoribus non decerni; that public honors and rewards are
not propounded unto such as shall kill a Tyrant: and some late Pamphleters
conclude it lawful to rebel in the case of Tyranny, because forsooth, If a King
exercising Tyranny over his Subjects may not be resisted, (that is to say, if
the Subject may not take up Arms against him) he and his followers may destroy
the Kingdom. And and we are fallen upon the business of Resistance. Calvin
allows of no case (for ought I can see) in which the Subject lawfully may
resist the Sovereign; Sect. 23.
quandoquidem resisti magistratui non potest quin simul resistatur Deo,
forasmuch as the Magistrate cannot be resisted, but that God is resisted also:
and reckoning up those several pressures whereof Samuel spoke unto the Jews,
and which he calls jus Regis, as himself translates it, he concludes at last,
Sect. 26.
cui parere ipsi necesse esset, nec obsistere liceret, that no resistance must
be made on the Subjects part, though Kings entrench as much upon them, both in
their liberties and properties, as the Prophet speaks of. His Scholars are
grown wiser, and instruct us otherwise. Paraeus says, that if the King assault
our persons, or endeavor to break into our Houses, we may as lawfully resist
him, as we would do a Thief or Robber on the like occasions. And our new Master
have found out many other Cases in which the Subject may resist, and which is
more than so, is bound to do it, Paraeus in Romans cap. 13.
as namely in his own behalf, and in Gods behalf, in behalf of his Country,
and in behalf of the Laws; and in so many more behalfs, that they have turned
most Christian Kings out of half their Kingdoms.

But to go on, Calvin determins very rightly, insulsos ratioeinatores, Sect. 29.
but sorry and unsavory Disputants:and reckons it for a seditious
imagination. that we must deal no otherwise with Kings than they do deserve,
nec aequum esse ut subditos ei nos praestemus, qui vicissim Regem nobis non se
praestet, Sect. 27.
or to imagine that it is neither sense nor reason that we should ^^ew our
selves obedient subjects unto him, who does not mutually perform the duty of a
King to us. His Scholars are grown able to teach their Master a new Lesson, and
would tell him, if he were alive, that there is a mutual Contract between King
and Subjects; and if he break the Covenant, he forfeiteth the benefit of the
Agreement, and he not performing the duty of a King, they are released from the
duty of Subjects. As contrary to their Masters Tenet as black to white; and yet
some late Pamphleters press no doctrine with such strength and eagerness, as
they have done this: Nor have the Pulpits spa^ed to publish it to their cheated
Auditories, as a new Article of Faith, that if the Ruler perform not his duty,
the Contract is dissolved, and the people are at liberty to right themselves.
What excellent uses have been raised from this dangerous Doctrine, as many
Kings of Christendom have fest already, so posterity will have cause to lament
the mischiefs which it will bring into the World in succeeding Ages. Finally
Calvin has determined, and exceeding piously, that if the Magistrate command
us any thing which is contrary to the Will and word of God, we must observe
Saint Peter's Rule, and rather choose to obey God, than men: and that withal we
must prepare our selves to endure such punishments as the offendd Magistrate
shall inflict upon us, for the said refusal; Sect. 32.
Et quicquid potius perpeti quam a veritate deflectere, and rather suffer any
Torments, than forsake the way of Gods Commandments. The Magistrate, as it
seems by him, must at all times be honored by us, either in our active
obedience, or in our passive; if we refuse to do his will, we must be content
to suffer for it. His Scholars are too wise to submit to that, and are so far
form suffering for the testimony of the Gospel and a good conscience, that they
take care to teach the people that it is lawful to rebel in behalf of God, to
preserve the true Religion when it is in danger (or when they think it is in
danger) by force of Arms, and to procure the peace of Jerusalem by the
destruction of Babylon. Which being so, the difference being so great and
irreconcilable between the Followers and their Leader in the point of
practice, between the Master and the Scholars in the points of Doctrine: me
thinks it were exceeding fit the man were either less admired, or better
followed; that they who cry him up for the great Reformer, would either stand
to all his Tenets, or be bound to none; that they would be so careful of the
Churches peace, and their own salvation, as not to swallow down his Errors in
his points of disciplines, and pass him by with a Magister non t^netur, when he
does preach Obedience to them, and does so solidly discourse of the powers of
Government. Tilly Philip. 2.
Aut undique religionem [suam] toliant, at usquequaque conserent, as Tully said
of Antony in another case. But of this no more.

Hitherto CALVIN has done will, Genevian Doctors none, ne unus quidem, not so
much as one. But there is an herb which spoils the pottage, an HERB so venomous,
that it is mors in olla unto them that taste it. The figs in the next basket
are evil, Jerem. 24.
very evil,not to be eaten (as it is in the Prophets words) they are so evil.
In that before he did exceeding soundly and judiciously law down the doctrine
of obedience unto Kings and Princes, and the unlawfulness of Subjects taking
Arms against their Sovereign. In this to come he opens a most dangerous gap
to disobedience and rebellions in most States in Christendom, in which his name
is either reverenced or his works esteemed of. For having fully expressed the
points before delivered unto the conscience of the Subject, and utterly
disabled them from lifting up their hands against the Supreme Magistrate, on
any occasion whatsoever: he shows them how to help themselves, and what course
to take, for the asserting of their Liberties, and the recovery of their
Rights, if the Prince invade them; by telling them that all he spoke before was
of private persons, Sect. 31.
but that if there were any popular Officers, such as the Ephori of Sparta, the
Tribunes of Rome, the Demarchi of Athens, ordained for the restraint of Kings
and Supreme Governors, it never was his meaning to include them in it. And
such power he does suppose to be in the three Estates of every Kingdom, when
they are solemnly assebled; whom he condemns as guilty of perfidious
dissimulation,and the betrayers of the Subject Liberties, whereof they are the
proper and appointed Guardians, if they connive at Kings when they play the
Tyrants, or wantonly insuit on the common people. This is the gap through which
rebellions and seditions have found to plausible a passage in the Christian
World, to be dethroning of some Kings and Princes, the death of others. For
through this gap, broke in those dangerous and seditious Doctrines, that the
inferior Magistrates are ordained by God, and not appointed by the King, or
the Supreme Powers; that being so ordained by God, that are by him enabled to
compel the King to rule according unto justice and the Laws established; that
if the King be refractory and unreclaimable, they are to call him to account,
and to provide for the safety of the Commonwealth by all ways and means which
may conduce unto thepreservation of it: and finally (which is the darling
Doctrine of these later times) that there is a mixture in all Governments, and
that the three Estates convened in Parliament (or by what other name soever we
do call their meeting) are not subordinate to the King, but coordinate with
him; and have not only a supplemental power, to supply what is defective in
him, but a coercive also to restrain his Actions, and a Corrective too to
reform his Errors. But this I give you now in the generals only; hereafter you
shall see it more particularly, and every Author cited in his own words for the
proof hereof. Many of which as they did live in Calvin's time, and by their
writings gave great scandal to all Sovereign Princes, but more as to the
progress of the Reformation; so could not Calvin choose but be made acquainted
with the effects and consequences of his dangerous principles. Which since he
never did retract, upon the sight of those seditious Pamphlets, and worse than
those, those bloody tumults and rebellions which ensued upon it; but let it
stand unaltered to his dying day: is a clear argument to me, that this passage
fell not from his Pen by chance, but was laid of purpose as a Stumbling Block
in the Subjects way, to make him fall in the performance of his Christian duty
both to God and man. For though the Book of Institutions had been often printed
in his life time, and received many alterations and additions (as being
enlarged from a small Octavo, of not above 29 sheets, to a large Folio of 160)
yet this particular passage still remained unchanged, and has continued as it
is from the first Edition of it, which was in the year 1536, not long after his
first coming to Geneva.

But to proceed in our design. Si qui, and Forte, and ut nunc res habent, that
is to say, Perhaps, and as the World now goes, and if there be such Officers as
have been formerly, as the three disguises, which he has masked himself and
the point withal, that he might pass away unseen. And if there be such Officers
as perhaps there are, or that the world goes here as it did at Sparta, or in
the States of Rome and Athens; as perhaps it does; or that the three Estate, of
each several Kingdom have the same authority in them as the Ephori, the
Demarchi, and the Tribunes had, as perhaps they have; the Subject is no doubt
in a good condition, as good a man as the best Monarch of them all. But if the
Ephori, the Demarchi and the Tribunes, were not appointed at the first for the
restraint and regulating of the Supreme Powers, as indeed they were not; and if
the three Estates in each several Kingdom have not that authority, which the
Ephori, and the Tribunes did in fine usurp, and the Demarchi are supposed to
have, as indeed they have not; perhaps and peradventure will not serve the
turn. The Subject stands upon no better grounds, than before he did. Therefore
to take away this stumbling block and remove this rub, I shall propose and
prove these three points ensuing. 1. That the Ephori, the Demarchi, and the
Roman Tribunes were not instituted at the first, for those ends and purposes,
which are supposed by the Author. 2. If they were instituted for those ends,
yet the illation thereupon would be weak and childish, as it relates of Kings
and Kingdoms; And 3. That the three Estates in each several Kingdom without all
peradventures have no such authority, as the Author dreams of, and therefore of
no power to control their King. Which If I clearly prove, as I hope I shall, I
doubt not but to leave the cause in a better condition than I found it. And in
the proof of these, the first point especially, if it be thought that I insist
longer than I needed on the condition of the Spartan Ephori, the Roman
Tribunes, and the Demarchi of Athens, and spend more cost upon it than the
thing is worth; I must entreat the Reader to excuse me in it. I must first lay
down my grounds and make sure work there, before I go about my building:And
being my design relates particularly to the information and instruction of the
English Subject, I could not make my way unto it, but by a discovery of the
means and Artifices, by which some petit popular Officers attained unto so
great a mastery in the game of Government, as to give the Check unto their
Kings. Which being premised once for all, I now proceed unto the proof of the
points proposed, and having proved these points, I shall make an end. Haec tria
cum docuero perorabo, in the Orators Language.

CHAP. II. Of the Authority of the Ephori in the State of Sparta; and that they
were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin.
1. The Kings of Sparta absolute Monarchs at the first. 2. Of the declining of
the Regal power, and the condition of that State, when Lycurgus undertook to
change the Government. 3. What power Lycurgus gave the Senate; and what was
left unto the Kings. 4. The Ephori appointed by the Kings of Sparta to ease
themselves, and curb the Senate. 5. The blundering and mistakes of Joseph
Scaliger about the first Institution of the Ephori. 6. The Ephori from mean
beginnings grew to great Authority; and by what advantages. 7. The power and
influence which they had in the public Government. 8. By what degrees the
Ephori encroached on the Spartan Kings. 9. The insolences of the Ephori
toward their Kings altered the State into a Tyranny. 10. The Spartan Kings
stomach the insolency of the Ephori, and at last utterly destroy them. 11. An
application of the former passages to the point in hand.


I Know it is conceived by some that the Kings of Sparta were but titular,
Unlawfulness of resistance, p 90.
than the Duke of Venice at this day in that Republic. And to say truth, they
were but little better in the latter times, (though not altogether so
restrained) after Lycurgus first, and the Ephori afterward, had by their power
and practices entrenched upon them; and pared away so many of the fairest
Jewels in the Regal Diadem. But ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so from the
beginning: the Spartan Kings being at first as absolute Monarchs as any other
of those times, Tacit. Annal.
ubi addictius regnabantur, when men were most devoted to the will of Princes.
For if we look into the ancient stories of the States of Greece, it will there
be found, that at the return of the Heraclidae into Peloponnesus, under the
conduct of Temenus, Ctesiphon, and Aristodemus, the sons of Aristomachus of the
race of Hercules; Temenus possessed himself of Argos, Ctesiphon of Messene, and
Aristodemus conquered the City and Dominion of Sparta; which, dying very
shortly after, he left unto his two sons Eurysthenes, and Procles, Pausanias in
Lacon. l. 3.
with the authority and name of Kings. So that acquiring the Estate by
Conquest, and claiming by no other Title than by that of Arms, there is no
question to be made but that they governed in the way of absolute Monarchs: it
being not the guise of such as come in by Conquest to covenant and capitulate
with their Subjects, but to impose their will, for a Law, upon them; In the
first times, and in Dominion so acquired, Justin. hist. l. 1.
Arbitria Principum pro legibus erant, as we read in Justin. It Is true, the
Royal Family was divided from the very first, into two Regal Stems or Branches,
both honored with the name of Kings, both ruling the Estate in common by their
mutual Councils; of which the eldest House was that of Agidae, so called from
Agis, son and Successor unto Eurysthenes; the second that of the Eurypontidae,
denominated from Eurypon, Pausanius l. 3.
the third from Procles. It was appointed so to be by Aristodemus, confirmed by
the Oracle of Apollo, and so continued till the subjugating of all Greece to
Macedon. But this concludes no more against absolute Monarchy, than if it
should be said on the like occasion, that the Roman Emperors were no Monarchs,
or that State to Monarchy, because Carus and Numerianus, Diocletian and
Maximianus, Constantius and Maximinus ruled the same together; as after
Valentinian and his Brother Valens, and the two sons of Valentinian and
Theodosius did by their Example. And so it seems it was conceived by Cleomenes,
who having rooted out the Ephori, and being grown almost as absolute in the
State of Sparta, as any of his Predecessors, caused his Brother Euclidas (upon
the expiration of the Eurypontidae) to be made King with him: ^^^tarch in Agis
and Cleeme^.
which certainly he would not have done, had he believed that the assuming of a
partner would have made him less. For that the Spartan Kings were as absolute
Monarchs as any others of those times (when there was almost no Form of
Government in the World but that) does appear by Plutarch, where speaking of
the condition of that Government in the time of Eurypon (whom he calls
Eurytion) he says that it was (...), sufficiently Montarchical, if it were not
more. Plutarch. in Lycurgo.
And hereto Aristotle does agree, who styles the Government of Sparta under
Charilaus, before whose times (by reason of the negligence and connivence of
some former Kings) the People were become too headstrong to be kept in order,
Aristot. Polit. lib. 5. cap. 12.
by the name of (...), the Tyranny or absolute command of Charilaus in the
State of Sparta.

But whatsoever it was in the first foundation, Eurypon the Nephew of Procles,
(...), Plutarch. in Lycurg.
affecting to be plausible and gracious with the common people, improvidently
let loose the reins of Government, and was the first that laid aside that sole
and absolute power of a King; whereupon followed great disorder and
distraction, which continued long. For the People finding themselves at
liberty, became very bold and disobedient; some of the Kings which did succeed
being hated to the very death, because they did endeavor the recovery of their
old authority; others being forced to dissemble and wink at any thing, either
in hope thereby to gain the love of the People, or because indeed they were not
strong enough to rule them. And this did so increase the stomach of the
dissolute and rebellious multitude, that Eunomus the Father of Lycurgus, being
the fifth King from Procles, and the third from Eurypon, was slain amongst them
in a tumult. As such a dear and costly rate did Eurypon procure the favor and
good will of the rascal rabble; by which he purchased nothing but the loss of
Royalty, besides the empty honor of having the second house of the Royal
Family to be called by his name, the Eurypontidae. Things growing thus from bad
to worse, and both the Kings and People waxing weary of that disorder and
confusion which did reign amongst them; both parties cast their eyes upon
Lycurgus, of whose integrity and wisdom they had conceived a great opinion. For
the People finding that their Kings had nothing but the name and title, (...),
and nothing else whereby they differed from the rest, sent many a several
message to him to require his counsel: And on the other side, the Kings were as
desirous that he should return (being then gone abroad to travel) in hope that
the authority of his presence would bridle and restrain the People from their
insolency and disobedience toward them. But herein they were both deceived.
Id. ibid.
For Lycurgus seeing how things stood, resolved to apply himself to neither
party; but presently began to project, and cast how he might change and alter
the whole frame of Government: which to effect, he armed himself and his
Associates, and possessed the marketplace, and so proceeded to the alteration
which he meant to make. Id ibid. et in Agis and Cleomen.
Charilaus who was then King, being forced to fly for sanctuary to the Temple
of Juno. But Plato says there was another motive which induced him to attempt
this change, which was the ill success the other Kings his kindred of the house
of Hercules had found at Argos and Messene; where by degrees degenerating from
a Monarchy unto a Tyranny, they were in a fair way (...), to overthrow
themselves, their subjects, and their whole estates. To prevent this at Sparta,
which he dearly loved, and to preserve his Family and the State together,
(...), Plat. Epist. 8.
he set up the authority of the Senate as the only medicine, to cure the
miserable distemper which the State was in. So far, and somewhat further Plato;
of which more anon.

What the authority and power of this Senate was, we see best from Plutarch. In
Lycurge.
In this change of State (says he) which Lycurgus made, his chiefest
alteration was in the constitution of a Senate, which he made to have a Regal
power, and equal authority with the Kings in matters of the greatest weight and
importance; and was to be the healthful counterpoise of the whole body of the
Commonwealth. The other State before was ever wavering, sometimes inclining to
Tyranny, when the Kings were too mighty, and sometimes to confusion, when the
People did usurp Authority; between which two, the Senate was ordained as the
fittest medium to keep even the scale, and fortify the State of the
Commonwealth. For taking sometimes the Kings part, when it was needful to pull
down the fury of the People; and sometimes holding with the People against the
Kings, to bridle their Tyrannical Government, they were the means that neither
of the two did oppress the other. This Court or Senate had the supreme
direction and command in all things of moment, which did concern the
Commonwealth, both for peace and war; and had the highest jurisdiction and
dernier resort, from which there could be no appeal; in which regard Pausanias
calls it (...), Pausanias in Lacon. l. 3.
the sovereign Court of the Republic. It consisted of 28 Senators, all chosen
out of the Nobility and chief men of the City; who together with the two Kings
(who were allowed their voices in it) made up thirty in all; and unto these it
did belong to call the assemblies of the People, to propound that to them which
they thought convenient, and to dissolve them too when they saw occasion.
Plutarch. ibid.
But for the People so assembled, it was not lawful for them to propund any
thing to be debated or determined, nor to deliver their opinion in the point
proposed; there being nothing left to them, but to testify their assent to the
propositions, which either by the Senate or the two Kings had been made unto
them. So that whatever the Kings lost, the People got little by the alteration,
being left out of all employment in affairs of State, and forced to yield
obedience unto thirty Masters, whereas before they had but two. And as for the
Authority which remained unto the Kings, it consisted especially in the
conducting of the Armies, and the Supremacy in matters that concerned Religion
(for this has always gone along with the Kingly office. Nenophon de Repub.
Lacedaemon.
) (...). etc. For it was ordered by Lycurgus, that the King should offer
sacrifice for the prosperity of the Commonwealth, when the necessity of their
affairs did require the same, as one descended from the gods, that they should
participate of the thing sacrificed when the gods were served, and have a Pig
of every litter, that they might never want a facrifice, if upon any sudden
accident the gods were to be advised withal. (...), etc. It also appertained to
them to command the Armies, as often as they were sent abroad on any military
employment; and had a Pavillion allowed them at the public charge, for
entertainment of such company as repaired unto them. In these two points the
honor and authority of the Kings consisted principally, which Aristotle also
has observed. Aristot. Politic. l. 3. c. 10.
(...). Supremacy in Divine, command in Military matters, was all in which they
differed from the other Senators; and this command (I mean in military matters)
was both perpetual and hereditary, as the same Author tells us there, Id. ibid.
and l. 2. c. 7. and l. 3. d. 11.
and in other places. For matters which were merely honorary, they had some
prerogatives; the Kings being allowed a double Mess in all their Ordinaries,
the Senators and all the People arising from their seats to do him reverence,
when he came amongst them, yielding him more than humane honors when he was
deceased as to a Demi-god at least. And for their maintenance and support when
they were alive, Nenophon in Repub. Lacedaemon.
there was allotted to them a proportion of the richest Lands in many of the
Villages and Fields adjoining, enough to keep them out of want, though not
sufficient to make them either rich or powerful.

The Royalty and Power of the Kings being thus impaired, Senate growing every
day more insolent and predominant than at first it was, by reason that they
held their place for term of life, Plutarch in Agesilao.
as we find in Plutarch; the Kings resolved upon a course of putting the People
into such a condition as might enable them to curb and control the Senators. To
this end Theopompus, the ninth King of the second house, with the consent of
Polydorus his Associate, ordained certain Officers, being five in number,
Aristot. Pol. l. 2.8.
and chosen out of the body of the common people, and annually renewed or
changed, Id. Polit. l. 2. c. 7.
as occasion was; to whom authority was given, (...), even in the highest
points, and of most importance, as we are told by Aristotle, and shall see
anon. Plutarch in Agesilao.
These Officers he caused to be called by the name of Ephori, that is to say,
the Overseers and Superintendents of the State, (...), because they had the
charge and oversight of the Commonwealth. Aristot. Politic. l. 2. c. 7. Suidas.
And as amongst the Archontes in the State of Athens, which were nine in
number, one of them was called the (...). or the Archon in the way of
excellency, after whose name the year was called, and their reckonings made (as
Titio and Sempronio Coss. in the State of Rome;) so had the Ephori their
Eponymus, one who by way of eminency was called the Ephorus. But for this first
reason of their institution, take it thus from Plutarch, Pa^san. lib. 3. in
Lacon. Plutarch in Lycurgo.
(...), etc. Lycurgus having thus tempered the form of his Commonwealth, it
seemed notwithstanding unto those which came after him, that this small number
of thirty persons which made the Senate, was yet too mighty, and of too great
authority. Wherefore to bridle them a little, they gave them (as he cites from
Plato) a bit in their mouths, which was the Authority of the Ephori, erected in
the time of King Theopompus, about 130 years after the death of Lycurgus. A
second reason which induced those Kings to ordain these Ephori, was to ease
themselves, and delegate upon them that remainder of the Royal power, which
could not be exercised but within the City. For the Kings having little or no
command but in Wars abroad, cared not for being much at home, and thereupon
ordained these Officers to supply their places. Concerning which Cleomenes thus
discourses to the Spartans, after they had destroyed the Ephori, and
suppressed the Office: Id in Agis and Cleomenes.
informing them that Lycurgus had joined the Senators with the Kings, by whom
the Commonwealth was a long time governed, without help of any other Officers;
that afterward the City having great Wars with the Messenians, the Kings were
always so employed in that War that they could not attend the affairs of the
State at home, and thereupon made choice of certain of their friends to sit in
judgment in their stead, whom they called the Ephori, (...), and for a long
time did govern only as the Kings Ministers, though afterward by little and
little they took unto themselves the supreme Authority. Another reason has
been given of the institution, which is, that if a difference grew between the
two Kings in a point of judgment, there might be some to arbitrate between
them, and to have the casting voice amongst them when the difference could not
be agreed. And this is that which Lisander and Mandroclidas (two that had been
Ephori) suggested unto Agis and Cleombrotus the two Kings of Sparta; declaring,
Id. ibid.
That the Office of the Ephori was erected for no other reason, (...), etc. But
because they should give their voices unto that King who had the best reason on
his side, when the other would wilfully withstand both right and reason; and
therefore that they two agreeing might lawfully do what they would without
controlment; that to resist the Kings was a breach of Law, considering that the
Ephori, by Law, had no power nor privilege, but only to arbitrate between
them, when there was any cause of jar or controversy. And this was so received
at Sparta for an undoubted truth, that Cleomenes being sole King upon the death
of Agis of the other house, recalled Archidamus the Brother of Agis, from his
place of Banishment, with an intent to make him King, not doubting but they two
should agree together, and thereby make the Ephori of no power nor use. So then
we have three reasons of the institution, (and more than these I cannot find)
of which there is not one that favors the device of Calvin; or intimates
that the Authority of the Ephori was set up, to pull down the Kings. And to say
truth, it is a most unlikely matter that the Kings of Sparta having so little
power remaining, should need more Officers to restrain them than they had
before; that they should make a new rod for their own poor backs, and add five
Masters more to those eight and twenty, which Lycurgus had imposed upon them.
Which makes me wonder much at Tully, who does acknowledge that the Ephori were
ordained by Theopompus, (as both Aristotle and Plutarch do affirm) and yet will
have them instituted for no other cause, nisi ut oppositi sint Regibus, but to
oppose and curb the Kings: Aristot. Polit. l. 5. c. 11. Cicero de legibus, l. 3.
but more that Plato (who had so much advantage of him both in time and place)
should ascribe the institution to Lycurgus; and tell us that he did not only
ordain the Senate, (...), Plato Ep. 8. edit. gr. lat. To. 3.
but that he did also constitute the Ephorate for the strength and preservation
of the Regal power.

For out of doubt it is affirmed by Plutarch, confirmed by Scaliger, Eusebius
Chronicon, and the Authority of Aristotle, Plut. in Lycurgo. Scalig.
animadvers. in Eusebius. Chron.
who refers the same to Theopompus, as before was showed, that the first
Institution was no less than 130 years after the death of Lycurgus. Who was the
first that bore this Office, has been made a question, but never till these
later times, when men are grown such Skeptics as to doubt of every thing.
Plutarch affirms for certain, (...), that the first Ephorus (that is to say,
the first (...), Plutarch. in Lycurgo.
who had the name of Ephorus by way of excellency, for otherwise there were
five in all) was called Elatus: and hereto Scaliger did once agree, as appears
expressly, page 67. of his Annotations on Eusebius, where he declares it in
these words, Primus Elatus renunciatur (...). But after having a desire to
control Eusebius, he takes occasion by some words in Diogenes Laertius, to cry
up Chilo for the man: first positively, Primus (...) fuit Chilon, and next
exclusively of Elatus, Quibus animadversis non fuerit Elatus primus Ephorus sed
Chilon. To make this good being a fancy of his own (and as his own most dearly
cherished) he produces first the testimony of Laertius, and afterward
confirms the same by a new emendatio temporum, a Calculation and account of his
own inventing. The words produced from Laertius are these verbatim, (...).
Which is thus rendered in the Latin; Diogen. Lat. 1. l. 1. in Chilo.
and I think exactly. Fuit autem Ephorus circa quinquagessimam and quintam
Olympiada. Porro Pamphila circa sextam ait, primumque Ephorum fuisse sub
Euthydemo, autore Sosicrate: primumque instituisse ut Regibus Ephori
adjungerentur, Satyrus Lycurgum dixit. If it be granted in the first place,
that Chilo was not made Ephorus until the 55. Olympiad, as it is plain it was
not, and Scaliger affirms as much, it must needs follow upon true account, that
either Chilo was not the first Ephorus, or that the Ephori were not instituted
in more than twice an hundred and thirty years, after Lycurgus had new molded
the Commonwealth, contrary unto that which is said by Plutarch, and out of him
repeated by Joseph Scaliger. For from the time wherein Lycurgus made his Laws,
which was in the 25 year of Archelaus, the eighth King of the Elder House. unto
the death of Alcamenes, which was the year before the first Olympiad, Eusebius.
Chron. lib. post. p. 114. of Scaligers edit.
were 112 years just, none under. From thence unto the last year of the 55. 220
years complete; which put together make no fewer than 332 years full, a large
misreckoning. Whereas the second year of the fifth Olympiad, in which Eusebius
puts the Institution of the Ephori, both in the Greek and Latin Copies set out
by Scaliger himself; Page 117. of the Latin, and 35 of the Greek Edition.
that second year I say being added to the 112 before-remembred, in which King
Alcamenes died, makes up the full number of 130, which we find in Plutarch; and
agrees punctually with the time of Theopompus, who as it is confessed by
Scaliger, did first ordain them. Nor does Laertius say, if you mark him well,
either that Chilo was the first that was ever Ephorus, or the first that joined
the Ephori to the Kings of Sparta, both which absurdities are by Scaliger
imposed upon him. For unto any one who looks upon Laertius with a careful eye,
it may be easily discerned, that he speaks no otherwise of the Ephorate, than
of an Office instituted a long time before; with the condition of the which
Chilo was well acquainted, and therefore thought himself more fit to undergo it
than his Brother was, who very earnestly desired it. Laertius in vita Chilon.
All that Laertius says, is no more but this, that Chilo was made Ephorus
first, (not the first Ephorus which was made, as Scaliger would have it) under
Euthydemus; and that as Satyrus affirmed (who therein questionless was misled
by Plato) Lycurgus was the first who joined the Ephori to the Spartan Kings;
which words, viz. (...), he has left out of purpose to abuse his Author, and
make him speak the thing which he never meant. His other blunderings and
mistakes to make good this business, first laying the dissolution of the
Ephorate by Cleomenes, Page 67 of the Animadvers.
non multo ante vel post initium Philippi, either not long before or shortly
after the beginning of the reign of Philip the last King of Macedon, but one
(which indeed is true) and within nine Lines, no more, laying it in the 13.
year of the self-same King Philip, (most extremely false) the changing of his
Authors words from Fuit autem sub Regibus Lacedaemon annis 350, as they occur
in the Translation of S. Hierom, printed at Basil, into Fuit sub Regibus
Lacedaemoniorum Annis 350. against the Authors mind and the Rules of Grammar,
only to bring about his device of Chilo, and blind his Readers eyes with a new
Chronology; and others I could point to if my leisure served, I purpose to
forbear at the present time. Nor had I been so bold with Scaliger at all, or at
least not now, but that the proud man is more bold with the Ancient Fathers,
whom he is pleased to look on with contempt, and scorn, as often as they come
before him: for which see page 255. of his Annotations. And so I leave him with
that Censure which he gives Eusebius, as learned and industrious an Antiquary,
as any Scaliger of them all, (no man dispraised): Erratis hujus Autoris
enumerandis charta non suffecerit; Animadvers. in Eusebius. p. 255.
and so sare him well.

But to proceed, Ephori being thus ordained by Theopompus, became not presently
of such authority and power, as by degrees they did attain to: For being chosen
by the Kings as their proper Ministers as before was said, and many times
(...), even from their very nearest Friends, Plutarch. in Agis and Cleomen.
as we read in Plutarch; they were hard thrust at by the Senate, and forced to
put up many an affront from that mightier Body. And this was it that Chilo
aimed at, when he told his Brother who at the same time desired the Office,
Laertius in vita Chilon.
and seemed offended that he lost it, (...), that he was better skilled in
bearing injuries and affronts, than his Brother was. But this continued for no
longer than whilst the Kings served their turns upon them to oppose the
Senate, and kept the nomination of them in their own hands. For afterward the
Kings relinquishing the Election to the common people, upon a forlorn hope, of
gaining their affections by so great a benefit; they began to set up for
themselves, and in a very little time gained all the custom of the City. And of
this new Election I am apt to think that Chilo, whom before we spoke of, was
the first (...). Which I propose not so much out of a desire to comply with
Scaliger, who for ought I can see, aimed at no such matter; as on the credit of
Eusebius, whom he so much lights. For in Euebius Chronicon of Josephus
Scaligers own Edition, after he has put down the institution of the Ephori in
the second of the fifth Olympiad, as before I told you; he gives this Item in
the third of the five and fiftieth (which is the very same that Laertius speaks
of) Chilo qui de Septem Sapientibus fuit, Lacedaemone Ephorus constituitur,
Eusebius. Chronic. lib. poster. p. 127.
dispositione communis gentis, that Chilo one of the seven wise Masters was
ordained Ephorus at Sparta, by the general consent of all the people. But
whether this were so, or not, I am not able to determine absolutely. All I
observe from hence is this, that it is past all question, that from this time
they took upon them more than they had done formerly, and were intent on all
advantages to improve their power. For whereas at the first they were appointed
by the Kings to sit in Judgment in their steads, as before was said, by little
and little (...), they drew that power unto themselves, Plutarch in Agis and
Cleom.
and exercised it in their own name, by their own authority: not as the
Ministers of the Kings, they would none of that, but as the Officers of the
Commonwealth. And to that end they did erect a Court of Judicature, which for
power and greatness of authority was little inferior to the Senate; drawing
unto them all such businesses as were (...), most worthy of care and
consideration. Pausan. l. 3. in Laconicis. Aristot. Polit. lib. 3. cap. 1.
By means whereof, as they drew many of the people to depend upon them, whose
businesses and suits of Law were brought to be determined by them; so they
increased that dependence, by husbanding such difference as did often arise
between the Senate and the Kings, to their own advantage. For it is well
observed by Aristotle, that as long as the Senate and the Kings did agree
together, they kept all the power in their own hands: (...), but when they
jarred amongst themslves, Id. ibid. l. 2. c. 9.
they gave the people opportunity to become their Masters. But that which
raised them to the height, and made them terrible at last both to King and
Senate, was the mutual tie and correspondence which was between them and the
people: by whom they were not only chosen, and therefore cherished by them as
their own dear Creatures: but for the most part chosen (...), out of the body
of the people, and sometime (...): out of the very meanest and neediest of
them; Aristot. Polit. l. 2. cap. 7.
which made them on the other side to court the people, and to apply themselves
unto them upon all occasions. And though it happened many times, that some of
them being indigent and needy men, where easily wrought upon by money, and apt
to sell as well the justice as the honor of the Commonwealth, to enrich
themselves and raise their Families; whereof Aristotle much complains, and that
deservedly: Id. ibid. etc. 8.
yet this corruption served to advance their power, and put them into a
condition to be the better able to oblige the people. So that the common sort
of people doing all they could to advance the power and reputation of the
Ephori, whom they accounted for their own, as indeed they were; and the Ephori
striving by all possible means to gratify the people, by obtaining new Laws
and large immunities to be enacted for them, as they saw occasion: they altered
the whole frame of Government, and made it of an Aristocrasie to become an
Ogligarchie, and in conclusion a plain Popular Tyranny.

For trusting to the power and interess whic they had in the Commonalty, Ephori
must propound them? Or any Taxes to be levied for the necessary uses of the
Commonwealth, who but the Ephori must impose them? Plutarch in Agis and
Cleomen.
When Lysander had reduced the City of Athens unto such extremities, that they
were glad to yield unto such conditions as the Conquerors were pleased to
impose upon them: from whom must the Capitulations come, but from the Ephori?
It was the (...), the final resolution of the Ephori, Id. in Lysandro.
from which they were to expect either bonds or liberty. Cynado is accused of
Treason against Agesilaus and the State of Sparta, the Ephori must take the
information and proceed accordingly: Xenophon. in vita Agesilai. Thucydides. l.
1.
and if Pausanias be accused of holding correspondence with the King of Persia,
the Ephori send out their commands, (...), and commit him presently to Prison.
When any Ambassadors were sent forth on the public service, from whom must
they receive their power, from whom be furnished with instructions, but from
the Ephori alone? Plut. in Nicias.
and who but they must appoint Comminders for the Wars, require account of
their employments, and either punish or reward them as they haved served? When
Cleonymus was displeased because Areus was preferred before him in his
pretensions to the Kingdom: the Ephori did not only take upon them to sweeten
and demulce the man by great gifts and presents, (...), but also to confer upon
him the command of the Army, Pausan. l. 3. in Lacon.
though of right belonging to the Kings. When Mindarus the Admiral of their
Navy was miserably beat by the Athenians in the straight of Hellespont, an
Express is presently dispatched to Sparta, Plutarch. in Alcibiades. Idem in
Lysandro.
to give unto the Ephori an account thereof: Lysander had no sooner revenged
this quarrel, and beat the Fleet of the athenians near the self same place, but
he acquaints the Ephori with his good success, with all speed that might be.
And if the Wars prove fortunate, and the spoil so great, that part thereof be
sent to Sparta, to be laid up in the public Treasury; the Ephori, and none but
they must have the fingering of the money. Id. ibid.
Finally there was no Commander of the Armies, or other Officer employed by the
Commonwealth, whom they called not to an account as their stomachs served; not
staying till the Office was expired, and the Commander or the Officer become a
private man again, as in other States; but even in the midst of their Command
and Magistracy whatsoever it was: and whom they did not punish when they come
before them, Xenophon de Rep^b. Lacedaem.
either by imprisonment or death, as to them seemed best. Thus have we brought
them to their height, and seen them absolutely possessed of the Supreme Power,
in making peace or war as they thought convenient; and in disposing of the
goods, the liberties, yea and the lives too of the Spartan subject. It had been
a strange temper in them had they tarried there, and not encroached as much
(whilst the Tide went with them) upon the persons and the power of the Kings
themselves.

For howsoever at the first they were (...) the Ministers of the Kings,
Theopompus did but little dream of, when first he set them up to oppose the
Senate, although his Queen a wise and understanding Lady did evidently see, and
tell him, what would follow on it. Of which we find this story in the works of
Aristotle, and from him borrowed by Plutarch if I guess aright, that his Wife
seeing what design he was bent upon, and how unluckily he was carried on to
effect the same, advised him to take heed that by erecting this new Magistracy,
he did not leave the Kingdom in a worse condition to his Heirs and Successors,
than he received the same from his I redecessors; and that he answered
thereunto, (...), Apistot. Polit. l. 5. c. 11.
that by this means he hoped to leave it stronger and more durable than it was
before. But the event declared unto all the World that the Woman was the better
Prophet, and had the greater insight into things to come. The power of
Sovereignty when once communicated to the common people, or otherwise usurped
by such popular Officers, as depend wholly on the people for their place and
being, is seldom time recovered into Regal hands. And though some Kings may be
persuaded by some subtle Artifices (as it seems Theopompus was) that by this
means the Chair of State will stand the faster; yet the proceedings of the
Ephori in the State of Sparta will inform us otherwise, and easily lay open the
apparent danger of such weak surmises. For being made Officers of State, one of
the first points they obtained, was that the Kings made Oath unto them once in
every month, (...), Xenophon. de Kepub. Laced.
that they would govern the Estate according to the Laws established in the
Commonwealth, and that they would preserve the Kingdom in the best condition
that they could: the Ephori making Oath to them in the name of the City, whose
Officers they were, and by whom entrusted. Next they attempt to place such
Counselors about the Kings, as they might confide in, beginning with such
Kings as were under Age; and the first trial which they made was in appointing
one Cleandrides to be about King Plastonax, the 19. of the elder House, as his
chief Counselor and Director, without whose approbation nothing must be done.
Plutarch. in Pericles.
Another of their usurpations and encroachments was to restrain their Kings in
the point of Marriage, and to impose some fine or disgrace upon them, if they
presumed to marry against their liking. Anaxandrides the 15. of the elder
House, had married a Lady of brave parts, but it was her ill fortune to be
barren a long time together. Pausan. lib. 3. in Lacon.
The Ephori command him without more ado (...), to give her a Bill of divorce,
and send her going. Archidamus the 17. of the second House married a Wife which
brought him Children: But fault was found she was too little, and thereupon the
Ephori condemned him in a sum of money; saying (...), that she would not bring
them Kings, but demy-Kings. Plutarch. in Agesilao.
And that you may perceive how difficult a thing it was to please them in this
point, Leonidas had married one that was neither barren, nor too little; and
yet was quarrelled by the Ephori, and in fine condemned, for marrying with a
Woman of another Nation. The fundamental Laws of Sparta conferred upon the
Kings the Supreme command over the Military men in all Wars abroad. Id. in Agis
and Cleomenes.
The Ephori did not only dispose it otherwise, and gave it unto such whom they
desired to oblige unto them, as you heard before: but kept the Kings at such a
bay, that they neither could lead forth the Armies without their consent, nor
tarry longer in the Camp than they list to let them; and if the action did
miscarry, the Kings were either fined or imprisoned for it. Agesilaus being a
verry stirring Prince, and desirous to get honor in the Wars, was not
permitted to set forwards till he had bought the Ephori with a sum of money:
and yet being in the height of his good success was called back again, Id. in
Agesilao.
and glad to be conformable to the said Commands. And so it fared with Agis and
Clcomenes both, on the like occasions. And for the fining of their Kings,
besides what we have seen before in the former instances, Plistonax being
betrayed by Cleandrides, (whom the Ephori themselves had placed about him) and
his Army forced to disband and turn home again; is presently condemned in so
great a sum, that he was not able to discharge it. Id. in Pericles. Aristot.
Polit. l. 2. cap. 7.
By means whereof the Kings were brought at last unto that condition, (...), as
Aristotle truly notes, that they were forced to court and bribe the Ephori
upon all occasions, to the great disservice of the State, and sometimes to the
fatal overthrow of their chief designs. So that it is no marvel, if considered
rightly, either that the Ephori kept their state and rose not up to reverence
their King, when he came before them, though all the residue of the people and
the Senate did it, as we read in Xenophon; De Repub. Lacedaem. Plut. in
Agesilao.
or that Agesilaus used to rise up to them, as often as they came unto him
about any business, as we find in Plutarch; or that the Kings esteemed it such
a point of Sovereignty, that when they were commanded to attend the Ephori,
(...), they did refuse to go upon the first and second summons, and stirred not
till the third command, as Cleomenes bragged in the said Historian. Id. in Agis
and Cleomen.
Which trust me was a point of no small importance.

And yet they staid not here, they went furrher still. Thucydides not without
good reason, that they did not only punish with imprisonment their great and
principal Commanders; Thucydid. hist. l. 1.
(...), but that it was lawful for the Ephori to do the like unto their Kings.
Which to avoid, Pausanias was enforced to retire himself, and live a voluntary
exile in another Country. Nothing remains but they take authority to depose,
Plutarch in Lysander.
and in fine to murder them; and if they gain not this, all the rest is
nothing. And this they are resolved to gain, or be foully foiled; nor did they
fail in the attempt when they went about it. They quarrelled at Leonidas as
before I told you, for marrying with a Woman of another Country, without so
much as seeking for their approbation. And that they may be sure to effect
their business, Religion is pretended, and a star must fall, only to warrant
their proceedings. Which preparations bring past they cite him to appear before
them, and on default of his appearance they deposed him instantly, and
conferred the Kingdom on Cleombrotus. Id. in agis and Cleomenes.
But these men being out of Office, he came out of Sanctuary, and was restored
again by the next years Ephori. Who to make proof that their Authority was as
great as their Predecessors, thought it not argument enough to restore one
King, except they did depose and destroy another. And thereupon laid hands on
Agis of the other House, and inhumanly haled him to the common Prison, and
there most barbarously murdered him with his Mother and Grandmother. (...).
Id. ibid.
And this says Plutarch was the first time, that ever the Ephori put a King to
death. And so perhaps it was the first, but the last it was not. For Archidamus
the Brother of Agis being recalled from banishment by Cleomenes, to the end he
might enjoy the Kingdom which did by right belong unto him; was presently
seized on by the murderers, and dispatched in private, for fear he should
revenge the death of his slaughtered Brother. Id. ibid.
By which it is most evident without further proof, that the Spartan
Aristocracie was become a Tyranny, and of all Tyrannies the most insupportable,
because merely popular. Or if more proof should be desired, both Aristotle, and
his Master Plato will not stick to say it; though they both died, before these
two last Tragedies were acted on the stage of Sparta. For Plato being to
declare what he conceived of the Government of that Commonwealth resolves that
it did (...), Plato de legibus l. 4.
approach more near to Tyranny than to any other Form whatever; the Power and
Empire of the Ephori being (...), plainly Tyrannical, and no otherwise. And
Aristotle who had studied the condition of that State exactly, though at the
first he seemed to think that it was very well compounded of the three good
Forms, yet upon full debate thereof, he concludes at last, (...), Aristot.
Polit. l. 2. c. 4.
that the Dominion of the Ephori was an absolute Tyranny. Assuredly had they
lived to have seen that day, wherein the Ephori embrued their hands in the
blood of their Princes, under pretense of safety to the Commonwealth, they
would have voted it to have been a Tyranny in the highest degree; and then the
most unsufferable Tyrants that ever wretched State groaned under. For though
the Kings of Sparta were so lessened by Lycurgus Laws, that little more was
left unto them than the name and Title; yet they were Kings, and held so sacred
by their Neighbors, even their very Enemies, that none did ever offer to lay
hands upon them in the heat and fury of their fights, Plutarch. in Agis and
Cleom.
(...), out of the reverence they did bear to those beams of Majesty, which
most apparently shined in them.

The Ephori being grown to this height of Tyranny, Id. in Agesil.
bearing (...) a kind of Heritable grudge betwixt them (as my Author calls it)
ever since they took upon them to control their Masters: but either wanted
opportunity or spirit, to attempt any thing to their prejudice; and therefore
thought it safer to procure their favors, than run themselves upon a hazardous
Experiment. Pausanias, the 20. of the Elder House, was the first that ever did
attempt either by force or practice to subvert the Office; the insolences of
the which were then grown so great, that being a stout and active Prince, he
was not able to endure them. That he had entertained such thoughts is affirmed
by Aristotle, where he informs us that Lysander had a purpose to take away the
Kingly Government (or rather to acquire it to himself, as we find in Plutarch,)
(...), Id. in Lysand^o. Aristot. Polit. lib. 5. c. 1.
and that Pausanias had the like to destroy the Ephorate. But what he failed to
bring about, his Successors did at last accomplish. Of which Cleombrotus and
Agis, joining their hands and heads together did proceed so far, that going
into the Market place well attended by their Friends and followers, they
plucked the Ephori from their seats, and substituted others in their rooms,
whom they conceived would be more pliant to their prefent Enterprises: which
was the first actual attempt, Plutarch in Agis and Cleom.
that ever had been made against them by the Kings of Sparta. But evulgato
imperii Arcano, when so great a mystery of State was once discovered, that the
Ephori were but mortal men, and might as easily be displaced and deposed as any
of the other Magistrates; Leonidas immediately upon his restitution to the
Kingdom, made the like removal, and displaced those who had taken part against
him with the former Kings. Id. ibid.
So that the ice being broken, and the way made open, Cleomenes son unto
Leonidas had the fairer way to abrogate the Office utterly, which at last he
did. For being a brave and gallant Prince, and seeing that the project he was
bent upon for the reduction of the Commonwealth to its primitive honor, could
not be brought about but by their destruction; he fell upon them with his
Soldiers as they sat at supper, and killed four of them in the place, the
fifth escaping shrewdly hurt to the nearest Sanctuary. Id. ibid.
That done he went into the Market place, and overthrew all the Chairs of the
Ephori saving only one, which he reserved for himself as his Chair of State,
and sitting in the same in the sight of the people, gave them an account of his
proceedings, and the reasons which induced him to it: Declaring how the Ephori
were at first appointed by the Kings themselves; that for long time they
governed only (...) as the Kings Ministers, and no otherwise; that many years
after this, Asteropus one of the Ephori, building upon a new foundation, and
being the first Author of that dangerous change, they took the Government unto
themselves, and exercised the same in their own names only; that though they
had usurped a power which belonged not to them, yet had they managed it
discreetly, the might perhaps have held it longer, and with better liking; but
that licentiously abusing the authority which they had usurped by suppressing
the lawful Governors ordained of old, by taking upon them to banish some of the
Citizens, and to put some to death without law and justice, and finally by
threatening those who were desirous to restore the Government to its ancient
Form, they were no longer to be suffered: that for his part he should have
thought himself the happiest King that ever was, if possibly he could have
cured his Country of that foul affection withou grief or sorrow; but being it
was not to be done that way, he thought it better that some should be put to
death, than the whole Commonwealth run on to a swift destruction. This said,
he presently dissolved the Assembly, and seriously betook himself to the
Reformation which formerly he had projected, and in short time reduced the
people to the ancient Discipline, the staee and reputation of the Commonwealth
to its ancient height.

Thus have we made a brief discovery of the Spartan Ephori, Tyranny, and with
what suddenness they lost their power and their lives together. But in all this
there is not any show or color for that which is affirmed by CALVIN, no ground
for, nor verity at all in that Assertion, that the Ephori were at first
ordained to oppose the Kings, to regulate their proceedings, and restrain their
power: but rather that they were ordained (as indeed they were) to curb the
Senate, to be the Ministers of the Kings, and subservient to them; to sit in
Judgment for them, and discharge such Offices, as the Kings pleased to trust
them with, in their times of absence. If Calvin's popular Magistrates have no
more Authority, than the Spartan Ephori, according to the rules of their
Institution, they will have little color to control their Princes, and less
for putting a restraint on the Regal power. The most they can pretend to must
be usurpation, and that will hold no longer, if it hold so long, than they have
power to make it good by blood and violence, which I hope Calvin did not aim
at. And if they have no other ground than an unjust Title, prescription will
not serve the turn, (for nullum tempus occurrit Regi, as our Lawyers tell us)
when a courageous Prince is concerned in it, and oppressed by it. If any
Popular spirits entertain such hopes, if nothing else will satisfy their vast
ambitions but to be equal with their Kings and Supreme Governors, and at last
above them: let them remember what became of the Spartan Ephori, and that there
was a Cleomenes which called them to a sad account for all those insolences
and affronts which they had put upon himself and his Predecessors. And let all
Kings and Supreme Governors take heed by the example of these Spartan Princes,
how they let loose the reins of Government, and lay them on the necks of the
common people: which if unbridled once, and left at liberty, will not be easily
induced to receive that Bit into their mouths which before they champed on: and
that they give no way to such popular Magistrates as Calvin has presented to
us, who whatsoever color and pretense they make, aim at no other mark than the
Royal power, though out of too much modesty they disclaim the Title, and must
be either Kings or nothing. Of which invasions and encroachments on the Supreme
Power, our Author gives another hint in the Roman Tribunes; the truth and
fitness of which supposition must be looked on next.

CHAP. III. Of the Encroachments of the Tribunes on the State of Rome; and that
they were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin.
1. The Tribunes of the People why first Instituted in the State of Rome. 2.
And with what difficulty and conditions. 3. The Tribunes fortify themselves
with large immunities, before they went about to change the Government. 4. the
Tribunes no sooner in their Office, but they set themselves against the
Nobility, and the Senate, contrary to the Articles of their Institution. 5. The
many and dangerous Seditions occasioned by the Tribunes, in the City of Rome.
6. The Tribunes, and the people do agree together to change the Government of
the State. 7. By what degrees the people came to be possessed of all the
Offices in the State, both of power and dignity. 8. The Plots and Practices of
the Gracchi to put the Power of the Judiciature, and Supreme Majesty of the
State, into the hands of the People. 9. The Tribunes take upon them to commit
the Consuls, and bring all the Officers of the State under their command. 10.
The Office and authority of the Tribunes reduced unto its ancient bounds by
Corn. Sylla, and at last utterly destroyed. 11. An application of the former
passages to the point in hand.


ALthough the reasons which induced the people in the State of Rome to desire
some Officers of their own, Roman stories: yet I shall briefly lay it down, the
better to remove the intimation which we find in Calvin, that they were
purposely ordained to oppose the Consuls. The hory then in brief is this. The
people having not long before expulsed their Kings, and got some reputation by
their prowess in those petit States which bordered nearest to the City, found
quickly that the liberty which they expected was nothing but a golden dream,
not able to protect them from the common Gaols, and that their reputation in
the Wars would not pay their Debts, or save them from the hands of their cruel
Creditors. For serving in the Wars at their own proper charges, and having
little else to subsist upon but their Trades or labor, they were fain sometimes
to take up money upon Usury. And though they did return from the Wars with
Victory, and showed those honorable scars which they had received, fighting in
defense of their Country and the Commonwealth; yet this did edify but little
with their hungry Creditors: Plutarch in M Coriolano.
who did not only sell their goods, if they were not solvent, but apprehended
their persons also, and either laid them up in the common Prisons, or made them
serve instead of Bondmen, and made them subject to the whip and other base
corrections fit for none but Slaves. And somewhat to this purpose the old man
complained, as we read in Livy, declaring to the people (who were apt to hear
it) how his Patrimony had been seized on by the merciless Usurers, his person
apprehended by them, and that he was not only made a Slave, but marked out for
slaughter: Livit. hist. l. 2.
Inde ostentare tergum foedum recentibus vestigiis verberum, showing withal
upon his back the miserable prints which the whip had left. This made the
people murmur, and at last to mutiny, and in tumultuous manner, minaciter magis
quam suppliciter, rather with threats than supplications to require the Senate
to take some course for their relief: resolving otherwise to go no more unto
the Wars, serve the State who would. The Senate promised fair, as there was
good cause (the Volsci pressing hard upon them to their very gates); and by
that promise won the people, and obtained a Victory. But when the Wars were
done and performance looked for, instead of finding a redress of their former
grievances, the rigor of the Law took place, and creditoribus tradebantur, and
they were seized on by their Creditors as in former times: the Senate thinking
it unreasonable to make the Law submit to the necessities of particular men,
and against Law to defraud any man of the Debts which were due unto them.
Dionys. Halicreass. lib. 6.
But a new War approaching, a new promise made, and that neglected also when
the Wars was ended; the people seeing no relief was like to come from the hands
of the Senators, Long alia quam prime instituerant via grassabantur, began to
lend an ear to some desperate Counsels, and fell to contertain such hopes, as
formerly they durst never dream of. For drawing themselves into a body under
the conduct of Sicinius a troublesome and seditious person, they forsook the
City, and encamped upon an Hill adjoining: resolving as they gave it out, to
seek new dwellings, and that there was no place in Italy but would afford them
air and water, (...), and ground in which they might be buried. There is no
question to be made, but if the Senate had beheld the action with neglect and
scorn, as Appius, and C. Martius, did advise they should; Dionys. Halicarn. l.
6. Platarch in Corlolano.
the People out of love to their Wives and Children, would have returned to
their Houses: or if they had presented them in time with any tolerable
mitigations of the former Laws, they might have taken off their edge, and
appeased the Tumult. But giving way unto their fury till it grew too high, and
showing in their resolutions far more fear than courage; the people got the
better of them, and thought they stood upon the higher ground, as indeed they
did. Which pride and high conceit of theirs was the more increased, by the
authority and persuasions of one Junius Brutus, who came not to them till they
were too far engaged, to go off with safety. A man, as the Historian notes, of
a turbulent and seditious spirit, more apt to kindle a Rebellion, than to
quench the flame; but otherwise (...), Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 6.
of very great foresight into business, and one that had a ready Tongue upon
all occasions. To him they gave the managing of the whole design, and he
improved the trust to their best advantage. Insomuch that when Menenius Agrippa
was employed unto them to demand their grievances, and had brought the point of
such an issue, that there was nothing wanting to make up the breach, but some
security to be given on the part of the Senate, that the people should be no
more deluded with such empty promises; this Junius Brutus took upon him to
propose the terms: and no security would content him (as the Plot was laid) but
that some popular Magistrates should be forthwith made, for the protection of
the People. Concedite nobis (inquit) Magistratus aliquot quotannis e nostro
corpore create, etc. Let us, says he, Id. ibid.
have certain Magistrates to be chosen yearly out of our own body, on whom we
shall not ask you to confer more Power, than that they have authority to assist
the Commons, when they are either injured or oppressed by violence, and to take
order that they be not robbed of their rights and liberties. Other security
than this we will trust to none. Which when the People heard (for few of them
were made acquainted with the Plot before) (...), they made many a loud and
joyful shout, praising the man unto the skies, and absolutely resolving to
admit of no other terms, than what their Spokesman had proposed.

But yet the business was not done. Vlerius was the chief, whose Brother had
not long before expulsed the Kings, and from his courting of the People was
surnamed Poplicola: a Family that had been always favorable to the popular
Party, and more endeavored their content, than the honor of profit of the
public. In which regard Appius charged him to his face, Id. ibid.
(...), that the whole Generation of them were so partial in behalf of People,
that they have almost destroyed the Commonwealth. Others and those of the
greater courage and Nobility, scorning that such an innovation should be made
in the public Government, opposed it with all might and main; not sparing to
assure the Senate that in the setting up of this new Authority, they would in
fine put down their own. And of these Appius and Caius Martius, (who after had
the name of Coriolanus) were the leading men: who standing upon point of
honor, advised the Senate that having shaken off the Tyranny of their Kings,
they should not prostitute themselves to the lusts of the people; Id. ibid.
that they should stand on their own ground, and not do any thing unworthy of
their place and dignity; that these were but the beginning of sedition, and
that the purpose of the Commons was to abolish Law, and set up a Party:
Plutarch in Coriolano.
Appius foretelling, as inspired with the spirit of Prophecy, (...), how
great a Seminary of mischiefs it would prove to the Commonwealth, and calling
all the Gods to witness that he had done his best to prevent the same. But when
they found it like to pass, and that the Major part of the House did incline
that way, it was advised that they should hold the people to the terms by
themselves proposed, and give their Officers no more power but to relieve the
people from unjust oppression, and that they should only interpose, if any
thing were passed in Senate to the peoples prejudice, but propose nothing of
themselves, nor appear in any thing, until the Senate had before considered of
it; that the Election should be made in centuriatis Comitiis only, where the
Patricii and their followers bare the greatest stroke; and finally that in
their applications and addresses to the Lords of the Senate, in any business
whatsoever, they should all agree upon the point, so that if any one dissented,
the agreement and consent of all the rest should pass for nothing. For seeing
that Tribunes must be granted, they hoped that by their disagreement the honor
of the State might be kept upright, and that the Commonwealth was not quite
past help, Dionys. Halicarn. l. 10.
(...), as long as any discord or dissension might be sown amongst them. Which
last condition (for all the rest were broken as soon as they were agreed on) was
most religiously observed till the very last, as we read in Plutarch, who gives
it for a Rule amongst them, that if one Tribune did oppose (...); Platarch in
Caio and Tiber.
the agreement and command of all the rest did effect just nothing. Things
being brought unto this temper, and all points agreed on, the people went to
the Election, and chose five new Officers, (according to the number of the
Spartan Ephori) which they called Tribunes of the People; of which Sicinius and
Junius Bratus must be two at least. We may be sure they took not all his pains
for nothing.

And yet all this was nothing if they got not more. good behavior; and if they
did not break those bonds, they were Prisoners still. But first they must be
fortified with some special Privileges, to keep their persons out of danger,
that they might boldly venture upon any project without fear of Law; and put
themselves into such condition, that whatsoever wrongs they did, they would not
be called to an account. To that end Brutus taking his opportunity whilst the
heats were up, and the Senate in a disposition to deny them nothing, causes a
Law to be propounded and obtained for the perpetual indemnity of the Tribunes,
(...), and for declaring of their Office to be sacred and inviolable. Dionys.
Halicarn. l. 6
The substance of the Law was to this effect; That no man should compel the
Tribunes to do any thing against their wills, nor beat, or cause them to be
beaten, nor kill, or cause them to be killed; if any should presume to do the
contrary (...), he was to be pursued as an execrable person, and his goods
confiscate, and whosoever slew him should escape unpunished, and do a
meritorious service to the Commonwealth. A Privilege which they found good use
of in the times succeeding, and made it serve their turns upon all occasions.
Martius complained of them in the Senate for disobedience to the Consuls, and
an intent to bring an Anarchy upon the State: Platarch in Coriolano.
they Vote this for a breach of privilege, and nothing but his death or
banishment will give them satisfaction for it. Appius being Consul sends his
Lictor to lay hands upon them for raising Tumults in the City; Livie hist. Romans
lib. 2.
this is another breach of privilege, and he shall answer for it when his year
was out. Caeso Quintius like a noble Patriot, joins with the Consuls and the
Senate to oppress their insolences, when neither Law nor Reason would prevail
upon them; this also is a breach of privilege, Id. l. 3.
and his life shall pay for it. But to proceed, having obtained this Law for
their own security, their next work was to break or pass by those Laws by which
the State was governed in all times before, and which themselves had yielded to
at their first creation. It was the practice of the City from the first
foundation (and a continual custom has the force of Law) to give such respect
unto the Senate, Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 7.
that the people did not vote nor determine any thing, (...), which the Senate
had not first debated and resolved upon. This though no breach of privilege was
a main impediment to the advancing of those projects which they had in hand,
and therefore fit to be removed, as removed it was: and so a way made open unto
that confusion, which did expose the State to so many changes, that it was
never constant to one Form of Government. Which being obtained, the next thing
to be brought about, was to bring the Election of the Tribunes into the hands
of the people (who had before the least part in it) that so depending mutually
upon one onother, they might cooperate together to destroy the State, and
bring it absolutely under the command of the common people. For at the first,
according to the Articles of the Institution, the Tribunes were to be elected
in Comitiis Centuriatis as before was said, where none but men of years and
substance (such as were of the Livery, as we speak in England) had the right of
suffrage; By means whereof the Patricians had a very great stroke in the
Elections, Et per Clientum suffragia creandi quos vellent pote^tatem, Livie
hist.
and by the voices of their Clients or dependents set up whom they listed. They
must no longer hold this Power. The Tribunes were the creatures of the Common
people, and must be made by none but them. A Law must therefore be propounded
to put the Election, wholly into the hands of the People, and to transact the
same in Comitiis Tributis, where no Patrician was to vote, but all things
carried by the voices of the rascal Rabble. Which though it caused much heat
and no small ado, yet it was carried at the last; Appius complaining openly as
his custom was, Rempub. per metum prodi, that the Senate did destroy the
Commonwealth by their want of courage. And whereas at the first they had so
much modesty as not to come into the Senate, Sed positis subselliis ante fores
decreta Patrum examinare, Valor. Maxim. lib. 2. c. 2.
but to sit without upon some Benches, whilst they examined the decrees which
had passed the House: they challenge now a place, though no vote in Senate, and
had free ingress and egress when they would themselves.

But their main business was to pull down the Nobles, Martius had spoken some
words in Senate which displeased the Tribunes, and they incense the People to
revenge the injury: who promising to assist them in their undertakings, an
Officer is forthwith sent to apprehend him. This caused the Patricians whom the
cause concerned, to stand close together, and to oppose this strange
encroachment; and generally to affirm, as most true it was, that when they
yielded to the setting up this new Authority, there was no power given them by
the Senate (...), Dionys. Halicarn. l. 7.
but only to preserve the Commons from unjust oppressions. The like did Martius
plead in his own behalf, as we find in Livie, auxilii non poenae jus datum illi
potestati, plebisque non Patrum Tribunos esse, Livie hist. lib. 2.
that they were trusted with a Power to help the Commons, but with none to
punish, and were not Tribunes of the Lords, but of the People. And so much also
was affirmed in the open Senate, that the Authority of the Tribunes was at
first ordained not to offend or grieve the Senate, but that the Commons might
not suffer any grievance by it; and that they did not use their Power,
according to such limitations as were first agreed on, and as of right they
ought to use it, (...), Dionys. Halicarn. l. 7.
but to the ruin and destruction of the Laws established. Enough of conscience
to have stayed them from the prosecution, but that they had it in design, and
resolved to carry it. For Brutus had before given out and assured the people,
(...), that he would humble the Nobility, Id. ibid.
and bring down their pride; and 'twas no reason that such a man as he should
be disappointed, and not be master of his word. Martius being banished at the
last, their next bout was with Appius Claudius, a constant and professed Enemy
of the popular faction: one who had openly taken part against them in behalf of
Martius, and after seeing them apprehend some Gentlemen who opposed their
insolences, had openly denied, jus esse Tribuno in quenquam nisi in plebeium,
Live. l. 2.
that they could exercise their power on any but the Commons only. Him
therefore they accused of Treason, or at least sedition, in that he had
entrenched upon their Authority, which was made sacred by the Laws: and
doubtless had condemned him to some shameful punishment, had he not died before
his Trial. Which Victory on Martius, and the death of Appius, did so discourage
the Nobility and puff up the Tribunes, that from this time forwards (as the
Historian does observe) the Tribunes cited whom they listed to answer for
themselves before the People, and to submit their lives to their final
sentence: which as it did increase the Power of the popular faction in the
depressing of the Nobles, and weakening the Authority of the Senate; so did it
open them a way to aim at and attain to all those dignities in the
Commonwealth, (...), Dionys. Halicarn. l. 7.
which were most honorable in themselves and had formerly belonged to the
Patricians, and to none but them. And yet the Senate and Nobility did not so
give over, but that sometimes they put them in remembrance of their first
conditions, and challenged them of breaking all those bonds and Covenants,
which were so solemnly agreed on and accepted by them, at the first erection of
their Office. For this did Fabius press upon them when they went about to make
some Law for the restraint and regulating of the power of the Consuls, viz.
that their authority was given them ad auxilium singulorum, for the relief of
such particulars as did want their help, not for the ruin of the public; Livie
l. 3.
and that they should do well to bethink themselves, Tribunos plebis se
creatos, non hosts Patribus, that they were chosen Tribunes to protect the
people, not Enemies to oppress the Senate. And the expostulation of the Senate
was both just and necessary, when they demanded of the Tribunes on the same
occasion, (...), who gave them power to introduce new Laws and subvert the old;
Dionys. Halicarn. l. 10.
and told them in plain terms they had broke their Covenants, and that they
were not made upon such Conditions as to do all things that they listed, nor to
do any thing at all, but only to protect the poor, and preserve the Commons
from oppression. Which put together makes it a most evident Truth, that in the
creation of the Tribunes there was nothing less intended than to curb the
Senate, or to set up a Power to oppose the Consuls; as vainly and seditiously
is supposed by CALVIN, though true it is they did abuse their power with the
Common people, and the authority of their Office to suppress them both.

And this they were resolved to do, Livie. If they held quiet for one year, as
they seldom did (till they had brought the City under their obedience) they
broke out in the next that followed with the greater violence: and when the
course of the distemper was so intermitted, that it held not always a
Quotidian, it proved a Tertian Fever, or at most a Quartan, and therefore like
to tarry longer with the afflicted Patient. How many seditions did they raise
about the Law Argaria, of which Livie tells us that it was never moved sine
maximis motibus without great Tumults and Dissentions? Hist. Romans l. 2.
How many Tumults did they raise to oppose the Consuls, when they had any Wars
in hand, and were to press the Soldier to pursue those Wars? Id. lib. 3.
How often find we in that Author, Tribunitium bellum domi territare patres,
that when the Fathers had no Wars abroad, they found a Tribunitian War at home
which did more affright them? Id. lib. 4.
How often find we them complaining, non ultra ferri posse Tribunitios furores,
that the insolences of the Tribunes were no longer sufferable; and that they
could not look to be without continual Alarms, and renewed distractions,
whilst the seditions and the Authors of them did succeed so prosperously? Nay
they were so accustomed to it, that having had some intermission (and that no
otherwise obtained, but by yielding all things to the people which they had a
mind to) Livie takes notice of it as a thing observable, Id. lib. 10.
permultos annos esse, that many years had intervened since the Patricians and
the Tribunes had their last contention. And all this while they managed their
seditions by the Tongues end only, seldom proceeding unto blows, and much less
to blood. But when the two Gracchi came in play and attained the Office, they
fell from words to blows, and from blows to murder: Tiberius one of the two
Brothers, and many of his Friends and followers being tumultuously slain in the
Common Forum, as he was acting the part of a busy and seditious Tribune; whom
Caius the other of the two not long after followed both in life and death.
Velleius Patercul. hist.
And this, says the Historian, initium in urbe Roma Civilis sanguinis
gladiorumque impunitatis fuit, was the first time that the Sword was suffered
to range at liberty in the streets of Rome, and to be discolored with the
blood of the Citizens; their differences before that day (though not often
afterward) being determined by Parlies, but not by bloodshed. Which being put
together and considered seriously, it will appear to be no Paradox which we
find in Florus, where he affirms, Seditionum omnium causas Tribunitiam
potestatem excitasse, Florus histor. Romans l. 3.
that the Tribunitian power was the source and fountain of all those seditions,
wherewith the quiet of the State had been disturbed. Nor was it said by
Quintius without very good reason, that the Authority of the Tribunes, in
seditione and ad seditiones nata, was born in a sedition and to raise
seditions; Cicero de Legibus l. 3.
that it was pestifera potestas, a pestilent pernicious Office, and that Pompey
did exceeding ill to re-invest the Tribunes with that height of power, of which
they had been justly dispossessed by Sylla. Upon which grounds it had been
formerly averred by the Consuls and the rest of the Senate, that the Tribunes
were the cause of those distractions ((...), are the Authors words) which did
so miserably afflict the Commonwealth. Dionys. Halicarn. l. 10.
But this, to say the truth, is so clear a point, that it needs no proof. I
only shall observe and so pass it by, how justly the Nobility and Senate were
punished by their own Example; and for how little time they enjoyed that
Sovereignty, which they had wrested from their Kings. From the expulsion of the
Kings to the creating of the Tribunes were but sixteen years; and from the
death of Tarquin to the reign of Brutus and Sicinius, but one year, no more,
and in that little span of time the people profited so well in the School of
Rebellion, that they did not only beat the Senate at their own weapon of
Disloyalty, but choked them with their own Objection. For when it was objected
against the Tribunes, that their Authority was gotten and maintained by
seditious courses; the Tribunes handsomely replied, that that Objection might as
well be made against the Authority of the Consuls; which had been introduced
and established by no other means, (...), Id. lib. 10.
than the Rebellion of the Nobles or Patricians against their Kings. A very
shrewd retortion, if you mark it well; and fit to be considered of in these
present times.

If any ask to what end all these stirs were raised, and these seditions set on
foot, Tribunes to change the Government of the State, and to put the Supreme
Power of all into the hands of the people; that is to say, to bring it under
the command of a few factious persons, on whom the body of the people had
devolved their power. And this is positively affirmed by Florus, where having
told us that the Tribunes were the cause of all the tumults and seditions which
had been raised within the City, he adds, that being at first ordained specie
quidem tuendae plebis, Florus hist. Romans l. 3.
under pretense of being Protectors of the Commons, and taking care for the
preserving of their rights and liberties; they sought in very deed to usurp the
Sovereignty, re autem denominationem sibi acquirere, and to get the Supreme
Power into their own hands. To this end as the Tribunes strived to oblige the
people by causing new Laws to be made in their behalf, and for the increase of
their Authority; so did the people readily obey the Tribunes, and gathered into
an Head upon all occasions, as well for the protection of their persons, as the
confirmation of their power. When Martius had declamed against them in the open
Senate for their factious and seditious courses, the Tribunes presently made
complaint to the people of it, calling upon them to assist them, (...), and to
save their Tribunes: Plutarch in Coriolano.
at which the people were so madded, and ran on so furiously, that they were
like to have fallen desperately upon all the Senate. And Appius found unto his
cost, that in offering to attach a Trihune, though he well dserved it) concio
omnis coorta pro Tribuno in Consulem, Livie l. 2.
the whole Assembly rose against him as one man, to defend their Tribune, the
rascal multitude gathering together out of all the City to do him right against
the Consul. And Plutarch tells us in the life of Tiberius Gracchus, that the
people were so sottishly affected to him, that many of the needy and seditious
rout waited upon him all night long up and down the Town; Plutarch. in Tiber.
and C. Gracchis.
some of them buying Tents and lying about his House to watch it, as a guard to
his person. And on the other side the Houses of the Tribunes were kept
continually open a well nights as days, that they might serve as a Protection
or a Common Sanctuary for men of all sorts to repair unto whom either Debt or
misdemeanor, or some greater matter had made obnoxious to the Sergeants, or
other Ministers of Justice, to the great prejudice of the honest and
well-meaning Subjects in their suits and businesses. And besides this, the
Tribunes never failed to flatter and bewitch the people by some piece of
courtship, or by preferring some new Laws (as before was said) for their ease
and benefit. They had no sooner way than that to advance their power, or to
obtain unto that absoluteness of Command and Empire, which they projected to
themselves. For doubtless that of the Historian is exactly true, (...), Dionys.
Halicarn. lib. 6.
that he that means to be a Tyrant must be first a flatterer; there being no
readier way to advance a Tyranny than by being popular, a professed servant of
that people whom he would command. But this confederacy between the Tribunes
and the people and the mutual ties that were between them, I cannot better lay
before you than in Plutarchs words, who speaking of the Gracchi, does inform us
thus, Plutarch. in Agis and Cleomen.
That having received many favors from the peoples hands they were ashamed to
be indebted to them, and therefore earnesTly endeavored to requite their
courtesies, by making new Decrees and Laws which they propounded and obtained
for the peoples profit; and on the other side, the people for their parts were
not wanting to admire and honor them the more, by how much they perceived them
studious of their good and benefit. So that with like strife on either side,
the one to gratify and oblige the other, their interesses were so mingled, and
their intentions so concorporated, that they must needs hold on as they had
begun, and either stand or fall together. By means whereof the people in
conclusion became Lords of all, the Majesty of the State and the Power of
Judicature being absolutely vested in them: which since they could not manage
but by their Atturneys, nor otherwise execute and discharge than by their
Proxies, who but the Tribunes their own creatures must be trusted with it? And
this is that which Tacitus observes to be the issue of those Quarrels which
were kept on foot between the Nobility and the Commons, T^^^t. hist. lib. 2.
modo turbulenti Tribuni, modo Consules praevalidi, sometimes some factious
Tribunes carried it away, and then again the Consul. had the better, and
prevailed in Power, according as they did comply with the peoples humors; till
Marius and Sylla first, and Julius Caesar afterward by their Example, by force
of Arms subdued both parties, and introduced an absolute Government.

Now for the steps by which the people did ascend to this height of Power,
Poplicola advised, and at last enacted it for Law, that no man should presume
upon pain of death to take upon him any Office, (...), Plutarch in Publicola.
unless it come unto him by the gift of the people; and that if any were
condemned, and appealed to them, the execution should be respited, till the
people should give sentence in it. But then withal the Nobility kept all
Offices both of power and State in their own hands only, the people being
incapable of the meanest Office which did relate unto the Government of the
Commonwealth; until they gained the Tribunes and the two Aediles (which were
under Officers to the Tribunes) to be chosen out of their own body. Which once
obtained, there was no place, how high soever, which they did not aim at, and
which their Tribunes did not find some way to compass for them; the Nobles and
Patricians still in vain complaining how much they were dishonored in the
competition. First therefore having gained a Law (but with much ado) that the
Commons might be married into Noble Families, Livie. l. 4.
they presently propose another, ut populo potestas esset, seu de Plebe, seu de
Patribus vellet, Consules faciendi, that the people might have liberty to
choose the Consuls out of which rank of men they listed: and at the first
attempt did prevail so far, that instead of the two Consuls which they had
before, six Military Tribunes should be chosen by them, to be possessed of all
the Consular Authority, and they to be promiscuously elected out of the
Patricians and the People, Livie. l. 4.
as they saw convenient; and having got this ground they went on a main. For
not long after, P. Licinius Calvus a mere Plebeian, is made one of these
Military Tribunes; and shortly after that the Magister Equitum, or the
Commander of the Horse. Thus Silius and Aelius are made Questors, those of
Patrician rank having had the canvass; and next that followed a Decree, that
the Decemviri Sacrorum, who had the custody and charge of the Sibyls Books, Id.
lib. 6.
partim ex Plebe, partim ex Patriciis, should be indifferently chosen out of
both Estates. In little time, the Tribunes pressing hotly for it, L. Sextus
obtains the Consulship, Id. ibid. Id. lib. 7. Id. lib. 8.
C. Martius Rutilius is first made Dictator, afterward one of the Censors
also; and P. Philo is advanced to the place and dignity of the Praetor. Having
thus taken possession of all Civil Magistracy, which were of any power and
dignity in the Commonwealth; the Tribunes would not rest nor content
themselves, until the Commons were made capable of the Priesthood also: which
after some slight opposition made by Appius Claudius (a Family that never
yielded any thing to advance the people) was conferred upon them, five Augures,
and four Pontifices being added to the former number, all chosen, and for ever
to be chosen by and out of the Commons. Id. lib. 10.
There were only now two places of respect and credit, that of the Maximus
Curio and the Pontifex Maximus, both which the Nobles did pretend to belong to
them: but the Tribunes were resolved to have it otherwise. According to which
resolution, Id. lib. 26.
C. Manilius got the Office of the Maximus Curio: and in the close of all,
Rofin. Antiq. Romans l. 3. c. 22.
but a good while after, Omnibus honoribus plebi communicatis, after all other
honors were conferred upon them, or rather communicated to them, one T.
Coruncanius was declared the Pontifex Maximus. All this and more they had, but
it would not satisfy.

For there was wanting still both the power of Judicature, Tribunes must bestir
themselves both with Art and Violence; or else they could not hope to estate it
on them. A business of so high a nature, that it was never in a way to be
brought about, till the two Gracchi undertook the contrivance of it: who being
men of excellent parts and great abilities, did most unfortunately fall on the
undertaking; and being fallen upon it did devise all ways which either Art or
Wit could present unto them to effect the work. Of these Tiberius was the
eldest, who stumbling in the way on the Lex Agraria, as being a means to make
the poor people more considerable, and the rich less powerful; and finding that
Octavius one of his Colleagues did oppose him in it, deposed him from his
Office by force and violence, only because he stood upon the right of his
negative Voice. Plutarch in Tib. and Calo.
He had before inflamed the people by making a seditious speech to prefer their
business; and now he takes a course to inflame them more, for the advancement
of his own. For one of his Friends being found dead upon a sudden, not without
some suspicion of poison, as he gave it out, he put on mourning Apparel, and
brought his sons before the people, into the common Forum, beseeching them to
have compassion on his Wife and Children, as one that utterly despaired of his
own safety, having for their sakes got the hatred of the Noblemen. And
sometimes he would be the first man in the Marketplace, apparelled all in
black, his face swelled with Tears, and looking heavily upon the matter, would
pray the people to stand to him, saying, he was afraid his Enemies would come
in the Night, and overthrow his House to kill him. By means of which Devices he
so wrought upon them, that many of them bought Tents and lay about his House
continually, to keep him from the hands of his deadly Enemies. So that being
sure of their concurrence and assistance in any project which he should set on
foot to advance himself, under pretense of doing service to the Commonwealth;
he presently proposed a Law, (...), that any man that would might appeal from
the Judges to the people in what cause soever. And that he might be sure to
embase the Senate, to the improvement and increase of the peoples power, he had
prepared another of an higher nature, which was to add unto the Senate an equal
number of the Equites, or the Roman Knights, who were to be of equal power, and
to have liberty of Voting in all public businesses with the ancient Senators.
In passing which and other of his popular Laws he got this Trick, (and he was
very constant to it) that if he found the sense of the House to be against him,
and was not like to carry with him the major part of the Voices, he would
quarrel with his fellow Tribunes to spin out the time till his party were all
come together; and if that could not do it neither, then he adjourned the
Assembly to some other day. But yet for all these Artifices and unworthy
practices, he could not compass the design, but left it to be finished by his
Brother Caius: Who taking the same course to engage the people which his
Brother had pursued before, brought those designs about which Tiberius failed
in. Id. ibid.
For first whereas the Senate were the only Judges in matters which concerned
the affairs of the Commonwealth, which made them no less reverenced by the
Roman Knights, than by others of the common people: Caius prevailed so far that
he gained a Law for adding three hundred of these Equites to as many Senators
(for the Senate did consist of three hundred anciently) (...), giving them
equal power of judging in all causes which were brought before them. So that by
gaining this and the former Law of appealing to the people upon all occasions,
the people were estated in the power of Judicature, and the dernier resort (as
the Lawers call it) was in them alone. The only point now left was the Supreme
Majesty, and that did Caius very handsomely confer upon them without noise or
trouble. For whereas all other Orators when they made their Speeches, turned
themselves toward the Palace where the Senate sat: he on the contrary turned
himself toward the Market place where the people were, and taught all other
Orators by his Example to do the like. And thus (says Plutarch) by the only
turning of his look he gained a point of infinite consequence and importance;
(...), changing the Commonwealth from an Aristocratie, to a mere Democratie:
which was the matter so aimed at by his Predecessors.

The Tribunes had been insolent enough in the former times, Scipio himself, the
very Atlas of the State when it was in danger, a man in whom there was not any
thing but brave and gallant, could not escape so clear, but that he was accused
by these factious Tribunes, and forced to live retired in his Countrey-house,
Livie. hist. lib. 28.
far from the employments of that State, which did not otherwise subsist but by
his abilities. Nor could they look on their Dictators but with eyes of malice,
although they had as much Authority as that State could give them, or any of
their Kings had enjoyed before, whom they endeavor to make subject to their
pride and Tyrenny by all means imaginable. And to that end, sometimes denied
him the honor of a Triumph, though he had deserved it in all men's judgments
but their own; and sometimes making their Magister Equitum, Id. lib. 22.
to be of equal power and authority with him: and finally sometimes they
declaim against him, Id. ibid.
to make him of no reputation with the common people. And for their dealing
with the Consuls, in had been a complaint of old, even if the dawning of the
day of their new Authority, Consulatum captum and oppressum a Tribunitia
postestate, Id. lib. 2.
that the Consulship was suppressed and captivated by the power of the
Tribunes; and we can no where find that they improved their modesty, as they
did their power. Nor did they only quarrel with the Consuls, and proceed no
further, (though that had been an high affront to the Supreme Magistrate) but
threatened to commit them to the Prison also, and many times their threatenings
were not made in vain. Plutarch. in Mario.
For thus we read, that Caius Marius being Tribune, threatened to send Cotta the
Consul unto Prison, but afterward was taken off by fair persuasions; and
Sulpitius, one as violent as he, though not so valiant, assaulted both the
Consuls as they sat in the Senate House, Id. ibid.
and killed one of their sons there, who was not so quick of foot as to escape
his hands. Which though they were but bare attempts were yet lewd enough,
sufficiently to the dishonor of such eminent Magistrates, and to the infamy
and disgrace of the public Government. And therefore to make sure work of it,
and that the world might see they could more than threaten, Quintius will tell
you in the Dialogue with his Brother cicero, Brutum and P. Scipionem tales
tantos viros hominum omnium infimum and sordidissimum Trib. Pl. C. Curiatium in
vincula conjecisse, Cicero de Legibus lib. 3.
that C. Curiatius, a most base and unworthy person, had caused such gallant
men as Brutus and P. Scipio to be cast into Prison. And if we make a further
search we shall quickly find, that M. Drusus being Tribune caused Philip the
Consul to be cast headlong out of his Seat, to the no small danger of his life,
only for interrupting him in the middle of a factious Speech; which was an
insolency beyond imprisonment. To speak of their behavior toward the other
Magistrates were a thing impertinent. For if the Consuls and Dictators could
not escape their hands, there is no question to be made b ut that the Praetors,
Censors, Quaestors, yea the Pontifices themselves, were most abundantly debased
and insulted on by these popular Tyrants.

Thus have we brought the Tribunes to as great an height both for power and
insolency, as were the Ephori before; Lucius Sylla having brought the Estate of
Rome under his command, and knowing full well how dangerous these men would be
to him, if they were suffered to continue in their former power, set forth a
Law by which they were reduced to their ancient bounds; enabled only to
relieve, not to wrong the Subject. Sylla Tribunis Plebis lege sua injuriae
faciendae potestatem ademit, auxilii ferendi reliquit, as we read in Tully. Id.
ibid.
A thing that much displeased the people, and the Tribunes more. But Sylla was
no (...), no great applyer of himself to the peoples humers, and therefore
cared but little how they took the matter. Pompey succeeding him in power and
in purpose too, took a course quite contrary; and re-established them in that
Authority whereof Sylla had of late deprived them. For finding that the common
people longed for nothing more than to see the Office of the Tribunes in the
height again, and being resolved to lay the foundation of his greatness on the
affections and dependence of the common people, Platarch in Pompeio.
(...), he gratified them in that point, and thought himself a happy man to
find so fair an opportunity to oblige them to him. On which deceitful grounds
(for they proved no other) he set them in their power again, as before was
said; for which he stands accused by Quintus, Cicero de Legibus. l. 3.
and I think deservedly: Certain I am that Pompey bought the short affection
and applause of the common people at no less a price than his own destruction:
Plutarch. in I. Caesare.
the Tribunes being the very men which pulled down his pride, and set up Caesar
to oppose him, who going the same way to work that Sylla did, and knowing that
a Tribune and a Tribunitian spirit were no friends to Monarchy, left them the
name, but nothing else. The power and privilege of the Office he kept unto
himself for his own security; as one that understood, none better, how many
notable advantages he should gain thereby, Dion. histor. Some. lib. 53.
for the confirming of his Empire. Which Course Augustus followed also, taking
the Tribunitian power into his own hands, posito Triumviri nomine, as soon as
the Triumvirate was expired by the death of his Partners; Tacitus Annal. lib. 1.
and from thence reckoned the years of his Government, as Tribunitiae
potestatis tertium, quartum, etc. which his Successors did after his Example
till the time of Constantine, when the name of Tribune was laid by as a thing
forgotten. Rosin. Antiq. Romans
The Empire was then cast into another kind of mould than it had been formerly;
new Offices ordained, new Forms of Government introduced, and a new Rome built:
and to what purpose should they keep the name, when the thing was gone?

Let us look back on all that is said before, and we shall find but little
reason to rely upon Calvin's word. He says the Tribunes were set up to oppose
the Consuls; popular Magistrates as were ordained to moderate and restrain the
vast power of Kings and other Supreme Magistrates; but the best Writers do
affirm that the Tribunes were not instituted till the Kings were outed; nor
instituted at the first to restrain the Consular power, though by degrees they
did restrain it as they pleased; and finally that they were again abridged of
their power and Tyranny, as soon as Monarchy were restored, and the State
brought to be obedient to one Sovereign Prince. He seems to intimate that the
Consuls were not wronged by such oppositions as the Tribunes daily made against
them, and that the Tribunes did no more in such oppositions than by their place
and Office they were bound to do. But the best Writers do affirm that the
Consuls made complaint from time to time of those wrongs and insolences which
those proud creatures of the people did afflict them with; and they complained
not without cause, as their stories tell us. So that there is but little ground
for the supposition, touching the first creation of these mighty Tyrants, which
Calvin trimly puts upon us; less for the application of it to his end and
purpose. What other power soever they enjoyed or exercised more than the power
of interceding, when any Bill at Ordinance was to pass the Senate, by which the
people might have suffered in their goods and liberties, was an incroachment on
the Consuls, and wrested from them by strong hand, sometimes with blood, but
never without dangerous Tumults. The best use can be made of such false
surmises, especially when they are false and factious too (and some good uses
may be made of the strongest poisons) is that an Item may be taken by all
Kings, Princes, and Supreme Governors to have a care of their Estates, and
neither suffer any Tribunes, or men of Tribunitian spirits, or such as
challenge to themselves Tribunitian power, to grow up under them, or live
within the verge of their Dominions. The Tribune and the Tribunitian spirit are
no friend to Monarchy; and have so much of Pompey in them (who restored the
Office) that they will never be content to endure an Equal, much less to suffer
a Superior. For further proof of which (if more proof be requisite) and for
discovering to the World with what Arts and practices those factious and
seditious spirits did attain their height: it would be a most excellent piece
of service to all Sovereign Princes, if a just Tribunitian History were
composed by some man of judgment, for the recovery of this Age from the present
maladies, and a Memento to the future. But this I leave to those who have time
and leisure, and other fit abilities to go through with it. I have another Task
in hand, and the Demarchi call upon me to pass on to Athens, where we are like
to find worse work than we met with hitherto. Worse work I mean in this
respect, that we are like to find less ground for the Supposition; for
otherwise we are like to find no work at all, as will appear more evidently by
that which follows.

CHAP. IV. Of what Authority the DEMARCHI were in the state of ATHENS, and of
the danger and unfitness of the instances produced by CALVIN.
1. Athens first governed by Kings, and afterward by one Sovereign Prince
under other Titles. 2. The Annual Magistrates of Athens what they were, and of
what Authority. 3. By whom and what degrees the State of Athens was reduced to
a Democratie. 4. Of the authority of the Senate, and the famous Court of the
Areopagites. 5. What the Demarchi were in the State of Athens, and of what
Authority. 6. The Demarchi never were of power to oppose the Senate, nor were
ordained to that end. 7. Calvin's ill luck in making choice of three such
instances, which if true, would not serve his turn. 8. The danger which lies
hidden under the disguise of such popular Magistrates, as are here instanced in
by Calvin. 9. What moved Calvin to lay these dangerous Stumbling Blocks in the
Subjects way. 10. The dangerous oppositions and practices which have hence
ensued in most parts of Europe. 11. The sect of CALVIN professed Enemies to
Monarchy, and the power of Princes.


THE State of Athens, Cecrops, from whom his Successors were called Cecropidae:
Tacit. Annal. lib. 3.
and they, as other Kings in those ancient times, ut libitum imperitabant,
governed the people under them by no other Rule than their own discretion.
Theseus the tenth from Cecrops, was the first King of Athens which let go his
hold, and parted with so many of the Regal rights, as made the Kings weak and
the Subjects wanton. For having a desire to incorporate all the Inhabitants of
Attica into the City of Athens, the better to unite them against foreign force,
and to assemble them together as occasion served, he was fain to win them to it
by large promises of giving them some share in the public Government: without
which bait, the wealthier sort, and such as had authority in their several
Buroughs, could not be drawn into the City. Plutarch in Theseo.
Yet still he kept unto himself and to his Successors (...), as we find in
Plutarch, the chief Commandery in the Wars, and the preservation of the Laws,
together with a superintendency in matters which concerned Religion; the main
points of Sovereignty. And in this state things stood till the death of Codrus,
the seventh from Theseus, who giving up his own life to preserve his Country,
became so honored and admired amongst his people, that they resolved for his
sake to have no more Kings, for fear they should never meet with any who might
be worthy to succeed him: which was one of the prettiest wanton quarrels that
ever was picked against a Monarchy. The Princes which succeeded after his
decease, they called not Kings, but (...), or Governors; but the change was
only in the name, and in the manner of their getting the Supreme Authority. For
being once invested with the Supreme Power, they held it during life without
check or censure; as is affirmed by Africanus, an ancient Writer: who laying
down the succession of the King of Athens, African. apud Eusebius. Chron. edit.
Scaliger. Eusebius. in Chro.
to the death of Codrus, adds this, (...), that after them succeeded the
perpetual Archontes, who held the Government during life. The like Eusebius
does affirm, and all Authors else, which treat of the affairs of Athens. The
difference was, that formerly the Kingdom was successive merely, entailed upon
the Princes of the line of Cecrops, now it began to be Elective, Tacit. hist.
l. 1.
and to be given to them who best pleased the people: Et loco libertatis erat,
quod eligi coeperunt, and it was some degree of liberty, (and a great one too)
that they had power to nominate and elect their Princes. But long they did not
like of this, although no doubt a great intrusion on the Regal dignity. The
Princes were too absolute when they held for life, not so observant of the
people as it was expected; because not liable to account, nor to be called unto
a reckoning till it was too late, till death had freed them from their faults,
and the peoples censure. And therefore having tried the Government of thirteen
of these perpetual Archontes, of which Medon the son of Codrus was the first,
and the last Alemaeon; In december annos Magistratuum consuetudo conversa est,
they introduced another custom, Eusebius. in Chr. Asrican. apud Eusebius. Chron^.
and every tenth year changed their Governors. These they called (...), or
Decennial Archontes; of which they had but seven in all, and then gave them
over: and from that time were governed by nine Officers or Magistrates chosen
every year, who for that cause were called (...), or the Annual Magistrates.
And yet it is to be observed that in both these changes, the Archon whosoever
he was, and whether he was for term of life or for ten years only, had all the
power which formerly was belonging to the Kings, save the very name; in which
regard Eusebius does not stick to call them by the name of Kings: where
speaking of the institution of these Annual Magistrates, he does thus express
is, Eusebius. Chron.
Athenis Annui principes constituti sunt cessantibus Regibus, as S. Hierom
renders it.

Now for these Annual Magistrates, they were these that follow, that is to say,
Jul. P. (...) in Onomast. l. 8. c. 9.
which we may call the Provost (who (...) was called the Archon) the Bishop or
High Priest, the Marshal, and the six Chief Justices, Of these the Provost was
the chief, (...), of whom they did denominate the ensuing year, and by whose
name they dated all their private Contracts, and Acts of State. Id ibid. Sect.
2.
To him it appertained to have a care of celebrating the Orgies of Bacchus, and
the great Festival which they termed Thargelia, consecrated to Apollo and
Diana; as also to take cognizance of misdemeanors, and in particular to punish
those who were common Drunkards; and to determine in all cases which concerned
matter of inheritance: and furthermore to nominate Arbitrators for the ending
of Suits and private differences, to appoint Guardians unto Orphans, and
Overseers unto Women left with child by their Husbands. The (...) whom we call
the Bishop or High Priest, had the charge of all the sacred mysteries, (...),
Id. ibid. Sect. 3.
and the administration of the usual and accustomed Sacrifices; together with
the cognizance of sacriledg, profaneness, and all other actions which
concerned Religion, as also power to interdict litigious persons (or Common
Barretters as we call them) from being present at the celebration of the holy
Mysteries. And he retained the name of (...), because that anciently their
Kings, (as in all places else) had the chief hand in matters which related to
the public service of the Gods, and the solemn Sacrifices. On the which reason
and no other, the Romans had their Regem Sacrificulum, (whom Plutarch calls
(...), in imitation of the Latin, but Dionysius (...), Plutarch in Problemat.
Dionys. Halicarnas. hist. l. 5. Livie hist. Roman. lib. 2.
in the true Greek phrase); of which Livie thus. Rerum deinde divinarum habita
cura: and quia quaedam publica sacra per ipsos Reges factitata erant, necubi
Regum desiderium esset, Regem Sacrificulum creant. But to proceed, the
Polemarchus whom we English by the name of Marshal, sat Judge in cases of
sedition, and such whereby the grandeur of the State might suffer detriment; as
also in all actions which concerned either Denizens, or Merchant-strangers: and
unto him it appertained to sacrifice to Diana and to Mars, the two military
Deities, Jul. Pollux in Onomast. l. 8. c. 93.
(...), and to prescribe the funeral pomp for such as lost their lives in their
Countries service. Each of these had their two Assessors, Id. ibid. Sect.
of their own Election; but so that they were bound to choose them out of the
Senate of five hundred, from no lower rank. Finally for the (...), who we call
Chief Justices, they were six in number, (...), Suidas in Lex.
and had authority to give Judgment absolutely in all Civil pleas, to judge of
strangers which abused the privileges which they had in the City, of Bribery,
Conspiracies, false inscriptions, in cases of Adultery and public crimes; in
points of Trade, Jul. Pollux in Onomast. ll. 4. c. 9. sect. 1.
and actions which concerned the Stannaries; as also to review the sentence of
the Provost, and the decrees of the Senate if occasion were; and to give notice
to the people, (...), as Julius Pollux, if any man preferred a Law which was
not profitable and expedient for the Commonwealth. Such were the Officers, and
such the duty of those Officers, ordained at Athens, upon the last alteration
of the Government which before we spoke of: and amongst these we find not any
popular Magistrate, who was to have a care of the common people, and to
preserve them in their rights and liberties from the oppression of the greater
and more powerful Citizens; much less set up of purpose to oppose the Senate.
And to say truth, we must not look for any such amongst the Nine, nor in these
times in which this alteration of the Government was first established. They
could not fall immediately from a Regal State, to a Democratical, but they must
take the Aristocratie in the way unto it. They had been under Kings at first,
or such as had the power of Kings, although not the name. And when they chose
these Annual Officers, they chose them ex nobilibus urbis, out of the Nobles
only, Eusebius. Chron. Scaliger in A^imadve^s.
as Eusebius has it: which Scaliger is forced to grant to be so at first,
though out of a desire to confute his Author, he would very fain have had it
otherwise. Whether or no they had such Officers as Calvin dreams of, when they
had settled their Democratie, we shall see anon: having first shown by whom and
by what degrees the Government of the State was cast on the peoples shoulders,
and the form thereof made merely popular or Democratical. For certainly it is
most true, that never any Democratical State showed it self at the first in its
proper colors, or came into the World by a lawful entrance; but crept into it
secretly at the backdoor either of Faction or Sedition.

Now the first man that gave the hint to the Democratie, Theseus, a valiant but
unfortunate King, who the better to induce the people of Attica to desert their
dwellings, and be incorporated into Athens, promised them (as before was said)
that all of them should have some share in the public Government, and after
the form and manner of a Commonwealth. And so far he performed his promise, as
to divest himself of some parts of Sovereignty (...), and laid the first
foundation of that popular State, Pl^ta^ch in Thes^o.
which was after built: but he paid dear for it. For the people who before had
been so tractable, that they would do whatsoever their Kings commanded, at the
first words speaking; began to take more state upon them, and became so
stubborn, that they would do nothing on command, but looked to be flattered
with and courted, upon all occasions. Id. ibid.
Which being noted by Menestheus a popular man, but otherwise of the Royal
Blood, he so fed that humor, and wrought so finely on them by his Wit an
cunning, that Theseus was in fine deposed, and his Sons disherited, and the
remainder of the Royalty conferred by them upon Menestheus, as their deed of
gift. And though no doubt the people did improve their power, both when their
Kings became Elective, and when their Governors were Elected but for term of
years, and specially when the Magistrates were no more than Annual; yet they
could get no further than an Aristocratie, till the time of Solon; which were
about 170 years after the Annual Officers were first established: the Annual
Officers being established in the first year of the 5. Olympiad, and Solon's
reformation happening in the second of the 47. But Solon being chosen Provost (or
the (...)) and finding the Republic much embroiled in dangerous factions which
had been long since bred between the Nobles and Commons, in the change of
Governments: took on him by the joint consent of both parties, the emendation
of the Laws, and the reducing of the State of the Commonwealth to a more
peaceable and equal temper. Id. in Solone.
And he so ordered their affairs, that the chief Offices of the City remained
in the hands of the Nobility, as before they were; which for the time contented
them: but the Election of those Officers, and the dernier resort, or the
admittance of Appeals upon Writs of Error (as we call them);that he confirmed
unto the people; which did not only please the people for the present time, but
put them into a condition of drawing to themselves the Supreme Authority.
Insomuch that Aristotle though he seem to say, that Solon s^tled in the City a
mixed form of Government, the Court of Areopagites (which he also instituted)
pretending to an Oligarchy, the Annual Officers or Archontes to an
Aristocratie, Aristot. Politi^. l. 2. c. 10.
and the power of Judicature being vested in the common people, unto a
Democratie: yet he confesses at the last, that this power of Judicature, and
the necessity which all men found of applying themselves unto the people,
(...), changed the Republic in conclusion to a mere Democratie, as it
continued till his time. But yet it was not brought about but with great ado,
Plutarch in Solone.
Pisistratus first reducing the Estate to an absolute Monarchy, (which because
he got it from them by fraud and force, they called a Tyranny) and after
Clisthenes freeing his Country from that yoke (by driving his posterity out of
Attica) restoring it unto an Aristocratie, Id. in Artistide, in Pericle, and
Cimene.
as before it was. At last it seemed good to Aristides, though for a time he
concurred with Clisthenes in his form of Government, to cast a more indulgent
eye on the common people, who had behaved themselves exceeding gallantly in the
dreadful War against the Persians: and to cause a Law to be Enacted that all
Authority and power of Government should be communicated equally to all the
Citizens, (...), Id. in Aristide.
and that they should be capable of all the Offices and Honors in the
Commonwealth. Which as it added much to the Authority of the common people, so
that Authority was increased much more by the Arts of Pericles; who bearing a
grudg unto the Court of the Areopagites, whereof he was never any Member, and
finding that the power thereof, and of the Senate of five hundred, did derogate
exceeding much from the power of the people, to whose faction he was wholly
wedded: by the help and setting on of Ephialtes (a busy and popular man) took
from them the hearing and determining of the weightiest causes, Id. in Poi^^e
and Cimone.
and put them over to the judgment and decision of the common people, who had
no more before but the last Appeal: and thereby perfected and produced that
pure Democratie, which had so often been desired, but in vain attempted.

The people being screwed to this height of power, popular Officers as Calvin
speaks of, ordained of purpose (as he thinks) to oppose the Senate, and
counter-ballancetheir Authority. Nor were those Courts at any time so inclined
to Tyranny, or likely in their constitution to oppress the people, when their
Authority was greatest, and their power most eminent, as that the people needed
any special Officers to restrain their insolences, or to confine them to the
limits of their Jurisdiction. Now for the Senate, it consisted at the first of
400 persons, an hundred out of every Tribe; and to that number was restrained
by Solon, whose device it was: Id. in Solone.
but Clisthenes, having increased the number of the Tribes to ten, added one
hundred more, which made five in all (for each Tribe fifty) and so continued
till the expiration of that Commonwealth. A chief part of their business was,
(...), etc. to deliberate and debate of all such matters as were to be
commended to the care of the common people, that when the whole body of the
people was assembled together, no point should be propounded to them but what
the Council of five hundred had fitted and prepared for their resolution. Id.
ibid.
It also appertained to them (...), etc. to consult about denouncing War, and
raising Moneys, to advise upon the making of new Laws, to judge of any accident
which at any time happened in the City, and of such matters which concerned their
Allies and Neighbors; to impose Tribute on the Subject, and to take care both
of the Navy and the Temples; and furthermore to enquire into the carriage of
the City Magistrates, to appoint keepers unto Prisoners taken in the Wars, to
judge of Suits concerning Orphans, and sometimes in such cases as belonged more
properly to a Court of War. Other particulars there are which they were to deal
in, Xenophon. d^ Repub. Athen.
but these the principal: and these though points of great concernment, and
arguments of the power and trust committed to them, were little like to tempt
them to abuse their power in the oppressing of the people. For besides that
they were chosen but for one year only, and that too not without a previous
inquisition into their former life and conversation; which were sufficient to
induce them to hold fair quarter with the people by all means imaginable: they
were bound by Oath at their admission to that honor, to consult the peoples
good and benefit in most special manner, and not to imprison any of them, how
mean soever, unless he were found guilty of some practice to betray the City,
and diminish the authority and power of the people, or that being one of the
Farmers of the Tolls and Taxes, or a Collector of the Tributes, he became
non-solvent, and had not cleared his account with the Commonwealth. Demosthen.
in oratione cont. Niceram.
As for the Court or Council of the Areopagites, it consisted from the first
beginning, (...), of such and such alone who had formerly been of the number of
the nine chief Magistrates; and they being once admitted held for term of life:
Plutarch in Solone, and Pericle.
which made them, being men of eminence and reputation, to be more able to
annoy the people, and to entrench upon them in their rights and liberties, had
their mind been answerable. For unto them belonged the general superintendency
of all things in the Commonwealth, and them did Solon trust with this special
Power, that they should be (...), Id. in Solo^.
and see the Laws to be maintained and to have their course: and in particular
to judge in the case of murder, and manslaughter, and briefly in all Capital
causes. And with these Courts or Councils, call them which you will, the
prudent Legislator thought that he had settled and confirmed the Commonwealth,
(...), as with two strong Achors, in such a firm and constant manner, that
neither the fabric of the State should be easily shaken, nor the people apt to
take offense, or run themselves upon unpeaceable and seditious courses.

But if the Senate or the Council should abuse their power, Demarchi take the
peoples part, and save them from the wrongs and injuries intended toward them?
Calvin so intimates indeed, but he speaks without book, being more guided to
that Error by the sound and Etymology of the word, than by the nature of the
Office. The best Greek Authors who have written the affairs of Rome, do call
the Tribunes of the people by this name Demarchi, and their Authority or Office
by the name of (...) also. 'Nothing more common in Polybius, Halicarnassensis,
Plutarch, and whosoever else have left us any thing of the Roman stories in
that Language. But the Demarchi of Athens were of no such power, and had but
small authority (God wot) in affairs of State. Measure them by the definition
which is given by Suidas, and he will tell you that they were certain Officers
appointed in the Buroughs and free Towns of Attica (being twelve in number)
(...). Suidas in Lex.
And for his power, he tells us that it did especially consist in making a
Terrier of the Lands of every Township, and keeping of the public Registers
which concerned the Borough, in calling the people of the Town together when
their occasions did require it, and calculating of their Voices by the Poll, or
scrutiny, and sometimes in distraining on their Goods and Chattels, if any of
them were indebted to the State either in Amerciaments or Contributions. But
take his own words with you for the more assurance. (...) (says he) (...). Id.
Ibid.
The Author of the Etymologicon magnum says the same with Suidas, but in fewer
words; and he describes this mighty man of whom Calvin dreams, to be no other
than the Bailiff of some ancient Borough is with us in England, his power
being limited and confined within the perambulation of his own Parish, in which
he could do little more than take the valuation of his Neighbors Estate, and
tell how much he was to be assessed at in the Subsidy Book, Etymologicon Magnum
in Demarcho.
(...). So he, which is in sum what we had before. It Is true, there was another
Officer of the same name in the City also, and for each Tribe one; the Alderman
of the Word we may fitliest call him; but not of much more power and reputation
than the Countrey-Bailiff. Of these says Harpocration an old Grammarian, that
they were called Naucrari at the first, and had authority to arrest or destrain
such persons as stood indebted to the Exchequer or the Commonwealth. Harto^at.
in Demarcho.
(...), so Harpocration briefly in his wonted manner. But Julius Pollux in his
Onomasticon goes to work more plainly, Jul. Pollux l. 8. c. 9. ^ect. 30.
and tells us of these Demarchi, that they were (...), the Governors or
Aldermen of their several Wards, that formerly they were called Naucrari; that
anciently the twelfth part of a Tribe or Ward was called Naucraria, and in the
later times the whole Ward it self; that these Demarchi had the ordering of the
Taxes raise in every Ward, and looked unto the issuing of them for the public
use; and finally, that every Naucraria or Ward was to find two Horsemen and
one Ship for the service of the Commonwealth, (...), from whence in probabiliy
they derived the word. Add unto this from Suidas, as the close of all, Suidas
in Lex.
(...), that they had also the setting forth of the great Festival called
Panathenaea; ordained by Theseus on the incorporating of all the people of
Attica into the City of Athens. (...) in Theseo.


Put all that has been said together touching these Demarchi (and more than
this I cannot find which concerns that Office) and we may easily perceive that
they were men of no authority in affairs of State: Demarchi were ordained to
oppose the Senate, when it lay heavy on the necks of the common people; or
actually did make head against them in behalf of the people if at any time they
were oppressed and injured by it, cannot be found (I dare with confidence
affirm) in any Author of good credit, either Greek or Latin. It Is true, there
were some People-pleasers in the State of Athens, whom they called (...), who
by applying themselves to the peoples humor, and seeming zealously assected to
their power and profit, could lead them whither they would, and to what they
lifted: and sometimes did oppose themselves for the people sake, not only
against the Senate, but all other Magistrates. Of these it is that Arstotle
does make frequent mention in his books of Politics, and seems to prophecy,
that if not looked into in time, (...), they would change the State into a
Tyranny. But these were neither of Officers of State, nor Justice, Aristot.
Politic. l. 5 c. ^.
nor indeed any Officers at all, though many times they did ill Offices to the
Commonwealth, the better to advance the hopes of the popular faction, and by it
themselves. And it is true which Aristotle tells us in another place, (...),
that the people had not only power to elect their Magistrates, Id. ibid. l. 2.
c. 12.
but to call them also to account, in case of mal-administration; and had their
proper Officers appointed to that end and purpose. But then it is true withal,
but amongst them we meet not these Demarchi of whom Calvin dreams; or any
others which stood up in behalf of the common people, but only in behalf of the
Commonwealth. Of this sort were the (...) superadded to the nine Archontes,
and of authority to call them to an after-reckoning, if they found them guilty
of extortion: Jul. Pollux. l. 8. c. 9. sect. 16. Id. ibid. sect. 13.
and of this sect were also those whom they called Logistae, some of the which
((...), says mine Author) were purposely appointed to observe and enquire into
the Acts of the Senate, and to proceed against them when their time was out,
according as they saw occasion: which kind of Overseers had an eye also on the
Areopagites. And this is that which is observed by Aeschines the famous Orator,
where speaking of the Fundamental constitutions of the Commonwealth, he tells
us, that it was ordained by the Legislators, (...), Aeschin. in Orat. Contra
Demosth. and Ctesiphon.
that even the Senate of five hundred should give up an account of their
ministration; and that the holy Council of the Areopagites should be obnoxious
to the censure of the Logistrae, for by that very name he calls them. Of any
account they were to give to these Demarchi, or any thing they did de facto, or
might do de jure, with reference to the case and benefit of the common people,
nothing but silence to be found in all Antiquity. And to say truth, it was not
necessary that any popular Magistrates should be made of purpose, to save the
people from the pride and Tyranny of the higher Courts, which were accountable
to the people upon all occasions, and were to be accountable to them according
to the fundamental institution of the Commonwealth. The State of Athens being
one of the absolutest Democraties which was ever exant, and so accounted of by
all who write of Politics, had little need or use of such popular Magistrates
which Calvin fancieth in that place; which may be serviceable to the people in
an Aistocratie, but in a popular estate of no use at all. Which makes we wonder
by the way, why Plato should affirm against right and reason, that the State of
Athens in his time and the times before ((...)) was an Aristocratie: Plato in
Meneximo.
when by the current of all Writers and the course of story, it appears most
evidently that it was not only a Democratie, but (...), Plutarch in Cimone.
the purest and most unmixt Democratie that was ever read of.

Thus have we proved the first of the three points propounded in the beginning
of this work, viz. that the Ephori, the Demarchi, Roman Tribunes were not
ordained at first for those ends and purposes which are supposed by the Author:
but more particularly, that neither the Ephori of Sparta were first instituted
to oppose the Kings, nor the Tribunes first ordained to oppose the Consuls, nor
the Demarchi of Authority to oppose the Senate. And we have proved (which is
directly contrary unto Calvin's aim) that the Ephori were at first ordained to
ease the Kings, and to be aiding to them against the Senate, who began sensibly
to encroach on the Regal power: that the Tribunes were first instituted to no
other end but to preserve the people from unjust oppression, and that their
opposition to the Consuls was accounted always to be against the rules of their
Institution, and a breach of Articles: And as for these Demarchi whom we spoke
of last, that neither by their Institution nor by Usurpation, they did oppose
against the Senate in behalf of the people, but executed their commands upon
the people, as their duty bound them. So that the great imagination which the
Author had of showing to the World a view of such popular Magistrates, as might
encourage men of place and eminence to think themselves ordained after these
Examples to moderate the licentiousness of Kings and Princes; is fallen
directly to the ground without more ado, as being built upon a weak, nay a
false foundation; not able to support the building. And more than so, in case
the instances proposed had been rightly chosen, and that the Ephori in Sparta
had been first ordained to oppose the Kings, the Tribunes to oppose the
Consuls, and the Demarchi to keep under the Athenian State: yet these would
prove but sorry instances of such popular Officers as were ordained ad
moderandum Regum libidinem, to moderate the licentiousness of Kings and
Sovereign Princes, for proof of which they were produced. The Ephori were not
instituted in the State of Sparta till the Kings were brought under the command
of the Senate, and the State become an Aristocratie, in which the Kings had
very little left them of the Royal dignity but the empty name, and were in
power no other than the Dukes of Venice, save that they were to have the
command of the Armies, which those Dukes have not. And for the Tribunes, it is
well known to every one who has perused the Roman story, that there were no
such creatures to be found in Rome, till the Romans had expulsed their Kings,
and were under their command of Consuls; Monarchy being changed to an
Optimatie, and the peoplebound by solemn Oaths never to admit of a King amongst
them. The like may be affirmed also of the Demarchi of Athens, supposing that
they were of as great Authority, as either the Ephori or the Tribunes; that
they were instituted in a time when the affairs of State were managed by nine
Annual Magistrates, all of them chosen by the people and accomptable to them.
Livie hist. lib. 2.
In all these cases, cum non in regno populus esset sed in liberate, when the
people had sued out their Wardship, and thought themselves to be at liberty,
freed from those bonds which Nature and Allegiance formerly had laid upon them:
they did no more than what a wise and understanding people had good cause to
do, in taking the best course they could for their future safety. And in my
mind the people plead most unanswerably in their own behalf, when they
alleged, se foris pro imperio and liberate dimicantes, Id. ibid.
domi a civibus captos and oppressos, that fighting valiantly abroad both for
their own liberty and their Countries honor, against their Kings, they were
oppressed and wronged at home by their fellow-Citizens; that their condition as
things stood, was better in times of War, than in times of peace; their liberty
never more assured than when they were amongst their Enemies: and therefore
being no otherwise bound to submit themselves to that change of Government,
than as it had been introduced by their own consent, they had all the reason in
the World to get as good terms as they could, and be no losers by the bargain.
Which though it were the case and plea particularly of the people of Rome,
might be used also very fitly by the Spartans and Athenians on the self-same
reasons. But this can no way be pretended or alleged by those, who live in an
established and successional Monarchy, where there is one only to command in
chief, and nothing left to the Subject praeter obsequii gloriam, Tacit. Annal.
but the glory of obedience only, and the necessity of submiting with a Loyal
heart to those commands and impositions which may be laid upon them with an
unjust hand. So that admitting it for true (as indeed it is not) the Ephori,
the Demarchi, and the Tribunes were ordained for the ends supposed; yet it can
follow by no rules of Law or Logic, that because such popular Officers have
been sometimes instituted to keep the scale upright and the balance even,
betwixt the Nobles and the People in an Aristocratie, therefore the like are to
be fancied in a settled Monarchy, for moderating the licentiousness, that is to
say, (for that no doubt must be his meaning) for regulating the Authority of
the Sovereign Prince.

Thus have we seen a manifest discovery of Calvin's purpose for setting up some
popular Officers in every Kingdom to regulate the Authority and restrain the
power of Sovereign Princes; Parenthesis, than what is obvious at first sight to
the unwary Reader. For by the instances proposed and presented to us, it seems
to be his meaning, that those popular Officers should not have power only to
restrain their Kings when they trangress the bounds of Law or Equity, and
either Tyranically oppress the Subject, or wilfully dilapidate the Patrimony of
the Commonwealth: but that they should set themselves against them and
control their doings, in the same way and after the same manner, as the Ephori
did the Kings of Sparta, or the Tribunes did the Roman Consuls. Now we have
shown before out of several Authors, Vide Chap. 1.
that the Ephori did not only take upon them to appoint such Privy Counselors
about their Kings as to them seemed best, to limit and prescribe them in the
choice of their Wives; to send them out unto the Wars and recall them home, as
if they had been hirelings only and of no more reckoning; to put them upon Fine
and Ransom, if they did any thing which was not pleasing to these humorous
Gentlemen; to have them at command both to come and go at often as they
whistled for them, or held up a Finger, and finally to look for lowly reverence
from them, whenever they vouchsafed to summon them to attend their pleasures:
but also to imprison; next to banish, and in fine to murder them. And we have
showed you of the Tribunes, that after they had fortified themselves with large
privileges, and grew predominant in the affections of the common people; Vide
Chap. 2.
they did not only quarrel and oppose the Consuls under pretense of setting
forth new Laws for the peoples benefit, nor were content to ut the people into
the possession of all the Offices and honors of the Commonwealth (which
formerly belonged to the Nobles only) whether the Consuls would or not: but
sometimes clapped them up in Prison, and sometimes forced them to fly the
Senate House for their lives and safety, and sometimes threw them down headlong
out of their Chairs of State, to the great danger of their lives, and disgrace
of their persons. Princes should be in worse condition than their meanest
Subjects, if they were under the command of such powerful masters, who being
exalted from mean fortunes and ignoble Families, little acquainted with good
manners, and less with any thing which is brave and Rohal, would think
themselves unworthy of so great an Office, should they not Lord it to the
purpose, and exercise all kind of Tyranny on their captived Kings, which
insolence and malice could suggest unto them. If Jack be once in Office he must
be a Gentleman; and gallop to the Devil if he get on Horseback. Juvenal. Sat.
Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum, as the Poet has it. If once
the Bramble come to have Dominion over the trees of the forest, he will not
only rob the Olive of his fatness, the Vine of his rich Wines, and the Fig Tree
of his sweetness, but also will devour the Cedars, even the Cedars of Lebanon.
Judge. c. 9.
No King or other Supreme Magistrate shall dare to stand before them; or if he
do, a fire shall come out of the Bramble, and consume him utterly. Such popular
Officers as those of whom Calvin speaks, are of such credit and Authority with
the common people (whose Officers they are in name, but in fact their Masters)
that if they do but blow the Trumpet, and say, We have no part in David, nor no
inheritance at all in the son of Jesse; 2 Samuel 20.
every man will unto his Tents, and forsake the King or Supreme Magistrate to
follow after them though men of Belial. And this I do believe the rather to be
Calvin's meaning, because G. Buchannan who built on his foundation, and pursued
his Principles, does not only exceedingly commend the act of Theopompus, in
setting up the Ephori in the State of Sparta, and the Answer which he made his
Wife when she murmured at it: but thinks it very meet and reasonable that a
free people (as all Subjects are in his opinion) should be armed with the like
Authority in reprimenda tyrannidis acerbitate, De jure regni apud Scotos.
for the suppressing of Tyrannical Government (in which themselves must be
Judges) which the Ephori enjoyed at Sparta, and the Tribunes in the City of
Rome. For though he durst not go so far in terminis, as to advise the
instituting of such popular Magistrates as Calvin speaks of in this place; yet
he comes very near it, to a Tantamont, For that which Calvin does ascribe to
his popular Magistrates, Buchannan gives to the whole body of the people
generally, to whom he does allow as much Authority over the persons of their
Kings, Quod illi in singulos e multitudine habent, Id. ibid.
as they have over any one of the common people: and thinks it both
unreasonable and absurd that they should not be called to account before the
ordinary Judges of their several Kingdoms (which must supply the place of these
popular Magistrates) as often as any of their Subjects shall accuse them, of
murder, or adultery, or neglects in Government, or whatsoever else they shall
charge them with; instancing in no fewer than twelve Kings of Sctoland, who
either were condemned to perpetual Prison, or else by voluntary death or exile,
Justas scelerum poenas fugerunt, escaped the punishment which was most justly
due unto them (as he most impudently says) for their wicked lives.

If any ask (as some justly may) what might induced our Author to these
different courses, to lay so sure a groundwork for obedience in the first part
of his Discourse, superstructure, as absolutely pulls up his own foundation:
the answer is, that the man was very much distracted between his reason and his
passion, his conscience and his private interess. Aliudque eupido, men's aliud
suadet. His reason and his conscience told him, that every Subject was to yield
obedience to the authority and commands of the Sovereign Princes and that if
any other Doctrine should be plainly preached, it would conduce both to the
Scandal and the hinderance of the Reformation. And his experience in the World
could not choose but tell him, that many of the chief Reformers by their heat
and iolence had given too great advantage to the public Enemy; and made the
Protestant Religion to be much suspected, Nil aliud quaerere and captare quam
Seditionum opprrtunitatem, Calvin in Epistola Dedic. ad Franciscum. l. 1536.
for giving too much ground to seditious courses, and publishing some Doctrines
which were inconsistent with the rules of Government. This made him write so
soundly of the Subjects duty even to wicked Princes, and the unlawfulness of
resisting in the way of Arms, though open force and violence were offered to
them by ungodly Tyrants: and this he does so well, that few do it better.
Vtinam sic semper errasset CALVINVS, as once the learned Cardinal said of him
in another case. But then his Interess in the cause and quarrel of Geneva, who
by the help of some such popular Officers as he speaks of here, had not long
before expelled their Bishop, who had also all the jurisdiction of a temporal
Prince within the City and the Territory which belonged unto it, inclined him
to say somewhat which might serve o defend that action, and give the like
advantage unto other Cities to follow the Example which was laid before them.
Thuan. Hist. sui temp. l.
The case is briefly touched by Thuanus thus; Jus Supremi Domini in Civitatem
Genevae Episcopos semper penes se retinuisse, donec mutata religione, Syndici
qui sub Episcopali autoritate libertatem antea tuebantur, illus proprium sibi
fecere, and ejectis Episcopis sub imperii patrocinio Rempub. administrabant.
The Sovereignty (says he) or Supreme Dominion over the City of Geneva the
Bishops stillkept unto themselves, till in the alteration of Religion the
Syndicks, who before preserved the liberty of the people under the Government
of the Bishops, assumed the same unto themselves, and absolutely casting out
the Bishops governed it like a Commonwealth under the patronage or protection
of the German Emperors. In which it is first clear on the Bishops side, that
they had jus Supremi Dominii, the Sovereignty or Supreme Dominion of the City.
And so much is affirmed by Calvin, in another place, Habebat jus gladii and
alias civilis jurisdictionis parts. Calvin in Epistola ad Sadoletum.
He had, says he, the power of the Sword, and other parts of temporal
Jurisdiction; but as he thinks (but foolishly and against all records)
Magistratui ereptas, either by fraud or force extorted from the Civil
Magistrate. Next it is clear, that the Bishops did continue the possession of
this Supreme Power, till Viret and Farellus, two zealous Gospellers, came to
live amongst them; who finding that those of Berne in the year 1528. had made
an alteration of Religion, practiced the like upon the City of Goneva. Which
not being likely to effect with the Bishops leave, and as little able to effect
against his liking, considering the great power and sway, which legally and
properly was inherent in him: they set the Syndicks (whom they had wrought upon
before) to make head against him; who by a popular Tumult madehim fly the City,
which presently they changed to a Commonwealth, after the manner of the Free
or Imperial Cities. In which respect Calvin bestows upon Farellus the Title of
libertatis Patrem, In Epistola ad Minist. Tigurin, 1553.
the Father of that common Liberty, which by his means the people of Geneva at
the time enjoyed. As for the Syndicks by whose power and countenance they
advanced the business, they were a kind of popular Officers, who had the care
of looking to the conservation of the peoples Liberties, as Thuanus intimates;
and were much used in many parts of France and Italy, Bodin de Repub. lib. 4.
c. 4. Id. ibid.
as Bodinus tell us. Their Office did consist of two special points: the one a
Magistratibus rationem reposcere, to call the ordinary Magistrates to an
after-reckoning, if they did any thing unworthy of their place and dignity, or
to the hinderance and disservice of the Commonwealth; which had somewhat in it
of the Ephori in the State of Sparta: the other was, prospicere ne tenniores
and infimae sortis homines a nobilibus, uti fit, premerentur, to have a care
that the poor people be not wronged or injured (as many times it happens) by
the power of the Nobles; which mas the main reason for the institution of the
Roman Tribunes. In this regard the Civil Laws interpret Syndicus to be the same
with defensor Civitatis, Calvin in Lexico Jurid. verbo Syndicus.
the Conservator of the liberties of a Town or City, as full well they might:
the Office being made up (as it seems it was) of that of the Ephori and the
Tribunes mixed together. Now though this change was made before Calvin's coming
to Geneva, which was not till the year 1535, yet he affirms it of himself that
whatsoever had been done in the alteration, suffragio meo comprobavi, he had
confirmed and approved as a thing well done: Calvin in Eplstola ad Cardinal.
Sadolet.
and therefore thought himself to be no less obliged to defend the action, than
if it had been done at first bh his own command. For doubtless that of Tully is
exceeding true, Nil refert utrum voluerim fieri vel gaudeam factum: Cicero in
Philip. 2.
between the doing of a soul and disloyal act, and the approbation of it when
it is done, is but little difference.

But to proceed; Geeva, thought himself bound not only to justify unto others
what himself approved; but also to lay down such grounds whereby the Example
might be followed, and their disloyalty and rebellion the less observed,
because they did not go alone without company. In which respect (and it is a
thing to be observed althoughthat Book of Institutions has been often printed,
and received many alterations and additions (as before was noted) yet this
particular passage still remains unaltered, and has continued as it is from
the first Edition, which was in the year 1536. when the Rebellion of Geneva was
yet fresh and talked of as an ill Example. Nor was the man deceived in his
expectation; For as he grew into esteem and reputation in the World abroad, so
he attained at last to that power and Empire over the souls and consciences of
his followers, that his Errors were accounted Orthodox, his defects
Perfections, and the revolt of the Genevians from their natural Prince must by
no means be called Rebellion, because projected and pursued by such popular
Officers, to whom it appertained of common course to regulate the Authority of
Kings and Princes. And though he does not say expressly that there either are or
ought to be such popular Officers in every Realm or commonwealth, but brings
it in upon the by with his ifs and ands: yet ifs and ands are not allowed of in
the Laws to excuse Rebellions, Bacons History of King Henry the seventh.
and by the setting up of that dangerous Si quis ( si qui sint^populares
Magistratus, as his words there are) he seems to make a Proclamation that where
there were such Popular Officers, it was their bounden duty to correct their
Princes after the manner of Geneva; where there were none, the people were (God
help them) in an ill condition, unless some other means were thought of, for
their ease and remedy. Upon which Principles of his, his folowers raised such
Positions, and pursued such practices as have distracted and embroyled the most
parts of Europe, and made it of a Garden to become a Wilderness. For finding
that they could not easily create such popular Magistrates to lord it over
Kings and Princes who had not been accustomed to the like Controlments; they
put that power of regulating the Supreme Authority either upon the body of the
people generally, whereof you were told before from Buchannan, or upon such to
whom they should communicate or transser their Power, as occasion served,
whereof you may hear further in that which follows. And that not only in the
case of civil Liberty, for which the Examples of the Ephori and the Roman
Tribunes were at first found out, and that of the Demarchi thrust upon the
Readers for the like foul end; but specially in such matters which concerned
Religion, wherein the extraordinary calling of some men in the holy Scriptures
must serve for Precedents and Examples to confirm their practices. From hence
it was that Buchannan does not only subject his King unto the Ordinary Judges
and Courts of Justice as before was noted: but fearing that Kings would be too
potent to be so kept under, advises this, Buchann. de jure Regni.
Eorum interfectoribus praemia decerni, that Rewards should publicly be
decreed for those who kill a Tyrant (and Kings and Tyrants are the same as
heretofore in the word and notion, so now in the Opinion of the Presbyterian or
Calvinian faction) as usually are proposed to those who kill Wolves, or Bears.
From hence it was that the inferior or subordinate Magistrate is advanced so
high, as to be entitled to a Power, adversus Superiorem Magistratum se,
Rempub. and Ecclesiam etiam armis defendere, Paraeus in Epistola ad Romans cap.
13.
of taking Arms against the King or Superior Magistrate, in defense of
himself, his Country and true Religion: which though they are the words of
Paraeus only, yetthey contain the mind and meaning of all the rest of that
faction, as his son Philip does demonstrate. In Append. ad Cap. 13. Epist. ad
Romans Cambden Annal. Eliz. An. 1559.
Hence was it that John Knox, delivered for sound Orthodox doctrine, Procerum
esse propria autoritate Idololatriam tollere, and Principes intra legum
rescripta per vim reducere, that it belonged unto the Peers of each several
Kingdom to reform matters of the Church by their own Authority, and to confine
their Kings and Princes within the bounds prescribed by Law, even by force of
Arms. Hence that Geselius one of the Lecturers of Roterdam preached unto his
people, Necessaria Respons. Jean. de Serres inventnire de Fr. History of the
Netherlands. Thuan. hist. l. 114. Camden. Annal. An. 15 59. Laurea Austriaca.
Continuati. Thuan. hist. l. 8.
that if the Magistrates and Clergy did neglect their duty in the reformation
of Religion, necesse est id facere plebeios, that then it did belong to the
common people, who were bound to have a care thereof and proceed accordingly.
And as for points of Practice, should we look that way, what a confusion should
we find in most parts of Europe, occasioned by no other ground than the
entertainment of these Principles and the scattering of these positions amongst
the people? Witness the Civil Wars of France, the revolt of Holland, the
expulsion of the Earl of East-Friezland, the insurrections of the Scots, the
Tumults of Bohemia, the commotions of Brandenburg, the translation of the Crown
of Sweden from the King of Pole to Charles Duke of Finland, the change of
Government in England: all acted by the Presbyterian or Calvinian party in
those several States, under pretense of Reformation and redress of grievances.

And to say truth, such is the Genius of the Sect, parity is the thing most
aimed at by them both in Church and State) yet they will hardly be persuaded to
submit themselves to a Superior, to no Superiors more unwillingly than to
Kings and Princes: whose persons they disgrace, whose power they ruinate, whose
calling they endeavor to decry and blemish by all means imaginable. First for
their calling, they say it is no other than an humane Ordinance, and that the
King is but a creature of the peoples making; whom having made, they may as
easily destroy and unmake again. Which as it is the darling Doctrine of this
present time, so is it very eagerly pursued by Buchannan, who affirms expressly,
Quicquid juris populus alicui dederit, Buchann. de jure Regni.
idem justis de causis posse reposcere, that whatsoever power the people give
unto their King or Supreme Magistrate, they may resume again upon just
occasions. Their Power they make so small and inconsiderable, that they afford
them very little even in matters of Temporal, and no Authority at all in things
Spiritual. Calvin professes for himself, that he was very much agrieved to
hear that King Henry the eighth, had took unto himself the Title of Supreme
Head of the Church of England, accuses them of inconsiderate zeal, nay
blasphemy, who conferred it on him; and though he be content at last to allow
Kings a Ministerial power in matters which concern the Reformation of Gods
Public Worship, yet he condemns them as before of great inconsiderateness.
Calvin in Amos cap. 7.
Qui facerent eos nimis spirituales, who did ascribe unto them any great
authority in spiritual matters. The designation of all those who bear public
Office in the Church, the calling of Councils or Assemblies, the Presidency in
those Councils, Ordaining public Fasts, and appointing Festivals, which
anciently belonged unto Christian Princes as the chief branches of the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which is vested in them; are utterly denied to
Kings and Princes in their Books of Discipline. Insomuch that when the Citizens
of Embden did expel their Earl, they did it chiefly for this reason, Thuan.
hist. l. 114.
Quod se negotiis Ecclesiasticis and Consistorialibus praeter jus and
aequitatem immisceret, that he had intermedled more than they thought fit in
Ecclesiastical causes, and entrenched too much upon their Consistory. As for
their power in Temporal or civil Causes, by that time Knoxes Peers and
Buchannans Judges, Paraeus his inferior Magistrates, and Calvin's popular
Officers have performed their parts, in keeping them within the compass of the
Laws; arraigning them for their offenses, if they should transgress; opposing
them by force of Arms, if any thing be done unto the prejudice of the Church or
State; and finally in regulating their Authority, after the manner of the
Spartan Ephori, and the Roman Tribunes: all that is left will be by much too
little for a Royd'Ivitot, or for a King of Clouts, as we English phrase it.
Last of all, for their persons which God held so sacred, that he gave it for a
Law to his people Israel, not to speak evil of their Princes, saying, Thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people; Let us but look upon these
men, and we shall find the basest attributes too good for the greatest Kings.
Calvin calls Mary Queen of England by the name of Proserpine, Calvin in Amos
cap. 7.
and says that she did superare omnes Diabolos, that all the Devils of Hell
were not half so mischievous. Beza affords Queen Mary of Scotland no better
Titles than those of Medea and Athaliah; Beza in Epist. ad Jo.
of which the last was most infamous in divine; the other no less scandalous in
humane stories; the one a Sorceress and a Witch, the other a Tyrant and
Usurper. The Author of the Altar Damascenum, whosoever he was, can find no
better attribute for King James of most blessed memory, than infensissimus
Evangelii hostis, Didoclaviu^ in Epistola ad ^^ctor.
the greatest and deadly Enemy of the Gospel of Christ. And Queen Elizabeth her
self did not escape so clear, but that the zealous Brethren were too bold
sometimes with her Name and Honor, though some of them paid dearly for it, and
were hanged for their labor. How that seditious Hugonot, the Author of the
lewd and unworthy Dialogue, entitled Eusebius Philadelphus, has dealt with
three great Princes of the House of France, and what reproachful names he gives
them, I had rather you should look for in the Author than expect from me; being
loath to wade too far in these dirty puddles; save that I shall be bold to add
this general Character which Didoclavius gives to all Kings in general; viz.
Natura insitum est in omnibus Regibus Christi odium, that all Kings naturally
hate Christ; which may serve for all. This is enough to let us see, how
irreconcilable an hatred these of the Calvinian faction bear against Kings and
Princes; how well they play the part of the very Antichrist in exalting
themselves against whatsoever is called God; and that the special reason why
they affect so much to be called the Saints, is out of a strong probable hope
to see the day in which they shall bind Kings in chains, and all the Princes of
the earth in fetters of iron. Finally such is their disaffection unto sacred
Monarchy, which they have sucked out of the grounds and principles here laid
down by Calvin, that we may justly say of them what was most truly said of the
ancient Romans, quasi nefas esset Regem aliquem prope eorum terminos esse,
J^stin. hist. l. 29.
they have bestirred themselves so bravely in defiance of the Regal Government,
as if they did account it an unpardonable sin to suffer any King, though most
good and gracious, to border near them. Which lest they should not be of power
to compass by their popular Magistrates, or by the Judges, or the Peers, or the
People severally; which make the main Battle for this Combat: let us next look
on the Reserve, and see what hopes they have to effect the business by the
three Estates conjoined in Parliament, (or by what other name soever we shall
call their meeting) which Calvin in the last place does reflect upon, but
cautiously with a qua forte, or a peradventure, as in that before.

CHAP. V. What are the three Estates in each several Kingdom, in which CALVIN
speaks, and what particularly in the Realm of England.
1. Of the division of a People into three Estates; and that the Priests or
Clergy have been always one. 2. The Priests employed in Civil matters and
affairs of State, by the Egyptians and the Persians, the Greeks, Gauls, and
Romans. 3. The Priests and Levites exercised in affairs of Civil Government by
Gods own appointment. 4. The Prelates versed in Civil matters and affairs of
State, in the best and happiest times of Christianity. 5. The Clergy make the
third Estate in Germany, France, Spain, and the Northern Kingdoms. 6. That
anciently in the Saxon times the Ecclesiastics of this Realm were called to
all public Councils. 7. The Prelates an essential fundamental part of the
English Parliament. 8. Objections answered, and that the word Clerus in the
Legal notion, does not extend unto the Prelates. 9. That the inferior Clergy of
the Realm of England had anciently their Votes in Parliament, to all intents
and purposes as the Commons had. 10. Objections answered; and that the calling
of the Clergy to Parliaments and Convocations,were after different manners, and
by several Writs. 11. The great Disfranchisement and slavery obtruded on the
English Clergy, by the depriving of the Bishops of their Votes in Parliament.
12. A brief discussion of the Question, whether any two of the three Estates
conspiring or angreeing together, can conclude any thing unto the prejudice of
the third.


BUT first before we fall on the Point it self, Calvin to the three Estates of
every Kingdom, we must first see what kind of men they are, and of what
condition, who constitute the said Estates: which being first settled and
determined, we shall the better be enabled to proceed accordingly in the
enquiry after that Authority which our Author gives them of regulating the
proceedings of the Sovereign Prince; and putting a restraint on the exorbitant
power of Kings. In which we shall presume for granted what our Author gives us,
viz, tres Ordines in singulis Regnis, that in each several Kingdom there are
three Estates; and those three we shall prove to be (though our Author is no
otherwise to be understood) the Clergy, the Nobility, the Common people: which
distribution of the Subject into three Estates as it is very ancient, so ws the
distribution of them into three, neither more nor less, founded on good
prudential motives and grounds of Polity. For as judicious Bodin very well
observes, should there be only two Estates, and no more than so, either upon
such differences as might rise between them, the one side would be apt to
compel the other by force of violence; or else, aequatis Ordinum suffragiis,
Bodin de Repub. l. 3. cap. ult.
the balance being even between them, their meetings would be many times
dissolved without producing any notable effect to the benefit of the
Commonwealth. In which respect the counterpoise or addition of a third Estate
was exceeding necessary, ut alterutri sese adjungens utrumque conciliet, that
joining unto either of the other two, it might unite them both into one
Opinion, and advance the service of the public. And on the other side were
there more than three, opinionum multitudo, the difference of Opinions, and
pretense of interesses, would keep them at perpetual distance, and hinder them
from pitching upon any point, in which all their purposes and aims were to be
concentred. So that the casting of the body of a people into three Estates,
seems most convenient for the furtherance of the public service: and of those
three Estates the Priests (or Clergy, as we call them since the times of
CHRIST) have generally been accounted one. For though Hippodamus (whom
Aristotle justly taxes for defects in Polity) ordained his three Estates to be
the Soldiery, Aristot. Politic. l.
the Handicrafts-man, and the Husbandman: yet wiser Statists saw no reason that
the two last should pass for several Estates or ranks of men, being that both
might be more fitly comprehended under the name and rank of the common people.
And therefore the Egyptians did divide the people into these three ranks, the
Priest, which is respondent to the Christian Clergy; the Soldier, who carries
most resemblance to the State of Nobles; and those which lived by Trades and
labors, whom by one general name they called Operarii, Diodor. Siculus.
as we now the Commons: which course we find to be observed also by the ancient
Gauls dividing their whole body into these three Orders, the Druides, who had
the charge of matters which concerned Religion; Caesar de Bello Gallico. l. 6.
the Equites who managed the affairs of War; and then the Plebs, or common
people, who were subordinate to the other two, and directed by them. How this
division has succeeded in the States of Christendom we shall see hereafter.

In the mean time we may take notice that the Priests of Egypt, Druides of
Gaul, and those who had the ordering of those services which concerned the
gods, by whatsoever name or Title they were known and called in other
Countries, were not so tied unto the Altars, and other ministerial Offices
which concerned the gods, as not to have some special influence in ordering the
affairs of the Commonwealth. The Priests of Egypt, as we read in Aelian (an
Author of unquestioned credit) possessed the highest seats of Judicature, and
were the only Judges which that people had: Aelian in Varia histor. l. 14. c.
34. Synesius Ep. 57.
Judices apud Egyptios iidem quondam fuerunt qui and sacerdotes, as that Author
has it. And so much is assured us by Synesius also a Christian Bishop of the
East, where he resembles them in this particular to the Priests of Judah. The
like we find in Agathias of the Priests of Persia, men better known in ancient
Writers by the name of Magi: Agathias in hist. Porsic. l. 2.
of whom he tells us, eorum consilio publica omnia administrari, etc. that by
their counsel and advice the principal affairs of the State were ordered,
rewards proportioned and conferred upon well-deservers, and several punishments
inflicted on the Malefactors, according to the quality of the misdemeanor; and
finally that nothing was conceived to be rightly done, quod Magnorum sententia
non sit confirmatum, which had not passed the approbation of these Priests or
Magi. If we draw nearer toward the West, and look into the Government of the
State of Athens, we shall find the chief authority thereof to consist in the
Senate of 500, and in the famous Court of the Areopagites, as was noted in the
former Chapter: in which the Priests, or at the least the principal of that
rank or order had both place and suffrage. For in that honorary Edict which
they made in favor of Hyrcanus, we may clearly see that Dionysius the son of
Asclepiades was one of the Priests, Joseph. Judaic. Antiqu. l. 14. c. 16.
and also one of the Prytanaei, or Presidents of the Council, as we call them
now; and that in calculating of the Voices, (...), Dorotheus the chief Priest
had the greatest stroke, and pronounced the Edict to be passed. And for the
Court of Areopagites, it consisted as before we told you of such and such alone
as formerly had bore the Office of the nine Annual Magistrates, whereof the
(...), or Rex Sacrorum, (whom we may English the chief Bishop) had the second
place. Suidas in verbo (...) Plutarch in Pericle.
And this appears yet further by a passage in the life of Pericles, where we
are told of his design for the abasing of the power of the Areopagites, (...),
of which Court he was not any Member, as the Author tells us, in that he had
never born the Office either of the Provost, or the King, or the Polemarchus,
or any of the six chief Justices. So that the (...), the Rex Sacrorum, or chief
Bishop being of course to be admitted into the Court or Council of the
Areopagites when his year was ended, it cannot be, but that there must be many
of them in that famous Session; an equal number at the least, with those who
had been Polemarchi, or the yearly (...). Add here, that we are told by Julius
Pollux in his Onomasticon, Lib. 8. cap. 8. sect. 3.
that it pertained to this (...), or Rex Sacrorum, besides the service of the
gods, (...), to endite those before the Court who were guilty or murder; but
then withal, that having put in the Enditement, and laid by his Crown, (...),
he sat upon the Bench with the other Judges and passed sentence on them. Thus
was it with the Druides or the Priests of Gallia, who did not only take the
charge of all sacred matter which did relate unto the service of the gods, but
de omnibus fere controversiis publicis privatisque, Caesar de Bello Gallico l.
6.
they did determine in almost all suits and controversies, as well public as
private; particularly in matters of inheritance, real actions, capital crimes,
as murder and the like offenses; and also had a power to decree both rewards
and punishments as they saw occasion. And for the better dispatch of business
both for their own ease and the Peoples too, they chose some certain times or
Terms in which they met together not far from Chartres (being in the middle of
the Country) whither all sorts of People who had suits and differences did
repair unto them, eorumque judiciis and decretis parebant, and to their
Judgments and Decrees did submit themselves. And thus it also was with the
Pontifices or Priests of Rome, who had not only a chief place in the holy
Mysteries, such as concerned the public worship of their gods; but also a
great power and sway in the greatest and most important businesses which
concerned the State: which Tully makes one of those Constitutions or Arts of
Government, which seemed to have been devised by the gods themselves. Cicero in
Orat. pro Domo sua.
Cum multa divinitus a majoribus nostris inventa atque instituta sunt, tum
nihil praeclarius quam quod Pontifices eosdem and Religionibus Deorum
immortalium and summae reipub. praeesse voluerunt. And as the principal Priests
in Athens had their place and Vote not only in the Court of Areopagites, but in
the Senate of five hundred as before was noted: so some of the more eminent
sort of Priests had the like pre-eminence of sitting and voting in the Roman
Senate, which was as high an honor as that State could give them. For besides
that Rosinus has observed that some of the Priests were chosen out of the
number of the Senators, who doubtless did not lose the right of suffrage which
before they had; Rosin. Antiqu. Romans
there is a memorable case in Livie touching C. Flaccus: who was no sooner
chosen the Flamen Dialis, or Priest of Jupiter, but presently he put in his
title to a place in Senate, which anciently belonged unto his predecessors in
the right of their Office, though of late years it seemed to have been
forfeited by discontinuance. The issue of which plea was this, That though
Licinius the Praetor did the best he could to cross the business, alleging, Non
exoletis vetustate Annalium exemplis stare jus, Livie hist. Romans lib. 26.
that they were not to be guided in the case by Worm-eaten Precedents, but by
the late practice of the State; yet it was otherwise determined by the Fathers
generally, and Flaccus settled in his place in the Roman Senate, Magno assensu
Patrum Plebisque, with the joint consent of all the People. But what need these
particulars have been brought to confirm this point, whenas it is affirmed in
generals by Synesius, a right godly Bishop of the Primitive times? Synes.
Epist. 57.
(...), that in old times the same men were both Priests and Judges. Which
said, he instanceth in the particulars of the Jews and Egyptians who for long
time (...), had been chiefly governed by their Priests.

This brings me on to the power and practice of the Priests in the Land of
Judah, Moses first complained that the sole Government of the People was a
burden too heavy for him to bear, it pleased God to appoint a standing
Consistory of seventy Elders, men of ability and wisdom, Numb. 11. v. 16
who were to have a share in the public Government, and to decide amongst
themselves such weighty businesses, great matters, as the Scripture calls them,
Exodus 18. v. 22.
which were reserved to Moses by a former Ordinance. Of these, the Priests, as
men who for the most part were at better leisure than the rest to attend the
service, and generally of more abilities to go through with it, made always a
considerably number, and many times the major part. In which respect it was
ordained by the Lord, when a matter did arise to be scanned in judgment between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, and stroke and stroke, being matters of
controversy within their gates, the People should arise and go unto the place
which the Lord should choose, and come unto the Priests, the Levites, and unto
the Judge that shall be in those days, and enquire, and they shall show them
the sentence of judgment. Deuteronomy. c. 17. v. 8, 9.
The like is also ordered in the case of false witnesses, where it is said,
that if a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him that
which is wrong; then both the men between whom the controversy is shall stand
before the Lord, before the Priests and Judges which shall be in those days.
Deuteronomy. 19. v. 17.
Which passages are not understood of any particular Priests or Judges,
dispersed in their several dwellings up and down the Country; but of the
Priests and other Judges united and assembled in that famous Consistory of the
70 Elders, conveened together in that place which the Lord should choose;
called by the Jews the Sanhedrim, by the Greeks (...), and was the great
Council of estate for the Jewish Nation. To this Josephus does attest, where he
informs us, (...), that the Priests of Jewry had the cognizance of all
doubtful matters; Joseph. adv. Appion. lib. 2.
more plainly Philo, who knew well the customs of his native Country, where he
affirms expressly, and in terminis, (...), that the Priests had place and
suffrage in this great (...), Philo de vita Mosis.
or Court of Sanhedrim. And this is that which Casaubon does also tell us from
the most learned and expert of the Jewish Rabbis, Non nisi nobilissimos e
sacerdotibus, Levitis, caeteroque populo, and in lege peritissimos in Sanhedrim
eligi, Casaub. Exercit. in Baron. 1. Sect. 3.
that is to say, that none but the most eminent of the Priests, the Levites and
the rest of the People, and such as were most conversant in the Book of the
Law, were to be chosen into the Sanhedrim. But to return again to the Book of
God, the power and reputation of this Court and Consistory having been much
diminished in the times of the Kings of Judah, was again revived by Jehosaphat.
Of whom we read, that he not only did appoint Judges in the Land throughout all
the fenced Cities of Judah; 2 Chronicles. 19.5.
but that he established at Jerusalem a standing Council, consisting of the
Levites and of the Priests, and of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the
judgments of the Lord, Ibid. r. 8.
and for controversies: according to the model formerly laid by God himself in
the Book of Deuteronomy. Which Court or Council thus revived, continued in full
force, authority, and power, during the time of the captivity of Babylon; as
appears plainly by that passage in the Prophecy of Ezekiel, where it is said
of the Priests even by God himself, Ezekiel. 44. v. 24.
in controversy they shall stand in judgment; compared with another place of
the same Prophet, where he makes mention of the Seventy of the Ancients of the
House of Israel, Id. c. 8. v. 11.
and Jaazaniah the Son of Shaphan standing in the midst, as Prince of the
Senate. And after their return from that house of bondage, they were confirmed
in this authority by the Edict and Decree of Artaxerxes, who gave Commission
unto Ezra to set Magistrates and Judges over the People; not after a new way of
his own devising, Ezra. 6.7. v. 25.
but after the wisdom of his God, declared in the foregoing Ages by his Servant
Moses. In which estate they stood all the times succeeding, until the final
dissolution of that State and Nation: with this addition to the power of the
holy Priesthood, that they had not only all that while their place and suffrage
in the Court of Sanhedrim, as will appear to any one who has either read
Josephus or the four Evangelists; but for a great part of that time, till the
Reign of Herod, the Supreme Government of the State was in the hands of the
Priests. In which regard, besides what was affirmed from Synesius formerly, it
is said by Justin, Morem esse apud Judaeos ut eosdem Reges and sacerdotes
haberent, that it was the custom of the Jews for the same men to be Kings and
Priests: Justin. hist. l. 36.
and Tacitus gives this general note, Judaeis Sacerdotu honorem firmamentum
potentiae esse, that the honor given unto the Priesthood amongst the Jews, did
most espeeially conduce to the establishment of their power and Empire. And yet
I cannot yield to Baronius neither, Tacit. hist. l. 3.
where he affirms (the better to establish a Supremacy in the Popes of Rome)
Summum Pont. arbitrio suo moderari magnum illud Concilium, Baron. Annal. An. 57.
etc. that the High Priest was always President of the Council or Court of
Sanhedrim: it being generally declared in the Jewish Writers, that the High
Priest could challenge no place at all therein, in regard of his offense and
descent, but merely in respect of such personal abilities as made himself to
undergo such a weighty burden, for which see Phagius in his notes on the 16 of
Deuteronomy.

Thus have we seen of what authority and power the Priests were formerly as
well amongst the Jews as amongst the Gentiles; Optatus, Deschismat. Donatist.
l. 3.
Ecclesia erat in Republica, the Church became a part of the Commonwealth, and
had their ends and aims united; there followed these two things upon it: first
that the Supreme Government of the Church depended much upon the will and
pleasure of the Supreme Magistrate; Scorat. Eccl. hist. lib. 5. c. 1.
insomuch as Socrates observes, (...), that the greatest Councils have been
called by their authority and appointment: And 2ly. That the Governors and
Rulers of the Church of God, came to have place and power in disposing matter,
that appertained to the well ordering of the Civil State. And this they did,
not our of any busy or pragmatical desire to draw the cognizance of secular
causes into their own hands, or to increase their power and reputation with the
common People; but merely for the ease and benefit of those who did repair unto
them for their help and counsel, and to comply with the command of the Apostle,
who imposed it on them. S. Austin tells us of S. Ambrose, with how great
difficulty he obtained an opportunity of conversing with him privately, and at
large, as his case required: Secludentibus eum ab ejus aure atque ore catervis
negociosorum hominum, August Confess. l. 6. c. 3.
the multitude of those who had business to him, and suits to be determined by
him, debarring him from all advantages of access and conference. Which took up
so much of his time, that he had little leisure to refresh his body with
necessary food, or his mind with the reading of good Authors. And Posidonius
tells us of S. Austin, causas audisse diligenter and pie, that he diligently
and religiously attended such businesses as were brought before him, not only
spending all the morning in that troublesome exercise, Posidon. in vita.
August. c. 19.
but sometimes fasting all day long, the better to content the suitor, and
dispatch the business. The like S. Austin tells us of himself, and his fellow
Prelates, first that the Christians of those times pro secularibus causis suis
nos non raro quaererent, August. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 74 and Epist. 147.
did ordinarily apply themselves unto them for the determining of secular
causes, and cheerfully submitted unto their decisions: next that the Prelates
did comply with their earnest solicitations and desires, therein Tu
multuosissimas eausarum alienarum perplexitates patiendo, Id. de opere Monach.
c. 29.
by intermitting their own studies to engage themselves in the determining of
such secular causes as were brought before them, for the contentation of the
People, and the diseharge of their own duty both to God and man. And this is
that which both S. Ambrose and S. Austin tell us in their several writings,
viz. that they did undergo this trouble for no other reason than out of a
conformity and obedience to the words and imitation of S. Paul, 1 Cor. cap. 6.
touching the ending of such suits and differences as did arise amongst the
Faithful: S. Austin saying, Constituisse Apostolum talibus causis
Ecclesiasticos cognitores, Id. in Psalm. 110. sermon. 174. Id. de opere Monach.
29. Amb. Epist. 24.
and iisdem molestiis eos affixisse Apostolos; S. Ambrose, that he had
undertook the businesses which were brought before him, Secundum sacrae formam
praeceptionis qua eum Apostolus induebat, which did impose such a necessity
upon him, that he was not able to decline it. Both of them do agree in this,
and Posidonius does agree with both in the same particular, that they were not
only warranted, but obliged by S. Paul's injunction, Posidon. in vita August. c.
19.
to undertake the cognizance of such secular causes as were from time to time
committed to their care and trust; and that they had not done their duty, had
they made any scruple of the undertaking. But these being only private matters,
let us next see whether their service was not used in affairs of State, and we
shall find that Constantine did always take some Bishops with him when he went
to War; not only for their ghostly counsel in spiritual matters, but for advise
in matters which concerned the occasion, the prosecution of the War which was
then in hand: Eusebius. in vita Constant. l. 4. c. 54.
that Ambrose was twice sent Ambassador from Valentinian the younger, to the
Tyrant Maximus, which he performed to the great contentment of his Prince, and
the preservation of the Empire; whereof he gives us an account in an express
unto the Emperor: that when Firmus had rebelled in Africa, Amb. Epist. 27. lib.
5.
and saw himself too weak to resist the Forces which were raised against him
under Theodosius, Antistites ritus Christiani pacem oraturos misit, he sent the
African Prelates his Ambassadors to treat of peace: Ammian. Marcel. hist. l.
29. Socrat. Eccles. hist. l. 7. c. 8.
that Marutha Bishop of Mesapotamia was in like nature sent to the Court of
Persia, in the time of the Emperor Honorius I. as after that Epiphanius Bishop
of Ticinum (which we now call Pavie) employed from the Ligurians to Athalaricus
King of the Goths in Italy, from him unto the Court of Burgundy, as
Cassiodorus and Ennodius do describe at large: that James the godly Bishop of
Nisibis, (a frontier Town against the Persians) was also (...), both Governor
of the place, and Captain of the Soldiers which were there in Garrison;
Theodoret. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 30.
and did most manfully defend it against all the force and fury of the Persian
Armies, An. 338. or thereabouts: and finally (which was an argument of great
power and trust) that the Bishops in Justinians time were by him appointed to
oversee the Civil Magistrates, and to give notice to the Emperor if they
failed in any thing which did concern the Government of the Estate in their
several places; Novel. 56. and in Append. ad Novel. 8.
of which the very Edicts are still extant in the Book of Novels.

The Prelates being grown into this esteem for their integrity and wisdom with
the Roman Emperors;

And first beginning (as of right) with the German Empire, August. Thuan. hist.
lib. 2.
Thuanus gives this note in general, Imperium in tria omnino membra dividi,
that that Emire is divided into three Estates, over all which the Emperor is
the Head or the Supreme Prince. Of these the first Estate is ex sacro Ordine,
of the holy Hierarchy, composed of the three spiritual Electors, together with
the residue of the Archbishops and Bishops, and many Abbots, Priors, and other
Prelates. The second is of the Nobility consisting of the three temporal
Electors, the Dukes, Marquesses, Lantgraves, Burgraves, Earls and Barons, of
which there is no determinate number; the Emperor having power to add daily to
them, as he sees occasion. The third Estate is of the free or Imperial Cities,
in number 60. or thereabouts, who represent themselves at the General Diets, by
such Commissioners or Deputies as are authorized to that purpose. Now for these
Diets, (for by that name they call their Conventus Ordinum, or Assembly of the
three Estates) they are summoned at the will and pleasure of the Emperor only,
and at such place and time as to him seems meetest. Id. ibid.
Where being met, (as all the three Estates must meet either in person or by
their Ambassadors) they use to treat of Peace and War, of raising Subsidies and
Taxes to support the State, of leagues and confederacies, of raising and
decrying moneys, of making, abrogating, and expounding laws, and of such other
points and matters as do pertain unto the honor of the Empire and the public
safety. Nor is this any new authority which the Ecclesiastical Estate has
gained in the latter times; but such wherein they were entrusted from the first
beginning of that Empire: It being affirmed by Aventinus (a Writer of
unquestioned credit) that long before the institution of the seven Electors,
(which was in An. 996.) the Prelates, the Nobility, and the chief of the People
had the election of the Emperor. Aventini Annal. Boiorum. l. 5.
And if the Prelates were entrusted in so high a point, as the Election of the
Emperor or the Sovereign Prince; no question but they were employed also in
his public Councels, in matters which concerned the managery of the
Commonwealth.

Next pass we over into France, and there we find the Subjects marshalled into
three Estates, whereof the Clergy is the first. Rex coactis tribus Ordinibus,
Sacerdotio, Nobilitate, Plebe, Paul. Aemilius hist. Franc. l. 9.
subsidia rei pecuniariae petiit, that is to say, the King assembling or
conveening the three Estates, viz. the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons,
demanded subsidies for the support of his Estate: So Paulus Aemilius does
inform us: Out of these three are chosen certain Delegates or Commissioners,
some for each Estate, as often as the Kings occasions do require their meeting,
the time and place whereof is absolutely left unto his disposing; and these
thus met do make up the Conventus Ordinum, or L' Assembly des Estats, as the
French men call it, in form much like the English Parliament, but in nothing
else: the power and reputation of it being much diminished in these latter
times, especially since the great improvement of the Court of Parliament, fixed
and of long time fixed in Paris. Which Court of Parliament, as it was
instituted at the first by Charles Martel, Mayre of the Palace to the
Merovignian line of France, and Grandfather to Charle magne, so it consisted
at the first of the same ingredients, of which the great Assembly des Estats
consists now, that is to say, the Prelates and the Peers, and certain of the
principal Gentry which they call La Nebless, together with some few of the most
considerable Officers of the Kings household. A Court of such esteem in the
former time, that the Kings of Sicily, Cyprus, Bohemia, Scotland, and Navar,
Andre du Chesne.
have thought it no disparagement unto them to be members of it: and which is
more, when Frederick the second had spent much time and treasure in his
quarrels with Pope Innocent the fourth, he was content to submit the whole
cause in difference unto the judgment of this Court. But being at last become
sedentaire and fixed at Paris, as other ordinary Courts of Justice were, (which
was in An. 1286. or thereabouts) the Nobles first, and after them the Bishops
withdrew themselves from the troubles of it, and left it to the ordering of the
Civil Lawyers: though still the Peers do challenge and enjoy a place therein as
often as any point of moment is in agitation; the Bishop of Paris, and the Abbot
of St. Denis, continuing constant members of it to this very day. But for the
Assembly des Estats, or Conventus Ordinum, made up of the Clergy, the Nobility
and the Commons, as before I told you: he that would see the manner of it, the
points there handled, and that remainder of authority which is left unto them,
let him repair unto Thuanus, Thuan. hist. sui temp. lib.
and look upon the great Assembly held at Bloys, An. 1573. He shall find it
there.

Pass we next over the Pyrenees, to the Realms of Spain, and we shall find in
each the same three Estates, whose meeting they call there by the name of
Curia, Bodin. de Repub. lib. 3. c.
the Court (...), or by way of eminency; consisting of the Clergy, the
Nobility, and Commissioners of the Provinces and most ancient Cities. But we
must tell you by the way, that long before the institution of these Courts, and
long before the division of Spain into so many Kingdoms; the Prelates of that
Church were of such authority, that a chief stroke in the election of their
Kings did belong to them. For in the eighth Council of Toledo summoned by
Recesvintus the 25th. of the Gothish race of the Kings of Spain, An. 653. so
long ago, in which were present 52 Bishops, 12 Abbots, and the Delegates of
Vicars of ten other Bishops, who could not personally attend the service; it
was ordered with the Kings consent, that from thenceforth the Kings of Spain
should be elected in the Regal City, or in what other place soever the King
should happen to decease, by the joint suffrages of the Prelates, and the great
Lords of the Court, Majores Palatii as the Canon calls them. Council. Tolet.
VIII. Can. 10.
But take the whole Canon with you for the more assurance, and you find it
thus. Abhinc ergo and deinceps ita erunt in Regni gloria praeficiendi Rectores,
ut aut in urbe Regia, aut in loco ubi Princeps decesserit, cum Pontisicum
Majorumque Palatii omnimodo eligantur assensu. But after Spain became divided
into several Kingdoms, and that each Kingdom had its Court or Curia, as they
call their Parliament, the Clergy were esteemed in each for the third Estate
(the first indeed of all the three) and either in person or by their Proxies,
made up the most considerable part in those public meetings. For proof of
which we need but look into the General History of Spain, translated out of
French by Grimston, and we shall find a Court or Parliament for the Realm of
Aragon, consisting of the Bishops, Nobles, and Deputies of Towns and
Commonalties, having place in the said Estates conveened by King James at
Saragossa, Anno 1325. for settling the Succession, and declaring the Heir,
another at Monson, Genesis hist. of Spain. l. 14. Id. lib. 11.
where the Estates of Aragon and Catalogne did conveen together 1236. to
consult about the Conquest of Valentia; and before that another Assembly of the
Bishops and Noblemen called at Saragossa by Alfonso the Great, touching the War
against the Moors. Id. lib. 9.
And as for the Realm of Naples and Sicily, being appends on this Crown, there
is little question to be made but that the Bishops and Clergy of both enjoyed
the place and privileges of the third Estate; both Kingdoms being anciently
hoden of the Pope, and of his Erection, and the Italian Bishops (as lying
directly under his nose) more amply privileged for the most part than in other
Countries. Thus for Castile, we find a Parliament of Lords, Prelates, and
Deputies of Towns summoned at Toledo by Alfonso the Noble, An. 1210. upon
occasion of an invasion made by the Moors; another before that at Burgos, Id.
lib. 10.
under the same King, Anno 1179. for levying of money on the people to maintain
the Wars; that great Convention of the States held at Toledo by Ferdinand the
Catholic 1479. for swearing to the succession of his Son, Don John, in which
the Prelates, the Nobility, and almost all the Towns and Cities which sent
Commissioners to the Assembly, are expressly named. Id. lib.
Thus finally do we find a meeting of the Deputies of the three Estates of
Navarre at the Town of Tasalla, Anno 1481. for preserving the Kingdom in
obedience to King Francis Phoebus, being then a Minor, under Age: and that the
Deputies of the Clergy, Id. lib. 22.
Nobility, Provinces and good Towns and Portugal, assembled at Tomara, Anno
1581. to acknowledge Philip the second for their King, and to settle the
Government of that Kingdom for the times to come. Id. lib. 30.


Now let us take a view of the Northern Kingdoms, Clergy, the Nobility, and
certain Deputies, sent from the Provinces and Cities, as in those before. In
Hungary, before that Realm received the Gospel, we read of none but Nobiles and
Plebeii, Bonfinius in hist. Hungar. Dec. l. 1. Id. ibid. Dec. 2. l. 2. Id.
Decad. 2. l. 3.
the Nobility and common people who did concur to the Election of their Kings;
but no sooner was the Faith of Christ admitted, and a Clergy instituted, but
instantly we find a third Estate, Episcopos and Sacerdotum Collegia, Bishops
and others of the Clergy superadded to them, for the Election of the Kings, and
the dispatch of other businesses which concerned the public, as it continues
to this day. In Danemark we shall find the same, if we mark it well. For though
Poutanus seem to count upon five Estates, making the Regal Family to be the
first, and subdividing the Commons into two, whereof the Yeomanry makes one,
and the Tradesman or Citizen the other: Pontan. in Doriae descript. Id. in
histor. Rerum Danic. l. 7.
yet in the body of the History we find only three, which are the Bishops, the
Nobility, and Civitatum delegati, the Deputies or Commissioners of Towns and
Cities: Take which of these Accounts you will, and reckon either upon Five or
on three Estates, yet still the Ecclesiastic State, or Ordo Ecclesiasticus, as
himself entituleth it, is declared for one; and has been so declared, as their
stories tell us, ever since the first admittance of the Faith amongst them: the
Bishops, together with the Peers and Deputies, making up the Comitia or
Conventus Ordinum. In Poland the chief sway and power of Government, next to
the King, is in the Council of Estate, Secundum Regem maxima and Augustissima
Senatus autoritas, Thuan. hist. sui temp. l. 56.
as Thuanus has it. And that consists of nine Bishops, whereof the
Archbishops of Guisna and Leopolis make always two; of fifteen Palatines, for
by that name they call the greater sort of the Nobility, and of sixty five
Chastellans, which are the better sort of the Polish Gentry; who with the nine
great Officers of the Kingdom, (or which the Clergy are as capable as any other
sort or degree of Subjects) do complete that Council. The Common people there
are in no Authority, (a procuratione Reipub. omnino summota) not having any
Vote or suffrage in the great Comitia, Thuan. hist. sui temp. l. 56.
or general Assemblies of the Kingdom, as in other places. For Sweden, it comes
near the Government and Forms of Danemark, and has the same Estates and
degrees of people as amongst the Danes, that is to say, Proceres and Nobiles,
the greater and the less Nobility, Episcopi and Ecclesiastici, the Bishops and
inferior Clergy, Civitates and universitates, the Cities and Towns corporate
(for so I think he means by universitates) as Thuanus mustereth them. Id. lib.
131.
And in this Realm the Bishops and Clergy enjoy the place and privileges of
the third Estate (notwithstanding the alteration of Religion) to this very day;
the Bishops in their own persons, and a certain number of the Clergy out of
every Sochen (a division like our Rural Deanries) in the name of the rest, have
a necessary Vote in all their Parliaments. And as for Scotland, their
Parliament consisted anciently of three Estates, as learned Cambden does inform
us, that is to say, the Lords spiritual, as Bishops, Abbots, Priors; the
temporal Lords, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons, Cambden in
descript. Scotiae.
and the Commissioners of the Cities and Buroughs; To which were added by King
James two Delegates or Commissioners out of every County to make it more
conform to the English Parliaments. And in some Acts the Prelates are by name
declared to be the third Estate, as in the Parliament, Anno 1597. Anno 1606,
etc. for which I do refer you to the Book at large.

And now at last we are come to England, Saxons, the Ecclesiastics have been
called to all public Councils, and their advice required in the weightiest
matters touching the safety of the Kingdom. No sooner had King Ethelbert
received the Gospel, but presently we read that as well the Clergy as the Laity
were called unto the Common Council: which the Saxons sometimes called Mysel
Synoth, the Great Assembly, and sometimes Wittenagemots, the Council or
Assembly of the Wise men of the Realm. Anno 605. Coke on Lit. l. 1.2 sect. H.
Spelman in Council. p. 126.
Ethelbertus Rex in fide roboratus Catholica, etc. Cantuariae convocavit
eommune concilium tam Cleri quam populi, etc: King Ethelbert, as my Author has
it, being confirmed in the Faith in the year 605. (which was but nine years
after his conversion) together with Bertha his Queen, their son Eadbald, the
most Reverend Archbishop Augustine, and all the rest of the Nobility, did
solemnize the Feast of Christ's Nativity in the City of Canterbury; and did
there cause to be assembled on the ninth of January the Common Council of his
Kingdom, as well the Clergy as the Lay Subject, by whose consent and
approbation, he caused the Monastery by him built, to be dedicated to the
honor of Almighty God, by the hand of Augustine. And though no question other
Examples of this kind may be found amongst the Saxon Heptarchs, yet being the
West Saxon Kingdom did in fine prevail, and united all the rest into one
Monarchy: we shall apply our selves unto that more punctually. Where we shall
find besides two Charters issued out by Athelston, Consilio Wlfelmi
Archiepiscopi mei and aliorum Episcoporum meorum, Ap. eund. p. 402, 403.
by the advice of Wlfelm his Archbishop and his other Bishops: that Ina in the
year 702. caused the Great Council of his Realm to be assembled, consisting ex
Episcopis, Principibus, proceribus, etc. of Bishops, Princes, Nobles, Earls,
and of all the Wise men, Elders, and people of the whole Kingdom, and there
enacted diverse Laws for the weal of his Realm. Apud. eund. p. 219.
Thus do we read that Egbert, who first united the seven Kingdoms of the Saxons
under the name of England, did cause to be convened at London his Bishops and
the Peers of the highest rank, pro consilio capiendo adversus Danicos Piratas,
Charta Whitlafii Merciorum Regis ap Ingulf.
to advise upon some course against the Danish Pirates who infested the Sea
coasts of England. Another Parliament or Council, call it which you will,
called at Kingsbury, Anno 855. in the time of Ethelwolph the Son of Egbert, pro
negotiis regni, to treat of the affairs of the Kingdom: Chart. Bertulfi. Merc.
Regis ap. Ingulf. Ingulfi Croyland hist.
the Acts whereof are ratified and subscribed by the Bishops, Abbots, and other
great men of the Realm. The same King Ethelwolph in a Parliament or Assembly of
his States at Winchester, Anno 855. Cum consilio Episcoporum and principum, by
the advice and counsel of the Bishops and Nobility, confirmed unto the Clergy
the tenth part of all men's goods; and ordered that the Tithe so confirmed unto
them should be free ab omnibus secularibus servitutibus, from all secular
services and impositions. In the Reign of Edred we find this, Anno 948. In
Festo igitur nativitatis B. Mariae cum universi Magnates regni per Regium
edictum summoniti, tam Archiepiscopi and Episcopi ac Abbates, quam caeteri
totius Regni, proceres and optimates Londoniis convenissent ad tractandum de
negotiis publicis totius Regni: Id ibid. p. 49. edit. Land.
viz. That in the Feast of the Nativity of the blessed Virgin, the great men of
the Realm, that is to say, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Nobles, Peers, were
summoned by the Kings Writ to appear at London, to handle and conclude about
the public affairs of the Kingdom. Mention of this Assembly is made again at
the foundation and endowment of the Abbie of Crowland; Id. p. 500.
and afterward a confirmation of the same by Edgar, Anno 966. praesentibus
Archiepiscopis, Espiscopi, Abbatibus and Optimatibus Regni, in the presence of
the Archbishops, Bishops, Id. page 501. 502.
Abbots and Peers of the Kingdom. Like convention of Estates we find to have
been called by Canutus after the death of Edmund Ironside, for the settling of
the Crown on his own head, of which thus the Author. Rog. Hoveden. Annal. pars
prior. p. 250.
Cujus post mortem Rex Canutus omnes Episcopos and Duces, necnon and principes
cunctosque optimates gentis Angliae Londoniae congregari jussit. Where still we
find the Bishops to be called to Parliament as well as the Dukes, Princes, and
the rest of the Nobility; and to be ranked and marshalled first (which clearly
shows that they were always reckoned for the first Estate) before the greatest
and most eminent of the secular Peers. And so we find it also in a Charter of
King Edward the Confessor, the last King of the Saxon race) by which he granted
certain Lands and privileges to the Church of Westminster, Anno 1066. Cum
consilio and decreto Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum, aliorumque
Optimatum, Ap. H. Spelman in Council. p. 630.
with the Council and decree of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and others of
his Nobles. And all this while the Bishops and other Prelates of the Church did
hold their Lands by no other Tenure, than in pura and perpetua eleemosyna, or
Frank almoigne, Cambden in Brit.
as our Lawyers call it: and therefore sat in Parliament in no other capacity
than as spiritual persons merely, who by their extraordinary knowledge in the
Word of God, and in such other parts of Learning, as the World then knew, were
thought best able to direct and advise their Princes in points of judgment. In
which capacity and no other the Priors of the Cathedral Churches of Canterbury,
Ely, Winchester, Coventry, Bath, Worcester, Norwich, and Durham, the Deans of
Exeter, York, Wells, Salisbury, and Lincoln, the Official of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Dean of the Arches, the Guardian of the Spiritualties of
any Bishopric when the Sea was vacant, Seldom Titles of hon. part. 2. c. 5.
and the Vicars general of such Bishops as were absent beyond the Seas, had
sometimes place and suffrage in the house of Lords in the Ages following.

But when the Norman Conqueror had possessed the State, Frankalmoigne as before
they did, or to be free from secular services and commands, as before they
were. Although they kept their Lands, yet they changed their Tenure, and by the
Conqueror, Mat. Paris in Will. 1. Auno 1.70.
were ordained to hold their Lands sub militari servitute, either in Capite, or
by Baronage, or some such military hold, and thereby were comp^^lable to aid
the Kings in all times of War, with Men, Arms, and Horses, as the Lay subjects
of the same Tenures were required to do. Which though it were conceived to be a
great Disfranchisement at the first, and an heavy burden to the Prelacy, yet it
conduced at last to their greater honor; in giving them a further Title to
their place in Parliament, than that which formerly they could pretend to.
Before, they claimed a place therein ratione Officii, only by reason of their
Offices or spiritual Dignities; but after this, by reason also of those ancient
Baronies which were annexed unto their Dignities; Stamfords Pleas, l. 3. c. 1.
en respect de lour possessions, l'antient Baronies annexes a lour dignities,
as our Lawyers have it. From this time forwards we must look upon them in the
House of Parliament, not as Bishops only, but as Peers and Barons of the Realm
also, and so themselves affirmed to the Temporal Lords in the Parliament holden
at Northampt^n under Henry 2. Non sedimus hic Episcopi, sed Barons; nos
Barons, vos Barons; Ap. Seldom. Titles of hon. p. 2. c. 5.
Pares hic sumus. We fit not here say they, as Bishops only, but as Barons; We
are Barons, and you are Barons; here we sit as Peers. Which last is also
verified in terminis, by the words of a Statute, or Act of Parliament, wherein
the Bishops are acknowledged to be Peers of the Land. Stat. 25 Edw. 3. c. 5.
Now that the Bishops are a fundamental and essential part of the Parliament of
England, I shall endeavor to make good by two manner of proofs; whereof the
one shall be de jure, and the other de facto. And first we shall begin with the
proofs de jure, and therein first with that which does occur in the Laws of
King Athelstan, amongst the which there is a Chapter (it is Cap. 11.) entitled
De officio Episcopi, and quid pertinet ad officium ejus; and therein it is thus
declared. Spelm. council. p. 402.
Episcopo jure pertinet omnem rectitudinem promovere, Dei scilicet and seculi
etc. and convenit ut per consilium and testimonium ejus omne legis scitum, and
Burgi mensura, and omne pondus sit secundum dictionem ejus institutum, that is
to say, it belongs of right unto the Bishop to promote Justifice, in matters
which concern both the Church and State, and unto him it appertains that by
his counsel and award, all Laws and Weights, and Measures be ordained
throughout the Kingdom. 2. Next we will have recourse to the old Record
entitled Modus tenendi Parliamentum. In which it is affirmed, ad Parliamentum
summoneri and venire debere Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, and
alios majores cleri, qui tenent per Comitatum aut Baroniam ratione hujusmodi
tenurae, Modus tenendi Parliament.
that all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other Prelates of the
Church, who hold their Lands either by an Earls fee or a Barons fee, were to be
summoned and to come to Parliament in regard of their Tenure. 3. Next look we
on the chartularies of King Henry the first, recognized in full Parliament at
Clarendon under Henry the 2d. where they are called avitas consuetudines, which
declare it thus, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and universae personae qui de Rege
tenent in Capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege sicut Baroniam, etc. and
sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse juditiis Curiae Regis cum Baronibus,
quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum vel ad mortem. Matthew. Paris in
Hen. 2.
The meaning is in brief, that Archbishops, Bishops, and all other
Ecclesiastical persons which hold in Capite of the King, are to have and hold
their Lands in Barony, and that they ought as Barons to be present in all
Judgments with the other Barons in the Court of Parliament, until the very
sentence of death or mutilation (which was very common in those times) was to
be pronounced. And then they commonly did use to withdraw themselves, not out
of any incapacity supposed to be in them by the Law of England, but out of a
restraint imposed upon them by the Canons of the Church of Rome. 4. In the
great Charter made by King John in the last of his Reign, we have the Form of
summoning a Parliament, and calling those together who have Votes therein, thus
expressed at large. Ad habendum commune consilium Regni de auxilio assidendo,
etc. and de scutagiis assidendis, faciemus summoneri Archiepiscopos, Episcopos,
Abbates, Comites, and Majores Barons Regni sigillatim per literas nostras: Et
praeterea summoneri faciemus in generali per Vice Comites and Ballivos nostros
omnes alios qui in Capite tenent ad certum diem, Id. in Joh.
sc. ad terminum 40. dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum, etc. In which we
have not only a most evident proof, that the Bishops are of right to be called
to Parliament, for granting Subsidies and Escuago, and treating of the great
Affairs which concern the Kingdom, but that they are to be summoned by
particular Letters, as well as the Earls and Barons or either of them; A Form
or copy of which summons issued in the time of the said King John, is extant on
Record, and put in print of late in the Titles of Honor. Pr. 2. c. 5.
And we have here (I note this only by the way) a brief intimation touching the
Form of summoning the Commons to attend in Parliament, and the time of 40 days
expressly specified to intervene between the summons and the beginning of the
Parliament: Which Commons being such as anciently did hold in Capite, and
either having a Knights fee or the degree of Knighthood, did first
promiscuously attend in these public meetings, and after were reduced to four
( quatuor discretos milites de Comitatu tuo, Id. ibid.
as the Writ ran unto the Sheriff) and at last to two, as they continue to this
day. 5. We have it thus in the Magna Charta of King Henry the 3d. the
birthright of the English Subject, according as it stands translated in the
book of Statutes. First we have granted to God, and by this our present charter
have confirmed for us and our heirs for ever, that the Church of England shall
be free, Magna Charta. ca. 1.
and shall enjoy all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable. But it was a
known Right and Liberty of the Church of England, that all the Bishops, and
many of the greater Clergy (and peradventure also the inferior Clergy whereof
more anon) had their Votes in Parliament; and therefore is to be preserved
inviolable by the Kings of England, their heirs and Successors for ever. Which
Charter as it was confirmed by a solemn Curse denounced on all the Infringers
of it by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew. Paris in Henr. 3.
and ratified in no fewer than 30 succeeding Parliaments: so was it enacted in
the reign of Edward the first, that it should be sent under the great Seal of
England, to all the Cathedral Churches of the Kingdom, to be read twice a year
before the people; 25 Edw. 1. c. 2. 28 Edw. 1. c. 1. 25 Edw. 1. c. 3.
that they should be read four times every year in a full County Court, and
finally that all judgments given against it should be void. 6. We have the
Protestation of John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury in the time of King
Edward the 3d. who being in disfavour with the King, and denied entrance into
the House of Peers, ^^llenged his place and suffrage there as the first Peer of
the Realm, and one that ought to have the first Voice in Parliament in right of
his See. But hear him speak his own words, which are these that follow. Amici
(for he spoke to those who took witness of it) Rex me ad hoc Parliamentum
scripto suo vocavit, and ego tanquam major Par Regni post Regem, and primam
vocem habere debens in Parliamento, jura Ecclesiae meae Cantuariensis vendico,
Antiqu. Britan. in Joh. Stratford.
and ideo ingressum in Parliamentum peto, which is full and plain. 7. And
lastly, there is the Protestation on Record of all the Bishops in the reign of
King Richard the 2d. at what time William Courtney was Archbishop of
Canterbury: who being to withdraw themselves from the House of Peers at the
pronouncing of the sentence of death on some guilty Lords, first made their
Procurators to supply their rooms, and then put up their Protestation to
preserve their Rights; the sum whereof, for as much as does concern this
business, in their own words thus. De jure and consuetudine regni Angliae ad
Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem qui pro tempore fuerit, necnon caeteros
Suffraganeos confratres and compatres, Abbates and Priores aliosque Prelatos
quoscunque per Baroniam de domino Rege tenentes, pertinet in Parliamentis Regis
quibuscunque, ut Pares regni praedicti personaliter interesse, ibidemque de
regni negotiis ac aliis tractari consuetis cum caeteris dicti regni Paribus and
aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibus consulere and tractare, ordinare,
statuere, and diffinire, ac caetera facere quae Parliamento ibidem imminent
facienda. In vita Gul. Courtney.
This put together makes enough abundantly for the proofs de jure, and makes
the Bishops right to have Vote in Parliament to be undeniable: Let us next see
whether this right of theirs be not confirmed and countenanced by continual
practice, and that they have not lost it by discontinuance; which is my second
kind of proofs, those I mean de facto. And first beginning with the reign of
the Norman Conqueror, we find a Parliament assembled in the fifth year of that
King, wherein are present Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, and Primates toties
Angliae, the Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and the rest of the Baronage of England.
Matthew. Paris in Williglmo 1.
In the 9th year of William Rufus an old Author tells us, de regni statu
acturus, Episcopos, Abbates, and quoscunque Regni proceres in unum praecepti
sui sanctione egit; that being to consult of the affairs of the Kingdom he
called together by his Writ the Bishops, Abbots and all the Peers of the Realm.
Eadmer. hist. Nov. l. 2.
During the reign of Henry the 2d. (for we will take but one Example out of
each Kings reign, though each Kings reign would yield us more) a Patliament was
called at London, wherein were many things dispatched as well so Ecclesiastical
as secular nature; the Bishops and Abbots being present with the other Lords.
Coacto apud Londoniam magno Episcoporum, and Procerum, Abbatumque Concilio,
multa ecclesiasticarum and secularium rerum ordinata negotia, decisa litigia,
says the Monk of Malmesbury. Malmesb. hist. reg. Angl. l. 5.
And of this Parliament it is, I take it, that Eadmer speaks, Hist. Novel. l.
4. p. 91. Proceed we to King Henry the 2d. (for King Stephens reign was so full
of Wars and Tumults that there is very little to be found of Parliaments) and
there we find the Bishops with the other Peers convened in Parliament for the
determination of the points in controversy between Alfonso K. of Castile and
Sancho K. of Navarre, referred by compremise to that King of England, and here
determined by K. Henry amongst other things, habito cum Episcopis Comitibus and
Baronibus cum deliberatione consilio, as in Roger Hoveden. Hoveder Annal. pars
posterin Hen. 2.
Next him comes Richard the first, his Son, during whose imprisonment by the D.
of Austria, his Brother John then Earl of Moriton endeavored by force and
cunning in Normandy to set the Crown on his own head: which caused Hubert the
Archbishop of Canterbury to call a Parliament ( Convocatis coram eo Episcois,
Comitibus and Baronibus regni) wherein the Bishops, Id in Joh.
Earls, and Barons did with one consent agree to seiz on his Estate, and
suppress his power, the better to preserve the Kingdom in wealth, peace and
safety. After succeeded John, and he calls a Parliament, wherein were certain
Laws made for the defense of his Kingdom, Communi assensu Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum and omnium fidelium suorum Angliae, by the common
Council and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and the rest of
his Leiges. (Remember what was said before touching the Writ of Summons in the
said Kings time) From this time till the last Parliament of King Charles, there
is no Kings reign, of which we have not many (though not all) the Acts of
Parliament still in print amongst us. Nor is there any Act of Parliament in the
printed Books, to the enactig of the which the Bishops approbation and consent
is not plainly spectified, either in the general Prome set before the Acts, or
in the body of the Act it self; as by the books themselves does at large
appear. And to this kind of proof may be further added the form and manner of
the Writ by which the Prelates in all times have been called to Parliament,
being the very same verbatim with that which is directed to the Temporal
Barons, save that the Spiritual Lords are commanded to attend to the service,
in fide and dilectione, the Temporal in fide and homagio, and of late times in
fide and legeantia. A form or copy of which summons as ancient as King John's
time, V. Titles of Hon. pt. 2. c. 5.
is still preserved upon Record, directed nominatim to the Archbishop of
Canterbury; and then a scriptum est similiter to the residue of the Bishops,
Abbots, Earls, and Barons. Then add the Privilege of Parliament for themselves
and their servants, during the time of the Sessions; the liberty to kill, and
take one or two of the Kings Deer as they pass by any of his Forests in coming
to the Parliament upon his commandment; Charta de Foresta cap. Cambden in
Britannia.
their enjoying of the same immunities, which are and have been heretofore
enjoyed by the Temporaal Barons: and tell me if the Bishops did not sit in
Parliament by as good a Title, and have not sat there longer by some hundreds
of years in their Predecessors, as or than any of the Temporal Lords do sit or
have sat there in their Progenitors; and therefore certainly Essential,
Fundamental parts of the Court of Parliament.

But against this it is objected, Clarendon, and the following practice. This
has been touched on before, and we told you then, that this restraint was laid
upon them, not by the Common Law of England, or an Act or Ordinance of the
House of Peers, by which they were disabled to attend that service. It was
their own voluntary Act, none compelled them to it, but only out of a
copnformity to some former Canons ( ad sanctorum Canonum instituta, Antiqu.
Brit. in Gul. Conrine^. Constitut. Othobon. fol. 45.
as their own words are) by which it was not lawful for the Clergymen to be
either Judges or Assessors in causa Sanguinis. And yet they took such care to
preserve their Interests, that they did not only give their Proxies for the
representing of their persons, but did put up their Protestation with a salvo
jure for the preserving of their rights for the time to come: jure Paritatis
and interessendi in dicto Parliamento quaod omnia and singula ibi exercenda in
omnibus semper salvo, Antiqu. Britan. in Gul. Courtney.
as the manner was. Examples of the which are as full and frequent, as their
withdrawing themselves on the said occasions. But then the main Objection is,
that as some Acts have passed in Parliament absentibus Praelatis, when the
Bishops did absent themselves of their own accord; so many things have been
transacted in the Parliament excluso Clero, when the Clergy have been excluded
or put out of the House by some Act or Ordinance. A precedent for this has
been found and published by such as envied that poor remnant of the Churches
honor: though possibly they will find themselves deceived in their greatest
hope, and that the evidence will not serve to evince the cause, The Author of
the Pamphlet entitled, The Prerogative and practice of Parliaments, first
laying down his Tenet, that many good Acts of Parliament may be made though the
Archbishops and Bishops should not consent unto them (which is a point no man
doubts of, Printed at London 16.8. p. 37.
consideriong how easily their Negative may be overruled by the far greater
number in the House of Peers) adds, that at a Parliament holden at St.
Edmundsbury 1196. in th reign of Edw. 1. a Statute was made by the King, the
Barons, and the Commons, Excluso Clero, and for the proof hereof refers us unto
Bishop Jewel. Now Bishop Jewel says indeed, that in a Parliament solemnly
holden at St. Edmundsbury by King Edward 1. An 1296. the Archbishops and
Bishops were quite shut forth, and yet the Parliament held on, and good, and
wholesome Laws were there enacted, the departing or absence of the Lords
Spiritual notwithstanding. In the Records whereof it is written thus, Defense
of the Apolog. pt. 5. c. 2.. 1.
Habito Rex cum Baronibus suis Parliamento, and Clergo excluso statutum est,
etc. the King keeping the Parliament with his Barons, the Clergy (that is to
say, the Archbishops, and Bishops) being shut forth, it was enacted, etc.
Wherein who does not see, if he has any eyes, that by this reason (if the
proof be good) many good Acts of Parliament may be made, though the Commons
either out of absence or opposition should not consent unto them of whose
consent unto that Statute (whatsoever it was) there is as little to be found in
that Record, as the concurrence of the Bishops. But for Answer unto so much of
this Record so often spoken of and applauded as concerns the Bishops, we say,
that this (if truly senced as I think it be not) was the particular Act of an
angry and offended King against his Clergy, not to be drawn into Example as a
proof or Argument against a most clear, known, and undoubted right. The case
stood thus, A Constitution had been made by Boniface the 8th. Ne aliqua
collecta ex Ecclesiasticis proventibus Regi aut cuivis alii Principi
concedatur, Matthew. Westminster. in Edw. 1.
that Clergymen should not pay any Tax or Tallage unto Kings or Princes our of
their Spiritual preferments, without the leave of the Pope: under pretense
whereof the Clergy at this Parliament at St. Edmundsbury, refused to be
contributory to the Kings occasions, when the Lay-Members of the House had been
forwards in it. The King being herewith much offended, gives them a further day
to consider of it, adjourning the Parliament to London, there to begin on the
morrow after St. Hilaries day; and in the mean time commanded all their Barns
to be fast sealed up. The day being come, and the Clergy still persisting in
their former obstinacy, excluso e Parlamento Clero Concilium Rex cum solis
Baronibus etc populo habuit, totumq, Antiq. Brit. in R. Winchelsey.
statim Clerum protectione sua privavit; the King (says the Historian)
excluding the Clergy out of the Parliament, advised with his Barons and his
people only, what was best to be done, by whose advice he put the Clergy out of
his protection, and thereby forced them to conform to his will and pleasure.
This is the summa totalis of the business, and comes unto no more but this,
that a particular course was advised in Parliament on a particular displeasure
taken by the King against the body of his Clergy then convened together, for
their particular refusal to contribute to his wants and Wars, the better to
reduce them to their natural duty. Which makes not any thing at all against the
right of Bishops in the House of Peers, or for excluding them that House, or
for the validity of such Acts as are made in Parliament during the time of such
exclusion: especially considering that the King shortly after called his States
together, Wlsingh. in Edw. 1. Anno 1297.
and did excuse himself for many extravagant Acts whch he had committed against
the liberties of the Subject (whereof this was one) laying the blame thereof on
his great occasions, and the necessities which the Wars which he had abroad,
did impose upon him: And so much as in answer unto that Record, supposing that
the words thereof be rightly senced, as I think they are not, and that by
Clerus there we are to understand Archbishops and Bishops, as I think we be
not, there being no Record (I dare boldly say it) either of History of Law, in
which the word Clerus serve to signify the Archbishops, and Bishops,
exclusive of the other Clergy; or any writing whatsoever, wherein it does not
either signify the whole Clergy generally, or there inferior Clergy only
exclusive of the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates. Therefore in answer
unto that so much applauded Cavil of Excluso Clero, from what Record soever it
either has been hitherto or shall hereafter be produced; I shall propose it to
the consideration of the sober Reader, whether by Clerus in that place, or in
any other of that kind and time, we must not understand the inferior Clergy,
as they stand distinguished in the Laws from my Lords the Bishops. For
howsoever it be true, that Clerus in the Ecclesiastical notion of the word does
signify the whole Clergy generally, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons: yet in the legal notion of it, it stands distinguished from the
Prelates, and signifies only the inferior Clergy. Thus do we find the
Ecclesiastics of this Realm divided into Prelates, men of Religion, and other
Clerks, 3. Edw. 1. c. 1. the Seculars either into Prelates and Clerks, 9 Edw.
2. c. 3. 1 Rich. 2. c. 3. or Prelates and Clerks Beneficed, 18 Edw. 3. c. 2. or
generally into the Prelates and the Clergy, 9 Edw. 2. c. 15. 14 Edw. 3. c. 1.
and 3. 18 Edw. 3. 2.7. and 25 Edw. 3.2.4. and 8 Hen. 6. c. 1. and in all acts
and grants of Subsidies, made by the Clergy to the Kings or Queens of England
since the 32 of Henry 8. (when the Clergy Subsidies first began to be confirmed
by Act of Parliament.) So also in the Latin ideom, Regist. Warham. Regist.
Cranmer. Statut. ^. Eliz c. 17. and ever since. Stat. 1. Phil. and Mar. c. 8.
which comes nearest home, Nos Praelati and Clerus, in the submission of the
Clergy to King Henry VIII. and in the sentence of divorce against Anne of
Cleve, and in the instrument of the grant of the grant of the Clergy Subsidies
presented to the Kings of England ever since the 27th. of Queen Elizabeth, and
in the form of the Certificates (per Praelatos and Clerum) returned by every
Bishop to the Lord High Treasurer, and finally, Nos Episcopi and Clerus
Cantuariensis Provinciae in hac Synodo more nostro solito dum Regni
Parliamentum celebratur, congregati, in the Petition to K. K. Philip and Mary,
about the confirmation of the Abbey Lands to the Patentees. So that though many
Statutes have been made in these later times, excluso Clero, the Clergy (that
is to say the inferior Clergy) being quite shut out, and utterly excluded from
those public Councils; yet this proves nothing to the point, that any Act of
Parliament has been they either were shut out by force, or excluded by
cunning, As for Kilbancies book which that Author speaks of, Proing. and pract.
of Parl. p. 38.
in which the Justices are made to say 7 H. 8. that our Sovereign Lord the King
may well hold his Parliament by him and his Temporal Lords, and by the Commons
also, without the Spiritual Lords, for that the Spiritual Lords have not any
place in the Parliament Chamber, by reason of their Spiritualties, but by
reason of their Temporal possessions: Besides that it is only the opinion of a
private man, of no authority or credit in the Commonwealth, and contrary to
the practice in the Saxon times, in which the Bishops sat in Parliament as
Spiritual persons, not as Barons; the reason for ought I can see, will serve as
well to pretermit all or any of the Temporal Lords, as it can serve to
pretermit or exclude the Bishops, the Temporal Lords being called to Parliament
on no other ground, than for the Temporal possessions which they hold by Barony.

If it be said that my second answer to the argument of Excluso Clero supposes
that the inferior Clergy had some place in Parliament, Concilium magnum, or
Concilium commune, or by what other name soever the old Writers called it)
summoned by King Ethelbert, Council. Hen. Spei^^.
Anno 605. which my Author calls Commune concilium tam Cleri quam Populi,
where Clerus comprehends the body of the Clergy generally, as well the
Presbyters as the Bishops; as the word populus does the lay-subject generally,
as well Lords as Commons; or else the Lords and Commons, one of the two must
needs be left out. And in this sense we are to understand these words in the
latter times, Matthew. Paris in Hen. 1.
as where we read that Clerus Angliae and populus Vniversus were summoned to
appear at Westminister, at the Coronation of King Henry the first, where diverse
Laws were made and declared, subscribed by the Archbishops, Bishops, and
others of the principal persons that were there assembled: Rong. Hov. in Hen. 2.
that Clero and populo convocato, the Clergy and People of the Realm were
called to Clarendon, Anno 1163. by King Henry II. for the declaring and
conforming of the Subjects liberties: that in the year 1185. toward the latter
end of the said Kings Reign, Convocatus est Clerus and populus cum tota
Nobilitate ad fontem Clericorum, Matthew. Paris in Hen. 2.
the Clergy, Commons, and Nobility were called unto the Parliament held at
Clerkenwell: and finally that a Parliament was called at London, in which the
Archbishop of Canterbury was present, cum toto Clero and tota secta Laicali,
Quadrilog. ap. Seldom Tit. of Hon. pt. 2. c. 5.
in the time of King John. Hitherto then the Clergy of both ranks and orders,
as well as Populus or tota secta Laioalis, the Subjects of the Laity, or the
Lords and Commons, had their place in Parliament. And in possession of this
right the Clergy stood when the Magna Charta was set out by King Henry III.
wherein the Freedoms, Rights, and Privileges of the Church of England (of
which this evidently was one) was confirmed unto her: of the irrefragable and
inviolable authority whereof we have spoken before. Magna Charta, cap. 1.
The Cavil of Excluso Clero which has been used against the Voting of the
Bishops in the House of Peers, comes in next for proof, that the inferior
Clergy had their place or Vote with the House of Commons; (if in those times
the Lords and Commons made two Houses, which I am not sure of) the Clergy could
not be excluded in an angry fit, or out of a particular design to deprive them
of the benefit of the Kings protection; if they had not formerly a place
amongst them: and if we will not understand by Clerus, the inferior Clergy,
which much about that time (as before we showed) began to be the legal English
of the word; we must needs understand the whole Clergy generally, the Clergy of
both ranks and orders. But our main proofs are yet to come, which are these
that follow. First, it is evident that anciently the Clergy of each several
Diocese were chargeable by Law for the expenses of their Proctors in attending
the service of the Parliament; according as the Counties were by Common law
(since confirmed by Statute 23 H. 6. c. 11.) to bear the charges of their
Knights, the buroughs and Cities of their Representees; which questionless the
Laws had not taken care for, but that the Clergy had their place in Parliament
as the Commons had. Rotul. Patent. 26 Ed. 3. pt. 1. 1. M. 22.
And this appears by a Record of 26th. of King Edward III. in which the Abbot
of Leicester being then, but never formerly commanded to attend in Parliament
amongst others of the Regular Prelates; petitioned to be discharged from that
attendance, in regard he held in Frank-Almoigne only, by no other tenure. Which
he obtained upon this condition, ut semper in Procuratores ad hujusmodi
Parliamenta mittendos consentiat, and, ut moris est, eorundem expensis
contribuat, that is to say, that he and his Successors did give their Voices in
the choice of such Procurators, as the Clergy were to send to Parliament, and
did contribute toward their charges as the custom was. Next in the Modus
tenendi Parliamentum, which before we spoke of, there is a modus convocandi
Clerum Angliae ad Parl. Regis, Modus tenendi Parl. Ms. V. Titles of hon. pt. 2.
a form of to the Court of Parliament; said to be used in the time of Edward
the Son of Ethelred, presented to the Conqueror, and by him observed; which
shows the Clergy in those times had their place in Parliament. Which being but
a general inference shall be delivered more particularly from the Modus it
self, which informs us thus, Rex est caput, principium and finis Parliamenti,
etc. The King is the Head, Modus tenendi Parl. Ms. c. 12.
the beginning and end of the Parliament, and so he has not any equal in the
first degree; the second is of Archbishop, Bishops, and Priors, and Abbots
holding by Barony; the third is of Procurators of the Clergy; the fourth of
Earls, Barons, and other Nobles; the fifth is of Knights of the Shire; the
sixth of Citizens and Burgesses: and so the whole Parliament is made up of
these six degrees. But the said Modus tells us more, and goes more
particularly to work than so. For in the ninth Chapter, speaking of the course
which was observed in canvassing hard and difficult matters, it tells us that
they used to choose 25 out of all degrees, (like a grand Committee) to whose
consideration they referred the point; that is to say, two Bishops and three
Proctors for the Cleergy, two Earls, three Barons, fire Knights, five Citizens,
and as many Burgesses. And in the 12th that on the fourth day of the
Parliament, the Lord High Steward, the Lord Constable, and the Lord Marshal
were to call the House, every degree or rank of men in its several Order; and
that if any of the Proctors of the Clergy did not make appearance, the Bishop
of the Diocese was to be fined 100 l. and in the 23d. Chapter it is said
expressly, that as the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in things which do
concern the Commons, have more Authority than all the Lords; so the Proctors
for the Clergy, in things which do concern the Clergy, have more Authority than
all the Bishops. Preface to the 9th. part of Reports.
Which Modus, if it be as ancient as the Norman Conqueror, as both Sir Edward
Coke conceives, and the title signifies, it shows the Clergies claim to a
place in Parliament to be more ancient than the Commons can pretend unto: but
if no older than the Reign of King Edward III. as confidently is affirmed in
the Titles of Honor, Titles of hon. pt. 2. c. 5.
it shows that in the usage of those latter times the Procurators of the
Clergy had a right and place there as well as Citizens and Burgesses, or the
Knights of the Shires. And this is further proved by the Writs of Summons
directed to the Archbishops and Bishops for their own coming to the
Parliament; in the end whereof there is a clause for warning the Dean and
Chapter of their Cathedrals, and the Archdeacons with the whole Clergy to be
present at it, that is to say the Deans and Archdeacons personally, the
Chapter and Clergy in their Proctours, then and there to consent to such Acts
and Ordinances as shall be made by the Common Council of the Kingdom. The whole
clause word for word is this, Praemunientes Priorem and Capitulum (or decanum
and Capitulum, Extant ibid. pt. 2. c. 5.
as the case might vary) Ecclesiae vestrae N. ac Archidiacanos totumque Clerum
vestrae Dioceseos, quod iidem Decanus and Archidiaconi in propriis personis
suis, ac dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque Clerus per duos Procuratores
idoneos plenam and sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo and Clero
habentes, praedicto die and loco personaliter intersint, ad consentiendum iis
quae tunc ibidem de communi consilio ipsius Regni nostri divina favente
clementia contigerit ordinari. Which clause being in the Writs of King Edward
I. and for the most part of the Reign of his next Successors, till the middle
of King Richard the second, at which time it began to be fixed and formal; has
still continued in those Writs (without any difference almost between the
Syllables) to this very day. Id. ibid.
Now that this clause was more than Verbal, and that the Proctors of the Clergy
did attend in Parliament, is evident by the Acts and Statutes of King Richard
the second: the passages whereof I shall cite at large, the better to conclude
what I have in hand. The Duke of Gloucester and the Earl of Arundel having
gotten the mastery of the King, obtained a Commission directed to themselves
and others of their nomination, Statut. 21 R. 2. c. 2.
to have the rule of the King and his Realm: and having their Commission
confirmed by Parliament, in the 11. year of his reign, did execute diverse of
his Friends and Ministers, and seized on their Estates as forfeited. But having
gotten the better of his headstrong and rebellious Lords, in the one and
twentieth of his reign he calls a Parliament, in the Acts whereof it is
declared, That on the Petition of the Commons, of the assent of all the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Proctors of the Clergy, Ibid. c. 2.
he repealed the said Statute and Commission, and with the assent of the said
Lords and Commons did ordain and establish that no such Commission nor the like
be henceforth purchased, pursued or made. This done, the Heirs of such as had
been condemned by virtue of the said Commision, demanded restitution of their
Lands and Honors. And thereupon the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Procurators of the Clergy ( the Commons having prayed to the King before as the
Appellants prayed) severally examined, did assent expressly that the said
Parliament and all the Statutes, Ibid. c. 12.
etc. and restitution made as before is said. And also the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, the Procurators of the Clergy; and the said Commons were severally
examined of the Questions proposed at Nottingham, and of the Answer which the
Judges made unto the same: which being read as well before the King and the
Lords, as before the Commons, it was demanded of all the States of the
Parliament, what they thought of the Answers, and they said that they were
lawfully and duly made, etc. And then it follows, whereupon the King, by the
assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Procurators of the Clergy
and the said Commons, and by the advice of the Justices and Sergeants aforesaid
(who had been asked their Opinion in point of Law) ordained and established
that the said Parliament should be annulled and held for none. Add unto this
that passage in the 9 of Edward 2. where it is said, that many Articles
containing diverse grievances committed against the Church of England, the
Prelates and Clergy, were propounded by the Prelates and Clerks of our Realm;
in Parliament, and great instance made that convenient remedy might be
appointed therein: Proem ad articalos Cleri.
that of the complaints made to the King in Parliament by the Prelates and
Clergy of this Realm, 50 Ed. 3.5. and 8 Rich. 2. c. 13. and that of the
Petition delivered to the King in the Parliament by the Clergy of England,
Seldom hist. of Tithes. c. 8.33.
4 Hen. 4. c. 2. And finally that memorable passage in the Parliament, 51 Edw.
3. which in brief was this. The Commons finding themselves agrieved as well
with certain Constitutions made by the Clergy in their Synods, as with some
Laws or Ordinances which were lately passed, more to the advantage of the
Clergy than the common people, put in a Bill to this effect, viz. That no Act
nor Ordinance should from thenceforth be made or granted on the petition of the
said Clergy, without the consent of the Commons; and that the said Commons
should not be bound in times to come by any constitutions made by the Clergy of
this Realm, for their own advantage, to which the Commons of this Realm had not
given consent. The reason of the which is this, and it is worth the marking) car
eux ne veullent estre obligez a null de vos estatuz ne Ordinances faitz sanz
leur assent, because the said Clergy did not think themselves bound, (as indeed
they were not in those times) by any Statute, Act, or Ordinance, made without
their Assent in the Court of Parliament. Which clearly shows that in those
times the Clergy had their place in Parliament as the Commons had. Put all
which has been said together, and tell me if it be not clear and evident that
the inferior Clergy had their place in Parliament; whether the clause touching
the calling of them thither, were not more than verbal in the Bishops Writs,
and is true that in the Writ of summons directed to their several and
respective Bishops they were called only ad consentiendum, to manifest their
consent to those Acts and Ordinances, which by the Common Council of the Realm
were to be ordained. But then it is as true withal, that sometimes their advice
was asked in the weighty matters, as in the 21 of King Richard the 2. and
sometimes they petitioned and remonstrated for redress of grievances, as in the
instances and cases which were last produced. And it is as true that if they had
been present only ad consentiendum, to testify their assent to those Acts
which by the Common Council of the Realm were proposed unto them: their
presence was as necessary, and their Voice as requisite to all intents and
purposes (for ought I can see) as the Voice and presence of the Commons in the
times we speak of. For in the Writs of summons issued to the several Sheriffs
for the electing of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to attend the Parliament,
it is said expressly, first that the King resolves upon weighty motives
touching the weal and safety both of Church and State to hold his Parliament,
Forma Brevis pro summonit. Parliamenti.
and ibidem cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus dicti regni nostri
colloquium habere and tractare, then and there to advise and treat with the
Prelates, Peers and Nobles of this Realm: Which words are also expressly used in
the Writs of summons directed to the Bishops, Titles of Hon. part 2. cap. 5.
and to every of them; who also are required in a further clause consilium suum
impendere, to give the King their best advice in his great affairs. So that the
Prelates and Nobility convened in Parliament made the Kings great Council, and
were called thither to that end. What then belonged unto the Commons. 1. No
more than did belong to the Clergy also, that is to say, the giving of their
consent to such Laws and Statutes as should there be made. Which
notwithstanding in Tract of time gave them such a sway, and stroke in the
course of Parliaments, that no Law could be made, nor no Tax imposed without
their liking and allowance. And this is that which is expressed in the last
clause of the said Writ, by which the Knights and Burgesses are to come
prepared ad faciendum and consentiendum iis quae tunc ibidem de consilio dicti
Regni nostri super negotiis antedictis contigerint ordinari. Forma Brevis, etc.
Which is the very same which you had before in the Writ directed to the
Bishops, for summoning the Clergy of their several Diocesses, and that here is
a faciendum which the other had not. A word which if you mark it well, has no
operation in the construction of the Text, except it be in paying Subsidies, or
doing such things as are appointed to be done by that great Council of the
Kingdom; Which clause, though it be cunningly left out (that I may say no
worse) in the recital of the Writ by the Author of the Book entitled, The
Prerogative and practice of Parliaments: is most ingenuously acknowledged in
the Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled at Oxon, Declaration of the
Treaty, p. 15.
where it is said, That the Writs of summons, the foundation of all power in
Parliament, are directed to the Lords in express terms to treat and advise with
the King and the rest of the Peers of the Kingdom of England; and to the
Commons to do and consent to those things, which by that Common Council of
England should be ordained. And thus it stands, as with the common people
generally in most states of Christendom, so with the Commons anciently in most
states of Greece; of which Plutarch tells, us, Plutarch in L^curgo.
That when the people were assembled in Council, it was not lawful for any of
them to put forth matters to the Council to be determined, neither might any of
them deliver his Opinion what he thought of any thing, but the people had only
authority (...), to give their assent unto such things as either the Senators
or their Kings do propound unto them.

But against this it is objected, first, ad consentiendum (though no more than
so) we should have found more frequent mention of their consent unto the Acts
and Statutes in our printed Books. For answer unto which it may first be said,
that to suppose the Clergy had no Voice in Parliament, because it is not to be
found when they lost that privilege, is such a kind of Argument (if it be an
argument) as is made by Bellarmine, Bellarm. de Eccl. lib 4. c. 5.
to prove that many of the controverted Tenets of the Church of Rome, are
neither erroneous nor new, because we cannot say expressly, quo tempore, quo
autore, when and by whose promoting they first crept in. And though we cannot
say expressly when the inferior Clergy lost their place in Parliament, in
regard it might be lost by discontinuance or non-usage; or that the clause was
pretermitted for some space of time the better to disuse them from it, or that
they might neglect the service in regard of their attendance in the
Convocation, which gave them power and reputation both with the common people:
yet I have reason to believe, that this pretermission and disuse did chiefly
happen under the Government of the Kings of the House of Lancaster, who being
the true Heirs and Successors of John of Gaunt, cast many a longing eye on the
Church revenues, and hardly were persuaded to abstain from that height of
sacriledg, which Henry the 8. did after come to. And this I am induced to
believe the rather, in regard that in the confirmation of the Churches rights
so solemnly confirmed and ratified in all former Parliaments; there was a clog
put to or added in these times, which shaked the Fabric: the confirmation
being first of such rights and liberties as were not repealed, 3 Hen. 5. cap.
1. and 4 Hen. 5. cap. 1. and afterward of such as by the Common Law were not
repealable, 2 Hen. 6. cap. 1. which might go very far indeed. And secondly I
find that in the 8. of Henry the 6. an Act of Parliament was passed, that all
the Clergy called to Convocation by the Kings Writ, and their servants and
Family shall for ever hereafter fully use and enjoy such liberty and defense in
coming, tarrying and returning, as the great men and Commonalty of the Realm of
England called to the Kings Parliament do enjoy, 8 Hen. 6. cap. 1.
etc. Which being an unnecessary care or caution when the Clergy had their
Voice in Parliament, and very necessary to be taken formerly, if they had never
had such Voice: makes me conceive, that it was much about this time that they
lost that privilege. But this I leave as a conjecture, and no more than so. For
answer to the second Argument, that if they had been called of old ad
consentiendum, we should have found more frequent mention of their consent unto
the Acts and Statutes of the former times; besides that it is a Negative proof,
and so non concludent, it strikes as much against the presence and consent of
the Knights and Burgesses in the elder Parliaments, as it can do against the
Clergy. For in the elder Parliaments under King Henry 3. and K. Edward the
first there is no mention of the Commons made at all, either as preent or
consenting; nor much almost in all the Parliaments till King Henry 7. but that
they did petition for redress of grievance, and that upon their special
instance and request several Laws were made for the behoof and benefit of the
Commonwealth: In the Proem to the several Sessions.
which part the Clergy also acted in some former Parliaments, as before was
showed. So that this negative Argument must conclude against both or neither.
But secondly I answer, that in these elder times in which the Proctors for the
Clergy had their place in Parliament, they are included generally in the name
of the Commons. And this I say on the Authority of the old modus tenendi
Parliamentum, in which the Commons are divided in the Spiritualty and the
Temporalty; and where it is expressly said, that the Proctors for the Clergy,
the Knights, the Citizens and the Burgesses did represent the whole commonalty
of the Realm of England. Cap. ult.
And this holds good in Law (for ought I find unto the contrary) to this very
day. Certain I am that Crompton in his book of the Jurisdiction of Courts,
where he speaks of Parliaments, does tell us that the Knights, Citizens,
Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque Ports, ove le Clergy qu' eux assemble au
Pawles, Crompton Jurisd. des Courts, Car.
represent le corpse de tout le Comminalty Dengliterre, together with the Clergy
which assembled at S. Paul's, do represent the body of the whole Commonalty of
England. So then, the Clergy were not only called but were present also,
according to that clause in the Writ of Summons (which before I spoke of)
directed to their several and respective Bishops, as the Kings spiritual
Sheriffs, if I may so say) enabled by the Laws to that end and purpose. Which
some endeavoring to avoid, have at last found out that the clause before
recited out of the Writ to the Bishops, is not a calling of the Clergy to
attend in Parliament, but to command them to attend in the Convocation: which I
have heard much pressed by those who pretend unto some knowledge in the course
of things. Which though it be a gross mistake, and inconsistent with the words
and circumstances of the Writ it self, which relates merely to the Parliament,
and business of a Parliamentarie nature: yet for the clearing of the point, and
undeceiving such as have been deceived, they may please to know, thta besides
this Writ by which the Clergy are commanded to appear in Parliament, there is
another Writ and another Form of calling them unto the service of the
Convocation, which is briefly this. The King sends out his Writ or Mandat to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, requiring him super quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis, Regist. Warham.
etc. for diverse great and weighty reasons cocnerning the Kings Honor, the
Churches safety, and the public peace of his Dominions, to summon all the
Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and the whole Clergy of his Province
to meet in Convocation at a day and place appointed. On the reception of which
Writ thge Archbishop sends out his Monitory to the Bishop of London (who by
his place in Dean of the Episcopal College, Antiqu. Britan. in initio.
and to disperse the Mandates of the Metropolitan) requiring him to appear
himself in person, and to send out his Warrant unto every Bishop of the
Province, to appear there also, and to take order that the Deans of the
Cathedrals, and Arch-decaons personally, the Chapter of one Procurator, the
Clergy of the Diocese by two, (whom we usually call Clerks of the Convocation)
do attend that service. Which coming to the hands of each several Bishop the do
accordingly give intimation to their Deans and Chapters, Regist. Warham.
and to their Archdeacons and the Clergy; and they accordingly prepare
themselves to obey the Monitory, and to return certificate of their doings in
it. The like proceeding is observed also for the Province of York. So that the
calling of the Clergy to the Convocation being by a different Writ and another
Form, which has no reference to nor dependence on the Writs directed by the
King to each several Bishop for their attendance in the Parliament, it must
needs be (as I conceive it) that by that clause remaining in the Writs
aforesaid, the Clergy have good right and Title to a Voice in Parliament,
though they have lost their jus in re, the benefit, the use and possession of
it.

But I speak this as once the Apostle said in another case, not by commandment
but by permission. For I persaude my self the Clergy do not aim so high at the
recovery of a right so long antiquated and disused, but would be well enough
content with the restitution of the Bishops to their Vote in Parliament, of
which they stood possessed by so strong a Title as the very constitution of the
Parliament, and the fundamental Laws of the English Government could confer
upon them. For though the Bishops sat in Parliament in their own personal
capacities, and not as the representative body of the Clergy; yet the poor
Clergy, found it some respect unto them to be thus honored in their Heads: and
were the more obliged to obey such Acts as were established in that Court,
wherein these heads ha dopportunity of interceding, if perhaps any thing were
propounded which might be grievous to the Clergy, and many times a power of
hindering and divertring if not by Voice and Numbers, yet by strength of
reasons. They were not altogether Slaves and Bondmen, whilst the Church held
that remnant of her ancient Rights; for whilst the Heads retained that Honor,
the body could not choose but rejoice in it and be cherished by it. But since
they have been stripped of that (by what unworthy Arts the World knows too
well) they are become of such condition, that the most despicable Tradesman in
a Corporate Town is more considerable in the eye of the State, and has a
greater interesse in the affairs thereof, than the greatest Prelate, and to say
truth, than all the Clergy of the Realm. For being there are three Ingredients
which make up a Freeman (as Sir Francis Bacon well observed in his speech
concerning the Post-nati) that is to say, 1. jus Civitatis, which did enable a
man to buy and sell, and to take Inheritances; 2. jus suffragii, a Voice in the
passing of Laws and Election of Officers; and 3. jus honoris, a capability of
such Offices and Honors as the State could give him: the Clergy by this means
are limited to the first right only, and utterly excluded from the other two,
and thereby put into a worse condition, than the meanest Freeman in the
Kingdom. Insomuch that whereas every needy Artizan, if he be free of any
Corporate Town or City, every Cottager that dwells in an ancient Borough,
and every Clown which can lay claim to forty shillings per Annum of Freehold,
either for life or of Inheritance, has a Voice in Parliament, either in person
or by Proxy; and is not bound by any Law but what himself consents to in his
Representatives: the Clergy only of this Realm (as the case now stands) being
out of the greatest States of this Kingdom, as is acknowledged expressly in
terminis by Act of Parliament, 8 Eliz. c. 1.
are neither capable of place there in their personal capacities, nor suffered
to be there in their Procurators, as of old they were; nor have so much as any
Voice in choosing of the Knights and Burgesses which represent the body of the
people generally. I know it has been said in reply to this, that the Clergy
may give Voices at the Election of the Knights and Burgesses, and that it is
their own neglect if they do it not. But I know too, that this is only yielded
unto such of the Clergy, as are possessed of Lands and Houses in those several
places where such Elections are to be made, and not then neither in most
places, except it be to make a party for particular ends, especially where some
good man or the main cause it self it concerned therein: which as it totally
excludes the greatest part of the Clergy from having any Voice at all in these
Elections, (the greatest part of the Clergy (the more the pity) having neither
Lands nor Houses to such a value in fee simple) so it gives no more power unto
those that have, than what of necessity must serve (I am sure occasionally it
may) to their own undoing. For to say truth, those that give out that the
Clergy may give Voice at such Elections, use it but as a shift for the present
turn: intending nothing less indeed (as has often been seen) than that the
Clergy should be capable of so great a trust. The reason is, because there is
not any Freeman of a City or a Corporate Town who has a Voice in the Election
of a Citizen to serve in Parliament, nor almost any Cottager or Freeholder who
has a Voice in the Election either of a Knight or Burgess, but is directly
eligible to the place himself. Of Citizens and Burgesses Elected from the very
meanest of the people, we have many instances, and shall have more according as
they find their strength, and have received a taste of the sweets of
Government. And for the choosing of the Knights of the several Shires, it is
determined by the Statutes that as 40 s. Land of Freehold per Annum, 8 Hen. 6.
c. 7.
is enough to qualify a Clown for giving a Voice at the Election; so the same
Clown if he have 20 l. Land per Annum is capable of being chosen for a Knight
of the Shire, as appears plainly and expressly by the Statute Law. For though
the Writ directed to the several and respective Sheriffs prescribe a choice of
dues milites gladio cinctos, yet we know well that by the Statute of King Henry
6. which is explanatory in this case of the Common Law, such notable Esquires
or Gentlemen, 23 Hen. 6.15.
born of the same Counties, as shall be able to the Knights, are made as
capable as a dubbed Knight to attend that service; and he that has no more
than 20 l. per Annum either in Capite or Socage is not only able by the Law to
be made a Knight, 1 Ed. 2. c. 1.
but was compelled thereunto even by the Statute Law it self, until the Law was
lately altered in that point. 17 Carol. c. 1.
And on the other side it is clera enough (for there have been of late some
experiments of it) that though a Clergyman be born an Esquire or Gentleman
(for they are not all born ex fece Plebis, as the late Lord Brook forgetting
his own poor Extraction has been pleased to say) and though he be possessed of
a fair Estate descended to him from his Ancestors, L. Brook against Episcopacy.
or otherwise possessed of some Lands or Houses in Town, Borough, or City,
whereby he stands as eligible in the eye of the Law, as any Lady-Gentleman of
them all; yet either he is held incapable, and so pretermitted; or if returned,
rejected at the House it self to his soul reproach. It is a Fundamental
constitution of the Realm of England, that every Freeman has a Voice in the
Legislative power of Parliament: And so acknowledged in a Writ of Summons of K.
Edw. 1.
and it is a Rule in Politics, quod omnes tangit ab omnibus tractari debet.
Which being now denied to the English Clergy, reduces them to that condition
which St. Paul complains of; and makes them no otherwise accounted of by the
common people, than as, (...), the filth and offscouring of the world to this
very day.

This tempts me to a brief dicussion of a Question exceeding weighty in it
self, English Clergy: that is to say, whether that any two of the three Estates
conspiring or agreeing together can conclude on any thing unto the prejudice of
the third. Bodinus that renowned Statesman does resolve it Negatively; and
states it thus, nihil a duobus ordinibus discerni posse, quo uni ex tribus
incommodum inferatur, Bodin de Rep. l. 3. c. 7.
si res ad singulos ordines seorsum pertinet, that nothing can be done by two
of the Estates to the disprofit of the third, in case the point proposed be
such as concerns them severally. The point was brought into debate upon this
occasion. Henry the 3d. of France had summoned an Assembly of the three Estates
or Conventus Ondinum to be held at Bloys, Anno 1577. (the Form and Order of the
which we have at large by Thuanus Lib. 63.) But finding that he could not bring
his ends about so easily with that numerous body, as if they were contracted to
a narrower compass, he caused it to be moved unto them that they should make
choice of 36, twelve of each Estate, Tonanus in hist temp. l. 63.
quox Rex cum de postulatis decerneret in consilium adhibere dignaretur, whom
the King would deign call to Council for the dispatch of such Affairs and
motions as had been either moved or proposed unto him. Which being very readily
assented to by the Clergy and Nobility, who hoped thereby to find some favor
in the Court, and by degrees to be admitted to the Privy Council, was very
earnestly opposed by Bodinus, being then Delegate or Commissioner for the
Province of Veromandois, who saw full well that if businesses were so carried,
the Commons (which made the third Estate,) would find but little hopes to have
their grievances redressed, ^^iin de Rep. ^. 1. c. 7.
their petitions answered. And therefore labored the rest of the Commissioners
not to yield unto it, as being utterly destructive of the Rights and Liberties
of the common people: which having done, he was by them entrusted to debate the
business before the other two Estates, and did it to so good effect, that at
the last he took them off from their resolution, and obtained the cause. What
Arguments he used in particular, neither himself nor Thuanus tells us. But
sure I am that he insisted both on the ancient customs of the Realm of France,
as also of the Realm of Spain and England, and the Roman Empire; in each of
which it was received for a ruled case, nihil a duobus ordinibus statui posse,
quo uni ex tribus prejudicium crearetur, that nothing could be done by any of
the two Estates unto the prejudice of the third. And if it were a ruled case
then in the Parliament of England, there is no reason why it should be
otherwise in the present times, the equity and justice of it being still the
same, and the same reasons for it now as forcible, as they could be then. Had
it been otherwise resolved of in the former Ages, wherein the Clergy were so
prevalent in all public Councils, how easy a matter had it been for them
either by joining with all the Nobility to exclude the Commons, or by joining
with the Commonalty to exclude the Nobles. Or having too much conscience to
adventure to so great a change, an alteration so incompatible and inconsistent
with the Constitution of a Parliament; how easily might they have suppressed
the potency, and impair the Privileges of either of the other two, by working
on the humors or affections of the one to keep down the other? But these were
Arts not known in the former days, nor had been thought of in these last, but
by men of Ruin, who were resolved to change the Government (as the event does
show too clearly) both of Church and State. Nor does it help the matter in the
least degree, to say that the exclusion of the Bishops from the House of Peers,
was not done merely by the practice of the two other Estates, but by the assent
of the King, of whom the Laws say he can do no wrong, and by an Act of
Parliament whereof our Laws yet say, quae null doit imaginer chose
dishonorable, that no man is to think dishonourably. Plowden in Commentar.
For we know well in what condition the King was when he passed that Act, to
what extremities he was reduced, on what terms he stood, how he was forced to
fly from his City of London, to part with his dear Wife and Children, and in a
word, so overpowred by the prevailing party in the two Houses of Parliament,
that it was not safe for him (as his case then was) to deny them any thing. And
for the Act of Parliament so unduly gained, besides that the Bill had been
rejected when it was first brought unto the Lords, and that the greater part of
the Lords were frighted out of the House, when contrary unto the course of
Parliament it was brought again; it is a point resolved both in Law and Reason,
that the Parliament can do nothing to the destruction of it self, and that such
Acts as are extorted from the King are not good and valid, whereof we have a
fair Example in the book of Statutes. 15 Ed. 3.
For whereasz the King had granted certain Articles pretended to be granted in
the Form of a statute, expressly contrary to the Laws of the Realm, and his own
Prerogative and Rights Royal (mark it, for this is just the case) which he had
yielded to eschew the dangers, which by denying of the same were like to
follow: in the same Parliament it was repealed in these following words; It
seemed good to the said Earls, Barons, and other wise men, that since the
Statute did not proceed of our Free will, the same be void; and ought not to
have the name nor strength of a Statute, and therefore by their counsel and
assent we have decreed the said Statute to be void, etc. Or if it should not be
repealed in a formal manner, yet is this Act however gotten, void in effect
already by a former Statute, in which it was enacted in full Parliament, and at
the self-same place where this Act was gained, that the Great Charter (by which
and many other Titles the Bishops held their place in Parliament) should be
kept in all points, and if any Statute be made to the contrary, 42 Ed. 3. c. 1.
it shall be holden for none.

CHAP. VI. That the three Estates of every Kingdom whereof Calvin speaks, have
no Authority either to regulate the power, or control the actions of the
Sovereign Prince.
1. The Bishops and Clergy of England, not the Kings, make the third Estate,
and of the dangerous consequences which may follow on the contrary Tenet. 2.
The different influence of the three Estates upon conditional Princes, and an
absolute Monarch. 3. The Sanhedrim of no Authority over the persons, or the
actions of the Kings of Judah. 4. The three Estates in France of how small
Authority over the actions of that King. 5. The King of Spain not overruled,
or regulated by the three Estates. 6. Of what Authority they have been
anciently in the Parliaments of Scotland. 7. The King of England always
accounted heretofore for an absolute Monarch. 8. No part of Sovereignty
invested legally in the English Parliaments. 9. The three Estates assembled in
the Parment of England, subordinate unto the King, not coordinate with him.
10. The Legislative power of Parliaments is properly and legally in the King
alone. 11. In what particulars the power of the English Parliament does consist
especially. 12. The Kings of England ordinarily overrule their Parliaments by
themselves, their Council, and their Judges. 13. Objections answered, touching
the power and practice of some former Parliaments, and the testimonies given
unto them. 14. No such Authority given by God in Holy Scripture to any such
Popular Magistrates, as Calvin dreams of and pretends. 15. The Application and
Conclusion of the whole discourse.


I Have been purposely more copious in the former Chapter, because I thought it
necessary to declare and manifest who made the three Estates in each several
Kingdom, which are pretended by our Author to have such power of regulating the
Authority, and censuring the actions and the persons of their Sovereign
Princes. And this the rather in regard it is thought of late, and (more than
thought) presented to the world in some public writings, (especially as it
relates to the Realm of England) that the King, the Lords, and Commons, make
the three Estates; which brings the King into an equal rank with the other two,
in reference to the business and affairs of Parliament. A fancy, by what
accident soever it was broached and published, which has no consistence either
with truth, or ordinary observation, or with the practice of this Realm, or of
any other. For the proof of this my position, that the King is none of the
three Estates as is now pretended, if all proofs else should fail, I have one
from Calvin, whose judgment in this point amongst many of us, will be instar
omnium. Calvin, instit. 4. cap. ult.
For where he says in singulis Regnis tres esse Ordines, that there are three
Estates in each several Kingdom, and that these three Estates convened in
Parliament, (or by what other name soever they call their meeting) are
furnished with a power, Regum lididinem moderandi, of moderating the
licentiousness of Kings and Princes; and that they become guilty of perfidious
dissimulation, si Regibus impotenter grassantibus, etc. If they connive at
Kings, when they play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the common people: I
trow it cannot be conceived that the King is any one of the three Estates, who
are here trusted (or at least supposed to be entrusted) with sufficient power,
as well to regulate his authority, as to control his actions. If Calvin be
allowed to have common sense, and to have wit and words enough to express his
meaning, (as even his greatest Adversaries do confess he had) it must be
granted that he did not take the King of what Realm soever, to be any of the
three Estates: or if he did, he would have thought of other means to restrain
his insolences, than by leaving him in his own hands, to his own correction.
Either then Calvin is mistaken in the three Estates, (and if he be mistaken in
designing the men he aims at, may he not be mistaken in the power he gives
them?) or else the King is none, and indeed can be none of the three Estates,
qui primarios conventus peragunt, who usually convene in Parliament for those
ends and purposes before remembered. But not to trust to him alone, though
questionless he be ideoneus testis in the present case: Let us behold the
Assembly of the three Estates or Conventus Ordinum in France (from whence it is
conceived that all Assemblies of this kind had their first Original) and we
shall find a very full description of them in the Assembly des Estats at Bloys
under Henry III. Anno 1577. of which thus Thuanus. Rex in sublimi loco sub
uranisco sedebat, Thanus in histor. sci. temp. l. 63.
etc. The King (says he) sat on an high erected Throne under the Canopy of
State, the Queen Mother, and the Queen his Wife, and all the Cardinals,
Princes, Peers upon either hand. And then it follows, Transtris infra
dispositis ad dextram suam sacri Ordinis Delegati, ad laevam Nobilitas, and
infra plebetus ordo sedebat; that on some lower forms there sat the Delegates
of the Clergy toward the right hand of the King, the Nobility toward the
left, and the Commissioners for the Commons in the space below. We may
conjecture at the rest by the view of this: Of those in Spain, by those
Conventions of the States which before we spoke of, at Burgos, Monson, Toledo,
and in other places, in which the King is always mentioned as a different
person, who called them, and dissolved them as he saw occasion. For Scotland,
it is ordinary in the style of Parliaments, to say the King and the Estates do
ordain and constitute; for which I do refer you to the Book of Statutes) which
clearly makes the King to be a different person from the Estates of that
Kingdom. And as for England, Statutes of Scotland.
besides what may be gathered from the former Chapter, we read in the History
of Titus Livius, touching the Reign and Acts of King Henry V. that when his
Funerals were ended, the three Estates of the Realm of England did assemble
together, and declared his Son King Henry VI. being an Infant of eight months
old to be their Sovereign Lord, Tit. Live. M. S. in Bibl. Bodl.
as his Heir and Successor. And in the Parliament Rolls of King Richard III.
there is mention of a Bill or Parchment presented to that Prince, being then
Duke of Gloucester, on the behalf, and in the name of the three Estates of this
Realm of England; that is to wit, of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of
the Commons by name: which forasmuch as neither the said three Estates, nor the
persons which delivered it on their behalf were then Assembled in form of
Parliament, was afterward in the first Parliament of that King by the same
three Estates Assembled in this present Parliament (I speak the very words of
the Act it self) and by Authority of the same, enrolled, Ap. Speed in K. Rich.
3.
recorded, and approved: And at the request, and by the assent of three Estates
of this Realm; that is to say, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of
this Land Assembled in this present Parliament, and by Authority of the same,
it be pronounced, decreed, and declared, that our said Sovereign Lord the King
was, and is the very and undoubted Heir of this Realm of England, 1 Eliz. cap.
3.
etc. And so it is acknowledged in a Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 3. where the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament assembled, being
said expressly, and in terminis to represent the three Estates of the Realm of
England, did recognize the Queens Majesty to be their true, lawful, and
undoubted Sovereign Liege Lady, and Queen. This makes it evident, that the King
was not accounted in the times before for one of the three Estates of
Parliament, nor can be so accounted the present times. For considering that the
Lords and Commons do most confessedly make two of the three Estates, and that
the Clergy in another Act of Parliament of the said Queens time, are confessed
to be one of the greatest States of the Realm, which Statute being still in
force, Statut. 8. Eliz. cap. 1.
does clearly make the Clergy to be the third; either there must be more than
three Estates in this Kingdom, which is against the Doctrine of the present
times, or else the King is none of the Estates, as indeed he is not, which was
the matter to be proved. But I spend too much time in confuting that which has
so little ground to stand on, more than the dangerous consequences which are
covered under it: For if the King be granted once to be no more than one of the
three Estates, how can it choose but follow from so sad a principle, that he is
of no more power and consideration in the time of Parliament, than the House of
Peers, which sometimes has consisted of three Lords, no more; or than the
House of Commons only, which has many times consisted of no more than eighty,
or an hundred Gentlemen: but of far less consideration to all intents and
purposes in the Law whatever, than both the Houses joined together. What else
can follow hereupon, but that the King must be coordinate with his two Honses
of Parliament, and if coordinate, then to be overruled by their joint
concurrence, bound to conform unto their Acts, and confirm their Ordinances; or
upon case of inconformity and noncompliance to see them put in execution
against his liking and consent, to his foul reproach. And what at last will be
the issue of this dangerous consequence, but that the Lords content themselves
to come down to the Commons, and the King be no otherwise esteemed of than the
chief of the Lords, the Princeps Senatus if you will, or the Duke of Venice, at
the best no more, which if Sir Edward Dering may be credited, as I think he may
in this particular, seems to have been the main design of some of the most
popular and powerful Members then sitting with him, for which I do refer the
Reader to his book of Speeches. Which dangerous consequents whether they were
observed at first by these who first ventured on the expression, or were
improvidently looked over, I can hardly say. Certain I am, it gave too manifest
an advantage to the Antimonarchical party in this Kingdom, and hardened them in
their proceeding against their King, whom they were taught to look on and
esteem no otherwise than as a Joint-tenant of the Sovereignty with the Lords
and Commons. And if Kings have partners in the Sovereignty, they are then no
King; such being the nature and Law of Monarchy, that si divisionem capiat
interitum capiat necesse est, Laciant. Institut. Div. l. 1. c.
if it be once divided, and the authorities thereof imparted, it is soon
destroyed. Such is the dangerous consequence of this new Expression, that it
seems utterly to deprive the Bishops, and in them the Clergy of this Land, of
all future hopes of being restored again to their place in Parliament. For
being the Parliament can consist but of three Estates, if the King fall so low
as to pass for one, either the Bishops or the Commons, or the Temporal Lords
must desert their claim, the better to make way for this new pretension: and in
all probability the Commons being grown so potent, and the Nobility so numerous
and united in blood and marriages, will not quit their interesse; and therefore
the poor Clergy must be no Estate, because less able, as the World now goes
with them, to maintain their Title. I have often read that Constantine did use
to call himself (...) the Bishop or superintendent of his Bishops; Eusebius. de
vita Constant.
and I have often heard our Lawyers say, that the King is the general Ordinary
of the Kingdom: but never heard nor read till within these few years, that ever
any King did possess himself of the Bishops place or Vote in Parliament, or sat
there as the first of the three Estates (as anciently the Bishops did) to
supply their absence. By which device, whether the Clergy or the King be the
greater losers (though it be partly seen already) future times will show.

This Rub removed, three Estates: which we shall find on search and trial to be
very different, according to the constitution of the Kingdom in which they are.
For where the Kings are absolute Monarchs, as in England, Scotland, France, and
Spain, Bod in de Repuo. l. 1. c.
the three Estates, have properly and legally little more Authority, than to
advise their King, as they see occasion, to present unto his view their common
grievances, and to propose such remedies for redress thereof, as to them seem
meetest, to canvass and review such erroneous judgments as formerly have passed
in inferior Courts, and finally to consult about, and prepare such Laws as are
expedient for the public. In other Countries where the Kings are more
conditional, and hold their Crowns by compact and agreement between them and
their Subjects; the reputation and authority of the three Estates is more high
and eminent, as in Polonia, Denmark, and some others of the Northern Kingdoms,
where the Estates lay claim to more than a directive power, and think it not
enough to advise their King, unless they may dispose of the Kingdom also, or at
least make their King no better than a Royal Slave. Thus and no otherwise it is
with the German Emperors, who are obnoxious to the Laws, Thuan. hist. sui temp.
l. 2.
and for their Government accomptable to the Estates of the Empire: insomuch
that if the Princes of the Empire be persuaded in their consciences that he is
likely by his mal-administration to destroy the Empire, and that he will not
hearken to advice and counsel ab Electorum Collegio Caesaria potestate privari
potest, Anonym. Script. ap Philip. Paraeum in Append. ad Romans 13.
he may be deprived by the Electors, and a more fit and able man elected to
supply the place. And to this purpose in a Constitution made by the Emperor
Jodocus, about the year 1410. there is a clause, that if he or any of his
Successors do any thing unto the contrary thereof, the Electors and other
States of the Empire sine rebellionis vel infidelitatis crimine libertatem
babeant, Goldast. Constit. Imperial. Tom. 3. p. 424.
should be at liberty without incurring the crimes of Treason or Disloyalty,
not only to oppose, but resist them in it. The like to which occurrs for the
Realm of Hungary, wherein K. Andrew gives Authority to his Bishops, Lords,
Bonfinius de Edict. publ. p. 37.
and other Nobles sine nota alicujus infidelitatis; that without any imputation
of Disloyalty, they may contradict, oppose, and resist their Kings, if they do
any thing in violation of some Laws and sanctions. In Poland the King takes a
solemn Oath at his Coronation, to confirm all the Privileges, Rights and
Liberties which have been granted to his Subjects of all ranks and Orders by
any of his Predecessors: and then adds this clause, quod si Sacramentum meum
violavero, incolae Regni nullam nobis obedientiam praestare tenebuntur; which
if he violates, his Subjects shall no longer be obliged to yield him Obedience.
Which Oath as Bodin well observes, Bodin de Rep. lib. 2. cap. 8.
does savor rather of the condition of the Prince of the Senate, than of the
Majesty of a King. The like may be affirmed of Frederick the first King of
Danemark, who being called unto that Crown on the ejection of K. Christian the
2d. An. 1523. was so conditioned with by the Lords of the Kingdom, that at his
Coronation, or before, he was fain to swear, that he would put none of the
Nobility to death or banishment, but by the judgment of the Senate, that the
great men should have power of life or death over their Tenants and Vassals,
and that no Appeal should lie from them to the Kings Tribunal, nor the King be
partaker of the confiscations; nec item honores aut imperia privatis daturum,
Id. ibid.
etc. nor advance any private person to Commands or Honors, but by Authority
of his great Council. Which Oath being also taken by Frederick the second, made
Bodinus say, that the Kings of Danemark, non tam reipsa quam appellatione Reges
sunt, were only titular Kings, but not Kings indeed: Which Character he also
gives of the King of Bobemia. Id. ibid. p. 88.
But in an absolute Monarchy the case is otherwise, all the prerogatives and
rights of Sovereignty being so vested in the Kings person, ut nec singulis
civibus nec universis fas est, etc. that it is neither lawful to particular
men, nor to the whole body of the Subjects generally to call the Prince in
question for Life, Fame, or Fortunes: Id. ibid. p. 210.
and amongst these he reckons the Kingdoms of France, Spain, England,
Scotland, the Tartars, Muscovites, and omnium pene Africae and Asiae
imperiorum, and of almost all the Kingdoms of Africa, and Asia. But this we
shall the better see by looking over the particulars as they lie before us.

But first before we come unto those particulars we will look backwards on the
condition and Authority of the Jewish Sanbedrim; Jews were the Lords own
people, and their King honored with the Title of the Lords Anointed: it will
be thought, that if the Sanhedrim, or the great Council of the seventy had any
Authority and power over the Kings of Judah, (of whose jus Regni such a larger
description is made by God himself in the first of Sam. cap. 8.) the three
Estates may reasonably expect the like in these parts of Christendom. Now for
the Authority of the Sanhedrim, it is said by Cardinal Baronius, that they had
power of Judicature over the Law, the Prophets, and the Kings themselves.
Baron. Annai. Eccl. An. 31. sect. 10.
Erat horum summa autoritas ut qui de lege cognoscerent, and Prophetis, and
simul de Regibus judicarent. Which false position he confirms by as false an
instance, affirming in the very next words, horum judicio Herodem Regem
postulatum esse, that King Herod was convented and convicted by them; for which
he cites Josphus with the like integrity. I should have wondered very much what
should occasion such a gross mistake in the learned Cardinal, had I not shown
before, that as he makes the Sanhedrim to rule the King, so he has made the
high Priest to rule the Sanhedrim: which to what purpose it was done every man
can tell, who knows the Cardinal endeavors nothing more in his large
Collections, than to advance the dignity and supremacy of the Popes of Romans But
for the power pretended to be in the Sanhedrim, Id. in Epist. dedicator.
and their proceedings against Herod as their actual King; Josephus whom he
cites is so far from saying it, that he does expressly say the contrary. For as
Josephus tells the story, Hyrcanus was then King, not Herod; and Herod of so
little hopes to enjoy the Kingdom, that he could not possibly pretend any Title
to it. But having a command in Galilee procured by Antipater his Father, of the
good King Hyrcanus, he had played the wanton Governor amongst them, and put
some of them to death against Law and Justice. For which the Mothers of the
slain (...), did often call upon the King and people in the open Temple, (...),
etc. that Herod might answer for the murder before the Sanhedrim. Joseph.
Antiq. Judic. l. 14. cap. 17.
Which being granted by the King, he was accordingly convented by them, and had
been questionless condemned, had not the King, who loved him dearly, given him
notice of it; on whose advertisement he went out of the Town, and so escaped
the danger. This is the substance of that story: and this gives no Authority to
the Court of Sanhedrim, over the persons or the actions of the Kings of Judah.
Others there are, who make them equal to the Kings, though not superior, (
Magnam fuisse Senatus autoritatem and Regiae velut parem, says the Learned
Grotius: Grotius in Matthew. cap. 5. v. 22.
) And for the proof thereof allege those words of Sedechias in the Book of
Jeremy: who when the Princes of his Realm required of him to put the Prophet to
death, Jerem. 38.5.
returned this Answer, Behold he is in your hand, Rex enim contra vos nihil
potest, for the King is not he that can do any thing against you. Which words
are also cited by Mr. Prynne to prove that the King of England has no Negative
Voice; but by neither rightly. For Calvin (who, as one observes, composed his
Expositions on the book of God according to the Doctrine of his Institutions)
would not have lost so fair an evidence for the advancing of the power of his
three Estates: Prynne of Parl. pt. 2. p. 73. Hookers Preface.
had he conceived he could have made it serviceable to his end and purpose. But
he upon the contrary finds fault with them, who do so expound it, or think the
King did speak so honorably of his Princes, ac si nihil iis sit negandum, as
if it were not fit to deny them any thing. Calvin. in Jerem. c. 38. ver. 5.
Not so, says he, it rather is amarulenta Regis querimonia, a sad and bitter
complaint of the poor captivated King against his Counselors; by whom he was
so overruled, ut velit nolit cedere iis cogitur, that he was forced to yield
to them whether he would or not: which he expressly calls inexcusabilem
arrogantiam, an intolerable piece of sawciness in those Princes, and an
exclusion of the King from his legal Rights.

Let us next take a view of such Christian Kingdoms as are under the command of
absolute Monarchs. France, the Government whereof is merely Regal, if not
despotical, such as that of a Master over his Servants: which Aristotle
defines to be a Form of Government, (...), wherein the King may do whatsoever
he list, Aristot. Politic. l. 3.
according to the counsel of his own mind. For in his Arbitrary Edicts which he
sends abroad, he never mentions the consent of the People, or the
approbation of the Council, or the advice of his Judges (which might be thought
to derogate too much from his absolute power) but concludes all of them in this
Regal Form, Car tell est nostre plaisir, for such is our pleasure. And though
the Court of Parliament in Paris do use to take upon them to peruse his Edicts,
View of France by Dallington.
before they pass abroad for Laws, and sometime to demur on his Grants, and
Patents, and to petition him to reverse the same, as they see occasion; yet
their perusal is a matter but of mere formality, and their demurs more dilatory
than effectual. It is the Car tell est nostre plaisir that concludes the
business, and the Kings pleasure is the Law which that Court is ruled by. As
for the Assembly des Estats, or Conventus Ordinum, it was reputed anciently
the Supreme Court for Government and Justice of all the Kingdom; and had the
cognizance of the greatest and most weighty affairs of State. But these
meetings have been long since discontinued, and almost forgotten: there being
no such Assembly from the time of King Charles the eighth, to the beginning of
the reign of King Charles the ninth, Thuanus. hist. sui temp.
which was 70 years, and not many since. And to say truth, they could be but of
little use, as the World now goes, were the meetings oftener. For whereas there
are three Principal, if not sole occasions of calling this Assembly, or
Conventus Ordinum, that is to say, the disposing of the Regency, during the
nonage or sickness of the King, the granting Aids and Subsidies, and the
redress of the grievances: there is now another course taken to dispatch their
business. The Parliament of Paris, which speaks most commonly as it is prompted
by power and greatness, appoints the Regent; Contin. Thuani. An. 1610. View
of France.
the Kings themselves together with their Treasurers and Underofficers
determine of the Taxes, and they that do complain of Grievances may either have
recourse to the Courts of Justice, or else petition to the King for redress
thereof. And for the making new Laws or repealing the old, the naturalization
of the Alien, and the regulating of his Sales or Grants of the Crown Lands, the
public patrimony of the Kingdom, which were wont to be the proper Subject and
debates of these Grand Assemblies: they also have been so disposed of, that
Conventus Ordinum is neither troubled with them, nor called about them. The
Chamber of Accounts in Paris (which has some resemblance to our Court of
Exchequer) does absolutely dispose of Naturalizations, Andr. Du Chesn.
and superficially surveyeth the Kings Grants and Sales, which they seldom
cross. The Kings Car tell est nostre plaisir is the Subjects Law, and is as
binding as any Act or Ordinance of the three Estates: and for repealing of such
Laws as upon long experience are conceived to be unprofitable, the Kings sole
Edict is as powerful as any Act of Parliament. Of which Bodinus does not only
say in these general terms, Bodin de Rep. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Saepe vidimus sine Ordinum convocatione and consensu leges a Principe
abrogatas, that many times these Kings did abrogate some ancient Laws without
the calling and consent of the three Estates: but says, that it was neither
new nor strange that they should so do, and gives us some particular instances,
not only of the later times but the former Ages. Nay when the power of this
Assembly des Estats was most great and eminent, neither so curtailed nor
neglected as it has been lately; yet then they carried themselves with the
greatest reverence and respect before their King, that could be possibly
imagined. For in the Assembly held at Tours under Charles the 8. though the
King was then no more than 14 years of age, and the Authority of that Court so
great and awful that it was never at so high an eminence for power and
reputation, quanta illis temporibus, as it was at that time: yet when they came
before the King, Monsieur de Rell being then Speaker for the Commons or the
third Estate, did in the name of all the rest, and with as much humility and
reverence as he could devise, promise such duty and obedience, such a
conformity of his will and pleasure, such readiness to supply his wants, and
such alacrity in hearking unto his Commandments, that as Bodinus well observes,
his whole Oration was nothing else, quam perpetua voluntatis omnium erga Regem
testificatio, but a constant testimony and expression of the good affections of
the Subject to their Lord and Sovereign. Id. ibid.
But whatsoever power they had in former times is not now material, King Lewis
the thirteenth, having (on good reason of State) discharged those Conventions
for the time ensuing. Instead whereof he instituted an Assembly of another
temper, and such as should be more obnoxious to his will and pleasure,
consisting of a certain number of persons out of each Estate, but all of his
own nomination and appointment, which joined with certain of his Council and
principal Officers, he caused to be called L' Assembly des Notables, assigning
to them all the power and privileges which the later Conventions of the three
Estates did pretend unto, right well assured that men so nominated and
entrusted would never use their powers to his detriment, and disturbance of his
heirs and successors.

But to proceed, Bodinus having shown what dutiful respects the Convention of
Estates in France showed unto their King, adds this Note, nec aliter Hispanorum
conventus habentur, that the Assembly of the three Estates in the Realms of
Spain carry themselves with the like reverence and submission to their Lord the
King: Nay major etiam obedientia and majus obsequium Regi exhibetur, the King
of Spain has more obedience and observance from his three Estates, than that
which is afforded to the Kings of France. Id. ibid.
which being but general and comparative, is yet enough to let us see that the
Assembly of Estates in the Realms of Spain, which they call the Curia, is very
observant of their King and obsequious to him, and have but little of that
power which is supposed by our Author to be inherent in the three Estates of
all the Christian Kingdoms; But this Bodinus proves more particularly,
ascribing to the King, and to him alone, the power of calling this Assembly
when he sees occasion, and of dissolving it again when his work is done;
according as is used both in France and England. And when they are assembled
and met together, their Acts and Consultations are of no effect, further than
as they are confirmed by the Kings consent. Which he declares in the same Form
(eadem formula qua apud nos) that has accustomably been used by the Kings of
France, which is authoritative enough; that is to say decernimus, statuimus,
volumus, We will, and we appoint, and we have decreed. The Kings of Spain, Id.
ibid. p. 90.
though not so despotical in their Government as the French Kings are, are as
absolute Monarchs, and have as great an influence on the three Estates, to make
them pliant to their will, and to work out their own ends by them, as ever had
the French Kings on their Courts of Parliament: a touch whereof we had before
in the former Chapter. And this we may yet further see by their observance of
the pleasure of King Philip the 2d. Who having married the Lady Elizabeth
Daughter of Henry the 2d. of France, Convocatos Castellae and reliquarum
Hispaniae Provinciarum Ordines, calling together the Estates of Castile and his
other Provinces of Spain, Thuan. hist. sui. temp. l. 23.
he caused them to swear to the succession of his Son Prince Charles, whom he
had by the Lady Mary of Portugal, and after having on some jealousies of State
put that Prince to death, caused them to swear to the succession of another Son
by the Lady of Austria. And for the power of his Edicts, which they call
Pragmaticas, they are as binding to the Subject as an Act of Parliament, or any
kind of Law whatever: Examples of the which are very obvious and familiar in
the Spanish Histories. For though there be a body of Laws in use amongst them,
partly made up of some old Gothish Laws and Constitutions, and partly of some
parts of the Law imperial: yet for the explanation of the Laws in force, if any
doubt arise about them, or for supplying such defects which in the best
collection of the Laws may occur sometimes, the Magistrates and Judges are to
have recourse to the King alone, and to conform to such instructions as he
gives them in it. And this is it which was ordained by Alfonso the tenth, qui
etiam magistratus ad judices Principem adire jussit, quoties patrio jure nihil
de proposita causa seriptum esset, as Bodinus has it. Bodin de Rep. lib. 1.
cap. 8.
It Is true that for the railing of supplies of money, and the imposing of
extraordinary Taxes upon the Subject, the Kings of Spain must be beholden to
the three Estates, without whose consent it cannot legally be done. But then it
is as true withal, Id. ibid. p. 90.
that there are customary Tributes called Servitia which the King raises of
his own Aurhority without such consent. And their consenting to the
extraordinary is a thing of course: the Spanish Nation being so well affected
naturally to the power and greatness of their Kings, whom they desire to make
considerable if not formidable in the opinion of their Neighbors, that the
Kings seldom fail of moneys if the Subjects have it. Finally that we may
perceive how absolute this Monarch is over all the Courts or Curias of his
whole Dominions; take this along according as it stands verbatim in the Spanish
History. Spanish Hist. 67. by Iyrannel.
The King of Spain as he is a potent Prince and Lord of many Countries, so has
he many Councils for the managing of their affairs distinctly and apart without
any confusion: every Council treating only of those matters which concern their
Jurisdiction and charges: with which Councils and with the Presidents thereof,
being men of chief note, the King does usually confer touching matters
belonging to the good Government, preservation, and increase of his Estates,
and having heard every man's Opinion, he commands that to be executed which he
holds most fit and convenient.

Next let us take a view of Scotland, France or Spain. For besides that Bodinus
makes it one of those absolute Monarchies, ubi Keges sine controversia omnia
jura Majestatis habent per sese, Bodin de Repub. l. 2. c. 7. Cambden in Britan.
descript.
in which the Kings have clearly all the Rights of Majesty inherent in their
own persons only: it is declared in the Records of that very Kingdom, that the
King is directus totius Dominus, the Sovereign Lord of the whole State, and
has all authority and jurisdiction over all Estates and degrees, as well
Ecclesiaestical as Lay or Temporal. And as for those Estates and Degrees
convened in Parliament, we may conjecture at their Power, by that which is
delivered of the Form or Order which they held it in, Form of holding the Parl.
in Scotland.
which is briefly this. As soon as the Kings Writ is issued out for summoning
the Estates to meet in Parliament, he makes choice of eight of the Spiritual
Lords, such on whose wisdom and integrity he may most rely; which eight do
choose as many of the Temporal Lords, and they together nominate eight more out
of the Commissioners for the Counties, and as many out of the Commissioners for
the Towns or Buroughs. These 32 thus chosen are called Domini pro Articulis,
Lords of the Articles: and they together with the Chancellor, Treasurer, Keeper
of the Privy Seal, and principal Secretaries of State, and the Master of the
Rolls (whom they call Clerk Register) do admit or reject every Bill, [but not
before they have been shown unto the King] if they pass there they are
presented afterward to the whole Assembly, where being thoroughly weighed, and
examined, and put unto the Votes of the House; such of them as are carried by
the major part of the Voices (for the Lords and Commons sit together in the
same House there) are on the last day of the Sessions exhibited to the King:
who by touching them with his Scepter pronounces that he either ratifieth and
approves them, or that he does disable them and make them void. But if the
business be disliked by the Lords of the Articles it proceeds no further, and
never comes unto the consideration of the Parliament, or if the King dislikes
of any thing in it when they show it to him, it either is razed out or mended
before it be prefented to the public view. King James of blessed memory, who
very well understood his own power and the Forms of that Parliament, describes
it much to the same purpose, in his Speech made at Whitehall, March 31. Anno
1609. About twenty days (says he) before the Parliament, Proclamation is made
throughout the Kingdom to deliver unto the Kings Clerk of Register all Bills to
be exhibited that Session before a certain day. Then are they brought unto the
King, and perused and considered by him, and only such as he allows of are
put into the Chancellors hands to be propounded to the Parliament, and none
others. And if any other man in Parliament speak of any other matter than is in
this sort first allowed by the King, the Chancellor tells him that the King
has allowed of no such Bill. Besides, when they have passed them for Laws they
are presented to the King, and he with his Scepter put into his hands by the
Chancellor, must say, I ratify and approve all things done in this present
Parliament. And if there be any thing that he disliketh it is razed out before.
So the eldest Parliament Man as he said himself at that time in Scotland. This
was the Form of holding Parliaments in Scotland, which, whosoever does consider
with a serious eye may perceive most plainly, that it is wholly in the Kings
power to frame the Parliament to his own will, or at the least to hinder it
from doing any thing to the prejudice of his Royal Crown and Dignity: in that
the nominating of the Lords of the Articles did in a manner totally depend on
him. Which being observed by the Scots, they took the opportunity when they
were in Arms to pass an Act during the Presidency of the Lord Burley, Anno
1640. for the abolition of this Order, Acts of Parliaments, 16 Carol.
and for reducing of that Parliament to the Forms of England; as being thought
more advantageous to their purposes, than the former was. So that the violent
disloyalty of the Scottish Subjects, their Insurrections against their Kings,
and murdering them sometimes when their heels were up, which makes that Nation
so ill spoken of in the Stories of Christendom, are not to be imputed to the
three Estates convened in Parliament, or to any power or Act of theirs, Rivet
cont. tenuit.
but only prae fervido Scotorum ingenio as one pleads it for them, unto the
natural disposition of that fierce and headstrong people, yet easilier made
subject unto Rule and Government. The three Estates assembled in the Court of
Parliament, (when in the judgment of our Author they are most fit to undertake
the business) have for the most part had no hand in those desperate courses.

And now at last we are come to England, where, since we came no sooner,
Monarchy, from whom the meeting of the three Estates in Parliament detracteth
nothing of his Power and Authority Royal. Bodin as great a Politic as any of
his time in the Realm of France, has ranked our Kings amongst the absolute
Monarchs of these Western parts. And Cambden as renowned an Antiquary as any of
the Age he lived in, Bodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.
has told us of the King of England, supremam potestatem and merum imperium
habere, Cambden in Britan. descript.
That he has supreme power and absolute command in his Dominions, and that he
neither holds his Crown in vassalage, nor receives his investiture of any
other, nor acknowledges any Superior, but God alone. To prove this last, he
cites these memorable words from Bracton an old English Lawyer, omnis quidem
sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo sed tantum sub Deo, that every man is under the
King, but the King under none saving only God. But Bracton tells us more than
this, and affirms expressly, that the King has supreme power and jurisdiction
over all causes and persons in this his Majesty's Realm of England, that all
Jurisdictions are vested in him and are issued from him, and that he has jus
gladii, or the right of the Sword, for the better governance of his people.
This is the substance of his words, but the words are these. Bracton de leg.
Angl. l. 2. c 24.
Sciendum est (says he) quod ipse Dominus Rex ordinariam habet jurisdictionem
and dignitatem and potestatem super omnes qui in regno suo sunt. Habet enim
omnia jura in manu sua quae ad coronam and laicalem pertinent potestatem, and
materialem gladium qui pertinet ad Regni gubernandum, etc. He adds yet further,
Habet item in potestate sua leges and constitutiones, that the Laws and
Constitutions of the Realm, Id. l. 2. c. 16.
are in the power of the King: by which words, whether he means that the
Legislative power is in the King, and whether the Legislative power be in him,
and in him alone, we shall see anon. But sure I am, that he ascribes unto the
King the power of interpreting the Law in all doubtful cases, in dubiis and
obscuris Domini Regis expectanda interpretatio and voluntas, which is plain
enough. For though he speaks only de chartis Regis expectanda interpretatio
and voluntas which is plain enough. For though he speaks only de chartis
Regiis and factis Regum, of the Kings Deeds and Charters only, as the words
seem to import; yet considering the times in which he lived (being Chief
Justice in the time of King Henry the 3d.) wherein there was but little written
Law more than what was comprehended in the Kings Grants and Charters, he may be
understood of all Laws whatever. And so much is collected out of Bractons words
by the Lord Chancellor Egerton, of whom it may be said without envy; that he
was as grave and learned a Lawyer, as ever sat upon that Bench. Who gathers
out of Bracton, that all cases not determined for want of foresight are in the
King, to whom belongs the right of interpretation, not in plain and evident
cases, but only in new questions and emergent doubts; and that the King has as
much right by the constitutions of this Kingdom, as the Civil Law gave the
Roman Emperors, where it is said, Rex solus judicat de causa a jure non
desinita. Case of the Post-nati. p. 107, 108.
And though the Kings make not any Laws without the counsel and consent of his
Lords and Commons, whereof we shall speak more in the following Section, yet in
such cases where the Laws do provide no remedy, and in such matters as concern
the politic administration of his Kingdoms, he may and does take order by his
Proclamations. He also has Authority by his Prerogative Royal to dispense with
the rigor of the Laws, and sometimes to pass by a Statute with a non obstante,
as in the Statute 1 Hen. IV. cap. VI. touching the value to be specified of
such Lands, Offices, or Annuities, etc. as by the King are granted in his
Letters patents. But these will better come within the compass of those jura
Majestatis, Cambden in Brit.
or rights of Sovereignty, which our Lawyers call sacra and individua: Sacred,
by reason they are not to be pried into with irreverent eyes; and individual or
inseparable, because they cannot be communicated unto any other. Of which kind
are the levying of Arms, Case of our Affairs, p.
suppressing of tumults and rebellions, providing for the present safety of his
Kingdom against sudden dangers, convoking of Parliaments, and dissolving them,
making of Peers, granting liberty of sending Burgesses to Towns and Cities,
treating with foreign States, making War, Leagues, and Peace, granting safe
conduct and protection, Indenizing, giving of Honor, Rewarding, Pardoning,
Coining, Printing, and the like to these. But what need these particulars have
been looked into, to prove the absoluteness and sovereignty of the Kings of
England, when the whole body of the Realm has affirmed the same, and solemnly
declared it in their Acts of Parliament. 16 Rich. 2. c. 5.
In one of which is affirmed, that the Crown of England has been so free at
all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but immediately to God,
in all things touching the regality of the said Crown; and to none other. And
in another Act, that the Realm of England is an Empire governed by one Supreme
Head and King, having the Dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the
same, unto whom a Body politic compact of all sorts and degrees of people,
divided in terms and by names of Spiritualty and Temporalty be bounden, and
ought to bear next to God a natural and bumble obedience. 24 Hen. 8. c. 12.
And more than so, That the King being the supreme Head of this Body Politic
is instituted and furnished by the goodness and sufferance of Almighty God with
plenary, whole and entire power, pre-eminence, authority, prerogative, and
jurisdiction to render and yield justice and final determination to all manner
of Subjects within this Realm, and in all causes whatsoever. Nor was this any
new Opinion invented only to comply with the Princes humor, but such as is
declared to have been fortified by sundry Laws and Ordinances made in former
Parliaments; Ibid.
and such as has been since confirmed by a solemn Oath, taken and to be taken
by most of the Subjects of this Kingdom. Which Oath consisting of two parts,
the one Declaratory, and the other Promissory; in the Declaratory part the man
thus takes it, he does declare and testify in his conscience that the Kings
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or
causes as temporal, etc. And in the Promissory part, 1 Eliz. c. 1.
they make Oath and swear, that to their power they will assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies, and Authorities granted or
belonging to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. Put all which has been said
together, and it will appear, that if to have merum imperium, a full and
absolute command, and all the jura majestatis which belong to Sovereignty; if
to be so Supreme, as to hold immediately of God, to have all persons under him,
none but God above him; if to have all authority and jurisdiction to be vested
in him, and proceeding from him, and the material sword at his sole disposal
for the correcting of offenders, and the well ordering of his people; if to
have whole and entire power of rendering justice and final determination of all
causes to all manner of Subjects, as also to interpret and dispense with Laws;
and all this ratified and confirmed unto him by the solemn Oath of his Subjects
in the Court of Parliament, be enough to make an absolute Monarch: the Kings of
England are more absolute Monarchs than either of their Neighbors of France or
Spain.

If any thing may be said to detract from this, Pryn published a discourse
entitled, The supreme power of Parliaments and Kingdoms; and others in their
Pamphlets upon that Argument have made the Parliament so absolute, and the King
so limited, that of the two, the Members of the Houses are the greater
Monarchs. But this is but a new device, not heard of in our former Monuments
and Records of Law; nor proved, or to be proved indeed by any other Medium than
the Rebellions of Cade, Tiler, Straw, Kett, Mackerel, Prynns book of Parl. etc.
pt. 3.
and the rest of that rascal rabble; or the seditious Parliaments in the time
of King Henry III. King Edward II. and King Richard II. when civil war and
faction carried all before it. For neither have the Houses, or either of them
enjoyed such Sovereignty de facto in times well settled, and Parliaments
lawfully assembled, nor ever could pretend to the same de jure. Or if they do,
as many have been apt enough to raise false pretenses, it would much trouble
them to determine whether this Sovereignty be conferred upon them by the King
or the People, whether it be in either of the Houses severally, or in both
united. If they can challenge this pretended Sovereignty in neither of these
capacities, nor by none of these titles, it may be warrantably concluded that
there is no such Sovereignty as they do pretend to. And first there is no part
nor branch of Sovereignty conferred upon them by the King. The Writs of
Summons, which the Deelaration of the Lords and Commons assembled at Oxon.
1643. does most truly call the foundation of all power in Parliament,
Declaration of the Trtaty. p. 15.
tell us no such matter. The Writ directed to the Lords does enable them only
to confer and treat with one another, and consilium vestrum impendere, and to
advise the King in such weighty matters as concern the safety of the Kingdom.
But they are only to advise, not compel the King, to counsel him, but not
control him; and to advise and counsel are no marks of Sovereignty, but rather
works of service and subordination. Nor can they come to give this Counsel
without he invite them, and being invited by his Writ cannot choose but come,
except he excuse them: which are sure notes of duty and subjection, but verry
sorry signs of power and sovereignty. It Is true, that being come together, they
may and sometimes do, on a Writ of Error, examine, and reverse or affirm such
judgments as have been given in the Kings Bench; and from their sentence in the
case there is no appeal, but only to the whole body of that Court, the King,
Case of our Assairs, p. 7, 8.
and both the Houses, the Head and Members. But this they do, not as the upper
House of Parliament, but as the distinct Court of the Kings Barons of
Parliament, of a particular and ministerial jurisdiction, to some intents and
purposes, and to some alone: which though it does invest them with a power of
judicature, confers not any thing upon them which belongs to Sovereignty. Then
for the Commons, all which the Writ does call them to, is facere and
consentire, to do and consent unto such things which are ordained by the Lords
and Common Council of the Kingdom of England, and sure conformity and consent,
(which is all the Writ requires from them) are no marks of Sovereignty, nor
can an Argument be drawn from thence by the subtlest Sophister, to show that
they are called to be partakers of the Sovereign power, or that the King
intends to denude himself of any branch or leaf thereof to hide their
nakedness. And being met together in a body collective, they are so far from
having any share in Sovereignty, that they cannot properly be called a Court of
Judicature, as neither having any power to minister an Oath, Id. p. 9.
or to imprison any body (except it be some of their own Members if they see
occasion) which are things incident to all Courts of Justice, and to every
Steward of a Leet, insomuch that the House of Commons is compared by some (and
not incongruously) unto the Grand Inquest at a general Sessions, whose
principal work it is to receive Bills, and prepare businesses, Review of the
Observat. p. 22.
and make them fit and ready for my Lords the Judges. Nay so far were they
heretofore from the thoughts of Sovereignty, that they were liable to suits and
punishments for things done in Parliament, though only to the prejudice of a
private Subject, until King Henry VIII. most graciously passed a Law for their
indemnity. For whereas Richard Strode, one of the company of Tinners in the
County of Cornwall, being a Member of the Commons House, had spoken somewhat to
the prejudice of that Society, and contrary to the Ordinances of the
Stanneries; at his return into the Country, he was Arrested, Fined, Imprisoned.
Complaint whereof being made in Parliament, the King passed a Law to this
effect, viz. That all suites, condemnations, 4 Hen. 8. c. 8.
executions, charges and impositions put or hereafter to be put upon Richard
Strode, and every of his Accomplices that be of this Parliament, or any other
hereafter, for any Bill, speaking, or reasoning of any thing concerning the
Parliament to be communed and treated of, shall be void and null: But neither
any reparation was allowed to Strode, nor any punishment inflicted upon those
that sued him, for ought appears upon Record. And for the Houses joined
together (which is the last capacity they can claim it in) they are so far from
having the supreme Authority, that (as it is observed by a learned Gentleman)
they cannot so unite or conjoyn as to be an entire Court either of Sovereign or
Ministerial jurisdiction; no otherwise cooperating than by concurrence of
Votes in their several Houses, for preparing matters in order to an Act of
Parliament: Case of our Affairs, p. 9.
Which when they have done, they are so far from having any legal Authority in
the State, as that in Law there is no style nor form of their joint Acts; nor
does the Law so much as take notice of them until they have the Royal Assent.
So that considering that the two Houses alone do no way make an entire Body or
Court, and that there is no known style nor form of any Law or Edict, by the
Votes of the two Houses only, nor any notice taken of them by the Law; it is
apparent that there is no Sovereignty in their two Votes alone. How far the
practice of the Lords and Commons which remained at Westminster, after so many
of both Houses had repaired to the King, etc. may create Precedents unto
Posterity, I am not able to determine: but sure I am, they have no Precedent to
show from the former Ages. But let us go a little further and suppose for
granted, that the Houses either joint or separate be capable of the
Sovereignty, were it given unto them: I would fain know whether they claim it
from the King, or the People only. Not from the King, for he confers upon them
no further power than to debate and treat of his great Affairs, to have access
unto his person, freedom of speech, (as long as they contain themselves within
the bounds of Loyalty) authority over their own Members: Hakewell of passing
Bills in Parliament.
which being customarily desired, and of course obtained (as it relates unto
the Commons) shows plainly, that these vulgar privileges are nothing more the
rights of Parliament than the favors of Princes, but yet such favors as
impart not the least power of Sovereignty. Nor does the calling of a Parliament
ex opere operato, as you know who phrase it, either denude the King of the
poorest robe of all his Royalty, or confer the same upon the Houses, or on
either of them; whether the King intend so by his call, or otherwise. For Bodin
(whom Mr. Prynn has honored with the title of a grand Politician, Prynn of
Parliament. par. 2. p. 45. Bodin. de Repub.
does affirm expressly, Principis majestatem nec Comitorum convocatione, nec
Senatus populique praesentia minui, that the Majesty or Sovereignty of the King
is not a jot diminished, either by the calling of a Parliament or Conventus
Ordinum, or by the frequency and presence of his Lords and Commons. Nay to say
truth, the Majesty of Sovereign Princes is never so transcendent and
conspicuous as when they sit in Parliament with their States about them, the
King then standing in his highest Estate, as was once said by Henry VIII. who
knew (as well as any of the Kings of England) how to keep up the Majesty of the
Crown Imperial. Nor can they claim it from the People, who have none to give;
for nemo dat quod non habet, as the saying is. The King (as has been proved
before) does hold his Royal Crown immediately from God himself, not from the
contract of the People. He writes not populi clementia, but Dei gratia, not by
the favor of the People, but by the grace of God. The consent and approbation
of the People (used and not used before the day of Coronation) is reckoned only
as a part of the solemn pomps which are then accustomably used. The King is
actually King to all intents and purposes in the Law whatever, immediately on
the death of his Predecessor. Nor ever was it otherwise objected in the Realm
of England, till Clark and Watson pleaded it at their Arraignment in the first
year of King James. Speeds History in K James.
Or grant we that the Majesty of this Kingdom was first originally in the
people, and by them devolved upon the King by their joint consent: yet having
given away that power by their said consent, and settled it upon the King by an
Act of State, confirmed by Oaths and all Solemnities which that Act requires;
they cannot so retract that grant, or make void that gift, as to pass a new
conveyance of it, and settle it upon their Representees in the House of
Commons. Or if they could, yet this would utterly exclude all the Lords from
having the least share or portion in this new found Sovereignty; in that they
represent not the common people, but sit there only in their own personal
capacities, and therefore must submit at last to these new made Sovereigns, who
carry both the Purse and Sword at their own girdles. So then the people cannot
give the Sovereignty, and if they have no power to give it, the Lords and
Commons have no claim thereunto de jure. See we next therefore how much of this
Sovereignty they or their Predecessors rather have enjoyed de facto, in
peaceable and regular times, fit to be drawn into example in the Ages
following. The chief particulars in which the Sovereignty consists we have seen
before; and will now see whether that any of them have been exercised and
enjoyed in peaceable and regular times by both, or either of the two Houses of
Parliament. And first for calling and dissolving Parliaments, making of Peers,
granting of liberty to Towns and Cities, to make choice of Burgesses, which
anciently had no such liberty, treating with foreign States, denouncing War, or
making Leagues or Peace after War commenced, granting safe conduct and
protection, indenizing of Aliens, giving of honors unto eminent and deserving
persons, Rewarding, Pardoning, Coining, Printing, making of Corporations, and
dispensing with the Laws in force; they are such points which never Parliament
did pretend to till these later times, wherein every thing almost is lawful (I
am sure more lawful) than to fear God and honor the King. Nor do I find that
Mr. Prynn has labored to entitle them to these particulars. For levying of
Arms, and the command of the Militia, besides that the Kings of England have
ever been in possession of it, and that possession never disturbed or
interrupted by any claim of right made in the behalf of the two Houses, (which
is as sure a title as the Law can make): the Houses have declared by an Act of
Parliament, Stat. 7. Ed. 1. Cap. 1.
that of right it belongs unto the King straightly to defend (that is prohibit)
all force of Arms, and that the Parliament is bound to aid him in that
prohibition. Touching the Royal Navy, and the Ports and Forts, the Kings
prescription to them is so strong and binding, 3. Edw. 3.
that in the 3d. of Edward III. the House of Commons did disclaim the having
cognizance of such matters as the guarding of the Seas, and marches of the
Kingdom; which certainly they had not done, had they pretended any title to the
Ports and Navy. As for suppressing tumults, and providing for the safety of the
Kingdom against sudden danger, the Law commits it solely to the care of the
King; 11 Henr. 7. c. 18.
obliging every Subject by the duty of his allegiance to aid and assist him at
all seasons when need shall require. And for their power of declaring Law in
the House of Peers, wherein they deliver their opinion in the point before
them, in true propriety of speech they have none at all. Case of our Affairs.
p. 4.
And this is that which was affirmed by his Majesty at the end of the
Parliament, Anno 1628. saying, that it belonged only to the Judges under him to
interpret Laws, and that none of the Houses of Parliament joint or separate
(what new Doctrine soever might be raised) had any power either to make or
declare Law without his consent. 3 Car.
And if it be done with his consent, it is not so properly the declaring and
interpreting of an old Law, as the making rather of a new, says a learned
Gentleman. Case of our Affairs, p. 5.


Others have found out a new way to invest the Parliament with the Robes of
Sovereignty, not as superior to the King, but coordinate with him: and this,
say they, appears sufficiently in that the two Houses of Parliament have not
only a power of consulting but of consenting, and that too in the highest
office of the Monarchy, (whereof they are a Co-ordinative part) the making of
Laws. Fuller Answer to D.F. p. 2.
Which dangerous doctrine as it was built at first on that former error which
makes the King to be one of the three Estates in Parliament, so it is
super-structed with some necessary consequents; whether more treasonable or
ridiculous, it is hard to say. For on these grounds the Author of the Fuller
Answers has presented us with these trim devises, Id. page 1.
viz. that England is not a simple subordinate and absolute, but a
co-ordinative and mixed Monarchy; that this mixed Monarchy is compounded of three
coordinate Estates, a King and two Houses of Parliament; that these three make
but one supreme, but that one is a mixed one, or else the Monarchy were not
mixed; and finally, which needs must follow from the premises, that although
every Member of the Houses seorsim, taken severally, may be called a Subject,
yet all collective in their Houses are no Subjects. Auditum admissi risum
teneatis? Can any man hear these serious follies and abstain from laughter? or
think a fellow who pretends both to wit and learning should talk thus of a
Monarchy (which every one that knows any thing in Greek, know to imply the
supreme government of one) compounded of three to-ordinate Estates, and those
coordinate Estates consisting of no fewer than 600 persons? Or that a man who
can pretend but to so much use of reason, as to distinguish him from a beast,
cauld fall on such a senseless dotage, as to make the same man at the same time
to be a Subject and no Subject; a Subject in the Streets, and in his private
House, no Subject when he sits in Haberdashers Hall for advance of moneys, or
in either of the two Houses of Parliament? And yet this senseless doctrine is
become so dangerous, because so universally admired and hearkened to, that the
beginning and continuance of our long disturbances may chiefly be ascribed unto
this opinion, to which they have seduced the poor ignorant people. The rather
in regard that some who have undertaken the confutation of these brainless
follies, have most improvidently granted not only that the two Houses of
Parliament are in a sort coordinate with the King ad aliquid, to some Act or
exercising of the supreme power, As in the book called Conscience satisfied.
that is to the making of Laws; but that this co-ordination of the three
Estates (of which the King is yielded every where for one) is fundamental, and
held by the two Houses on no worse a title than a fundamental Constitution;
which is as much as any reasonable Parliamentarian need desire to have.
Therefore in Answer to the Fuller, (not taking notice of his foolish and
seditious inferences) we will clear those points. 1. That the two Houses of
Parliament are not co ordinate with the King, but subordinate to him. And 2.
That the power of making Laws is properly and legally in the King alone. As for
the first, we had before a Recognition made by Act of Parliament, by which the
Kingdom of England is acknowledged to be an Empire governed by one supreme Head
and King, to whom all sorts and degrees of people ought to bear next to God a
natural and humble obedience; 24 H. 8. c. 12.
which certainly the Lords and Commons had not made to the dethroning of
themselves, their Heirs and Successors from this co-ordinative part of
Sovereignty, if any such co-ordination had been then believed. Or if it be
supposed, to excuse the matter, that King Henry VIII. being a severe and
terrible Prince, did wrest this Recognition from them (which yet will hardly
serve for a good defense:) what shall we say to the like recognition made in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, 1 Eliz. c. 1.
when she was green in State, and her power unsettled, and so less apt to work
upon her people by threats and terrors? Assuredly had the Houses dreamed in
those broken times of that co-ordinative Sovereignty, which is now pretended,
they might have easily regained it, and made up that breach, which by the
violent assaults of King Henry VIII. had been made upon them: which was a point
they never aimed at. Besides, if this co-ordinative Majesty might be once
admitted, it must needs follow, that though the King has no Superior, he has
many Equals; and where there is equality there is no subjection. But Bracton
tells us in plain terms, not only that the King has no Superior in his Realm,
except God Almighty, but no Equal neither; and the reason which he gives is
exceeding strong, Quia sic amitteret praeceptum, cum par in Parem non habeat
potestatem, Beacton de leg. Angl. l. 1. c. 8.
because he could not have an Equal, but with the loss of his Authority and
Regal Dignity, considering that one Equal has no power to command another. Now
lest the Fuller should object (as perhaps he may) that this is spoken of the
King out of times of Parliament, and of the Members of the Houses seorsim,
taken severally as particular persons; but when they are convened in
Parliament, then they are Sovereigns and no Subjects: first he must know, that
by the Statute of Queen Elizabeth, all of the House of Commons are to take the
Oath before remembered for the defending of all preheminences, and authorities
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and for bearing faith
and true allegiance to the King, his Heirs and lawful Successors: and that if
any of them do refuse this Oath, Stat. 5. Eliz. 1.
he is to have no voice in Parliament. 2. He cannot choose but know, that even
sedente Parliamento, both the Lords and Commons use to address themselves to
his Sacred Majesty in the way of supplication and petition, (and certainly it
is not the course for men of equal rank to send Petitions unto one another);
and that in those Petitions they do style themselves his Majesty's most humble
and obedient Subjects. Which is not only used as the common Complement which
the hypocrisy of these times has taken up, (though possibly it might be no
otherwise meant in some late addresses) but is the very phrase in some Acts of
Parliament, 25 Hen. 8. c. 22. etc.
as in the Acts at large does at full appear. 3. They may be pleased to know,
how happy a thing it was for the Realm of England that this Fuller did not live
in former times. For had he broached this Doctrine some Ages since, he would
have made an end of Parliaments. Princes are very jealous of the smallest
points of Sovereignty, and love to Reign alone without any Rivals: their Souls
being equally made up of Pompeys and Caesar's, and can as little brook an Equal,
as endure a Superior. And lastly, I must let him know what Bodinus says, who
tells us this, Legum ac edictorum probatio aut publicatio quae in Curia vel
Senatu fieri solet, Bedin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.
non arguit imperii majestatem in Senatu vel Curia inesse, viz. That the
publishing and approbation of Laws and Edicts which is made ordinarily in the
Court or Parliament, proves not the Majesty of the State to be in the said
Court or Parliament. And therefore if the power of confirmation or rejecting be
of a greater trust and more high concernment, than that of consulting and
consenting, as no doubt it is, the power of consulting and consenting, which
the Fuller does ascribe to the two Houses of Parliament, will give them but a
sorry title to Coordinative Sovereignty.

This leads me on unto the Power of making Laws, tanquam in proprio Subjecto,
as in the true and adequate subject of that Power. And for the proof thereof, I
shall thus proceed. When the Norman Conqueror first came in, as he won the
Kingdom by the Sword, so did he govern it by his Power: His Sword was then the
Scepter, and his Will the Law. There was no need on his part, of an Act of
Parliament; much less of calling all the Estates together, to know of them
after what Form, and by what Laws they would be governed. It might as well be
said of him, as in the flourish and best times of the Roman Emperors, Justin.
Institut. l. 1. c.
Quod Principi placuerit legis babet vigorem, that whatsoever the King willed
it did pass for Law. This King and some of his Successors being then (...), and
having a despotical power on the lives and fortunes of their Subjects, which
they disposed of for the benefit of their Friends and followers, Normans,
French, and Flemings, as to them seemed best. But as the Subjects found the
Yoke to be too heavy and insupportable; so they addressed themselves in their
Petitions to the Kings their Sovereigns, to have that Yoke made easier, and the
burden lighter, especially in such particulars, of which they were most
sensible at the present time. By this means they obtained first to have the
Laws of Edward the Confessor, contained for the most part in the Great Charter
afterward: and by this means, that is to say, by pouring out their prayers and
desires unto them, did they obtain most of the Laws and Statutes, which are now
remaining of the time of King Henry the 3d, and King Edward the first. Many of
which as they were issued at the first either in Form of Charters under the
Great Seal, or else as Proclamations of Grace and Favor; so do they carry
still this mark of their first procuring, the King wills, the King
commands, the King ordains, the King provideth, the King grants, etc. And
when the Kings were pleased to call their Estates together, it was not out of
an Opinion that they could not give away their Power, or dispense their
Favors, or abate any thing of the severity of their former Government, without
the approbation and consent of their people: but out of just fear lest any one
of the three Estates (I mean the Clergy, the Nobility, and the Commons) should
insist on any thing, which might be prejudicial to the other two. The Commons
being always on the Craving part, and suffering as much perhaps from their
immediate Lords, as from their King, might possibly have asked some things
which were as much derogatory to the Lords (under whom they held) as of their
Sovereign Liege the King, the chief Lord of all. In this respect, the Counsel
and Consent as well of the Prelates as the Temporal Lords, was accounted
necessary, in passing of all Acts of Grace and Favor to the people: because
that having many Royalties and large immunities of their own, a more near,
relation to the person, and a greater interesse in the honor of their Lord the
King; nothing should pass unto the prejudice and diminution of their own
Estates, or the disabling of the King to support his Sovereignty. And this for
long time was the Style of the following Parliaments, viz. To the honor of God
and of holy Church, Preface, an. 1 Ed. 3.
and to the redress of the oppressions of the people, our Sovereign Lord the
King, etc. at the request of the Commonalty of his Realm, by their Petition
made before him and his Council in the Parliament, by the Assent of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men assembled in the said Parliament,
has granted for him and his Heirs, etc. To this effect, but with some little
(and but a very little) variation of the words, was the usual Style in all the
Prefaces or Preambles of the Acts of Parliament, from the beginning of the
Reign of King Edward the 3d, till the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the
7th, save that sometimes we find the Lords complaining, 10 Ed. 3. etc. 21 Ed.
3. etc. 28 Ed. 3. etc.
or petitioning, and the Commons assenting, as their occasion did require: and
sometime also no other motive represented, but the Kings great desire to
provide for the ease and safety of his people, upon deliberation had with the
Prelates and Nobles, and learned men assisting with their mutual Counsel. 23
Ed. 3.
And all this while there is no question to be made, but that the power of
making Laws was conceived to be the chiefest Flower of the Royal Diadem, to
which the Lords and Commons neither joint nor separate, did not pretend the
smallest Title more than petitioning for them, or assenting to them: it being
wholly left to the Kings Grace and goodness, whether he would give ear or not
to their Petitions, or hearken unto such Advice as the Lords or other great men
gave him in behalf of his people. And this is that which was declared in the
Parliament by the Lords and Commons (and still holds good as well in point of
Law as Reason) that it belonged unto the regality of the King to grant or deny
what Petitions in Parliament be pleases. But as the Kings came in upon
doubtful Titles, 2 Hen. 5.
or otherwise were necessitated to comply with the peoples humors, (as
sometimes they were) so did the Parliaments make use of the opportunities for
the increase of their Authority, at least in the formalities of Law, and other
advantages of expression. So that in the minority of King Henry the sixth, unto
those usual words by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and at the special instance and request of the Commons (which were inserted
ordinarily into the body of the Acts from the beginning of the Reign of King
Henry the sixth,) was added this, By the Authority of the said Parliament. But
still it is to be observed, 3 Hen. 6. c. 2. and 8 H. 6.3. etc.
that though those words were added to the former clause, yet the power of
granting or ordaining was acknowledged to belong to the King alone; as in the
places in the Margin, where it is said, Our Lord the King considering the
premises, by the advice and assent, and at the request aforesaid, has ordained
and granted by the Authority of the said Parliament, 3 H. 6.2. and our Lord the
King considering, etc. has ordained and established by Authority of this
Parliament, 8 H. 6.3. And thus it generally stood, (but every general Rule may
have some exceptions) till the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the
seventh. about which time that usual clause, the special instance or request of
the Commons, began by little and little to be laid aside, and that of their
advice or assent to be inserted in the place thereof: for which I do refer you
to the Book at large. Which though it were some alteration of the former style,
and that those words By the Authority of this present Parliament, may make men
think that the Lords and Commons did then pretend some Title unto the power of
making Laws: yet neither advising or assenting are so operative in the present
case as to transfer the power of making Laws to such as do advise about them,
or assent unto them; nor can the alteration of the Forms and styles used in
anitient times, import an alteration of the Form of Government, unless it can
be showed, (as I think it cannot) that any of our Kings did renounce that
Power, which properly and solely did belong unto them, or did by any solomn Act
of Communication, confer the same upon the Lords and Commons convened in
Parliament. And this is that which is resolved and declared in our Common Law,
where it is said, Cited in the unlawfulness of resist. p. 107.
Le Roy fait les loix avec le consent du Seigneurs et communs, et non pas les
Seigneurs et communs avec le consent du Roy, that is to say, that the King
makes Laws in Parliament by the assent of the Lords and Commons, and not the
Lords and Commons by the assent of the King. And for a further proof of this,
and for the clearing of this point, that the Lords and Commons pretend to no
more power in the making of Laws, than opportunity to propound and advise about
them, and on mature advice to give their several Assents unto them, we need but
look into the first Act of the Parliament in the third year of K. Charles,
being a Recognition of some ancient rights belonging to the English Subject. An
Act conceived according to the Primitive Form, Statut. 3 Carol.
in way of a Petition to the Kings most excellent Majesty, in which the Lords
and Commons do most humbly pray as their Rights and Liberties, that no such
things as they complained of, might be done hereafter; that his Majesty would
vouchsafe to declare that the Awards, doings, and proceedings to the prejudice
of his people in any of the premises, shall not be drawn hereafter into
consequence or example, and that he would be pleased to declare his Royal
pleasure, that in the point aforesaid all his Offieers and Ministers should
serve him according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. To which although
the King returned a fair general Answer, assuring them that his Subjects should
have no cause for the time to come to complain of any wrong or oppressions
contrary to their just Rights and Liberties; yet this gave little fatisfaction
till he came in person, and causing the Petition to be distinctly read by the
Clerk of the Crown, Ibid.
returned his Answer in these words, Soit droit fait come est desire, that is
to say, let right be done as is desired. Which being the very formal words by
which the said Petition and every clause and Article therein contained, became
to be a Law and to have the force of an Act of Parliament; and being there is
nothing spoken of the concurrent Authority of the Lords and Commons for the
enacting of the same, may serve instead of many Arguments for the proof of
this, that the Legislative power as we phrase it now, is wholly and solely in
the King; although restrained in the exercise and use thereof by constant
custom, Smith de Rep. Angl.
unto the counsel and consent of the Lords and Commons. Le Roy veult or the
King will have it so, is the imperative phrase by which the Propositions of the
Lords and Commons are made Acts of Parliament. And let the Lords and Commons
agitate and propound what Laws they please for their ease and benefit (as
generally all Laws and Statutes are more for the ease and benefit of the
Subject, than the advantage of the King): yet as well now, as formerly in the
times of the Roman Emperors, Quod Principi placuerit legis habet vigorem,
nothing but that which the King pleases to allow of, is to pass for Law: the
Laws not taking their coercive force (as judicious Hooker well observes) from
the quality of such as devise them, but from the Power which gives them the
strength of Laws. Pooker Ecclesiast. Pol.
I shut up this Discourse with this expression and comparison of a late Learned
Gentleman, viz, That as in a Copyhold Estate, the Copyholder of a mere Tenant
at will comes by custom to gain an Inheritance, and so to limit and restrain
the will and power of the Lord, that he cannot make any determination of the
Copyholders Estate otherwise than according to the custom of the Manor; and
yet does not deprive the Lord of his Lordship in the Copyhold, nor participate
with him in it, neither yet divest the Fee and Franktenement out of the Lord,
Case of our Affairs. p. 6.
but that they still remain in him, and are ever parcel of his Demesne: so in
the restraining of the Kings Legislative power to the concurrence of the Peers
and Commons, though the custom of the Kingdom has so fixed and settled the
restraint, as that the King cannot in that point use his Sovereign power
without the concurrence of the Peers and Commons according to the custom of the
Kingdom; yet still the Sovereignty (and with it the inseparable Legislative
power) does reside solely in the King.

If any hereupon demand to what end serve Parliaments, much every way. Romans 3.2.
Many vexations oftentimes do befall the Subjects without the knowledge of the
King, and against his will, to which his Ears are open in a time of Parliament.
The King at other times uses the Eyes and Ears of such as have place about
him, who may perhaps be guilty of the wrongs which are done the people: but in
a Parliament he sees with his own Eyes, and hears with his own Ears, and so
is in a better way to redress the mischief than he could be otherwise. Nor do
the people by the opportunity of these Parliamentary meetings, obtain upon
their Prayers and Petitions a redress of grievances only, but many times the
King is overcome by their importunity to abate so much of his Power, to grant
such points, and pass such Laws and Statutes for their ease and benefit, as
otherwise he would not yield to. For certainly it is as true in making our
approaches and Petitions to our Lord the King, as in the pouring out of our
Prayers and supplications to the Lord our God: the more multitudinous and
united the Petitioners are, the more like to speed. And therefore said Bodinus
truly, Principem plaeraque universis concedere quae singulis denegarentur,
Bodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.
that Kings do many times grant those favors to the whole body of their
people, which would be absolutely denied or not so readily yielded to
particular persons. There are moreover many things of greater concernment,
(besides the abrogating of old Laws and making new) which having been formerly
recommended by the Kings of England, to the care and counsel of their people
convened in Parliament, are not now regularly dispatched but in such
Conventions: as are altering the Tenure of Lands, confirming the Rights,
Titles, and possessions of private men, naturalizing Aliens, legitimating
Bastards, adding sometimes the secular Authority to such points of Doctrine and
Forms of Worship as the Clergy have agreed upon in their Convocations, if it be
required, changing the public weights and measures throughout the Kingdom,
defining of such doubtful cases as are not easily resolved in the Courts of
Law, raising of Subsidies and Taxes, attainting such as either are too potent
to be caught, or too hard to be found, and so not triable in the ordinary
Courts of Justice; restoring to their Blood and Honors such, or the Heirs of
such, as have been formerly attainted; granting of free and general Pardons,
with diverse others of this nature. In all and each of these the Lords and
Commons do cooperate to the public good, Sir Tho. Smith, de Rep. Angl.
Cambden in Brit. Crompt. of Courts, etc.
in the way of means and preparation, but their co operation would be lost and
fruitless, did not the King by his Concomitant or subsequent grace produce
their good intentions into perfect Acts; and being Acts either of special Grace
and Favor, or else of ordinary Right and Justice, no way derogatory to the
Prerogative Royal, are usually confirmed by the Royal assent, without stop or
hesitancy. But then, some other things there are of great importance and
advantage to the Commonwealth, in which the Houses usually do proceed even to
final sentence (the Commons in the way of inquisition or Impeachment, the Lords
in that of Judicature and determination) with the consent and approbation of
the King, though many times without his personal assent and presence. The King
may be abused in his Grants and Patents, to the oppression of the people, or
the dilapidation and destruction of the Royal Patrimony; Judges, and other the
great Officers of Law and Equity are subject to corruptions, and may smell of
gifts, whereby the passages of Justices do become obstructed; The Ministers of
inferior Courts as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, either exhaust the miserable
Subject by Extortions, or else consume him by delays; Erroneous judgments may
be given through fear or favor to the undoing of a man and his whole
posterity, in which his Majesty's Justices of either Bench can afford no
remedy; The great Ones of the State may become too insolent, and the poor too
miserable; and many other ways there are by which the Fabric of the State may
be out of Order: for the removing of which mischiefs, the rectifying of which
abuses, the Lords and Commons in their several ways before remembered, are of
special use; yet so, that if the King's Grants do come in question, or any of
his Officers are called to a reckoning, they used heretofore to signify unto
his Majesty what they found therein, and he accordingly either revoked his
Grants, or displaced his Servants, or by some other means gave way unto their
contentment: the Kings consent being always necessary, and received as a part
of the final sentence, if they went so far. So that we may conclude this point
with these words of Bodin, who being well acquainted with the Government of
this State and Nation, partly by way of Conference with Dr. Dale the Queens
Ambassador in France, and partly in the way of observation when he was in
England, does give this resolution of the point in Controversy, Bodin. de
Repub. l. 1. o. 8.
Habere quidem Ordines Anglorum authoritatem quandam, jura vero majestatis, and
imperii summam in unius Principis arbitrio versari. The States says he of
England have a kind of Authority, but all the Rights of Sovereignty and command
in chief, are at the will and pleasure of the Prince alone.

And to say truth, 4 Ed. 1.
For in the Statute of Bigamie made in the fourth year of King Edward I. it is
said expressly, That in the prefence of certain Reverend Fathers, Bishops of
England, and others of the Kings Council, the Constitutions underwritten were
recited, and after published before the King his Council, forasmuch as all the
Kings Council, as well Justices as others did agree, that they should be put in
writing and observed. In the Articuli super Chartas, when the Great Charter was
confirmed at the request of the Prelates, 28 Ed. 1. c. 2.
Earls, and Barons, we find these two claufes: the one in the beginning thus,
Nevertheless the King and his Council do not intend, by reason of this Statute,
Ibid. c. 20.
to diminish the Kings right, etc. The other in the clofe of all in these
following words, And notwithstanding all these things mentioned, or any part of
them, both the King and his Council, and all they which were present at the
making of this Ordinance, do will and intend that the Right and Prerogative of
his Crown shall be saved in all things. In the 27th of King Edward the 3d. The
Commons presenting a Petition to the King, 27 Ed. 3.
which the Kings Council did mislike, were content thereupon to mend and
explain their Petition, the Form of which Petition is in these words following.
To their most redoubted Sovereign Lord the King, praying the Commons, that
whereas they have prayed him to be discharged of all manner of Articles of the
Lyre, etc. which Petition seems to his Council to be prejudicial unto him,
and in disherison of his Crown if it were so generally granted; his said
Commons not willing not desiring to demand things of him, which should fall in
disherison of him or of his Crown perpetually, as of Escheats, etc. but of
Trespasses, Misprifions, Negligences, and Ignorances, etc. In the 13th of the
reign of King Richard the 2d, when the Commons did pray that upon pain of
forfeiture, the Chancellor, or Council of the King should not after the end of
the Parliament make any Ordinance against the Common Law, 13 Rich. 2.
the King (by the advice of his Council) answered, Let it be used as it has
been used before this time, so as the Regality of the King be saved, for the
King will save his Regalities, 4 Hen. 4.
as his Predecessors have done. In the 4th year of King Henry IV. when the
Commons complained against Sub-poenae's and other Writs grounded upon false
suggestions, the King (upon the same advice) returned this Answer, that he
would give in charge to his Officers, that they should abstain more than before
time they had to send for his Subjects in that manner. But yet (says he) it is
not our intention that our Officers shall so abstain, that they may not send
for our Subjects in matters and causes necessary, as it has been used in the
time of our good Progenitors. Finally, not to bring forth more particulars in a
case so clear, it was the constant custom in all Parliaments, till the Reign of
King Henry V. that when any Bill had passed both Houses, Henr. 5.
and was presented to the King for his Royal Assent, the King by the abvice of
his Privy Council, or his Council learned in the Laws, or sometimes of both,
did use to cross out and obliterate as much or as little of it as he pleased,
to leave out what he liked not, and confirmed the rest; that only which the
King confirmed being held for Law. And though in the succeeding times the Kings
did graciously vouchsafe to pass the whole Bill in that Form which the Houses
gave it, or to reject it wholly as they saw occasion: yet still the Privy
Council, and the Judges, and the Council learned in the Laws, have and enjoy
their place in the House of Peers, as well for preservation of the Kings Rights
and Royalties, as for direction to the Lords in a point of Law, if any case of
difficulty be brought before them; on which occasions the Lords are to demand
the Opinion of the Judges, and upon their Opinions to ground their Judgment. As
for Example, In the Parliament 28 of Hen. VI. The Commons made suit that
William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk should be committed to Prison for many
Treasons and other Crimes, and thereupon the Lords demanded the Opinion of the
Judges, 28 Hen. 6.
whether he should be committed to Prison or not; whose Answer was, that he
ought not to be committed in regard the Commons had not charged him with any
particular offense, but with generals only; which Opinion was allowed and
followed. In another Parliament of the said King, held by Prorogation, one
Thomas Thorpe the Speaker of the House of Cemmons, was in the Prorogation-time
condemned in 1000 l. damages, upon an Action of Trespass at the suit of Richard
Duke of York, and was committed to Prison for execution of the same. The
Parliament being reassembled, the Commons made suit to the King and Lords to
have their Speaker delivered to them, according to the Privilege of
Parliaments: The priviled. of the Barons. p. 15.
the Lords demanded the Opinion of the Judges in it, and upon their Answer, did
conclude, that the Speaker should stilll remain in Prison according to Law,
notwithstanding the privilege of Parliament; and according to this resolution
the Commons were commanded in the Kings name to choose one Tho. Carleton for
their Speaker, which was done accordingly. Other Examples of this kind are
exceeding obvious, and for numbers infinite; yet neither more in number, nor
more obvious than those of our Kings serving their turns by and upon their
Parliaments, as their occasions did require. For not to look on higher and more
Regal times, we find that Richard the 2d, a Prince not very acceptable to the
Common people, could get an Act of Parliament, 21 Ric. 2.
to confirm the extrajudicial Opinion of the Judges, given before at Notingham;
that King Henry IV. could by another Act reverse all that Parliament, entail
the Crown to his posterity, 1 Hen. 4.
and keep his Duchy of Laneaster and all the Lands and Scigneuries of it, from
being united to the Crown; that King Edward the 4th could have a Parliament to
declare all the Kings of the House of Lancaster, to be Kings in Fact but not in
Right, 1 Ed. c. 1.
and for uniting of that Duchy to the Crown Imperial, notwithstanding the
former Act of separation; that King Richard the 3d could have a Parliament to
bastardize all his Brothers Children, Speeds Hist. in K. Richard 3. Verulams
Hist. of K. Hen. 7. 11 Hen. 7. c. 10.
to set the Crown on his own Head, though a most bloody Tyrant, and a plain
Usurper; that K. Henry VII. could have the Crown entailed by an Act of
Parliament, to the issue of his own body without relation to his Queen of the
House of York, which was conceived by many at that time to have the better
Title to it; another, for paying a Benevolence which he had required of the
Subject, though all Benevolences had been damned by a former Statute made in
the short, but bloody reign of King Richard the 3d, that King Henry VIII. could
have one Act of Parliament to bastardry his Daughter Mary, in favor of the
Lady Elizabeth; 65 Hen. 8. c. 22, and 28. c. 7. and 35 H. 8. c. 1.
another to declare the Lady Elizabeth to be illegitimate, in expectation of
the issue by Queen Jane Seymour; a third for settling the succession by his Will
and Testament, and what else he pleased; that Queen Mary could not only obtain
several Acts in favor of her self and the Sea of Rome, but for the settling of
the Regency on the King of Spain, 1 Mar. ses. 2. c. 1, 2. and 1. and 2 Ph. and
M. c. 8.10.
in case the Children of that Bed should be left in nonage. And finally that
Queen Elizabeth did not only gain many several Acts for the security of her own
Person, which were determinable with her life, but could procure an Act to be
passed in Parliament for making it high Treason to affirm and say, That the
Queen could not by Act of Parliament, bind and dispose the Rights and Titles
which any person whatsoever might have to the Crown. 13 Eliz. c. 1.
And as for raising moneys, and amassing Treasures by help of Parliaments, he
that desires to know how well our Kings have served themselves that way by the
help of Parliaments, let him peruse a book entitled, the Privilege of
Parliaments, writ in the manner of Dialogue between a Privy Counselor, and a
Justice of Peace, and he shall be satisfied to the full. Put all that has been
said together, and sure the Kingdom of England must not be the place, in which
the three Estates convened in Parliament have power to regulate the King, or
restrain his actions, or moderate his extravagances, or where they can be taxed
for persidious treachery, of they connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants,
or wantonly insult on the Common People, or otherwise abuse that power which
the Lord has given them. Calvin was much mistaken if he thought the contrary;
or if he dreamt that he should be believed on his ipse dixit, without a
punctual enquiry into the grounds and probability of such a dangerous
intimation as he lays before us.

But against this it is objected, Henry III. Edw. II. and King Richard the
second. Examples, which if rightly pondered, do not so much prove the Power, as
the Weakness of Parliaments, in being carried up and down by the private
conduct of every popular pretender. For it is well known that the Parliaments
did not take upon them to rule, or rather to overlook K. Henry III. but as
they were directed by Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, who having raised a
potent faction in the State, by the assistance of the Earls of Gloucester,
Matthew. Paris, Henr. 3.
Hereford, Derby, and some others of the great Lords of the Kingdom, compelled
the King to yield unto what terms he pleased, and made the Parliaments no other
than a means and instrument to put a popular gloss on his wretched purposes.
And it is well known that the ensuing Parliaments which they instance in, moved
not of their own accord to the deposing of K, Edw. the 2d, or K. Richard the
2d, but sailed as they were steered by those powerful Councils, which Qu.
Isabel in the one, Walsingham. in Hist. Angl. and Hypodig. Neustriae.
and Henry Duke of Lancaster in the other, did propose unto them. It was no
safe resisting those (as their cold wisdoms and forgotten loyalties did suggest
unto them) qui tot legionibus imperarent, who had so many thousand men in Arms
to make good their project, and they might think as the poor-spirited Citizens
of Samaria did in another case (but a case very like the present) Behold two
Kings stood not before him, 2 Kings 10.4.
how then can we stand? For had it been an Argument of the power of
Parliaments, that they deposed one King to set up another, dethroned King
Richard to advance the Duke of Lancaster to the Regal Diadem; they would have
kept the House of Lancaster in possession of it, (for the full demonstration of
a power indeed) and not have cast them off, at the first attempt of a new
plausible pretender, declared them to be kings in fact, but not in right, whose
lawful right they had before preferred above all other Titles, and set the
Crown upon the heads of their deadly Enemies. In the next place it is objected
that Parliaments are a great restraint of the Sovereign power (according to the
Doctrine here laid down by Calvin) in that the King can make no Laws, nor levy
any money upon the Subject, but by the counsel and assent of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament. But this Objection hurts as little as the
former did. For Kings, to say the truth need no Laws at all. In all such points
wherein they have not bound themselves by some former Laws made for the common
use and benefit of the Subject, they are left at liberty, and may proceed in
governing the people, given by God unto them, according to their own
discretion, and the advice of their Council. New Laws are chiefly made for the
Subjects benefit, at their desire, on their importunate requests, for their
special profit; not one in twenty, nay, I dare boldly say not one in an
hundred, made for the advantage of the King, either in the improvement of his
power, or the increase of his Revenue. Look over all the Acts of Parliaments,
from the beginning of the reign of King Henry III. to the present time, and
tell me he that can, if he finds it otherwise: Kings would have little use of
Parliaments, and less mind to call them, if nothing but the making of new Laws
were the matter aimed at. And as for raising Moneys and imposing Taxes, it
either must suppose the Kings to be always unthrifts, that they be always
indigent and necessitous, and behind-hand with the World (which are the
ordinary effects of ill husbandry) or else this Argument is lost, and of little
use: For if our Kings should husband their Estates to the best advantage, and
make the best benefit of such Escheats and forfeitures and confiscations as day
by day do fall unto them; If they should follow the Example of K. Henry VII.
and execute the penal Laws according to the power which those Laws have given
them, and the trust reposed in them by their People; if they should please to
examine their Revenue, and proportion their expense to their comings in, there
would be little need of Subsidies and supplies of money, more than the ordinary
aids and impositions upon Merchandise, which the Law allows of, and the known
rights of Sovereignty backed by prescription, and long custom have asserted to
them: So that it is by Accident, not by and Nature, that the Parliament has
any power or opportunity to restrain their King in this particular; for where
there is no need of asking, there is no occasion of denying; by consequence no
restraint upon, no baffle or affronting offered to the Regal power. And yet the
Sovereign need not fear (if he be tolerably careful of his own Estate) that any
reasonable demand of his in these money-matters, will meet with opposition or
denial in his Houses of Parliament. For whilst there are so many Acts of Grace
and Favor to be done in Parliament (as what almost in every Parliament but an
enlargement of the Kings favors to his people) and that none can be done in
Parliament but with the Kings siat and consent: there is no question to be
made, but that the two Houses of Parliament will far sooner choose to supply the
King (as all wise Parliaments have done) than rob the Subject of the benefit of
his Grace and Favors, which is the best fruit they reap from Parliaments.
Finally, whereas it is Objected (but I think it in sport) that the old Lord
Burleigh used to say, that he knew not what a Parliament in England could not
do; and that K. James once said in a Parliament, that then there were 500
Kings, which words were taken for a Concession that all were Kings as well as
he in a time of Parliament; they who have given us these Objections do either
misunderstand their Authors, or abuse themselves. For what the Lord Burleigh
said of Parliaments (though it be more than the wisest man alive can justify)
he spoke of Parliaments, according as the word is used in its proper sense; not
for the two Houses, or for either of them exclusive of the Kings presence and
consent; but for the supreme Court, for the highest Judicatory, consisting of
the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Representees of the Commons, and then it will not serve for the turn intended.
And what King James said once in jest (though I have often heard it used in
earnest upon this occasion) was spoken only in derision of some daring Spirits,
who laying by the modesty of their Predecessors, would needs be looking into
the Prerogative, or finding Errors and mistakes in the present Government, or
meddling with those Arcana imperii which former Parliaments beheld at distance,
with the eye of Reverence. But certainly King James intended nothing less than
to acknowledge a co-ordinative Sovereignty in the two Houses of Parliament, or
to make them his Copartners in the Regal power. His carriage and behavior
toward them in the whole course of his Government, clearly shows the contrary:
there never being Prince more jealous in the points of Sovereignty, nor more
incapable of a Rival in those points than he.

But yet the main Objection (which we may call the Objection paramount) does
remain unanswered. three Estates convened in Parliament, or any other popular
Magistrate, whom Calvin dreams of, be ordained by the Word of God, as Guardians
of the peoples Liberties; and therefore authorized to moderate and restrain the
power of Kings as often as they shall invade or infringe those liberties, as
Calvin plainly says they were; or that they know themselves to be ordained by
Gods Word to that end and purpose (cujus se lege Dei Tutores positos esse
norunt) as he says they do: then neither any discontinuance or non-usage on
their parts, nor any prescription to the contrary alleged by Kings and supreme
Princes, can hinder them from resuming and exercising that Authority which God
has given them, whenever they shall find a fit time for it. But first I
would fain learn of Calvin in what part of the Word of God we shall find any
such Authority given to those popular Magistrates (by what Name soever they are
called in their several Countries) as he tells us of. Not in the Old Testament
I am sure, though in the institution of the seventy Elders there be some hopes
of it. For when Moses first ordained those Elders, it was not to diminish any
part of that Power which was vested in him, but to ease himself of some part of
the burden which did lie upon him. And this appears plainly by the 18th
Chapter of the Book of Exodus. For when it was observed by Jethro his Father in
Law, that he attended the businesses of the people from morning till night, he
told him plainly ultra vires suas negotium esse, that the burden was too heavy
for him, verse. 18. and therefore that he should choose some Under Officers, and
place them over Thousands, over Hundreds, and over Fifties, and over Tens,
Verse. 21. Leviusque sit tibi partito in alios onere: that so it might be the
easier for him, those Officers bearing some part of the burden with him. Yet
so that these inferior Officers should only judge in matters of inferior
Nature, the greater matter being still reserved to his own Tribunal. Which
Counsel, as it was very well approved by Moses, so was it given by Jethro and
approved by Moses, with reference to the will and pleasure of Allmighty God,
Verse. 23. And what the Lord God did in it we shall find in the Book of Numbers
Chap. 11. For when Moses made complaint to God, that the Burden of all the
people was laid on him, Verse. 11. (where note it is the burden still which he
makes complaint of) and that he was not able to hear all the people alone,
because it was too heavy for him, Verse, 13. God willed him to make choice of
seventy of those Officers, which before he had placed over the people, and to
present them to him in the Tabernacle of the Congregation; where he would give
unto them the Spirit of Government, ut sustenent tecum onus populi, to the end
that they might bear the burden of the people with him, Verse. 17. Nothing in
all this, but the easing of the Supreme Magistrate of some part of the Burden,
which was before too heavy for him, without any diminution of his power in the
least respect. Nor does it make for Calvin's purpose, that God said to Moses,
that he would take of the Spirit which was upon him, and put it on the seventy
Elders, Verse. 17. the Spirit resting upon Moses in as full a measure as at
first it did, not lessened by the communication of it to those Under-officers.
And so the point is stated by two learned Writers, though otherwise of
different persuasions in the things of God. Estius in difficiliora sacrae
setipturae loca. Number 11. v. 17. Deodat. Annot. in Number. 11.
By Estius for the Pontificians it is so determined, Non significatur per hoc,
quod minus haberet Moses de spiritu quam antea, sed significatur, quod ex eodem
spiritu gratiae, quo repletus Moses populum illum regebat, etiam alii
adjutorium essent habituri, ad eundem populum regendum. The very same with that
of Deodatus for the Protestant or Reformed Writers. Not that the gift of the
Spirit (says he) should be in any manner truly (or really) diminished in
Moses, but because that infallible conduct of the Spirit of God, which until
then had been peculiar to Moses, should be made common to all the seventy in
the public Government. And much less did it derogate from the spirit and power
of Moses, that the Seventy were endued by God with the gift of Prophecy, Verse.
25. that being but a personal Grace, and perhaps but temporary to those persons
neither, to gain them at the first the greater estimation amongst the people,
whom they were to govern; never pretended to by any of their Successors in that
Magistracy for the times ensuing. And therefore when Moses was told of it, he
made light of the matter, and was so far from envying at it, that he seemed to
wish that all Gods people might be able to prophecy to one another, Verse. 29.
conceiving rightly nihil abesse dignitati suae personae, Estius in Number. 11. v.
29.
as my Author has it, that it did nothing derogate from his power and dignity;
though Joshua out of an honest zeal to his Masters greatness might fear it
tended, or might tend unto the diminution of his Masters dignity and credit, as
is observed by Deodate. What power these seventy Elders had in succeeding
times, when they were drawn into a body, and made up that great Court which was
called the Sanhedrim; and how far they were then from curbing and restraining
the power of those several Kings under which they lived, has been shown
already.

Now if the Old Testament do give so little countenance to that great Authority
which Calvin has assigned so peremptorily to his three Estates, or any other
popular Magistrates in their several Countries, I am sure the New Testament
does afford them less; in which obedience to the Supreme Magistrate, is
punctually and frequently required of all sorts of persons, Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, says the Apostle of the Gentiles, Romans 13.1. If
every soul, then neither any Papal, Presbyterian or popular pretender can
challenge any exemption from that obedience and subjection to the higher
powers, which is required of them in this Text; and much less exercise any
jurisdiction or Authority over them, whereby they may be brought in subjection
to him. Hyeroym. in Romans 13.
St. Jerome tells us that this Rule is given by the Apostle, for fear lest some
presuming on that Christian Liberty unto which they were called, might possibly
refuse to yield obedience and pay their just Tributes to those higher powers to
which the Lord had made them subject. And therefore he desires to humble them
and bring them unto a better understanding of their Christian Duty, ne forte
propter superbiam, magis quam propter Deum contumeliam patiantur. Lest the
reproach or punishment which they suffered for it, should be imputed rather to
their pride and arrogance, than their zeal to God. Now what St. Jerome tells us
in the general only, is by St. Chrysostom pressed particularly, with reference
almost to all degrees and Estates of men: Consost. in Kom. Hem. 23.
Here the Apostle shows (says he) that these things are commanded to all
men, both Priests and Monks, and not to temporal men only, which he declares
in the beginning, when he said, Let every soul be subject to the highest
powers: although thou be an Apostle, although thou be an Evangelist, although
thou be a Prophet, although thou be whatsoever thou art. Which said he gives
this reason for it, That Religion is not overthrown by this subjection. If no
Apostle could pretend to an exemption from those common duties which Subjects
owe unto their Princes; then certainly the Pope who pretends to sit in Peter's
Chair, and to challenge all the privileges which belonged unto him, must needs
be in as great subjection to a Christian Emperor, as the Apostles were (in
their times) to any Heathen King. If those things were required of Priests and
Monks, as he says they were, then must the Papal Clergy, (whether they be
Monastic or secular Priests) perform those duties, and yield that due
obedience unto those Kings and Princes under whom they live, which are here
required. But so it is, that partly by strong hand, and partly by taking their
opportunities in the darker Ages of the Church, the Pope has not only freed
his Clergy from the power of Princes, in matters even of Civil nature and
concernment, but challenges for himself a power above them, and exercised it
for a long time with great pride and Tyranny, contrary to the Apostles Rule and
the Fathers Commentary. If to Evangelist or Prophet could challenge any such
exemption as the Father plainly says they could not; then much less can the
Presbyterian Minister pretend unto it, though he be both a Prophet and an
Evangelist also in his own conceit. Which notwithstanding, the Scottish
Presbyterians had got unto so great a head in the minority of King James, in
all matters, which related to Ecclesiastical congnizance (and to that
cognizance they reduced all matters) they commonly declin d the Kings judgment,
and his Courts of Judicature as altogether incompetent; appealing from them
either to their own Presbyteries, or to the next general Assembly of their own
appointing: and standing so wilfully to those Appeals, that some of them had
like to have paid dear for it, (after that Kings coming into England) if the
King had not been more merciful to them, than that they deserved at his hands.
If no man whatsoever he be, can lawfully acquit himself from this subjection as
is said by Chrysostom; what will become of Calvin's popular Magistrates, and of
the great Authority which he gives them over Kings and Princes; those popular
Officers being included equally with the rest of the people, in St. Paul's
injunction? It s true that Calvin's popular Officers may seem to have some
color for it, both from our English Translation and the vulgar Latin; by which
obedience is required sublimioribus potestatibus, to the higher powers; and all
such popular Officers, whatsoever they be, may warrantably be looked upon as
higher powers, in respect of the residue of the people. But first the words in
the Original. viz. (...), do not so properly signify the higher, as the
supreme powers: and so the word is rend^ed in the first of S. Peter cap. 1.
ver. 13. in which submission is required to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be unto the King (...), as to the Supreme, or unto such
as are sent by him, etc. (...) says S. Peter in the singular, (...), says S.
Paul in the plural number; both words proceeding from (...), in the Nominative
Case, and consequently being of the same sense and signification. But secondly
permitting them the benefit of these Translations, yet will they find but
little color for that coercive power, that Sovereign Authority and
Jurisdiction, which Calvin has assigned to the three Estates or any other
popular Officers over Kings and Princes. For though such popular Officers may
warrantably be looked upon as higher powers in respect of the residue of the
people, as before was said, yet are they lower powers in respect of the King,
from whom as they receive all the Authority which they have, whatsoever it be,
so unto him they are to render an account of their actings in it, whenever he
pleases. So that these popular Officers may be compared not unntly unto the
Genera subalterna in the Schools of Logic; each of them being subordinate to
one another (the Constable to the Mayor or Bailiff in a Corporate Town, or to
the Justices of the Peace in the County at large, the Mayors and Justices to
the Judges in their several Circuits, the Judges in their several Circuits and
their Courts of Judicature to the Lord Chancellor for the time being, and he
unto the three Estates when convened in Parliament) till they end all in genus
summum, in that supreme power which is subordinate to none, and unto which the
rest are Species subalternae (as the Logicians phrase it) in their several
Orders, till they end all in Specie infima, even in the lowest of the People.

Less comfort can I give them from the Apostle of the Jews from the words of
St. Peter, in which submission is required (as before was said) to every
ordinance of man, whether it be unto the King as unto the Supreme, or unto
Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well. Now those which are thus authorized,
and sent by Kings to the ends and purposes before mentioned, may very properly
be resembled unto Jehosophats Commissioners in the Kingdom of Judah, or the
itinerary Judges in the Realm of England; 2 Chronicles. 17.7.
and can neither claim nor exercise any other Authority, than what in their
Commissions and instructions is assigned unto them. And certainly no King did
or will ever grant any such Commission whereby his Underofficers and Inferior
Magistrates may challenge any power above him, or exercise any jurisdiction or
Authority over him. If any thing in this Text may be thought to favor Calvin
in this strange opinion, it is that Kings are said to be (...), humana
creatura, says the vulgar Latin, an Ordinance of Man, as the English read it;
and being but a Creature of the Peoples making, the rest may think themselves
as good men as he. The Rhemists will have Kings to be called humane Creatures,
because Elected by the people, or holding their Sovereignty by birth and carnal
propagation, ordained for the wealth, peace, and prosperity of the Subjects; to
put a difference betwixt that humane Superiority, and the spiritual Rulers and
Regiments, guiding and governing the people to an higher end, and instituted by
God himself immediately, Christ having expressly constituted the form of
Regiment used ever since in the Church. Whereunto Dr. Fulk, for want of a
better does return this Answer, viz. That though there be great difference
between the government of Princes and Ecclesiastical Governors, yet the Apostle
calls not Princes an humane Creation, as though they were not also of Gods
Creation (for there is no power but of God) but that the form of their Creation
is in man's appointment. All the Genevians generally do so expound it, and it
concerns them so to do in point of interesse. The Bishop of that City was their
Sovereign Prince, and had jus utriusque gladii, as Calvin signified in a Letter
to Cardinal Sadolet, till he and all his Clergy were expelled the City in a
popular Tumult, Anno 1528. and a new form of Government established both in
Church and State. So that having laid the foundation of their Commonwealth in
the expulsion of their Prince, and the new model of their Discipline in
refusing to have any more Bishop; they found it best for justifying their
proceedings at home, and increasing their Partisans abroad, to maintain a
parity of Ministers in the Church of Christ, and to invest the people and their
popular Officers with a chief power in the concernments and affairs of State,
even to the deposing of Kings, and disposing of Kingdoms.

But for this last they find no warrant in the Text which we have before us.
For first admitting the Translation to be true and genuine (as indeed it is
not) the Roman Emperor, and consequently other Kings and Princes may be said to
be an humane Ordinance, because their power is most visibly conversant, circa
humanas Actiones, about ordering of humane Actions, and other civil affairs of
men, as they were subjects of the Empire, and Members of that Body politic,
whereof that Emperor was head. Secondly, to make Sovereign Princes by what name
and Title soever called, to be no other than an humane Ordinance, because they
are ordained by the people and of their appointment; must needs create an
irreconcilable difference between St. Peter and St. Paul, by which last the
Supreme Powers, whatsoever they be, are called the Ordinance of God. The Powers
(says that Apostle) are ordained of God, and therefore he that resists the
Powers, resists the Ordinance of God. Upon which words Deodate gives this
gloss or comment. That the Supreme Powers are called the Ordinance of God,
because God is the Author of this Order in the world: and all those who attain
to these Dignities, do so, either by his manifest will and approbation, when
the means are lawful: or by his secret Providence by mere permission or
toleration, when they are unlawful. Now it is fitting that man should approve
and tolerate that which God approves and tolerates. But thirdly, I conceive
that those words in the Greek Text of St. Peter, viz. (...), are not so
properly translated as they might have been; and as the same words, (...), are
rendered by the same Translators (somewhat more near to the Original) in another
place. For in the 8th. Chapter to the Romans, verse. 22. we find them rendering
(...), by the whole Creation (and why not rather every Creature, as both our
old Translation and the Rhemists read it, conform to omnis Creatura in the
vulgar Latin?) which had they done and kept themselves more near to the Greek
Original in St. Peter's Text, they either would have rendered it by every humane
Creature, as the Rhemists do; or rather by all Men, or by all Mankind, as the
words import. And then the meaning will be this, that the Jews living scattered
and dispersed in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and other Provinces of the Empire,
were to have their conversation so meek and lowly (for fear of giving scandal
to the Gentiles amongst whom they lived) as to submit themselves to all
Mankind, or rather to every Man (unto every humane Creature, as the Rhemists
read it) that was in Authority above, whether it were unto the Emperor himself,
as their supreme Lord, or to such Legates, Prefects, and Procurators, as were
appointed by him for the govenment of those several Provinces, to the end that
they may punish the evildoers, and encourage such as did well, living
conformably to the Laws, by which they were governed. Small comfort in this
Text, as in any of the rest before, for those popular Officers which Calvin
makes the Overseers of the Sovereign Prince, and Guardians of the Liberties of
the common people.

If then there be no Text of Scripture, no warrant from the Word of God, by
which the popular Officers which Calvin dreams of, are made the Keepers of the
Liberties of the common people, or vested with the power of opposing Kings and
Sovereign Princes as often as they wantonly insult upon the people, or
willingly infringe their Privileges: I would fain learn how they should come
to know that they are vested with such power, or trusted with the defense of
the Subjects Liberties ( cujus se Dei oratione Tutores positos esse norunt) as
Calvin plainly says they do. If they pretend to know it by inspiration, such
inspiration cannot be known to any but themselves alone; neither the Prince or
People, whom it most concerns, can take notice of it. Nor can they well
assure themselves whether such inspirations come from God of the Devil; the
Devil many times insnaring proud ambitious and vainglorious Men by such
strange delusions. If they pretend to know it by the dictate of their private
Spirit (the great Diana of Calvin and his followers in expounding Scripture) we
are but in the same uncertainties, as we were before. And who can tell whether
the private Spirit they pretend unto, and do so much brag of, 1 Ring. 22.22.
may not be such a lying Spirit as was put into the mouths of the Prophets,
when Ahab was to be seduced to his own destruction? Adeo Argumenta ex absurdo
petita ineptos habent exitus, as Lactantius notes it.

All I have now to add, is to show the difference between Calvin and his
followers, in the propounding of this Doctrine; delivered by Calvin in few
words, but Magisterially enough, and with no other Authority than his ipse
dixit; enlarged by David Paraeus in his Comment on Romans 13. into diverse
branches, and many endeavors used by him (as by the rest of Calvin's
followers,) to find out Arguments and instances out of several Authors to make
good the cause. For which, though Calvin escaped the fire, yet Paraeus could
not. Ille Crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic Diadema. For so it happened, that
one Mr. Knight of Brodegates (now Pembroke College) in Oxford, had preached up
the Authority of these popular Officers in a Sermon before the University,
about the beginning of the year 1622. for which being presently transmitted to
the King and Council, he there ingenuously confessed, that he had borrowed both
his doctrine, and his proofs and instances from the Book of Paraeus above
mentioned. Notice whereof being given to the University, the whole Doctrine of
Paraeus as to that particular, was drawn into several Propositions; which in a
full and frequent Convocation held on the 25th. of June, 1622. were severally
condemned to be erroneous, scandalous, and destructive of Monarchical
Government. Upon which Sentence, or determination, the King gave order that as
many of those books as could be gotten, should solemnly and publicly be burnt
in each of the Universities, and St. Paul's Churchyard, which was done
accordingly. An accident much complained of by the Puriten party for a long
time after, who looked upon it as the funeral pile of their Hopes and Projects;
till by degrees they got fresh courage, carrying on their designs more
secretly, by consequence more dangerously than before they did. The terrible
effects whereof we have seen and felt in our late Civil Wars and present
confusions. But it is time to close this point, and come to a conclusion of the
whole discourse; there be no other Objections that I know of, but what are
easily reduced unto those before, or not worth the answering.

15. Thus have we taken a brief survey of those insinuations, grounds or
principles (call them what you will) which Calvin has laid down in his book of
Institutions, for the encouragement of the Subjects to rebellious courses, and
putting them in Arms against their Sovereign, either in case of Tyranny,
Licentiousness, or Mal-administration, of what sort soever; by which the
Subject; may pretend that they are oppressed either in point of Liberty, or in
point of Property. And we have shown upon what false and weak foundations he
has raised his building; how much he has mistaken or abused his Authors, but
how much more he has betrayed and abused his Readers. For we have clearly
proved, and directly manifested, out of the best Records and Monuments of the
former times, that the Ephori were not instituted in the State of Sparta to
oppose the Kings; nor the Tribunes in the State of Rome to oppose the Consuls;
nor the Demarchi in the Commonwealth of Athens to oppose the Senate: or if
they were, that this could no way serve to advance his purpose of setting up
such popular Officers in the Kingdoms of Christendom; those Officers being only
found in Aristocraties, or Democraties, but never heard or dreamt of in a
Monarchical Government. And we have shown both who they are which constitute
the three Estates in all Christian Kingdoms; and that there is no Christian
Kingdom in which the three Estates convened in Parliament (or by what other
name soever they do call them) have any authority either to regulate the person
of the Sovereign Prince, or restrain his power, in case he be a Sovereign
Prince, and not merely titular and conditional; and that it is not to be found
in Holy Scripture, that they are or were ordained by God to be the Patrons and
Protectors of the common people, and therefore chargeable with no less a crime
than a most perfidious dissimulation, should they connive at Kings when they
play the Tyrants, or wantonly abuse that power which the Lord has given them,
to the oppression of their Subjects. In which last points, touching the
designation of the three Estates, and the authority pretended to be vested in
them, I have carried a more particular eye on this Kingdom of England where
those pernicious Principles and insinuations which our Author gives us, have
been too readily embraced, and too eagerly pursued by those of his party and
opinion. If herein I have done any service to supreme Authority, my Country,
and some misguided Zealots of it, I shall have reason to rejoice in my
undertaking. If not, posterity shall not say that Calvin's memory was so sacred
with me, and his name so venerable, as rather to suffer such a Stumbling Block
to be laid in the Subjects way without being censured and removed, than either
his authority should be brought in question, or any of his Dictates to a legal
trial. Having been purchased by the Lord at so dear a price, we are to be no
longer the Servants of men, or to have the truth of God with respect of
persons. I have God to be my Father, and the Church my Mother, and therefore
have not only pleaded the cause of Kings and Supreme Magistrates who are the
Deputies of God, but added somewhat in behalf of the Church of England, whose
rights and privileges I have pleaded to my best abilities. The issue and
success I refer to him by whom Kings do Reign, and who appointed Kings, and
other Supreme Magistrates to be nursing Fathers to his Church; that as they do
receive authority and power from the hands of God, so they may use the same in
the protection and defense of the Church of God: and God, even their own God
will give them his Blessing, and save them from the striving of unruly people,
whose mouth speaks proud words, and their right hand is a right hand of
iniquity.

FINIS.
De Jure Paritatis Episcoporum: OR, A BRIEF DISCOURSE ASSERTING THE Bishops
Right of Peerage, WHICH EITHER By Law or Ancient Custom DOES Belong unto them.

WRITTEN By the Learned and Reverend PETER HEYLYN, D. D. In the Year, 1640.

When it was Voted in the Lords House, That no Bishop should be of the
Committee for the preparatory Examination of the EARL of STRAFFORD.

-- He being dead yet speaks, Heb. xi. 4. LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, for C.
Harper. 1681.

A PREFACE.
ALthough there are Books enough writ to vindicate the Honors and Privileges
of Bishops, yet to those that are fore-stalled with prejudice and passion, all
that can be said or done will be little enough to make them wise unto sobriety;
to prevail with them not to contradict the conviction of their mind with absurd
and fond reasonings, but that Truth may conquer their prepossessions, and may
find so easy an access and welcome unto their practical judgments, that they
may profess their faith and subjection to that order, which by a misguided zeal
they once endeavored to destroy.

Many are the methods that have been, and are still used to raze up the
foundation of Episcopacy, and to make the Name of Bishop to be had no more in
remembrance. For first some strike at the Order and Function it self: And yet
St. Paul reckons it among his faithful sayings, 1 Timothy 3.1.
that the Office of a Bishop is a good work. And the order continued
perpetually in the Church without any interruption of time, or decrees of
Councils to the contrary, for the space of many Centuries after the Ascension
of Christ, and the Martyrdom of the Apostles. For they ordained Bishops and
approved them. Before St. John died, Rome had a succession of no less than
four, viz. Linus, Anacletus, Clemens, and Evaristus; Jerusalem had James the
just, and Simeon the Son of Cleophas; Antioch had Euodius and Ignatius; and St.
Mark, Anianus, Abilius and Cerdo successively filled the Sea of Alexandria. All
these lived in St. John's days; and their order obeyed by Christians, and
blessed by God throughout the whole world for the Conversion of Jews and
Gentiles, for the perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying of the Body of
Christ: Nay, their labor was blessed by God first for the Conversion, and then
for the Resormation of this Church and Kingdom; and therefore I hope there is
no sober Protestant in England, but will heartily say, Amen to that Prayer of
Mr. Beza's, who although no great Adorer of Episcopacy, yet considerdering the
Blessings that God brought to this Nation by their Ministry, put up this devout
Petition, Si nunc Anglicanae Ecclesiae instauratae suorum Episcoporum and
Archiepiscoporum auctoritate suffultae perstant: quemadmodum hoc illi nostra
memoria contigit, ut ejus ordininis homines non tantum insignes Dei martyrs,
sed etiam praestantissimos pastores ac Doctores habuerit: fruatur sane ista
singulari Dei beneficentia, quae utinam sit. illi perpetua. Theod. Bez. ad
Tract. de min. Evang. Grad. ab Hadr. Sarav. cap. 18.
Fruatur Anglia ista singulari Dei Beneficentia, quae utinam sit illi perpetua,
Let England enjoy that singular Blessing of God, which I pray to God may be
perpetual to it.

There are others that envy them their Honors and Dignities. For though the
Holy Spirit of God does oblige all Christians to esteem their Bishops very
highly (or more than abundantly (...)) in love for their work sake, 1 These.
5.12, 13. and reason it self dictates that the honors conferred upon
Representatives and Ambassadors, redound to the Prince that delegates and
imploys them; though Jews, Heathens, and Mahom^tans ever paid the profoundest
Veneration to their Priests, Caliphs, and Musti's, and our Relig ous Ancestors
in the Saxon, Danish, and Norman times, set the highest value upon their
Bishops; yet the Religion of this Age is to load them with all possible
Calumnies and Reproaches, and with Corah and his Accomplices to charge them with
taking too much upon them, and to disdain to set them with the Dogs of their
Flocks.

The Priests were Judges in Egypt, and so were the Magi and Areopagites (who
were sacred persons) in Persia and Athens; and it was no other wise with the
Druids amongst the Ancient Britains and Gauls. For Caesar tells us how their
Office extended to things Temporal as well as Religious; Sacrificia publica and
privata procurant, religiones interpretantur. Druides a bello a besse
consueverunt, ni que tributa una cum reliquis pendunt -- St quod admissum est
facinus, si caedes facta, si de haereditate, de finibus controversia est, iidem
decernunt -- Caesar. Com. lib. 6.
that they did not only order public and private Sacrifices, and expound
Religion, and instruct Youth, but were free from Contribution and Warfare, and
all burdens of State, and determined all Controversies, both public and
private, and executed the place both of Priests and Judges; for if any offense
were committed, as Murder or Manslaughter or any Controversy arose touching
Lands or Inheritance, they sentenced it, rewarding the Virtuous, and punishing
the Wicked. The Patricii, the noblest Romans were ambitious to be admitted into
the College of the Priests; and when the Government became Monarchical, the
Emperors took upon them the pontifical Dignity, thinking it no diminution of
them Grandeur to be employed about the Service of the gods, but rather
conceiving the Priesthood too noble an employment to be conferred upon a Subject.

But we need no other Testimonies to convince us of the Rights of Churchmen,
for the management of the civil concerns of human Society, that the holy
Scriptures. Amongst the Jews the Civil and Ecclesiastical power were not so
distinguished, but one and the same person exercised both. For not to expatiate
upon particular instances, Melchisedeck, Eli, Samuel, Ezra, Esdras, were all
Priests, and had the power not only of Ecclesiastical, but Civil jurisaictior.
Neither could Samuel have hewed Agag in pieces with his own hand, 1 Samuel 15.33.
if it had been unlawful for persons dedicated to the sacred Offices of
Religion to have intermeddled in causes of blood: Which very instance proves
that Clergymen are not excluded from managing the highest secular concerns by
any immutable Laws of God or Nature. And if there are any Canons or Councils
that forbid them to meddle in things of that kind, that so they may the better
attend upon the sacred Offices and Exercises of Religion, let those be
obligatory to the persons unto whom they were delivered, but not be pleaded or
produced to the prejudice of English Bishops, who have distinct Privileges and
Laws. For there have been Constitutions that have forbidden Churchmen to
Marry, to make Wills, to be Executors of men's Wills and Testaments, to be the
Wards of Orphans, etc. And these Constitutions are of as great force to bind
the Clergy of England, as the Council of Toledo to thrust the Bishops out of
the House of Lords in Causes of Attainder and Blood. Let the Archbishops of
Ments and Colen, with other Princes of the Empire look to it, if it be unlawful
for Ecclesiastical persons to adjudge Criminals to death.

It will be infinite to show how St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, and the Godly
Bishops of all Ages had no Supersedeas given them to intermeddle in things
civil and secular, because of their Wisdom and Knowledge in things Sacred and
Divine. Certainly the Holy Spirit of God did not conceive it unfit that Worldly
matters and Controversies should be committed to Churchmen; for it is highly
reasonable to think that those who are the Pastors of men's Souls, will be the
best Judges in determining their civil Rights.

It could not indeed be expected, whilst the Empire was Heathen, that Bishops
should be busied and employed in Secular affairs, unless it were in those
Controversies which arose among the Christians themselves, wherein St. Paul
gives direction that they should rather determine their Contentions by a
private Arbitrament of their own, than by the public judgments of their
Enemies. 1 Cor. 6.
But when Kings became Christians, Soz. lib. 1. c. 9.
we find persons making their Appeals from the Tribunals of Princes to the
Consistory of Bishops. For then Bishops had power to reverse the sentence of
death, and to stay the hands of Executioners, when the poor Criminals were
going to receive the reward of their Iniquities; just as the Praetors and
Consuls of Rome would submit their Fasces, those Ensigns of Authority, when
they did but casually meet with some of the Priests. Constantine granted the
Bishops this privilege, that condemned Malefactors might appeal unto their
Courts; and when such appeals were made, the Bishops had power as well to
deliver them over into the hands of Justice, as to extend unto them a Pardon or
Reprieve. For the privilege conferred on them, was as well for the punishment
and terror of the Wicked, as for mitigating the rigor of Justice, and
encouraging Criminals to Virtue and Repentance.

Mr. Seldom himself, who was none of the best Friends to Churchmen, grants,
that for four thousand years the Civil and Ecclesiastic jurisdiction went
always hand in hand together. Ex hisce simul, sane ex primo and secundo libro
hoc satis, puto, constabit per Annos amplius M. M. M. M. tam sacrorum regimen
(qua forense esset atque a functione facra rite distinctum) quam profanorum
(five res spectes five personas) juxta jus etiam divinum, ex Ecclesiae Judaicae
populorumque Dei anteriorum disciplina perpetua ad eosdem attinuisse judices
seu Magistratus ejusdem Religionis, atque ad synedria eadem, neutiquam omnino
ex juris istius instituto aliquo, sacrorum and prosanorum, instar Ecclesiarum
seu Spiritualium, and laicorum seu teorporalium. Nominibus nullatenus
discriminata. Seld. de syn. praefat. libr. secundi.
And so it did till Pope Nicolas made the one independent upon the other. So
that their disunion is a Popish Innovation; for till his time the Judges of
Church and State ever sat together; affairs Sacred and Religious were scanned
and determined in the morning, and those that were Secular and Civil in the
afternoon. There was not, till that time, any clashing between Moses and Aaron;
no prohibitions out of one Court to stop or evacuate the proceedings of
another, and then it was that Justice run down like a stream, and Righteousness
like a mighty River.

If it be said that there are many corruptions among Churchmen, and especially
in Ecclesiastical Courts: The answer is, That Callings must be distinguished
from persons, or else those two noble professions of Law and Physic will fall
under the same condemnation with Divinity. No man of any sobriety will condemn
either of those professions, because there are some Empericks in the World who
kill men's Bodies, and some Petifoggers that entangle and ruin their Estates.
And I hope Divines may have some grains of allowance granted them, as well as
the Inns of Court and Chancery, and the College of Physicians; if they cannot,
let that Calling which is most innocent cast the first stone.

It cannot be hoped that there will in this Age be a Revival of the primitive
usage of these two Jurisdictions. But yet this ought to be seriously regarded
by all who have any belief of a Deity and regard for their native Country; I
mean that either our English Monarchs might be totally excused from their
Coronation Oath, or not be put upon a necessity of violating thereof. Their
Oath in favor of the Clergy, is, that they will grant and keep the Laws,
Customs, and Franchises granted to the Clergy by the glorious King St. Edward
their Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, Rushw. Hist. Collect. part.
1^. page 204.
the true profession of the Gospel established in this Kingdom, agreeable to
the Prerogative of the Kings thereof, and the Ancient customs of the Realm. But
how this Oath is observed, when the Bishops are infringed in their ancient and
indisputable privileges, let it be considered by all persons of sober mind.
and principles. And let it be declared what order of men in the whole Nation
the King can rely upon with so much safety and confidence, as upon the Bishops;
and that not only upon the account of their Learning, Wisdom, Sanctity and
Integrity (qualifications not every day to be met withal in State-Politicians)
but upon the score of Gratitude and Interest. For it is from their Prince that
they derive their Honors, Dignities, Titles, Revenues, Privileges, Power,
Jurisdictions, with all other secular advantages; and upon this account there
is greater probability that they will be faithful to his Concerns and
Interests, than those who receive nothing from him but the common advantages of
Government. But this argument is known too well by our Anti-Episcopal
Democraticks. And perhaps it is the chief, if not the only reason of their
enmity against an Order of men of so sacred and venerable an Institution.

As for this little Treatise, the Author of it is too well known unto this
Nation, to invite any Scholar to peruse it. It was written when the Bishops
were Voted by the House of Lords not to be of the Committee in the Examination
of the Earl of Strafford. For then it was that Dr. Heylyn considered the case,
and put these few Sheets as a MSS. into the hands of several of the Bishops,
that they might be the better enabled to assert and vindicate their own Rights.
It was only intended for private use, and therefore the Reader is not to expect
so punctual an accuracy as he may find in other Treatises of this Learned
Author. It has been perused by some persons of good Eminency for judgment and
station in the Church of England; and by them approved and commended. All that
is wished by the Publisher is, that it may produce the effects which he
proposes to himself in exposing it to public view; and that those Lords who
are now Prisoners in the Tower, and from whose trial some have labored to
exclude the Bishops, were able to give unto the World as convincing Evidence of
their Innocence, as that great and generous States man did, who fell a
Sacrifice to a prevailing Faction; and whose Innocent Blood was so far from
being a lustration to the Court (as some thought it would have proved) as it
drew after it such a deluge of Gore, as for many preceding years had never been
spilt in this Kingdom.

But it is not my design or desire to revive any of the Injustice or
Inhumanities of the last Age. Suffice it to say, that it was for this
Apostolical Government of Bishops that King Charles the First lost his
Kingdoms, his Crown, his Life. And the exclusion of Bishops from Voting in
causes of blood, was the prologue to all those Tragical mischiefs that happened
to that Religion and Renowned Prince. And those who have the least veneration
for his present Majesty, cannot certainly conceive him a King of such slender
and weak abilities, as to permit Himself and Family to be ruined by those very
methods, with which his Father was before him.

De jure Paritatis Episcoporum; OR, The Right of Peerage vindicated to the
BISHOPS OF ENGLAND.
SINCE the restoring of the Bishops to their place and Vote in the House of
Peers, I find a difference to be raised, between a Peer of the Realm, and a
Lord of the Parliament; and then this Inference, or Insinuation to be built
upon it, that though the Bishops are admitted to be Lords of Parliament, yet
they are not to be reckoned amongst the Peers of the Realm, the contrary
whereof I shall endeavor to make good in this following Essay, and that not
only from the Testimony of approved Writers, but from unquestioned Records,
Book-Cases, Acts of Parliament, and such further Arguments, as may be able to
evince the point which we have in hand.

But first perhaps it may be said, that there is no such difference in truth
and verity betwixt a Lord of Parliament and a Peer of the Realm, but that we
may conclude the the Bishops to be Peers of the Realm, if they be once admitted
to be Lords of Parliament: concerning which take this from Chief Justice Coke,
where he affirms that only a Lord of Parliament shall be tried by his Peers,
being Lords of Parliament, and neither Noblemen of any other Country, nor
others that are called Lords and are no Lords of Parliament, are accounted
Peers, that is to say Peers within this Statute (he means the Magna Charta)
or Great Charter of England, the ground of all our Laws and Liberties to this
very day) by which it seems that he conceived a Peer and a Lord of Parliament
to be terms equivalent: every Peer of the Realm being a Lord of Parliament, and
every Lord of Parliament a Peer of the Realm, which clearly takes away the
pretended difference that is made between them.

But secondly, admit the distinction to be sound and solid, yet it will easily
be proved that Bishops are not only Lords of Parliament, but Peers of the
Realm. In order whereunto we must take notice of some passages in our former
Treatise, touching the Bishops place and Vote in Parliament, that is to say,
that from the first planting of the Gospel in the Realms of England, parcelled
at that time amongst several Kings, the Bishops always had the principal place
in their Common Councils, which the Saxons call by the name of Wittenegemote,
or the Assembly of wise men, and afterward in the time of the Normans, took
the name of Parliaments. In all which Interval from Ethelbert the first
Christian King of Kent in the year of our Lord 605. till the death of Edward
the Confessor, which happened in the year 1066, no Common Council of the Saxons
had been held without them, and all this while they held their Courts by no
other Tenures than pura and perpetua Eleemosyna ( frank Almoigne as our
Lawyers call it) discharged from all Attendances upon secular Services. And
therefore they could sit there in no other Capacity, than ratione officii and
spiritualis Dignitatis, in regard of their Episcopal function; which as it
raised them to an height of eminence in the eye of the people, so it was
probably presumed that they were better qualified than the rest of the Subjects
(as the times then were) for Governing the great Affairs of the Commonwealth.

But when the Norman Conqueror had attained the Crown, he thought it an
improvident Course to suffer so much of the Lands of the Nation as then
belonged unto the Prelates (whether Bishops or Abbots) in the Right of their
Churches to be discharged from doing service to the State: And therefore he
ordained them to hold their Lands sub militari servitute, either in Capite, or
by Baronage, or some such military hold whereby they were compellable to aid
the Kings in all times of War, with Men, Arms, and Horses, as the Lay-subjects
of the same Tenure were required to do. Concerning which our Learned Antiquary
out of Matthew Paris informs us thus, viz. Cambden Brit. fol. 123.
Rex enim Gulielmus Episcopatus, and Abbatias, quae Baronias tenebant in pura
and perpetua Eleemosyna, and catenus ab omni servitute militari libertatem
habuerunt, sub servitute statuit militari, Irrotulans singulos Episcopos, and
Abbatias pro voluntate sua, quot milites sibi and successoribus hostilitatis
tempore a singulis voluit exhiberi. Which though at first it was conceived to
be a great Disfranchisement, and an heavy burden to the Prelacy, yet Cambden
very well observes that it conduced at last to their greater honor in giving
them a further Title to their place in Parliament, a claim to all the Rights of
Peerage, and less obnoxious to Disputes, if considered rightly, than that which
formerly they could pretend to: so that from this time forwards we must look
upon them in all English Parliaments not only as Bishops in the Church, but as
Peers and Barons of the Realm; of the same Tenure, and therefore of the same
pre-eminence with the Temporal Lords. Which certainly must be the Reason that
the Bishops of the Isle of Man are not called to Parliament, because they hold
not of the King by Barony, as the rest of the English Bishops do, but hold the
whole Estate in Lands from the Earl of Darby.

Thus also says a Learned Lawyer, Coke Institut. part. 2. f. 3.
Every Archbishopric and Bishopric in England are of the Kings foundation,
and holden of the King per Baroniam, and many Abbots, and Priors of Monasteries
were also of the Kings foundation, and did hold of him per Baroniam, and in
this Right the Archbishops, and Bishops, and such of the Abbots, and Priors as
held per Baroniam, and were called by Writ to Parliament, were Lords of
Parliament. And yet not Lords of Parliament only, but Peers and Barons of the
Realm, as he shall call them very shortly on another occasion.

In the mean time we may observe that by this changing of their Tenure, the
Bishops frequently were comprehended in the name of Barons, and more
particularly in that passage of Magna Charta, Coke Institut. part 2. fol. 23.
where it is said Comites, and Barons non amercientur nisi per pares suos,
that Earls and Barons are not to be amerced but by their Peers; concerning
which the said Great Lawyer tells us thus, viz. That though this Statute (as he
calls it) be in the negative, yet long use has prevailed against it, for now
the Amerciament of the Nobility is reduced to a certainty, viz. a Duke 10 l. an
Earl 5 l. a Bishop that has a Barony 5 l. where plainly Bishops must be
comprehended in the name of Barons, and be amerced by their Peers, as the
Barons were; though afterward their Amerciaments be reduced to a certainty, as
well as those of Earls, and Barons in the times succeeding. And then if Bishops
be included in the name of Barons, and could not be legally amerced but by
their Peers (as neither could the Earls or Barons by the words of this Charter)
it must needs follow that the Bishops were accounted Peers, as well as any
either of the Earls or Barons by whom they were to be Amerced. And for the next
place we may behold the Constitutions made at Clarendon the tenth year of King
Henry the 2d. Matthew. Paris, in Hen. 2d.
Anno 1164. in which it was declared as follows, viz. Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi, and universae personae Regni qui Rege tenent in Capite, habeant
possessiones suos de Rege sicut Baroniam, and inde respondeant Justiciariis,
and Ministris Regis, and sicut caeteri Barons, debent interesse Curiae Regis
cum Baronibus quousque perventum sit ad diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem.
Where first I think that those words universae personae are to be understood of
none but Ecclesiastical persons (according to the notion of the word persona in
the Common Law) and so to comprehend the Regular Clergy as well as the
Archbishops, and Bishops. But secondly, if we must understand it of the Laity
also, it must needs follow thereupon, that all which held their Lands of the
Crown in Capite were capable in those times of a place in Parliament. And so it
seems they had in the Reign of King John, and afterward in the Reign of King
Henry the 3d, but in the last years of the said King Henry, and by the power
and prudence of King Edward the first, were brought into a narrower compass,
none being admitted to appear, and attend in Parliament, but such as he thought
fit to summon by his Royal Mandate.

And hereunto as well our choicest Antiquaries, as our most eminent Lawyers do
consent unanimously. But here is to be noted (says Chief Justice Coke) that if
the King give Lands to any one tenendum per servitium Baronis de Rege, he is no
Lord of Parliament till he be called by Writ to the Parliament; which as he
there declares for a point of Law, so is it also verified in point of practice,
out of the old Record entitled Modus tenendi Parliamentum, in which it is
affirmed, Ad Parliamentum, summoniri, and venire debere Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, and alios majores Cleri, qui tenent per Comitatum,
aut Baroniam, ratione hujusmodi Tenurae, that all Archbishops, Bishops,
Priors, and other Prelates of the Church, who hold their Lands either in right
of their Counties, or in right of their Baronages, were to be summoned, and
come to Parliament in regard of their Tenures. Where we may see that though
they had a jus ad rem in regard of their Tenures, yet they had no pretense to
their Jus in re but only by the Writ of Summons. And secondly whereas the Modus
speaks of some Bishops which were to be called to the Parliament in the right
of their Counties, I think he means it of the Bishops of Durham and Ely which
enjoyed all the Rights, and privileges of a County Palatine in their several
Circuits. By which we see that to the making of a Baron, or a Lord of
Parliament, it is not only necessary that he hold by Barony, but that he have
his Writ of Summons to attend the service which puts a signal difference
between Lords of Parliament, and such as are called Lords in respect of their
birth, or in regard of some great Offices which they hold in the State; of the
first sort whereof are all the eldest sons of Earls and upwards, who are not
only honored with the name of Lords, but challenge a precedence by the Rules
of Herauldry before all the Barons of the Realm, and yet can lay no claim to
the Rights of Peerage, unless perhaps they may be summoned to the Parliament in
their fathers life time. And so it happened in the Case of the Earl of Surrey the
eldest son of Thomas Lord Howard Duke of Norfolk, arraigned in the last days of
King Henry the eighth, and tried by a Jury of twelve men, because not being
called to Parliament in his fathers lifetime, he could not be considered as a
Peer of the Realm. And in the last sort we may reckon the Lord Chancellor, the
Lord Treasurer, the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord President of his Majesty's
Council, the Lord High Chamberlain, the Lord Admiral, the Lord Steward, and the
Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, the Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, and the three Chief Judges, who if they be not otherwise of the
Rank of Barons, can plead no Title to their Peerage, nor to Vote in Parliament;
and so it happened in the Case of Sir William Stanly Lord Chamberlain to King
Henry the seventh, tried by a Jury of twelve men in a case of Treason without
relation to his great Office or Title of Lord. Most true it is, that some of
these great Officers have their place in Parliament, and so have all the Judges
of the Courts of Westminster, the Master of the Rolls, the Masters of the
Chancery, the Kings Attorney General, and perhaps some others; all summoned to
attend the service by Especial Writs, but they are only called to advise the
Court to give their Judgment and Opinion when it is demanded, but not to
canvass, or debate, and much less to conclude in any business which is there
discoursed of, as both the Bishops and the Temporal Lords are empowered to do.
Which difference appears in the Writs themselves. For in the Writ of Summons to
the Judges, and the rest here mentioned, the words run thus, viz. Quod
intersitis nobiscum, and cum caeteris de concilio nostro, (and sometimes
nobiscum only) supra praemissis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri. But
in the Writ of Summons to the Bishops and the rest of the Peers, we shall find
it thus, viz. quod intersitis cum praelatis, magnatibus, and proceribus super
dictis negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri, etc. which Writs of
Summons to the Bishops, and the Temporal Peers, are the same verbatim; but that
the Bishops are required to attend the service sub fide, and dilectione, the
Temporal Peers sub fide, and ligeantia, quibus nobis tenemini. Upon which
Premises it may be rationally inferred, that the Bishops of this Church were
reputed Barons, (a Baron and a Barony being conjugata) and being Barons have as
good a Claim to the right of Peerage as any of the Temporal Lords, who hold as
well their Peerage as their place in Parliament by no other Tenure; for that a
Baron of Realm, and a Peer of the Realm are but terms synonymous, and that the
Bishops of the the Church of England are both Peers and Barons has been proved
before, and may be further evidenced from that which they affirmed to the
Temporal Lords convened in Parliament at Northampton under Henry the 2d, for
the determining of the differences betwixt the King and Thomas Becket Arch
bishop of Canterbury; which the Temporal Lords would fain have thrust upon the
Bishops, as more competent Judges, to which the Bishops thus replied, viz. non
sedemus hic Episcopi, sed Barons, nos Barons, vos Barons, Pares hic sumus;
We sit not here say they as Bishops only, Seldens Titles of Honor, page ^18.
but as Barons also, we are Barons and you are Barons, here we sit as Peers.
Their sitting in the Parliament was in a right of their Baronies. And in the
right of their Baronage they were also Peers, and Peers to all intents and
purposes as well as any others, (whether Earls or Barons) who had Vote in
Parliament. This appears further by the words of Archbishop Stratford, who
being suspended from his place in Parliament by King Edward the 3d, came boldly
to the Doors of the House, and turning toward those that attended there, thus
maintained his Claim, Amice Rex, me ad hoe Parliamentum scripto sua vocavit,
Antiq. Brittan.
and ego tanquam major Par regni post Regem and primam vocem habere debens in
Parliamento, Jura Ecclesiae meae Cantuariensis vendico and ideo Ingressum in
Parliamentum peto. Which makes it plain, that the Archbishop did not challenge
a place in Parliament, as the first Peer of the Realm, and one that ought to
have the first Voice in all English Parliaments, either by way of favor or of
Custom only, but as a power, and privilege which he ought to have ( habere
debeus as the words are) in right of his See.

Proceed we to the Case of John Bishopp of Winchester in the reign of the said
King Edward the 3d, who having departed from the Parliament without leave from
the King, was for the same accused, and prosecuted at the Kings Suit, by one
Adam de Fincham his Majesty's Attorney or Solicitor General, to which Action
the Bishop did appear, and put in his plea, in which he does maintain himself
to be a Peer of the Realm, and therefore to be tried by Parliament for the said
offense, which in a time of Parliament was committed by him. But take the whole
Record with you for the more assurance, Et praedictus Episcopus in propria
persona sua venit and defendit omnem contemptum, and transgressionem. and
quicquid, etc. and dicit quod ipse sit unus de Paribus regni, and Praelatus
saerosanctae Ecclesiae, and Jus venire ad Parliamentum Domini Regis per
summonitionem, Coke Institut. part. 4. fol. 16.
and pro voluntate ipsius Domini Regis cum sibi placuerit, and dicit quod si
quis eorum erga Dominum regem in Parliamento aliquo delinqueret, in Parliamento
debet corrigi and emendari, in non alibi minori Curia. And this Record proves
plainly, that he challenged his Right of Peerage. Though by my Author it is
brought for another purpose, that is to say, that misdemeanors and offenses
which are done in Parliament ought not to be enquired into, or punished in a
lower Court, contrary to the power, and practice of the Kings of England in all
times foregoing.

Now that which was affirmed by the Bishop of Winchester in reference to his
right of Peerage, was generally challenged by all the Bishops in the time of
King Richard the 2d, on the impeachment of the Duke of Ireland, and some others
in the Court of Parliament. At which time being to withdraw themselves by the
Canon Law which had prohibited all Clergymen from intermedling in Causa
sanguinis, they made this following Protestation to preserve their Rights.

In Dei nomine Amen, Antiqu. Brit. in Courtney.
cum de Jure and Consuetudine regni Angliae ad Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem qui
pro tempore fuerit nec non caeteros suos, suffraganeos, confratres, and
Coepiscopos, Abbates and Priores, aliosque praelatos quoscunque per Baroniam de
Domino nostro Rege tenentes, pertinet in Parliamentis Regis quibuscunque ut
Pares Regni praedicti personaliter interesse, ibidemque de regni negotiis and
allis ibidem tractari cousuetis, cum caeteris dicti regni paribus, and aliis
consulere, ordinare, statuere, and definire, ac caetera facere quae Parliamenti
tempore ibid. imminent facienda, in quibus omnibus and singulis not Willielmus
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus totius Augliae primas, and Apostolicae sedis
Legatus pro nobis, nostrisque suffraganeis coepiscopis, and confratribus, nec
non Abbatibus, Prioribus and praelatis omnibus supradictis protestamur, and
eorum quilibet protestatur, quis per se vel procuratorem, si fuerit modo
praesens, and public and express quod intendi volumus, ac vult little quilibet
in hoc praesenti Parliamento and aliis, ut Pares Regni praedicti more solito
interesse, considerare, tractare, ordinare, statuere, and diffinire, ac
caeterae exercare cum caeteris Jus interessendi habentibus eisdem, statis and
ordine nostris and eorum cujuslibet in omnibus semper salvis. Verum quia in
praesenti Parliamento agitur de non nullis materiis in quibus non licet nobis
alicui eorum juxta sacrorum Canonum Instituta, quomodolibet personaliter
interesse; eo propter pro nobis, and eorum quolibet protestamur, and eorum
quilibet hie praesens etiam protestatur quod non intendimus, nec volumus,
sicuti de Jure non possumus, nec debemus intendi, nec vult aliquis eorundem in
praesenti Parliamento, dum de hujusmodi materiis agitur, vel agotur,
quomodolibet interesse, sed nos and eorum quemlibet in ea part penitus
absentare, Jure Paritatis nostrae and cujuslibet eorum interessendi in dicto
Parliamento, quoad omnia, and singula ibidem exercenda, and eorum quilibet
statu and ordine semper salun. Ad hoc insuper protestamur, and eorum quilibet
protestatur, quod propter hujusmodi absentiam non intendimus, nec volumus, nec
eoruns aliquis intendit, nec vult quod habet processus and habend'in praesenti
Parliamento super materiis ante dictis, In quibus nec possumus nec debemus, and
permititur interesse quantum ad nos, and quemlibet eocum attinet suturis
temporibus, quomodolibet impugnentur, infirmentur seu etiam revocentur.

In which Record we may observe, First, that the Bishops and the rest there
mentioned held their Lands by Baronage; Secondly, that they were sommoned to
the Parliament in regard of their Tenures; Thirdly, that being called to serve
in Parliament, they sat there as Peers, and gave their Counsel in all matters
and affairs of moment, which were therein handled; Fourthly, that though to
testify their obedience to some Canons which were then in force, they did
withdraw their personal presence at the time of Trial, yet they did it with a
salvo Jure Paritatis, not to infringe the rights and privileges which belonged
unto them in regard of their Peerage. And finally we may observe, that this
Protestation is not only extant in the Antiquitates Britannicae (to which the
Margent does refer us) but at the desire of the said Prelates, the good leave
of the King, and the consent of all the Peers, which were there assembled, it
was entered in the Journal of the House of Peers, where it still continues.

But because possibly the Bishops may claim more than belongs unto them, or
that perhaps their Testimony may not be admitted in matters of their own
concernment, we will next see what is affirmed by others as to that particular.
And first we will begin with the Learned Cambden, who informs us thus, viz.
Ad quos Abbates (having first reckoned them according to their Names, Cambd.
Brit. fol. 123.
and Order) ut etiamnuin ad Episcopos Parliamentis quibuscunque ut Pares regni
cum caeteris Paribus personaliter interesse, consulere, tractare, ordinare,
statuere, definire ratione Baroniarum, quas de Rege tenebant, de Jure and
consuetudine spectavit: for proof whereof, besides the Credit of the Auther, we
are by him referred to the public Acts or Records of Parliament, but unto what
Records particularly he informs us not.

And therefore we nust help our selves by Sir Edward Coke, who tells us,
Jurisdiction of Courts. Coke Institutes. part. 4, p. 45.
out of the Records of Parliament, and in his Margent pointing to the 13th of
King Edward the third, does instruct us thus, viz. Abbates, Priores, aliosque
Praelatos quoscunque per Baroniam de Domino Rege tenentes pertinet in
Parliamentis Regni quibuscunq, ut pates Regni praedicti personaliter interesse,
ibique de Regni negotiis ac aliis tractari consuetis cum caeteris dicti Regni
Paribus and aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibus consulere, and tractare,
ordinare, statuere and definire, ac caetera facere, quae Parliamenti tempore
imminent facienda; Which if it be the same with that which we had before,
differing only in some words (as perhaps it is) yet we have gained the
Testimony of that Learned Lawyer, whose judgment in this Case must be worth the
having.

For hear him speaking in his own words and he tells us this, viz. Coke
Institut. fol. 4.
That every Lord of Parliament either Spiritual, as Archbishops, and Bishops,
or Temporal as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, Peers of the
Realm, and Lords of Parliament ought to have several Writs of Summons, where
plainly these words, Peers and Lords of Parliament relate as well to Spiritual,
as to the Temporal Lords. And therefore if the Archbishops, and the Bishops
may be granted to be Lords of Parliament, they must be also granted to be Peers
of the Realm.

Now to the Testimony, and Authority of particular persons, we shall next add
the sentence and determination of our Courts of Law, in which the Bishops are
declared to be Peers of the Realm, and to be capable of all the privileges,
which belong to the Peerage. For first in the aforesaid Case of the Bishop of
Winchester, when he was brought upon his Trial for departing from the service
of the Parliament without leave of the King, and pleaded sor himself, quod
esset unus e Paribus Regni, etc. The privilege of Barony.
It was supposed clearly, both by Court and Council that he was a Peer, that
part of his defense being not gainsayed, or so much, as questioned.

So in the Year-Books of the Reign of King Edward the 3d, in whose Reign the
Bishop of Winchester's Case was agitated (as before is said) a Writ of Wards
was brought by the Bishop of London, and by him pleaded to an Issue, and the
Defendant could not be Essoyned, or have day of Grace, for it was said that a
Bishop was a Peer of the Land, haec erat causa, says the Book, which reports
the Case.

In the like Case upon an Action of Trespass against the Abbot of Abbingdon,
who was one of the Lords Spiritual, day of Grace was denied against him because
he was a Peer de la Terre.

So also it is said expressly, that when question was made about the returning
of a Knight to be of a Jury where a Bishop was Defendant in a Quare impedit,
the Rule of the Court was, that it ought to be so, because the Bishop was a
Peer of the Realm.

And in the Judgment given against the Bishop of Norwich in the time of Richard
the 2d, he is in the Roll expressly allowed to be a Peer; for he had taken
exceptions that some things had passed against him without the Assent, or
knowledge of his Peers of the Realm. To which Exception it was Answered, that it
behoved him not at all to plead that he was a Prelate, for traversing such
Errors and misprisions, as in the quality of a Soldier, who had taken wages of
the King, were committed by him.

Thus also in the Assignment of the Errors under Henry the fifth, for the
Reversal of the Attainder of the Earl of Salisbury, one Error is assigned that
Judgment was given without the consent of the Prelates which were Peers in
Parliament. And although that was adjudged to be no Error, yet was it clearly
allowed both in the Roll, and the Petitions, that the Bishops were Peers.

Finally in the Government of the Realm of France, the Bishops did not only
pass in the Ranks of Peers, but six of them were taken into the number of the
Douze-pairs or twelve Peers of that Kingdom, highly esteemed and celebrated in
the times of Charlemayne, that is to say, the Archbishop and Duke of Rhemes;
the Bishop and Duke of Laon, the Bishop and Duke of Langres; the Bishop and
Earl of Beuvois, the Bishop and Earl of Noyon, the Bishop and Earl of Chalons.
And therefore it may be inferred, that in the Government established by the
Anjovin and Norman Kings, the English Bishops might be ranked with the Peers at
large, considering their place in Parliament, and their great Revenues, and the
strong influence which they had on the Church and State.

But there is little need for Inferences, and book-Cases, and the Authorities
of particular men to come in for Evidence, when we are able to produce an Act
of Parliament to make good the point. For in the Statute made the 4th year of
King Henry the fifth, it was repeated and confirmed, That no man of the Irish
Nation should be chosen by Election to be an Archbishop, Bishop, Abbot, or
Frior, nor in no other manner received or accepted to any dignity and benefice
within the said Land, etc. The Reason of which inhibition is there said to be
this, viz. because being Peers of the Parliament of the said Land, they brought
with them to the Parliaments, and Councils holden there some Irish servants,
whereby the privities of the Englishmen within the same Land have been, and be
daily discovered to the Irish people, (Rebels to the King) to the great peril
and mischief of the Kings lawful Liege people in the said Land. And if the
Bishops and Archbishops of Ireland had the name of Peers, there is no question
to be made, but the name of Peers, and the right of Peerage may properly be
assumed or challenged by them.

Now as this Statute gives them the name of Peers, so in an Act of Parliament
in the 25th year of King Henry the 8th, they are called the Nobles of your
Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal, as all your other Subjects now living,
etc. Which Term we find again repeated by the Parliament following, the Nobles
Spiritual and Temporal, and that twice for failing; so that we find no Title
given to Earls and Barons, Nobles and Peers, and Lords as the Statutes call
them, but what is given to the Bishops in our Acts of Parliament, and certainly
had not been given them in the style of that Court, had any question then been
made of their Right of Peerage; And that their calling had not raised them to a
state of Nobility; concerning which take this from the Lord Chief Justice Coke
for our more assurance, and he will tell us that the general division of
persons by the Law of England, is either one that is Noble, and in respect of
his nobility of the Lords House of Parliament, or one of the Commons of the
Realm, and in respect thereof of the House of Commons in Parliament.

Next to the Parliament the most renowned Judicatory of this Land, is the Great
Council of the Peers, called by the King on sudden and emergent occasions which
cannot safely stay the leisure of a Parliament, for the prescribing of such
remedies as the case requires; and called so for no other reason, but that it
is a general meeting of the Bishops and Temporal Lords, under the common name
of Peers, to give the King such Counsel and advice in his greatest
difficulties, as the exigencies of affairs shall suggest unto them; which
proves the Bishops to be Peers, as well as any of the Temporal Lords. Nor could
it properly be called the Great Council of Peers, if any but the Peers be
invited to it. The last example of which Council was that held at York, about
the latter end of September, Anno 1640. upon the breaking in of the Scottish
Rebels. And the like Argument may be drawn from that Appellation, which
commonly is given to that place, or Room wherein the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal do consult together in the times of Parliament, best known unto us by
the name of the House of Peers, and known unto us by that name for no other
Reason, but because it is appropriated to the use of the Peers (that is to say,
the Nobles Spiritual and Temporal, or the Bishops and the Temporal Lords) for
their Consultations.

And as they have the name of Peers and the Rights of Peerage, so is there none
of all the Ancient Rights of Peerage, which belong not to them as fully and as
amply as to any of the Temporal Lords, that is to say, a necessary place and
Vote in Parliament, and a particular Writ of Summons to invite them to it, the
freedom of their persons from Arrests at the suit of a Subject, not to be
troubled with Essoynes or supplicavits in the Courts of Justice, a power to
qualify their Chaplains to hold several Benefices, not to have any Action
against them tried except one Knight at the least be returned of the Panel;
the Liberty of killing one, or more of the Kings Deer in any of his Parks or
Chases, both in their going to the Parliament, and returning home, of which
take this in General from our Learned Antiquary, Cambden. Brit. fol. 123.
Inde Ecclesiastici illi omnibus, quibus caeteri Regni Barons gavisi sunt
immunitatibus nisi quod a Paribus non judicentur; that is to say, that they
enjoy all privileges, and Immunities, as the Lay Lords do, but that they are
not to be Judged by their Peers. But first he is not certain that this
exception (their not being to be Judged by their Peers) will hold good in Law,
and therefore leaves the resolution of that point to our Learned Lawyers, sed
an hoc sit Juris explorati dixerint ipsi Juris periti, as his own words are.
And secondly, the reason which he gives is no more than this, that since by
reason of the Canons, they could not be Judges or Assessors in causa sanguinis,
they therefore were referred to a Common Jury of twelve Men in all public
Trials; but by this reason they must either have no Trial at all, or may as
well be tried by their Peers, as a Common Jury, because they are disabled by
those Canons from sitting in Judgment on the life of a Common Juror as well as
of a Lord, or Peer, which I marvail Cambden did not see.

But weaker is the Reason which is given by Stamford in his Pleas of the Crown,
that is to say, that Bishops are not to be tried by their Peers, because they
do not hold their place in Parliament Ratione Nobilitatis, sed ratione officii:
and yet not only in regard of their Office eien en respect de lour possessions,
l'antient Baronyes annexes a lour dignitye, but in regard of their possessions,
and those ancient Baronies which are annexed to their Sees, which reason in my
Judgment has no reason at all, for then the old Barons which were called to
Parliament in regard of their Tenure (as they were all until the time of King
Richard the 2d) could have no Trial by their Peers, because they had no place
in Parliament, but in respect of their possessions, or temporal Baronies; and
secondly, the Bishops as before was proved, are accounted Nobles, and thereupon
may challenge their place in Parliament, not only ratione officii, (as
anciently before the times of William the Conqueror) but also ratione
Nobilitatis; since they were ranked amongst the Barons in regard of their
Tenure.

Others perhaps may give this reason, that Bishops in the former times were
debarred from Marriage, and that now holding their Estates and Honors only for
term of life, they are not capable of transmitting either unto their posterity,
which possibly may make the Laws less tender of them than they might be
otherwise; but then what shall we say of the Wives and Widows of the Temporal
Lords, who being either barren, or past hope of Children shall notwithstanding
be tried by their Peers according to the Statute of Henry the sixth; Or put the
case that any man should be created Earl or Baron for the time of his life, or
with a limitation to the Heirs of his body; and either live unmarried or
continue childless; must he be therefore made incapable of a Trial by the Peers
of the Realm, because his Honors and his Life do expire together. I think no
reasonable man can say it, and I hope none will.

It cannot be denied but that some Bishops have been tried by Common Juries,
that is to say Adam de Orlton Bishop of Hereford, Thomas Lyld Bishop of Ely,
Thomas Merkes Bishop of Carslile, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Thomas
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury; but then it is to be observed, that none but
Fisher suffered death on that account, whether by reason of some illegality in
their proceedings, or in reference to their High and holy Callings it is hard
to say; And secondly we may observe, that though in some confusions and
disorder of times such Presidents may be produced as in matter of Fact, yet the
Case is not altogether so clear in point of Law, as not to leave the matter
doubtful, as we heard before; and that it was conceived by some Learned men of
that profession, that if those Bishops had desired to be tried by their Peers,
it could not have been denied them in a course of Justice.

And therefore thirdly, we observe that the Bishops of Hereford and Ely did
trust so much to their dependence on the Pope, and their exemption from the
power of all secular Judges, that they refused absolutely to be tried by any
but the Archbishop of Canterbury, as the Popes Legate in this Kingdom, which
possibly might put their Enemies upon a course of enquiring into their offenses
by a Common Jury, the parties being wilfully absent and not submitting to a
Trial in due course of Law; and that the way being thus laid open, it was no
hard matter to make the Bishop of Carlisle obnoxious to that kind of Trial,
which being forsaken on all sides (as the times then were) he was not able to
avoid.

Which might be also the condition of Archbishop Cranmer, and as for Fisher
Bishop of Rochester he was to deal with an impetuous and violent Prince, who
was resolved to put the greater disgrace upon him, because he had received some
greater Honors from the Pope, than the condition of Affairs might be thought
to bear.

But against all these violations of their Rights of Peerage, it may be said in
their behalves for the times to come, that by the Statute of the 25th of King
Edward the 3d, which serves to this day for the standing Rule in Cases of
Treason, it is required that the Malefactor, or the suspected person must be
attainted by such men, as are of his own Condition, and therefore Bishops to be
tried by none; but the Peers of the Land, unless it be in open opposite on to
this Rule of King Edward, and in defiance to the fundamental Law in the Magna
Charta, where it is said, that no man is to be Disseised of his Freehold,
exiled, or any ways destroyed; nisi per Judicium parium suorum; Or per Legem
Terrae, but by the Judgment of his Peers, and by the Law of the Land, and I can
find no Law of the Land which tells me that a Bishop shall be tried by a Common
Jury.

Finally, if it be a sufficient Argument, that Bishops ought not to be reckoned
as Peers of the Realm, because they may be tried by a Common Jury, then also at
some times, and in certain Cases, the Temporal Lords, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
etc. must not pass for Peers, because in all Appeals of Murder, they are to be
tried by Common Jurors, like the rest of the Subjects.

But secondly it is objected, That since a Bishop cannot sit in Judgment on the
death of a Peer, nor be so much as present at the time of his Trial, they are
but half-Peers as it were, not Peers to all intents and purposes, as the others
are. But this incapacity is not laid upon them by the Laws of the Land, or any
Limitation of their powers in their Writ of Summons, or any thing inhering to
the Episcopal Function, but only by some ancient Canons, (and more particularly
by the fourth Canon of Toledo) which, whether they be now of force or not may
be somewhat questioned; Secondly, whenever they withdrew themselves, they did
it with a salvo Jure paritatis, as before is shown. To which intent they did
not only cause their Protestations to be filed on Record, Coke Institut. part
4. fol. 23.
but for the most part made a Proxy to some Temporal Lords to Act in their
behalf, and preserve their right, which though they did not in the Case we had
before us, yet afterward in the 21st of King Richard the 2d, and from that
time forwards (when they found Parliamentary Impeachments to become more
frequent) they observed it constantly as it continues to this day.

Nor were they hindered by those Canons, whatsoever they were, from being
present at the depositions of Witnesses, or taking such preparatory
examinations as concern the Trial, in which they might be able to direct the
Court (by the Rules of Conscience) though they withdrew themselves at the time
of the sentence. That was a Trick imposed upon the Bishops by the late long
Parliament, when they excluded them from being members of the Committee which
was appointed for taking the examinations in the business of the Earl of
Strafford. And this they did not in relation to those ancient Canons, but upon
design, for fear, they might discover some of those secret practices, which
were to be hatched, and contrived against him. Against which Preparations for a
final Trial, or taking the Examinations, or hearing of depositions of
Witnesses, or giving counsel in such cases as they saw occasion; the Council of
Toledo says not any thing which can be honestly interpreted to their
disadvantage. So that the Bishops Claim stands good to their right of Peerage,
any thing in those ancient Canons, or the unjust practices of the late Long
Parliament to the contrary notwithstanding.

To draw the business to an end, what one thing is required unto the
constituting of a Peer of England which is not to be found in an English
Bishop, if Tenure and Estate? they hold their Lands per integram Baroniam, as
the old Lords did; if Voice in Parliament? they have their several Writs of
Summons as the Lay-Lords have; if we desire Antiquity to make good their
Interesse? most of them have sat longer there in their Predecessors, than any
of our Temporal Lords in their noblest Ancestors; if point of Privilege? they
have the same in all respects as the others have, except it be in one
particular, neither clearly stated, nor universally enjoyed by those who
pretend most to it; if Letters Patents from the King to confirm these Honors?
they have his Majesty's Writ of Conge d'eslire his Royal Assent to the
Election, his Mandate under the Great Seal for their Consecration: If therefore
we allow the Bishops to be Lords of Parliament, we must allow them also to be
Peers of the Realm; There being nothing which distinguishes a Peer from from a
common Person, but his Voice in Parliament; which was the matter to be proved.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
The Way of the Reformation of the Church of England declared and justified.
SECT. I.
I. THE Introduction showing the Occasion, Method, and Design of the whole
Discourse. Page 1 I. Of Calling or Assembling the Convocation of the Clergy,
and the Authority thereof when convened together. Page 2 II. Of the Ejection of
the Pope, and vesting the Supremacy in the Regal Crown. Page 5 III. Of the
Translation of the Scriptures, and permitting them to be read in the English
Tongue. Page 7 IV. Of the Reformation of Religion in the points of Doctrine.
Page 10 V. Of the Reformation of the Church of England in the Forms of Worship;
and the times appointed thereunto. Page 14 VI. Of the power of making Canons,
for the well ordering of the Clergy, and the directing of the people in the
public duties of Religion. Page 18 VII. An Answer to the main Objections of
either Party. Page 20
SECT. II.
I. That the Church of England did not innovate in the Ejection of the Pope,
and settling the Supremacy in the Regal Crown. Page 23 II. That the Church of
England might proceed to a Reformation without the approbation of the Pope or
the Church of Rome. Page 26 III. That the Church of England might lawfully
proceed to a Reformation without the help of a General Council, or calling in
the aid of the Protestant Churches. Page 30 IV. That the Church did not
innovate in Translating the Scriptures and the public Liturgy into vulgar
Tongues, and of the Consequents thereof to the Church it self. Page 34 V. That
the proceedings of this Church in setting out the English Liturgy were not
merely Regal; and of the power of Sovereign Princes in Ecclesiastical affairs.
Page 38 VI. That the Clergy lost not any of their just Rights by the Act of
submission, and that the power of calling and confirming Councils did anciently
belong to the Christian Princes. Page 41
Of Liturgies.
CHAP. I. What does occur, and whether any thing at all, for set Forms of
Prayer from the time of Adam unto Moses.
I. PRayer, and the chief Exercise of public Worship. Page 49 II. The ground,
use, and necessity of public prayer. ibid. III. What privilege belongs unto
the Priest or Minister, in that part of Gods worship which consists in Prayer.
Page 50 IV. The inconvenience and confusion that must needs arise for want of
set forms in the Worship of God. Page 51 V. Liturgies, or set Forms of Prayer
in use amongst all sorts of people, Jew, Gentiles, Christians. ibid. VI. The
meaning of the werd Liturgy, (...), in the Civil sense. Page 52 VII. As also in
the Ecclesiastical Notion of it. ib. VIII. Whether the Offerings of Cain and
Abel were regulated by a prescribed Form. Page 53 IX. A prescribed Form of
Worship conceived by some to have been introduced by Enos. Page 54 X. The
Sacrifices and Devotions of the ancient Patriarchs for the most part occasional
only. Page 55 XI. The consecrating of set places for Gods worship, first begun
by Jacob. ibid.
CHAP. II. That from the time of Moses unto that of David, the Jews were not
without a Liturgy, or set Form of Worship.
I. The Israelites in the Land of Egypt bad not the liberty of public worship.
Page 56 II. That people made a constituted Church, first, in the time of Moses.
Page 57 III. The prescribed Rites and Form of Legal Sacrifices in the time of
Moses. Page 58 IV. Set Forms of Prayer and Benediction used at the offering of
Sacrifices in the time of Moses. Page 59 V. The Song of Moses made a part of
the Jewish Liturgies. ibid. VI. The Form and Rites used in the celebration of
the Passover, according to Joseph Scaliger. Page 60 VII. The same, together
with the Hymns then used, described by Beza. ibid. VIII. The several Prayers
and Benedictions which were used therein, according to the Jewish Rabbis. Page
61 IX. A form of Blessing of the people prescribed by God unto the Priests: a
prescribed Form used by the people at the offering of their first fruits and
tithes. Page 62 X. The like in burning of their Leaven, and in confessing of
their sins to Almighty God, as also in the excommunicating of impenitent
persons. Page 63 XI. An Answer to two main Objections from, and against the
Jewish Rabbis. Page 64 XII. The Forms of Marriage, and Rites of Burial used
amongst the Jews. Page 65
CHAP. III. Of the condition and estate of the Jewish Liturgy from the time of
David unto Christ.
I. Several hours of Prayer used among the Jews, and that the Prayers then used
were prescribed Forms. Page 66 II. The great improvement of the Jewish Liturgy,
in the time of David, by the addition of Psalms and Instruments of Music. Page
67 III. The form of celebrating Gods public service according to David's
Institutions, prescribed by the Jewish Rabbis. Page 68 IV. The solemn form
used in the Dedicating of the first and second Temples. Page 69 V. The Temple
principally built for an House of Prayer. Page 70 VI. The several and
accustomed Gestures used among the Jews, in the performance of Gods public
worship. ibid. VII. The weekly reading of the Law on the Sabbath days not used
until the time of Ezra. Page 72 VIII. The reading of the Law prescribed and
regulated according to the number of the Sections, by the care of Ezra, and of
the 18 Benedictions by him composed. Page 73 IX. The Exposition of the Law
prescribed, regulated, and ordered by the Authority of the Church. Page 74 X.
The first foundation of Synagogues, and Oratories, and for what employments.
Page 75 XI. The Church of Jewry ordained Holy Days and prescribed forms of
Prayer to be used thereon. Page 76 XII. Set days for public Annual Fasts
appointed by the Jewish Church, with a set form of Prayer agreeably to the
occasion. Page 77 XIII. The form of celebrating Gods public Service, according
as it is described by Jesus the Son of Syrac. ibid. XIV. Jesus the Son of God
conforms himself unto the Forms established in the Jewish Church. Page 78 XV. A
transition from the Forms received in the Jewish Church, to those in use among
the Gentiles, Page 79
CHAP. IV. That anciently the Gentiles had their Liturgies or prescribed Forms
of Prayer and public Worship of God.
I. The use of Sacrifice amongst the Gentiles before Moses time. Page 80 II.
Times, Priests, and Temples, sanctified and selected by the Gentiles, for the
public service of their gods. ibid. III. A general proof, that anciently the
Gentiles had their Liturgies, and set Forms of worship. Page 81 IV. Preparatory
Forms used at the celebration of their Sacrifices. Page 82 V. The Rites and
Forms used in the Sacrifice it self. Page 83 VI. Several short forms of words
observed amongst the Gentiles, both Greek and Latin, in their public
Sacrifices. Page 84 VII. Set Forms of prayer used unto Jupiter, Mars, Janus,
Juno, and other of the gods and goddesses. Page 85 VIII. The solemn Form used
by the Gentiles in evocation of the gods of besieged Cities. Page 86 IX. As
also in devoting themselves, or Enemies, to a certain ruin, for preservation
of the Commonwealth. Page 87 X. The several Gestures of the Gentiles in the act
of public Worship prescribed and regulated. ibid. XI. The Rites and Forms used
by the Greeks particularly in their solemn Sacrifices. Page 89 XII. A prescript
Form of Matrimony amongst the Romans. ibid.
CHAP. V. That in the time of the Apostles Liturgies or set Forms of
Ministration in the Christian Church, were composed and used.
I. The Jews and Gentiles made one Church by Christ our Savior. Page 91 II. A
Form of Prayer prescribed by Christ to his Disciples. Page 92 III. The
Institution of the Christian Sacrifice, with the set Form thereof by our Lord
and Savior. Page 93 IV. That the Lords Prayer, with other Benedictions, were
used by the Apostles in the celebration of the blessed Eucharist. Page 94 V. A
Form of celebrating Gods public service, prescribed in the first of St. Paul
to Timothy, according to the judgment of the Fathers. Page 95 VI. The Form and
manner of Gods public Service described in the first to the Corinthians. Page
96 VII. The Hymns and Psalms used in the Church of Corinth, were not voluntary,
but prescribed and set; and of the Music therewith used. Page 97 VIII. That
it is probable, that the Apostles ordained Liturgies for the public use. Page
98 IX. What may be said, touching the Liturgies ascribed unto St. Peter, Mark,
and James. Page 99 X. The Form of ministering the Sacrament of the blessed
Eucharist, described by Dionysius the Areopagite. Page 100 XI. That of the
ministering of the Sacrament of holy Baptism, described by him; and seconded by
the Constitutions ascribed to Clemens. Page 101 XII. Places appointed in this
Age of Gods public Worship, and honored with the name of Churches. Page 103
CHAP. VI. What does occur concerning Liturgies and Set Forms of Worship,
betwixt the death of the Apostles, and the Empire of Constantine the Great.
I. The Form observed in Baptism, and administration of the Eucharist, and in
celebrating of the Sundays service, according unto Justin Martyr. Page 105 II.
The order used in Baptism, and in the public meetings of the Congregations in
Tertullians time. Page 106 III. That in those times, the use of Psalms and
Hymns, was intermingled with the other parts of public Worship. Page 107 IV.
Tertullian cleared from a wrong sense imposed on him, in the point of Worship,
by some late Writers. ibid. V. The course and order of the Ministration,
according to the Author of the Constitutions, who lived about those times, in
their account who placed him latest. Page 108 VI. The order of reading holy
Scripture in the Congregation, prescribed and regulated in those times. Page
109 VII. Proofs for a public Liturgy, or set Form of prayer, from the works of
Origin. Page 110 VIII. As also from the Writings of Saint Cyprian. Page 111 IX.
Touching the Form of Prayer prescribed by the Emperor Constantine, for the use
of his Army. Page 112 X. That prescribed Forms of prayer were not occasioned by
the Arian or Pelagian Heresies, as it is supposed. Page 113 XI. What was
decreed conducing to set Forms of prayer in the ancient Coun^il of Laodicea.
ibid. XII. Several Offices or Forms of prayer at that time in use, agreeably
unto the several sorts of people in the Congregation. Page 114 XIII. A list of
several solemn Festivals appointed by the Church for Gods public Worship in
those early days. Page 116 XIV. Churches erected by the Christians in these two
Ages, for the public duties of Religion. ibid
CHAP. VII. Apparent proofs for Liturgies and Set Forms of Worship, betwixt the
Reign of Constantine and St. Austins death.
I. The Form of Baptism described by Cyril of Jerusalem, conform unto the
ancient Patterns. Page 118 II. As also of administering the blessed Eucharist.
Page 119 III. Conclusive proofs for Liturgies or set Forms of Worship in Saint
Basils time. ibid. IV. And from the Writings of Saint Chrysostom. Page 120 V.
The Liturgies of Chrysostom and Basil vindicated, and the Objections answered
which are made against them. Page 121 VI. Liturgies or set Forms of Worship in
the Western Churches, by whom, and what degrees established. Page 122 VII.
Proofs for the intient Liturgies, and prescribed Forms of Worship from Austins
works. Page 123 VIII. What was decreed concerning Liturgies or prescribed forms
of Worship in the African Councils. Page 124 IX. The Form of ordering Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, prescribed and regulated. Page 125 X. A prescribed form
of Marriage, and set Rites of Burial, used anciently in the Church of Christ.
Page 126 XI. Touching the Habit used of old, by Gods Priests and Ministers in
the officiating his divine service in the Congregation. Page 127 XII. Several
Gestures used by Gods people in the Congregation, according to the several
parts of public Worship. Page 128 XIII. A brief Essay concerning the Antiquity
of the Gloria Patri, the time when it was first made a part of the public
Liturgies, and the accustomed Gestures at the pronouncing of the same. Page 129
CHAP. VIII. A Corollary touching the Dedication of Churches, and of the
Anniversary Feasts thereby occasioned.
1. Dedication of Religious places used anciently by all Nations, and the
reasons why. Page 133 2. A repetition of some things that were said before,
with reference and application to the point in hand. Page 134 3. The Tabernacle
consecrated by Gods own appointment, and the consequents of it. ibid. 4.
Antiquity of the like Dedications amongst the Romans, and by whom performed.
Page 135 5. The Form and Ceremonies used in those Dedications by the ancient
Romans. Page 136 6. The antiquity and constant usage of such Dedications in the
Church of Christ. Page 137 7. Titulus and Encaenia what they signify in the
Ecclesiastical notion. Page 138 8. The great Solemnities and Feasts used by the
Jews and Gentiles in the Dedication of their Temples. Page 139 9. As also by
the Primitive Christians. Page 140 10. Dedication Feasts made Anniversary by
the Roman Gentiles. Page 141 11. And by the Christians in the times of their
greatest purity. ibid. 12. Continued till our times in the Church of England.
Page 142 13. The conclusion of the whole, and the Authors submission of it to
the Supreme Judge. Page 143
Of the Form of Prayer appointed to be used by Preachers before their Sermons.
1. THE Introduction to the whole. Page 148 2. The Canon of the year 1603. Page
149 3. The meaning and purpose of that Canon. ibid. 4. The Injunction of Queen
Elizabeth to the same effect. ibid. 5. The Injunction of King Edward VI. to the
same effect. Page 150 6. The like Injunction of King Henry VIII. ibid. 7. The
ground and reason of the Injunction of that King, and the exemplification of it
in the practice of Bishop Latimer. ibid. 8. The difference between Invocation,
and that bidding of Prayer which is required by the Canon. Page 151 9. The
Canon justified by the practice of Bishop Andrews. Page 152 10. By the practice
of Bishop Jewel in Queen Elizabeth's time. Page 153 11. By the practice of
Archbishop Parker, in King Edwards time. ibid. 12. By the like practice of
Bishop Latimer in that Kings time also. Page 154 13. More of the practice of
Bishop Latimer in this point. ibid. 14. The same proved also by the practice of
Bishop Gardener. Page 155 15. The result arising both from the precept and the
practice of the Church herein. ibid. 16. How the now Form of Prayer, by way of
Invocation was first taken up. Page 156 17. No Prayer by way of Invocation used
by the Ancients in their Sermons. Page 157 18. The Prayer appointed by the
Canon, and the Injunctions used rather heretofore as a part of the Sermon, than
as a preparation to it. ibid. 19. Bidding of Prayer more consonant unto the
meaning of the Law, than any set Prayer in the way of Invocation. Page 158 20.
Bidding of Prayer more proper for the place or Pulpit, which was not made for
Prayer, but for Exhortation. ibid. 21. The like concluded from the posture of
the Preacher also. Page 159 22. Some inconveniences arising from the Form of
Prayer by Invocation. ibid. 23. More inconveniences of that nature by accusing
the Liturgy as defective. Page 160 24. The conclusion and submission of the
whole to his Lordships judgment. Page 161
The Undeceiving of the People in the point of Tithes.
1. THAT never any Clergy in the Church of of God, has been or is maintained
with less charge to the Subject than the established Clergy of the Church of
England. Page 167 2. That there is no man in the Kingdom of England, who pays
any thing of his own toward the maintenance and support of his
Parish-Minister, but by his Easter-Offering. Page 171 3. That the change of
Tithes into Stipends will bring greater trouble to the Clergy than is yet
considered, and far less profit to the Country, than is now pretended. Page
174
The History of Episcopacy.
PART I.
CHAP. I. The Christian Church first founded by our Lord and Savior, in an
imparity of Ministers.
1. THE several Offices of Christ our Savior in the Administration of his
Church. Page 187 2. The aggregating of Disciples to him. Page 188 3. The
calling of the Apostles out of them, and why twelve in number. ibid. 4. Of the
Name and Office of an Apostle. Page 189 5. What things were specially required
unto the making of an Apostle. Page 190 6. All the Apostles equal in Authority
amongst themselves. ibid. 7. The calling and approinting of the 70 Disciples.
Page 191 8. A reconciliation of some different Opinions about the number. Page
192 9. The twelve Apostles superior to the Seventy by our Saviors Ordinance.
ibid. 10. What kind of superiority it was, that Christ interdicted his
Apostles. Page 193 11. The several powers, faculties, and preheminences given
to the Apostles by our Savior Christ. Page 194 12. That the Apostles were
Bishops, averred by the ancient Fathers. ibid. 13. And by the text of holy
Scripture. Page 195
CHAP. II. The foundation of the Church of Jerusalem under the Government of
Saint James the Apostle, and Simeon one of the Disciples, the two first Bishops
of the same.
1. Matthias chosen in the place of Judas. Page 196 2. The coming of the Holy
Ghost, and on whom it fell. Page 197 3. The greatest measure of the Spirit fell
on the Apostles, and therewithal the greatest power. ibid. 4. The several
Ministrations in the Church then given; and that in ranking of the same, the
Bishops are intended in the name of Pastors. Page 198 5. The sudden growth of
the Church of Jerusalem, and making Saint James the first Bishop there. ibid.
6. The former point deduced from Scripture. Page 199 7. And proved by the
general consent of Fathers. ib. 8. Of the Episcopal Chair, or throne of James,
and his Successors in Jerusalem. Page 200 9. Simeon elected by the Apostles to
succeed Saint James. Page 201 10. The meaning of the word Episcopus, and from
whence borrowed by the Church, ibid. 11. The institution of the Presbyters.
Page 202 12. What interest they had in the common business of the Church,
whilst St. James was Bishop. ib. 13. The Council of Jerusalem, and what the
Presbyters had to do therein. Page 203 14. The institution of the Seven, and to
what Office they were called. ibid. 15. The names of Ecclesiastical Functions
promiscuously used in holy Scripture. Page 204
CHAP. III. The Churches planted by Saint Peter, and his Disciples, originally
founded in Episcopacy.
1. The founding of the Church of Antioch, and that Saint Peter was the first
Bishop there. Page 205 2. A reconciliation of the difference about his next
Successors in the same. Page 206 3. A List of Bishops planted by him in the
Churches of the Circumcision. Page 207 4. Proofs thereof from St. Peter's
general Epistle to the Jews dispersed, according to the exposition of the
Ancient Writers. ibid. 5. And from Saint Paul's unto the Hebrews. Page 208 6.
Saint Paul's Praepositus, no other than a Bishop in the Opinion of the Fathers.
ibid. 7. Saint Peter the first Bishop of the Church of Rome. Page 209 8. The
difference about his next Successors there, reconciled also. ibid. 9. An Answer
unto such Objections as have been made against Saint Peter's being Bishop
there. Page 210 10. Saint Mark the first Bishop of Alexandria, and of his
Successors. Page 221 11. Notes on the observations of Epiphanius and Saint
Hierom, about the Church of Alexandria. Page 212 12. An observation of Saint
Ambrose applied unto the former business. ibid. 13. Of Churches founded by
Saint Peter and his Disciples in Italy, France, Spain, Germany, and the Isle of
Britain, and of the Bishops in them instituted. Page 213
CHAP. IV. The Bishoping of Timothy and Titus, and other of Saint Paul's
Disciples.
1. The Conversion of Saint Paul, and his ordaining to the place of an Apostle.
Page 214 2. The Presbyters created by Saint Paul, Acts 14. of what sort they
were. Page 215 3. Whether the Presbyters or Presbytery did lay on hands with
Paul, in any of his Ordinations. Page 216 4. The people had no voice in the
Election of those Presbyters by Saint Paul ordained. Page 217 5. Bishops not
founded by Saint Paul at first, in the particular Churches by him planted; and
upon what reasons. ibid. 6. The short time that the Churches of Saint Paul's
Plantation, continued without Bishops over them. Page 218 7. Timothy made
Bishop of Ephesus by Saint Paul, according to the general consent of Fathers.
Page 219 8. The time when Timothy was made Bishop, according to the holy
Scripture. Page 220 9. Titus made Bishop of Cretans; and the truth verified
herein by the ancient Writers. Page 221 10. An Answer unto some Objections
against the subscription of the Epistle unto Titus. ibid. 11. The Bishoping of
Dionysius the Areopagite, Aristarchus, Gaius, Epaphroditus, Epaphras, and
Archippus. Page 222 12. As also of Silas, Sosthenes, Sosipater, Crescens, and
Aristobulus. Page 223 13. The Office of a Bishop not incompetible with that of
an Evangelist. ibid.
CHAP. V. Of the Authority and Jurisdiction given unto Timothy and Titus; and
in them to all other Bishops by the Word of God.
1. The authority committed unto Timothy and Titus was to be perpetual, and not
personal only. Page 224 2. The power of Ordination entrusted only unto Bishops
by the Word of God, according to the exposition of the Fathers. Page 225 3.
Bishops alone both might and did ordain without their Presbyters. Page 226 4.
That Presbyters might not ordain without a Bishop, proved by the memorable case
of Colluthus and Ischyras. ibid. 5. As by those also of Maximus, and a Spanish
Bishop. Page 227 6. In what respects the joint assistance of the Presbyters was
required herein. Page 228 7. The case of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas,
objected, and declared. ibid. 8. The care of ordering Gods Divine Service a
work peculiar to the Bishop. Page 229 9. To whom the Ministration of the
Sacraments also does in chief belong. Page 230 10. Bishops to have a care that
Gods Word be preached, and to encourage those that take pains therein. ibid.
11. Bishops to silence and reprove such Presbyters as preach other Doctrines.
Page 231 12. As also to correct and reject the Heretic. ibid. 13. The censure
and correction of inferior Presbyters in point of life and conversation, does
belong also to Bishops. 14. And of Lay People, if they walk unworthy of their
Christian calling. ibid. 15. Conjectural proofs that the description of a
Bishop in the first to Timothy, is of a Bishop strictly and properly called.
Page 233
CHAP. VI. Of the estate of holy Church, particularly of the Asian Churces,
toward the later days of Saint John the Apostle.
1. The time of Saint John's coming into Asia. Page 235 2. All the seven
Churches except Ephesus, of his Plantation. ibid. 3. That the Angels of those
Churches were the Bishops of them, in the opinion of the Fathers. Page 236 4.
And of some Protestant Divines of name and eminency. ibid. 5. Conclusive
Reasons for the same. Page 237 6. Who is most like to the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus. ibid. 7. That Polycarpus was the Angel of the Church of Smyrna.
Page 238 8. Touching the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, and of Thiatyra.
ibid. 9. As also of the Churches of Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea. Page
239 10. What Successors these several Angels had in their several Churches.
Page 240 11. Of other Churches founded in Episcopacy by Saint John the Apostle.
ibid. 12. Saint John deceasing, left the Government of the Church to Bishops,
as to the Successors of the Apostles. Page 241 13. The ordinary Pastors of the
Church. Page 242 14. And the Vicars of Christ. Page 243 15. A brief Chronologic
of the estate of holy Church, in this first Century. Page 244
PART II.
CHAP. I. What does occur concerning Bishops, and the Government of the Church
by them, during the first half of the second Century.
1. OF the condition of the Church of Corinth, when Clemens wrote unto them his
Epistle. Page 249 2. What that Epistle does contain in reference to this point
in hand. Page 250 3. That by Episcopi, he means Bishops truly and properly so
called, proved by the scope of the Epistle. Page 251 4. And by a text of
Scripture therein cited. ibid. 5. Of the Episcopal Succession in the Church of
Corinth. Page 252 6. The Canons of the Apostles ascribed to Clemens, what they
say of Bishops. Page 253 7. A Bishop not to be ordained under three or two at
least of the same Order. ibid. 8. Bishops not barred by these Canons from any
Secular affairs, as concern their Families. Page 254 9. How far by them
restrained from the employments of the Commonwealth. ibid. 10. The
jurisdiction over Presbyters, given to the Bishops by those Canons. Page 255
11. Rome divided into Parishes, or tituli, by Pope Euaristus. Page 256 12. The
reasons why Presbyteries or Colleges of Presbyters, were planted first in
Cities. ibid. 13. Touching the superiority over all the flock given to the
Bishop by Ignatius. Page 257 14. As also of the Jurisdiction by him, allowed
them. Page 258 15. The same exemplified in the works of Justin Martyr. Page 259
CHAP. II. The settling of Episcopacy together with the Gospel, in the Isle of
Britain, by Pope Eleutherius.
1. What Bishops Egesippus met with in his Peregrination; and what he
testifies of them. Page 260 2. Of Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, and of the
Bishops by him mentioned. ibid. 3. How Bishops came to be ordained, where none
were left by the Apostles. Page 261 4. The settling of the Gospel in the Isle of
Britain by Pope Eleutherius. Page 262 5. Of the Condition of the Church of
Britain from the first preaching of the Gospel there, till the time of Lucius.
Page 263 6. That Lucius was a King in those parts of Britain which we now call
England. Page 264 7. Of the Episcopal Sees here founded by King Lucius at that
time. Page 265 8. Touching the Flamines and Arch-flamines, which those Stories
speak of. ibid. 9. What is most like to be the reason of the number of the
Arch-bishopricks and Bishoprics here, of old established. Page 266 10. Of the
Successors, which the Bishops of this Ordination are found to have on true
Record. Page 267 11. Which of the British Metropolitans was anciently the
Primate of that Nation. Page 268
CHAP. III. The Testimony given to Episcopal Authority, in the last part of
this second Century.
1. The difference betwixt Pope Victor and the Asian Bishops, about the Feast
of Easter. Page 269 2. The interpleading of Polycrates and Irenaeus, two
renowned Prelates, in the aforesaid cause. Page 270 3. Several Councils called
about it, by the Bishops of the Church then being; with observations on the
same. ibid. 4. Of the Episcopal Succession in the four prime Sees, for this
second Century. Page 271 5. An Answer to some Objections made against the same.
Page 272 6. The great authority and esteem of the said four Sees, in those
early days. ibid. 7. The use made of this Episcopal Succession by Saint
Irenaeus. Page 273 8. As also in Tertullian, and some other Ancients. Page 274
9. Of the authority enjoyed by Bishops in Tertullians time, in the
administration of the Sacraments. Page 275 10. As also in enjoining Fasts, and
the disposing of the Churches treasury. ibid. 11. And in the dispensation of
the Keys. Page 276 12. Tertullian misalledged in maintenance of the
Lay-Presbytery. Page 277 13. The great extent of Christianity and Episcopacy,
in Tertullians time, concludes this Century. Page 278
CHAP. IV. Of the Authority in the Government of the Church of Carthage,
enjoyed and exercised by Saint Cyprian and other Bishops of the same.
1. Of the foundation and pre-eminence of the Church of Carthage, Page 279 2.
Of Agrippinus and Donatus, two of Saint Cyprian's Predecessors. ibid. 3. The
troublesome condition of that Church, at Cyprian's first being Bishop there.
Page 280 4. Necessitated him to permit some things to the discretion of his
Presbyters, and consent of the People. Page 281 5. Of the Authority ascribed by
Cyprian to the People, in the Election of their Bishop. Page 282 6. What power
the People had de facto, in the said Elections. ibid. 7. How far the testimony
rf the People was required in the Ordination of their Presbyters. Page 283 8.
The power of Excommunication reserved by Saint Cyprian, to the Bishop only.
Page 284 9. No Reconciliation of a Penitent allowed by Cyprian without the
Bishops leave and license. Page 285 10. The Bishop's power as well in the
encouragement, as in the punishment and censure of his Clergy, Page 286 11. The
memorable case of Geminius Faustinus, one of the Presbyters of Carthage, Page
287 12. The Bishop's power in regulating and declaring Martyrs, Page 288 13.
The Divine Right, and eminent Authority of Bishops fully asserted by Saint
Cyprian. Page 289
CHAP. V. Of the condition and affairs of the two Patriarchal Churches of
Alexandria, and Antiochia.
1. Of the foundation and first Professors of the Divinity-School in
Alexandria. Page 290 2. What is affirmed by Clemens, one of those Professors
concerning Bishops, Page 291 3. Origin the Divinity Reader there, permitted to
expound the Scriptures, in the presence of the Bishop of Caesarea, ibid. 4.
Contrary to the custom of the Alexandrian and Western Churches, Page 292 5.
Origin ordained Presbyter by the Bishops of Jerusalem and Caesarea, and
excommunicated by the Bishop of Alexandria, Page 293 6. What does occur
touching the superiority and power of Bishops in the Works of Origin, ibid. 7.
The custom of the Church of Alexandria altered in the election of their
Bishops, Page 294 8. Of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, and his great care and
travels for the Churches peac, Page 295 9. The Government of the Church in the
former times, by Letters of intercourse and correspondence amongst the Bishops
of the same, ibid. 10. The same continued also in the present Century, Page 296
11. The speedy course taken by the Prelates of the Church, for the suppressing
of the Heresies of Samosatenus, Page 297 12. The Civil Jurisdiction, Train, and
Throne of Bishops, things not unusual in this Age, Page 298 13. The Bishops of
Italy and Rome, made Judges in a point of title and possession, by the Roman
Emperor, Page 299 14. The Bishops of Italy and Rome, why reckoned as distinct
in that Delegation. Page 300
CHAP. VI. Of the estate wherein Episcopacy stood in the Western Churches,
during the whole third Century.
1. Of Zepherinus Pope of Rome, and the Decrees ascribed unto him concerning
Bishops, Page 301 2. Of the condition of that Church, when Cornelius was chosen
Bishop thereof, Page 302 3. The Schism raised in Rome by Novatianus; with the
proceedings of the Church therein, Page 303 4. Considerable observations on the
former story, Page 304 5. Parishes set forth in Country Villages, by P.
Dionysius, ibid. 6. What the words (...) and (...) do signify most properly in
ancient Writers, Page 305 7. The great Authority which did accrue unto the
Presbyters, by the setting forth of Parishes, Page 306 8. The rite of
Confirmation, reserved by Bishops to themselves, as their own Prerogative, Page
307 9. Touching the ancient Chorepiscopi, and the Authority to them entrusted,
Page 308 10. The rising of the Manichean Heresy, with the great care taken by
the Bishops for the crushing of it, Page 309 11. The lapse of Marcellinus Pope
of Rome; with the proceedings the Church in his condemnation, Page 310 12. The
Council of Eliberis in Spain, what it decreed in honor of Episcopacy, Page 311
13. Constantine comes unto the Empire with a brief prospect of the great
honors done to Bishops in the following Age, Page 312 14. A brief Chronology
of the estate of holy Church, in these two last Centuries, Page 314
The History of the Sabbath.
BOOK I. From the Creation of the World to the destruction of the Temple.
CHAP. I. That the Sabbath was not instituted in the Beginning of the World.
1. THE entrance to the Work in hand, Page 325 2. That those words, Genesis 2. And
God blessed the seventh day, etc. are there delivered as by way of
anticipation, Page 326 3. Anticipations in the Scripture confessed by them, who
deny it here, Page 327 4. Anticipations of the same nature not strange in
Scripture, Page 328 5. No Law imposed by God on Adam, touching the keeping of
the Sabbath, Page 329 6. The Sabbath not ingraft by Nature in the soul of man,
ibid. 7. The greatest Advocates for the Sabbath, deny it to be any part of the
Law of Nature, Page 330 8. Of the morality and perfection, supposed to be in
the number of seven, by some learned men, Page 331 9. That other numbers in the
confession of the same learned men, particularly the first, third, and fourth,
are both as moral, and as perfect as the seventh, ibid. 10. The like is proved
of the sixth, eighth, and tenth, and of other numbers, Page 332 11. The
Scripture not more favorable to the number of seven, than it is to others,
Page 333 12. Great caution to be used by those who love to recreate themselves
in the mysteries of numbers, Page 334
CHAP. II. That there was no Sabbath kept, from the Creation to the Flood.
1. Gods rest upon the Seventh day, and from what he rested, Page 335 2.
Zanchius conceit touching the Sanctifying of the first Seventh day, by Christ
our Savior, Page 336 3. The like of Torniellus, touching the Sanctifying of
the same, by the Angels in Heaven, ibid. 4. A general demonstration that the
Fathers before the Law did not keep the Sabbath, Page 337 5. Of Adam, that he
kept not the Sabbath, ibid. 6. That Abel and Seth did not keep the Sabbath,
Page 333 7. Of Enos, that he kept not the Sabbath, Page 339 8. That Enoch and
Methusalem did not keep the Sabbath, ibid. 9. Of Noah, that he kept not the
Sabbath, Page 340 10. The Sacrifices and devotions of the Ancients were
occasional. ibid.
CHAP. III. That the Sabbath was not kept from the Flood to Moses.
1. The Sons of Noah did not keep the Sabbath, Page 341 2. The Sabbath could
not have been kept in the dispersion of Noah's Sons, had it not been commanded,
Page 342 3. Diversity of Longitudes and Latitudes, must of necessity make a
variation in the Sabbath, Page 343 4. Melchisedech, Heber, Lot, did not keep
the Sabbath, Page 344 5. Of Abraham and his Sons, that they kept not the
Sabbath, ibid. 6. That Abraham did not keep the Sabbath in the confession of
the Jews, Page 345 7. Jacob nor Job no Sabbath-keepers. ibid. 8. That neither
Joseph, Moses, nor the Israelites in Egypt did observe the Sabbath. Page 346 9.
The Israelites not permitted to offer Sacrifice while they were in Egypt, ibid.
10. Particular proofs that all the Moral Law was both known and kept amongst
the Fathers. Page 347
CHAP. IV. The nature of the fourth Commandment: and that the Sabbath was not
kept among the Gentiles.
1. The Sabbath first made known in the fall of Mannah, Page 348 2. The giving
of the Decalogue; and how far it binds, Page 349 3. That in the judgment of
the Fathers, in the Christian Church, the fourth Commandment is of a different
nature from the other nine, Page 350 4. The Sabbath was first given for a Law
by Moses. Page 351 5. And being given, was proper only to the Jews, Page 352 6.
What moved the Lord to give the Israelites a Sabbath, ibid. 7. Why the seventh
day was rather chosen for the Sabbath than any other, Page 353 8. The seventh
day not more honored by the Gentiles than the eighth or ninth, Page 354 9. The
Attributes given by some Greek Poets to the seventh day, no argument that they
kept the the Sabbath, Page 355 10. The Jews derided for their Sabbath, by the
Grecians, Romans, and Egyptians, Page 356 11. The division of the year into
weeks not generally used of old, amongst the Gentiles. Page 357
CHAP. V. The practice of the Jews in such observances as were annexed unto the
Sabbath.
1. Of some particular adjuncts affixed unto the Jewish Sabbath, Page 358 2.
The Annual Festivals called Sabbaths in the Book of God, and reckoned as a part
of the fourth Commandment, Page 359 3. The Annual Sabbaths no less solemnly
observed and celebrated than the weekly were, if not more solemnly, Page 360 4.
Of the Parasceue or Preparation to the Sabbath and the solemn Festivals, Page
361 5. All manner of work as well forbidden on the Annual as the weekly
Sabbaths, Page 362 6. What things were lawful to be done on the Sabbath days,
Page 363 7. Touching the prohibitions of not kindling fire, and not dressing
meat, Page 364 8. What moved the Gentiles generally to charge the Jews with
Fasting on the Sabbath day, Page 365 9. Touching this Prohibition, Let no man
go out of his place on the Sabbath day, Page 366 10, All lawful recreations, as
Dancing, Feasting, Man-like Exercises, allowed and practiced by the Jews upon
their Sabbaths. ibid.
CHAP. VI. Touching the observation of the Sabbath, unto the time the People
were established in the Promised Land.
1. The Sabbath not kept constantly during the time the People wandered in the
Wilderness, Page 368 2. Of him that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, ibid.
3. Wherein the sanctifying of the Sabbath did consist, in the time of Moses,
Page 369 4. The Law not ordered to be read in the Congregation every Sabbath
day, Page 370 5. The sack of Hiericho, and the destruction of that People was
upon the Sabbath, Page 371 6. No Sabbath, after this, without Circumcision, and
how that Ceremony could consist with the Sabbaths rest, Page 372 7. What moved
the Jews, to prefer Circumcision before the Sabbath, Page 373 8. The standing
still of the Sun at the prayers of Josuah, etc. could not but make some
alteration about the Sabbath, ibid. 9. What was the Priests work on the Sabbath
day; and whether it might stand with the Sabbaths rest, Page 374 10. The
scattering of the Levites over all the Tribes, had no relation unto the reading
of the Law on the Sabbath Days. Page 375
CHAP. VII. Touching the keeping of the Sabbath, from the time of David to the
Maccabees.
1. Particular necessities must give place to the Law of Nature, Page 376 2.
That David's flight from Saul was upon the Sabbath, Page 377 3. What David did,
being King of Israel, in ordering things about the Sabbath, ibid. 4. Elijahs
flight upon the Sabbath, and what else happened on the Sabbath in Elijah's time.
Page 378 5. The limitation of a Sabbath days journey, not known amongst the
Jews when Elisha lived, Page 379 6. The Lord becomes offended with the Jewish
Sabbaths, and on what occasion, ibid. 7. The Sabbath entertained by the
Samaritans, and their strange niceties therein, Page 380 8. Whether the
Sabbaths were observed during the Captivity, ibid. 9. The special care of
Nehemiah to reform the Sabbath, Page 381 10. The weekly reading of the Law on
the Sabbath days, begun by Ezra. Page 382 11. No Synagogues nor weekly reading
of the Law, during the Government of the Kings, Page 383 11. The Scribes and
Doctors of the Law impose new rigours on the People about their Sabbaths. Page
384
CHAP. VIII. What does occur about the Sabbath, from the Maccabees to the
destruction of the Temple.
1. The Jews refuse to fight in their own defense upon the Sabbath; and what
was ordered thereupon, Page 385 2. The Pharisees, about these times, had made
the Sabbath burdensome by their Traditions, Page 386 3. Jerusalem twice taken
by the Romans, on the Sabbath day, Page 387 4. The Romans, many of them,
Judaize, and take up the Sabbath: as other Nations did by the Jews example,
Page 388 5. Augustus Caesar very gracious to the Jews in matters that concerned
their Sabbath, Page 390 6. What our Redeemer taught, and did, to rectify the
abuses of, and in the Sabbath, ibid. 7. The final ruin of the Temple, and the
Jewish Ceremonies on a Sabbath day, Page 391 8. The Sabbath abrogated with the
other Ceremonies, Page 392 9. Wherein consists the Christian Sabbath, mentioned
in the Scriptures, and amongst the Fathers, Page 393 10. The idle and
ridiculous niceties of the modern Jews, in their Perasceves, and their Sabbaths
conclude the first Part. Page 394
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. That there is nothing found in Scripture, touching the keeping of the
Lords day.
1. The Sabbath not intended for a perpetual ordinance. Page 400 1.
Preparatives unto the dissolution of the Sabbath, by our Saviou Christ, Page
401 3. The Lords day not enjoined in the place thereof, either by Christ, or
the Apostles; but instituted by the authority of the Church, Page 402 4. Our
Saviors Resurrection on the first day of the week, and apparitions on the
same, make it not a Sabbath, Page 404 5. The coming down of the Holy Ghost upon
the first day of the week, makes it not a Sabbath, Page 405 6. The first day of
the week not made a Sabbath, more than others by S. Peter, S. Paul, or any
other of the Apostles, ibid. 7. S. Paul frequents the Synagogue, on the Jewish
Sabbath; and upon what reasons, Page 406 8. What was concluded against the
Sabbath, in the Council holden at Jerusalem, Page 407 9. The preaching of S.
Paul at Troas, upon the first day of the week, no argument, that then that day
was set apart by the Apostles for religious exercises, Page 408 10.
Collections, on the first day of the week, 1 Cor. 16. conclude as little for
that purpose, Page 409 11. Those places of S. Paul, Gal. 4.10. Coloss. 2.16. do
prove invincibly, that there is no Sabbath to be looked for, Page 410 12. The
first day of the week not called the Lords day, until the end of this first
age: and what that title adds unto it. Page 411
CHAP. II. In what estate the Lords day stood, from the death of the Apostles
to the Reign of Constantine.
1. Touching the orders settled by the Apostles, for the Congregation, Page 413
2. The Lords day and the Saturday, both Festivals, and both alike observed in
the East, in Ignatius time, Page 414 3. The Saturday not without great
difficulty, made a Fasting day, Page 415 4. The Controversy about keeping
Easter; and how much it conduces to the present business, Page 416 5. The
Feast of Easter not affixed to the Lords day, without much opposition of the
Eastern Churches, ibid. 6. What Justin Martyr and Dionysius of Corinth, have
left us of the Lords day; Clemens of Alexandria, his dislike thereof, Page 417
7. Upon what grounds the Christians of the former times used to pray, standing,
on the Lords day, and the time of Pentecost, Page 418 8. What is recorded by
Tertullian, of the Lords day, and the Assemblies of the Church, Page 419 9.
Origin, as his Master Clemens had done before, dislikes set days for the
Assembly, Page 420 10. S. Cyprian, what he tells us of the Lords day: and of
the reading of the Scriptures in S. Cyprians time, ibid. 11. Of other holy
days, established in these three first Ages; and that they were observed as
solemnly as the Lords day was, Page 421 12. The name of Sunday often used for
the Lords day, by the primitive Christians, but the Sabbath never. Page 422
CHAP. III. That in the fourth Age from the time of Constantine to Saint
Austine, the Lords day was not taken for a Sabbath day.
1. The Lords day first established by the Emperor Constantine, Page 423 2.
What labors were permitted, and what restrained on the Lords day, by this
Emperors Edict, Page 424 3. Of other Holy days, and Saints days, instituted in
the time of Constantine, Page 425 4. That weekly other days, particularly the
Wednesday and the Friday, were in this Age, and those before appointed for the
meetings of the Congregation, ibid. 5. The Saturday as highly honored in the
Eastern Churches, as the Lords day was, Page 426 6. The Fathers of the Eastern
Churches cry down the Jewish Sabbath, though they held the Saturday, Page 427
7. The Lords day not spent wholly in Religious exercises; and what was done
with that part of it, which was left at large, Page 428 8. The Lords day, in
this Age, a day of Feasting; and that it has been always deemed Heretical to
hold Fasts thereon, Page 429 9. Of Recreation on the Lords day; and of what
kind those Dancings were, against the which the Fathers enveigh so sharply,
Page 430 10. Other Imperial Edicts about the keeping of the Lords day, and the
other Holy Days, Page 432 11. The Orders, at this time in use, on the Lords
day, and other days, of public meeting in the Congregation, Page 433 12. The
infinite differences between the Lords day and the Sabbath. Page 434
CHAP. IV. The great improvement of the Lords day, in the fifth and sixth Ages,
make it not a Sabbath.
1. In what estate the Lords day stood in S. Austins time, Page 435 2. Stage
plays and public Shows prohibited on the Lords day, and the other Holy days,
by Imperial Edicts, Page 437 3. The base and beastly nature of the Stage Plays
at those times in use, Page 438 4. The barbarous bloody quality of the
Spectacula, or Shows, at this time prohibited, ibid. 5. Neither all civil
business, nor all kind of pleasure, restrained on the Lords day, by the
Emperor Leo; as some give it out, The so much cited Canon of the Council of
Mascon, proves no Lords day Sabbath, Page 440 6. The French and Spaniards in
the sixth Age, begin to Judaize about the Lords day, and of restraint of
Husbandry on that day, in that Age first thought of, Page 441 7. The so much
cited Canon of the Council of Mascon proves no Lords day Sabbath, Page 442 8.
Of public honors done in these Ages, to the Lords day, by Prince and Prelate,
Page 443 9. No Evening Service on the Lords day, till these present Ages, Page
444 10. Of public Orders now Established, for the better regulating of the
Lords Day-meetings, Page 445 11. All Business and Recreation not by Law
prohibited, are in themselves as lawful on the Lords day, as on any other.
ibid.
CHAP. V. That in the next six hundred years from Pope Gregory forwards, the
Lords day was not reckoned of, as of a Sabbath.
1. Pope Gregory's care to set the Lords day free from some Jewish rigours, at
that time obtruded on the Church, Page 447 2. Strange fancies taken up by some
about the Lords day, in these darker Ages, ibid. 3. Scriptures and Miracles in
these times found out, to justify the keeping of the Lords day Holy, Page 448
4. That in the judgment of the most Learned in these six Ages, the Lords day
has no other ground than the Authority of the Church, Page 449 5. With how
much difficulty the People of these times were barred from following their
Husbandry and Law-days, on the Lords day, Page 450 6. Husbandry not restrained
on the Lords day in the Eastern Parts, until the time of Leo Philosophus, Page
451 7. Markets and Handicrasts restrained with no less opposition than the
Plough and Pleading, Page 452 8. Several casus reservati in the Laws
themselves, wherein men were permitted to attend those businesses on the Lords
day, which the Laws restrained, Page 453 9. Of diverse great and public actions
done in these Ages on the Lords day, Page 454 10. Dancing and other sports no
otherwise prohibited on the Lords day, than as they were an hinderance to Gods
public Service, Page 455 11. The other Holy Days as much esteemed of and
observed as the Lords day was, Page 456 12. The public hallowing of the Lords
day, and the other Holy Days in these present Ages, Page 457 13. No Sabbath all
these Ages heard of, either on Saturday or Sunday; and how it stood with
Saturday in the Eastern Churches. Page 458
CHAP. VI. What is the judgment of the Schoolmen, and of the Protestants; and
what the practice of those Churches in this Lords day business.
1. That in the judgment of the Schoolmen, the keeping of one day in seven, is
not the moral part of the fourth Commandment, Page 640 2. As also that the
Lords day is not founded on Divine Authority, but the Authority of the Church,
Page 461 3. A Catalogue of the Holy Days drawn up in the Council of Lions; and
the new Doctrine of the Schools, touching the native sanctity of the Holy Days,
Page 462 4. In what estate the Lords day stood, in matter of restraint from
labor at the Reformation, Page 463 5. The Reformators find great fault, both
with the said new doctrine and restraints from labor, Page 464 6. That in the
judgment of the Protestant Divines, the keeping of one day in seven, is not the
moral part of the fourth Commandment, Page 465 7. As that the Lords day has no
other ground on which to stand, than the Authority of the Church, Page 466 8.
And that the Church has power to change the day, and to transfer it to some
other, Page 467 9. What is the practice of all Churches, the Roman, Lutheran,
and Calvinian chiefly in matter of Devotion, rest from labor, and sufferance
of lawful pleasures, Page 468 10. Dancing cried down by Calvin and the French
Churches, not in relation to the Lords day, but the sport it self, Page 470 11.
In what estate the Lords day stands in the Eastern Churches; and that the
Saturday is no less esteemed of by the Ethiopians, than the said Lords day,
Page 471
CHAP. VII. In what estate the Lords day stood in this Isle of Britain, from
the first planting of Religion, to the Reformation.
1. What does occur about the Lords day, and the other Festivals, amongst the
Churches of the Brittans, Page 472 2. Of the estate of the Lords day, and the
other Holy days in the Saxon Heptarchie, Page 473 3. The honors done unto the
Sunday and the other Holy Days by the Saxon Monarchs, Page 474 4. Of the
public actions, Civil, Ecclesiastical, mixed, and Military, done on the Lords
day, under the first six Norman Kings, Page 476 5. New Sabbath doctrines
broached in England, in King John's Reign; and the miraculous original of the
same, Page 477 6. The prosecution of the former story; and ill success therein
of the undertakers, ibid. 7. Restraint of worldly business on the Lords day,
and the other Holy Days, admitted in those times, in Scotland, Page 478 8.
Restraint of certain servile works on Sundays, Holy Days, and the Wakes,
concluded in the Council of Oxon, under Henry III. ibid. 9. Husbandry and Legal
process prohibited on the Lords day first, in the Reign of Edward III. Page 479
10. Selling of Wools, on the Lords day, and the solemn Feasts, forbidden first
by the said King Edward as after, Fairs and Markets generally, by King Henry
VI. Page 480 11. The Cordwainers of London, restrained from selling their Wares
on the Lords day, and some other Festivals, by King Edward IV. and the
repealing of that Act by King Henry VIII. Page 481 12. In what estate the Lords
day stood, both for the doctrine and the practice, in the beginning of the
Reign of the said King Henry. ibid.
CHAP. VIII. The story of the Lords day, from the Reformation of Religion in
this Kingdom, till this present time.
1. The doctrine of the Sabbath, and the Lords day, delivered by three several
Martyrs, conformably to the judgment of the Protestants before remembered, Page
483 2. The Lords day, and the other Holy Days, confessed by all this Kingdom,
in the Court of Parliament, to have no other ground than the Authority of the
Church, Page 484 3. The meaning and occasion of that clause in the
Common Prayer Book, Lord have mercy upon us, etc. repeated at the end of the
fourth Commandment, Page 485 4. That by the Queens Injunctions, and the first
Parliament of her Reign, the Lords day was not meant for a Sabbath day, Page
486 5. The doctrine in the Homilies delivered, about the Lords day, and the
Sabbath, ibid. 6. The sum and substance of that Homily; and that it makes not
any thing for a Lords day Sabbath, Page 487 7. The first original of the New
Sabbath Speculations, in this Church of England; by whom, and for what cause
invented, Page 489 8. Strange and most monstrous Paradoxes, preached on
occasion of the former doctrines; and of the other effects thereof, Page 490 9.
What care was taken of the Lords day in King James his Reign; the spreading of
the doctrines, and of the Articles of Ireland, Page 491 10. The Jewish Sabbath
set on foot; and of King James his Declaration about Lawful sports on the Lords
day, Page 493 11. What Tracts were writ and published in that Princes time, in
opposition to the doctrines before remembered, ibid. 12. In what estate the
Lords day, and the other Holy Days have stood in Scotland, since the
Reformation of Religion in that Kingdom, Page 494 13. Statutes about the Lords
day, made by our present Sovereign; and the misconstruing of the same: His
Majesty reviveth and enlarges the Declaration of King James, Page 496 14. An
exortation to obedience unto his Majesty's most Christian purpose, concludes
this History. Page 497
Historia Quinqu-Articularis: Or, a Declaration of the Judgment of the Western
Churches; and more particularly of the Church of England, in the five
Controverted Points, etc.
CHAP. I. The several Heresies of those who make God to be the Author of Sin,
or attribute too much to the Natural freedom of Man's Will in the Works of
Piety.
1. God affirmed by Florinus to be the Author of sin, the Blasphemy encountered
by Irenaeus, and the foul Consequents thereof, Page 505 2. Revived in the last
Ages by the Libertines, said by the Papists to proceed from the Schools of
Calvin, and by the Calvinists to proceed from the Schools of Rome, Page 506 3.
Disguised by the Maniches in another dress, and the necessity thereby imposed
on the Wills of men, ibid. 4. The like by Bardesanes, and the Priscilianists,
the dangerous consequents thereof exemplified out of Homer, and the words of
St. Augustine, Page 507 5. The Error of the Maniches, touching the servitude of
the Will revived by Luther, and continued by the rigid Lutherans, ibid. 6. As
those of Bardesanes and Priscilian, by that of Calvin, touching the Absolute
Decree; the dangers which lie hidden under the Decree, and the incompatibleness
thereof with Christ's coming to Judgment, ibid. 7. The large expressions of the
Ancient Fathers touching the freedom of the Will, abused by Pelagius and his
followers, Page 508 8. The Heresy of Pelagius, in what it did consist,
especially as to this particular, and the dangers of it, ibid. 9. The Pelagian
Heresy condemned and recalled: the temper of S. Augustine touching the freedom
of the Will in spiritual matters, ibid. 10. Pelagianism falsely charged on the
Moderate Lutherans: How far all parties do agree about the freedom of the Will,
and in what they differ. Page 509
CHAP. II. Of the Debates amongst the Divines in the Council of Trent, touching
Predestination and Original Sin.
1. The Articles drawn from the Writings of the Zuinglians, touching
Predestination and Reprobation, Page 510 2. The Doctrine of Predestination,
according to the Dominican way, ibid. 3. As also the old Franciscans, with
Reasons for their own, and against the other, Page 511 4. The Historians
judgment interposed between the Parties, ibid. 5. The middle way of Catarinus
to compose the differences, ibid. 6. The newness of St. Augustines Opinion, and
the dislike thereof by the most Learned men in the Ages following, Page 512 7.
The perplexities amongst the Theologues, touching the absoluteness of the
Decrees, ibid. 8. The judgment of the said Divines, touching the possibility of
falling from Grace, ibid. 9. The Debates about the nature and transmitting of
Original Sin, ibid. 10. The Doctrine of the Council in it. Page 513
CHAP. III. The like Debates about Free Will, with the Conclusions of the
Council, in the five Controverted Points.
1. The Articles against the Freedom of the Will, extracted out of Luther's
Writings, Page 314 2. The exclamation of the Divines against Luther's Doctrine
in the Point, and the absurdities thereof, ibid. 3. The several judgments of
Marinarus, Catarinus, and Andreas Vega, ibid. 4. The different judgment of the
Dominicans and Franciscans, whether it lay in man's power to believe, or not to
believe; and whether the freedom of the Will were lost in Adam, ibid. 5. As
also of the Point of the cooperation of man's Will with the Grace of God, Page
515 6. The opinion of Friar Catanca, in the point of irresistibility. ibid. 7.
Faintly maintained by Soto a Dominican Friar, and more cordially approved by
others, but in time rejected, ibid. 8. The great care taken by the Legates in
having the Articles so framed, as to please all parties, Page 516 9. The
Doctrine of the Council in the five Controverted Points, ibid. 10. A Transition
from the Council of Trent, to the Protestant and Reformed Churches. Page 517
CHAP. IV. The judgment of the Lutherans and Calvinians in these five Points,
with some Objections made against the Conclusions of the Council of Dort.
1. No difference in Five Points betwixt the Lutherans and the Church of Rome,
as is acknowledged by the Papists themselves, Page 518 2. The Judgment of the
Lutheran Churches in the said five Points, delivered in the famous Confession
of Ausperge, ibid. 3. The distribution of the Quarrel betwixt the Franciscans,
Melancthonians, and Arminians, on the one side, the Dominicans, rigid
Lutherans, and Sublapsarian Calvinists on the other; the middle way of
Catarinus paralleled by that of Bishop Overal, Page 519 4. The Doctrine of
Predestination as laid down by Calvin, of what ill Consequence in it self, and
how odious to the Lutheran Doctors, Page 520 5. Opposed by Sebastian Castellio
in Geneva it self, but propagated in most Churches of Calvin's Platform, and
afterward polished by Perkins, a Divine of England, and in him censured and
confuted by Jacob Van Harmine, a Belgic Writer, Page 521 6. A brief view of
the Doctrine of the Sublapsarians, and the odious Consequences of it, Page 522
7. The Judgment of the Sublapsarians in the said five Points, collected and
presented at the Conference at the Hague, Anno 1610. ibid. 8. The Doctrine of
the Synodists in the said Points, Page 523 9. Affirmed to be repugnant to the
holy Scripture, as also to the Purity, Mercy, Justice, and Sincerity of
Almighty God, ibid. 10. And the subversion of the Ministry, and all Acts of
Piety, illustrated by the example of Tiberius Caesar, and the Lantgrave of
Thurin. Page 524
CHAP. V. The Doctrine of the Remonstrants, and the story of them, until their
final Condemnation in the Synod of Dort.
1. The Doctrine of the Remonstrants ancienter than Calvinism in the Belgic
Churches, and who they were that stood up for it before Arminius, Page 525 2.
The first undertakings of Arminius, his preferment to the Divinity-Chair at
Leiden, his Commendations and death, Page 526 3. The occasion of the Name
Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants; the Controversy reduced to five Points,
and those disputed at the Hague, in a public Conference, ibid. 4 The said five
Points according to their several Heads first tendered at the Hague, and after
at the Synod at Dort, Page 527 5. The Remonstrants persecuted by their
Opposites, put themselves under the protection of Barnevelt, and by his means
obtained a collection of their Doctrine. Barnevelt seized and put to death by
the Prince of Orange, Page 528 6. The Calling of the Synod of Dort, the
parallel betwixt it and the Council at Trent, both in the conduct of the
business against their Adversaries, and the differences amongst themselves,
Page 529 7. The breaking out of the differences in the Synod in open Quarrels,
between Martinius one of the Divines of Breeme, and some of the Divines of
Holland; and on what occasions, ibid. 8. A Copy of the Letter from Dr.
Belconqual to S. Dudly Carleton, his Majesty's Resident at the Hague, working
the violent prosecutions of those Quarrels by the Dutch Divines, Page 530 9. A
further prosecution of the parallel between the Council and the Synod, in
reference to the Articles used in the draught upon the Canons and Decrees of
either, and the doubtful meaning of them both, Page 531 10. The quarrelling
Parties join together against the Remonstrants, denying them any place in the
Synod, and finally dismissed them in a furious Oration made by Boyerman, without
any hearing, Page 532 11. The Synodists indulgent to the damnable Doctrines of
Macorius, and unmerciful in the banishment or extermnation of the poor
Remonstrants, ibid. 12. Scandalously defamed, to make them odious, and those of
their persuasions in other places, Ejected, Persecuted, and Disgraced. Page 533
CHAP. VI. Objections made against the Doctrine of the Remonstrants; the Answer
unto all, and the retorting of some of them on the opposite Party.
1. An Introduction to the said Objections, Page 534 2. The first Objection,
touching their being enemies to the Grace of God, disproved in general, by
comparing the Doctrine with that of S. Augustine, though somewhat more
favorable to Free Will than that of Luther, ibid. 3. A more particular Answer,
in relation to some hard expressions which were used of them by King James,
Page 535 4. The second charging it as Introductive of Popery, begun in Holland,
and pressed more importunately in England, answered both by Reason and
Experience to the contrary of it, ibid. 5. The third, as filling men with
spiritual pride, first answered in relation to the testimony from which it was
taken, and then retorted on those who object the same, Page 536 6. The fourth
Charge, making the Remonstrants a factious and seditious People, begun in
Holland, prosecuted in England, and answered in the general by the most
Religious Bishop Ridley, ibid. 7. What moved King James to think so ill of the
Remonstrants as to exasperate the States against them, Page 537 8. The
Remonstrants neither so troublesome nor so chargeable to the States themselves,
as they are made by the Assertor, the indirect proceedings of the Prince of
Orange, viz. the death of Barnevelt, and the injustice of the Argument in
charging the practices of his Children, and the Prince upon all the party,
ibid. 9. Nothing in the Arminian Doctrine, which may incline a man to sediti us
courses, as it is affirmed and proved to be in the Calvin, Page 538 10. The
Recrimination further proved, by a passage in the Conference of the Lord
Treasurer Burleigh with Queen Eliz. in a Letter of some of the Bishops to the
Duke of Buckingham, and in that of Dr. Brooks to the late Archbishop, ibid. 11.
More fully prosecuted and exemplified by Campney's, an old English Protestant,
Page 539 12. A Transition to the Doctrine of the Church of England. ibid.
CHAP. VII. An Introduction to the Doctrine of the Church of England in the
points disputed, with the Removal of some rubs which are laid in the way.
1. The Doctrine of the Homilies, concerning the Endowments of man at his first
Creation, Page 541 2. His miserable fall, Page 542 3. And the promised hopes of
his Restitution in the Lord Christ Jesus, ibid. 4. A general Declaration of the
judgment of the Church of England in the points disputed, exemplified in the
story of Agilmond and Lamistus, Kings of Lombardy. ibid. 5. The contrary
judgment of Wicklif objected, answered, and applied to all modern Heresies.
Page 543 6. A general answer to the like Argument pretended to be drawn from
the Writings of Frith, Tyndal and Barns. But more particularly, Page 444 7. The
judgment of Dr. Barns in the present point, and the grounds on which he builded
the same, ibid. 8. Small comfort to be found from the works of Tyndal, in
favor of the Calvinian Doctrines, Page 545 9. The falsifyings of John Frith
and others in the Doctrine of Predestination, reproved by Tyndal, Page 546 10.
A parallel between some of our first Martyrs, and the blind man restored to
fight in the eighth of Saint Mark. ibid.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparatives to the Reformation, and the Doctrine of the
Church in the present points.
1. The danger of ascribing too much to our ancient Martyrs, etc. exemplified
in the parity of Ministers and popular elections unto Benefices, allowed by Mr.
John Lambert, Page 547 2. Nothing ascribed to Calvin's judgment by our first
Reformers, but much to the Augustine Confession, the Writings of Melancthon,
Page 548 3. And to the Authority of Erasmus, his Paraphrases being commended to
the use of the Church by King Edward VI. and the Reasons why, ibid. 4. The
Bishops Book in order to a Reformation, called, The institution of a Christian
man, commanded by King Henry VIII. 1537. correcied afterward with the Kings
own hand, examined and allowed by Cranmer, approved by Parliament, and finally,
published by the name of Necessary Doctrine, etc. An. 1543. ibid. 5. The
Doctrine of the said two Books in the points disputed, agreeable unto that
which after was established by King Edward VI. Page 549 6. Of the two Liturgies
made in the time of King Edward VI. and the manner of them; the testimony given
unto the first, and the alterations in the second, Page 550 7. The first Book
of Homilies, by whom made, approved by Bucer, and of the Argument that may be
gathered from the method of it, in the points disputed, ibid. 8. The quality
and condition of those men who principally concurred to the Book of Articles,
with the Harmony or consent in judgment between Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop
Ridley, Bishop Hooper, etc. Page 551 9. The Doctrine delivered in the Book of
Articles, touching the five controverted points, ibid. 10. An Answer to the
Objection against these Articles, for the supposed want of Authority in the
making of them, Page 552 11. An Objection against King Edwards Catechism,
mistaken for an Objection against the Articles, refelled, as that Catechism by
John Philpot Martyr, and of the delegating of some powers by that Convocation
to a choice Committee, Page 553 12. The Articles not drawn up in comprehensible
or ambiguous terms to please all parties, but to be understood in the
respective, literal and Grammatical sense, and the Reasons why. ibid.
CHAP. IX. Of the Doctrine of Predestination delivered in the Articles, the
Homilies, the public Liturgies, and the Writings of some of the Reformers.
1. The Articles differently understood by the Calvinian party, and the true
English Protestants, with the best way to find out the true sense thereof. Page
555 2. The definition of Predestination, and the most considerable points
contained in it, ibid. 3. The meaning of those words in the definition, viz.
Whom he has chosen in Christ, according to the Exposition of S. Ambrose, S.
Chrysostom, S. Jerome, as also of Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Latimer, and the
Book of Homilies, Page 556 4. The Absolute Decree condemned by Bishop Latimer,
as a means to Licentiousness and Carnal living, ibid. 5. For which, and making
God to be the Author of sin, condemned as much by Bishop Hooper, ibid. 6. Our
Election to be found in Christ, not sought for in Gods secret Councils,
according to the judgment of Bishop Hatimer, Page 557 7. The way to find out
our Election, delivered by the same godly Bishop, and by Bishop Hooper, with
somewhat to the same purpose also from the Book of Homilies, ibid. 8. The
Doctrine of Predestination, delivered by the holy Martyr John Bradford, with
Fox his gloss upon the same to corrupt the sense, Page 558 9. No countenance to
be had for any absolute, personal and irrespective decree of Predestination in
the public Liturgy, ibid. 10. An Answer to such passages out of the said
Liturgy, as seem to favor that opinion; as also touching the number of Gods
Elect.
CHAP. X. The Doctrine of the Church concerning Reprobation and Universal
Redemption.
1. The absolute Decree of Reprobation not found in the Articles of this
Church, but against it in some passages of the public Liturgy, Page 560 2.
The cause of Reprobation to be found in a man's self, and not in Gods Decrees,
according to the judgment of Bishop Latimer and Bishop Hooper, ibid. 3. The
Absolute Decrees of Election and Reprobation, how contrary to the last clause
in the seventeenth Article, Page 561 4. The inconsistency of the Absolute
Decree of Reprobation, with the Doctrine of Universal Redemption by the death
of Christ, ibid. 5. The Universal Redemption of mankind by the death of
Christ, declared in many places of the public Liturgy, and affirmed also in
one of the Homilies and the Book of Articles, Page 502 6. A further proof of it
from the Mission of the Apostles, and the Prayer used in the Ordination of
Priests, ibid. 7. The same confirmed by the Writings of Archbishop Cranmer, and
the two other Bishops before mentioned, Page 563 8. A Generality of the
Promises, and an Universality of Vocation, maintained by the said two godly
Bishops, ibid. 9. The reasons why this benefit is not made effectual to all
sorts of men, to be found only in themselves. ibid.
CHAP. XI. Of the Heavenly influences of Gods grace in the Conversion of a
Sinner, and a man's cooperation with those Heavenly influences.
1. The Doctrine of Deserving Grace ex congruo, maintained in the Roman Schools
before the Council of Trent, rejected by our ancient Martyrs, and the Book of
Articles, Page 564 2. The judgment of Dr. Barns and Mr. Tyndal, touching the
necessary workings of Gods grace on the will of man, not different from that of
the Church of England, Page 565 3. Universal grace maintained by Bishop Hooper,
and approved by some passages in the Liturgy and Book of Homilies, ibid. 4.
The offer of Universal grace made ineffectual to some, for want of faith; and
to others, for want of repentance, according to the judgment of Bishop Hooper,
ibid. 5. The necessity of Grace Preventing, and the free cooperation of man's
will being so prevented, maintained in the Articles, in the Homilies, and the
public Liturgy. Page 566 6. The necessity of this cooperation on the part
of man, defended, and applied to the exercise of a godly life, by Bishop
Hooper, ibid. 7. The Doctrine of Irresistibility, first broached by Calvin,
pertinaciously maintained by most of his followers, and by Gomarus amongst
others, Page 567 8. Gainsaid by Bishop Hooper, and Bishop Latimer, ibid. 9. And
their gain-sayings justified by the tenth Article of King Edwards Books, Page
568 And 10. The Book of Homilies, ibid.
CHAP. XII. The Doctrine of Free Will agreed upon by the Clergy in their
Convocation, An. 1543.
1. Of the Convocation holden in the year 1543. in order to the Reformation of
Religion in points of Doctrine, Page 569 2. The Article of Free Will in all the
powers and workings of it, agreed on by the Prelates and Clergy of that
Convocation, agreeable to the present Doctrine of the Church of England, ibid.
3. An Answer to the first Objection concerning the Popishness of the Bishops
and Clergy in that Convocation, Page 571 4. The Article of Free Will approved
by King Henry VIII. and Archbishop Cranmer, Page 572 5. An Answer to the last
Objection concerning the Conformity of the Article to the present Established
Doctrine in the Church of Rome. ibid.
CHAP. XIII. The Doctrine of the Church of England, concerning the certainty or
uncertainty of Perseverance.
1. The certainty of Grace debated in the Council of Trent, and maintained in
the Affirmative by the Dominicans, and some others, Page 573 2. The contrary
affirmed by Catarinus and his adherents, ibid. 3. The doubtful resolution of
the Council in it, Page 574 4. The Calvinists not content with certainty of
Grace, quoad statum praesentem, presume upon it also quoad statum futurum,
ibid. 5. The bounds and limits wherewith the judgment in this point ought
rationally to be circumscribed, Page 575 6. The Doctrine of the Church of
England in the present Article, ibid. 7. Justified by the testimonies of Bishop
Latimer, Bishoop Hooper, and Master Tyndal, Page 576 8. And proved by several
arguments from the public Liturgy, ibid. 9. The Homily commends a probable
and steadfast hope, Page 577 But 10. Allows no certainty of Grace and
perseverance (in any ordinary way) to the Sons of men. ibid.
CHAP. XIV. The Plain Song of the second Homily, touching the falling from God,
and the Descants made upon it.
1. More from some other Homilies, touching the possibility of falling from the
grace received, Page 578 2. The second Homily or Sermon touching falling from
God, laid down verbatim, Page 579 3. The sorry shifts of Mr. Yates, to illude
the true meaning of the Homily, plainly discovered and consuted, Page 581 4. An
Answer unto his Objection, touching the passage cited from the former Homily,
in Mr. Mountagues Appeal, ibid. 5. The judgment of Mr. Ridley, Archdeacon of
Canterbury, in the points of Election and Redemption, Page 582 6. As also
touching the reasons why the Word was not preached unto the Gentiles till the
coming of Christ, the influences of grace, the co-workings of man, and the
possibility of falling from the truth of Christ. ibid.
CHAP. XV. Of the Author and Authority of King Edwards Chatechism, as also of
the judgment of Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, in the Points disputed.
1. The Catechism published by the Authority of King Edward VI. Anno 1553.
affirmed to have been Writ by Bishop Poinet, and countenanced by the rest of
the Bishops and Clergy, Page 583 2. Several passages collected out of that
Catechism, to prove that the Calvinian Doctrins were the true, genuine, and
ancient Doctrins of the Church of England, Page 584 3. With a discovery of the
weakness and impertinency of the Allegation, Page 585 4. What may most probably
be conceived to have been the judgment of Bishop Poinet, in most of the
Controverted Points, Page 586 5. An Answer to another Objection derived from
Mr. Bucer, and Peter Martyr; and the influence which their Auditors and
Disciples are supposed to have had in the Reformation, ibid. 6. That Bucer was
a man of moderate Counsels, approving the first Liturgy of King Edward VI.
assenting to the Papists at the Diet of Ratisbone, in the possibility of
falling from grace; and that probably Peter Martyr had not so far espoused the
Calvinian quarrels, when he lived in Oxon, as after his return to Zurick and
Calvin's Neighborhood, Page 587 7. The judgment of Erasmus, according as it is
delivered in his Paraphrases on the four Evangelists, proposed first in the
general view, and after more particularly in every of the Points disputed. Page
588
PART III.
CHAP. XVI. Of the first breakings out of the Predestinarians, and their
Proceedings in the same.
1. The Predestinarians, called at first by the name of Gospellers, Page 589 2.
Campney's a professed Enemy to the Predestinarians, but neither Papist nor
Pelagian, Page 590 3. The common practices of the Calvinists to defame their
Adversaries, the name of Free Will men, to whom given, why, ibid. 4. The
Doctrine of John Knox, in restraining all men's actions, either good or evil, to
the determinate Will and Counsel of God, Page 591 5. The like affirmed by the
Author of the Table of Predestination; in whom, and the Genevian Notes, we find
Christ to be excluded from being the foundation of man's Election, and made to
be an inferior cause of salvation only, ibid. 6. God made to be the Author of
sin, by the Author of a Pamphlet, entitled against a Privy Papist, and his
secret Counsels called in for the proof thereof, both by him and Knox, with the
mischiefs which ensued upon it, ibid. 7. The Doctrine of Robert Crowly,
imputing all men's sins to Predestination, his silly defenses for the same, made
good by a distinction of John Verons, and the weakness of that distinction
showed by Campneys. Page 592 8. The Errors of the former Authors opposed by
Campneys, his Book in answer to those Errors, together with his Orthodoxie in
the point of universal Redemption, and what he builds upon the same, ibid. 9.
His solid Arguments against the imputing of all actions either good or evil to
Predestination; justified by a saying of Prosper of Aquitain, Page 593 10. The
virulent prosecutions of Veron and Crowly, according to the Genius of the sect
of Calvin. Page 594
CHAP. XVII. Of the disputes amongst the Confessors in Prison, in Queen Mary's
days, and the resetling of the Church on her former principles under Queen
Elizabeth.
1. The Doctrine of Predestination disputed amongst the Confessors in Prison in
Queen Mary's days, Page 595 2. The Examination of John Carelese between Dr.
Martin, in reference to the said Disputes, ibid. 3. Considerations on some
passages in the conference betwixt Dr. Martin and the said John Careless, Page
596 4. Review made of the public Liturgy by the command of Queen Elizabeth,
and the ^araphrases of Erasmus commended to the reading both of Priest and
People, Page 597 5. The second Book of Homilies how provided for, and of the
liberty taken by the Gospellers, and Zuinglian Sectaries, before the reviewing
and confirming of the Book of Articles, by the Queens Authority, ibid. 6. Of
the reviewing and authority of the Book of Articles, Anno 1562. and what may be
from thence inferred, Page 598 7. An Answer from the Agreement drawn from
omitting the ninth Article of King Edwards Book, the necessity of giving some
content to the Zuinglian Gospellers, and the difficulty wherewith they were
induced to subscribe the Book at the first passing of the same, ibid. 8. The
Argument taken from some passages in the English Catechism, set forth by Mr.
Alexander Nowel, and the strength thereof, Page 599 9. Several considerations
on the said Catechism, and the rest of the Authors making; and what his being
Prolocutor in the Convocation might add to any of them in point of Orthodoxie,
ibid. 10. Nothing to be collected out of the first passage in Mr. Nowels
Catechism, in favor of the Calvinian doctrine of Predestination, and the
points depending thereupon, and less than nothing in the second, if it be
understood according to the Authors meaning; and the determination of the
Church. Page 600
CHAP. XVIII. A Declaration of the Doctrine in the Points disputed under the
new establishment made by Queen Elizabeth.
1. The Doctrine of the second Book of Homilies concerning the wilful fall of
Adam, the miserable estate of man, the restitution of lost man in Jesus Christ,
and the universal redemption of all mankind by his death and passion, Page 601
2. The doctrine of the said second Book concerning universal grace, the
possibility of a total and final falling, and the cooperation of man's will
with the grace of God, Page 602 3. The judgment of Reverend Bishop Jewel,
touching the universal redemption of mankind by the death of Christ;
Predestination grounded upon faith in Christ, and reached out unto all them
that believe in him, by Mr. Alexander Nowel, ibid. 4. Dr. Harsnet in his Sermon
at St. Paul's Cross, Anno 1584. shows that the absolute decree of Reprobation
turns the truth of God into a lie, and makes him to the Author of sin, Page
603 5. That it deprives man of the natural freedom of his will, makes God
himself to be double-minded, to have two contrary wills, and to delight in
mocking his poor Creature, Man, ibid. 6. And finally, that it makes God more
cruel and unmerciful than the greatest Tyrant, contrary to the truth of
Scripture, and the constant Doctrine of the Fathers, Page 604 7. The rest of
the said Sermon reduced unto certain other heads, directly contrary to the
Calvinian Doctrine in the points disputed, ibid. 8. Certain considerations on
the Sermon aforesaid, with reference to the subject of it, as also to the time,
place, and persons in and before which it was first preached, Page 605 9. An
Answer to some Objections concerning a pretended Recantation falsely affirmed to
have been made by the said Mr. Harsnet, ibid. 10. That in the judgment of the
Right Learned Dr. King, after Bishop of London, the alteration of Gods
denounced judgments in some certain cases, infers no alteration in his
Councils; the difference between the changing of the will, and to will a
change, Page 606 11. That there is something in Gods decrees revealed to us,
and something concealed unto himself, the difference between the inferior and
superior causes, and of the conditionality of Gods threats and promises, ibid.
12. The accomodating of the former part of this discourse to the case of the
Ninevites, Page 607 13. And not the case of the Ninevites to the case disputed.
ibid.
CHAP. XIX. Of the first great breach which was made in the Doctrine of the
Church; by whom it was made, and what was done toward the making of it up.
1. Great alterations made in the face of the Church, from the return of such
Divines as had withdrawn themselves beyond Sea in the time of Queen Mary; with
the necessity of employing them in the public service, if otherwise of known
zeal against the Papists, Page 609 2. Several examples of that kind in the
places of greatest power and trust in the Church of England; particularly of
Mr. Fox the Martyrologist, and the occasion which he took of publishing his
opinion in the point of Predestination, ibid. 3. His Notes on one of the
Letters of John Bradford Martyr, touching the matter of Election therein
contained, ibid. 4. The difference between the Comment and the Text, and
between the Author of the Comment, and Bishop Hooper, Page 612 5. Exceptions
against some passages, and observations upon others, in the said Notes of Mr.
Fox, ibid. 6. The great breach made hereby in the Churches Doctrine, made
greater by the countenance which was given to the Book of Acts and Monuments,
by the Convocation, Anno 1571. Page 613 7. No argument to be drawn from hence,
touching the approbation of his doctrine by that Convocation, no more than for
the Approbation of his Marginal Notes, and some particular passages in it,
disgraceful to the Rites of the Church, attire of the Bishops, ibid. 8. A
counterballance made in the Convocation against Fox his Doctrine, and all other
Novelisms of that kind. Page 614
CHAP. XX. Of the great Invocation made by Perkins in the public Doctrine, the
stirs arising thence in Cambridge, and Mr. Barrets carriage in them.
1. Of Mr. Perkins and his Doctrine of Predestination, with his recital of the
four opinions, which were then maintained about the fame, Page 614 2. The sum
and substance of his Doctrine according to the Supralapsarian, or
Supra-creatarian way, Page 615 3. The several censures past upon it, both by
Papists and Protestants, by none more sharply than by Dr. Rob. Abbots, after
Bishop of Sarum, Page 616 4. Of Dr. Baroe, the Lady Margarets Professor in the
University, and his Doctrine touching the divine Decrees, upon occasion of Gods
denounced Judgment against the Ninivites, ibid. 5. His constant opposition to
the Predestinarians, and the great increase of his Adherents, Page 617 6. The
Articles collected out of Barrets Sermon, derogatory to the Doctrine and
persons of the chief Calvinians, ibid. 7. Barret convented for the same, and
the proceedings had against him at his first conventing, Page 618 8. A Form of
Recantation delivered to him, but not the same which does occur in the
Anti-Arminianism, to be found in the Records of the University, ibid. 9.
Several Arguments to prove that Barret never published the Recantation imposed
upon him, Page 619 10. The rest of Barrets story related in his own Letter to
Dr. Goad, being then Vice Chancellor, ibid. 11. The sentencing of Barret to a
Recantation, no argument that his Doctrine was repugnant to the Church of
England, and that the body of the same University differed from the heads in
that particular. Page 620
CHAP. XXI. Of the proceedings against Baroe, the Articles of Lambeth, and the
general calm which was in Oxon, touching these Disputes,
1. The differences between Baroe and Dr. Whitacres, the address of Whitacres
and others to Archbishop Whitgift, which drew on the Articles of Lambeth. Page
621 2. The Articles agreed on at Lambeth, presented both in English and Latin,
Page 622 3. The Articles of no authority in themselves, Archbishop Whitgift
questioned for them, together with the Queens command to have them utterly
suppressed, ibid. 4. That Baroe neither was deprived of his Professorship, nor
compelled to leave it, the Anti-Calvinian party being strong enough to have
kept him in if he had desired it, Page 623 5. A Copy of the Letter from the
Heads in Cambridge to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, occasioned as they said by
Barret and Baroe, Page 624 6. Dr. Overalds encounters with the Calvinists in
the point of falling from the grace received; his own private judgment in the
point, neither for total nor for final, and the concurrence of some other
Learned men in the same opinion, Page 625 7. The general calm which was at Oxon
at that time, touching these disputes, and the Reasons of it, ibid. 8. An
Answer to that Objection out of the writings of judicious Hooker, of the total
and final falling, Page 626 9. The disaffections of Dr. Bukeridge, and Dr.
Houson to Calvin's doctrins: An Answer to the Objection touching the paucity of
those who opposed the same, ibid. 10. Possession of a truth maintained but by
one or two, preserves it sacred and inviolable for more fortunate times; the
case of Liberius Pope of Rome; and that the testimonies of this kind are rather
to be valued by weight than tale, Page 627
CHAP. XXII. Of the Conference at Hampton Court, and the several encouragements
given to the Anti-Calvinians in the time of King James.
1. The occasion of the conference at Hampton Court, and the chief persons
there assembled, Page 628 2. The nine Articles of Lambeth rejected by King
James Page 629 3. Those of the Church being left in their former condition,
ibid. 4. The Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination decryed by Bishop Bancroft,
and disliked by King James; and the reasons of it, Page 630 5. Bishop Bancroft
and his Chaplain both abused; The inserting the Lambeth Articles into the
confession of Ireland, no argument of King James his approbation of them, by
whom they were inserted, and for what cause allowed of in the said Confession,
ibid. 6. A pious fraud of the Calvinians in clapping their Predestinarian
Doctrines at the end of the Old Testament, Anno 1607. discovered, censured and
rejected, with the reasons of it, Page 631 7. The great encouragement given by
King James to the Anti-Calvinians, and the increasing of that party both in
power and number by the stirs in Holland, ibid. 8. The offense taken by King
James at Conradus Vorstius, animateth the Oxon Calvanists to suspend Dr.
Houson, and to preach publicly against Dr. Laud, Page 632 9. The like
proceedings at Cambridge against Mr. Simpson, first prosecuted by King James,
and on what account that King was more incensed heainst the party of Arminius,
than against their persuasions, ibid. 10. The Instructions published by King
James in order to the diminishing of Calvin's Authority, the defense of
universal Redemption, and the suppressing of his Doctrines in the other points,
and why the last proved so unuseful in the case of Gabriel Bridges, Page 633
11. The publishing of Mountagues Answer to the Gagger, the information made
against it; the Author and his Doctrine taken by King James into his
protection, and his Appeal Licensed by the Kings appointment, Page 634 12. The
conclusion of the whole discourse, and the submission of it to the Church of
England. ibid. A Postscript to the Reader, concerning some particulars, in a
Scurrilous Pamphlet Entitled, A Review of the Certamen Epistolare, etc. Page
635
The Stumbling Block of Disobedience and Rebellion, etc.
CHAP. I. The Doctrine of Obedience laid down by Calvin, and of the Popular
Officers supposed by him, whereby he overthrows that Doctrine.
1. THe purpose and design of the work in hand, Page 645 2. The Doctrine of
Obedience unto Kings and Princes, soundly and piously laid down by Calvin, Page
646 3. And that not only to the good and gracious, but even to cruel Princes
and ungodly Tyrants, Page 647 4. With Answer unto such Objections as are made
against it, Page 649 5. The Principles of Disobedience in the supposal of some
particular Officers ordained of purpose to regulate the power of Kings, Page
650 6. How much the practice of Calvin's followers does differ from their
Masters Doctrine as to the point of Obedience, Page 651 7. Several Articles and
points of Doctrine, wherein the Disciples of Calvin are departed from him, Page
653 8. More of the differences in point of Doctrine betwixt the Master and the
Scholars, ibid. 9. The dangerous consequences which arise from his faulty
Principles, in the point or Article of Disobedience, Page 654 10. The method
and distribution of the following work. Page 655
CHAP. II. Of the Authority of Ephori in the State of Sparta, and that they
were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin.
1. The King of Sparta absolute Monarch at the first, Page 656 2. Of the
declining of the Regal power, and the condition of that State, when Lycurgus
undertook to change the Government, Page 657 3. What power Lycurgus gave the
Senate; and what was left unto the Kings, ibid. 4. The Ephori appointed by the
Kings of Sparta, to ease themselves, and curb the Senate, Page 658 5. The
blundering and mistakes of Joseph Scaliger, about the first Institution of the
Ephori, Page 659 6. The Ephori from mean beginnings grew to great Authority;
and by what advantages, Page 660 7. The power and influence which they had in
the public Government, Page 661 8. By what degrees the Ephori incroached on
the Spartan Kings, Page 662 9. The insolences of the Ephori toward their
Kings, altered the State into a Tyranny, Page 663 10. The Spartan Kings stomach
the insolency of the Ephori, and at last utterly destroy them, Page 664 11. An
application of the former passages to the point in hand. Page 665
CHAP. III. Of the Encroachments of the Tribunes on the State of Rome; and that
they were not instituted for the ends supposed by Calvin.
1. The Tribunes of the People why first Instituted in the State of Rome, Page
666 2. And with what difficulty and conditions, Page 667 3. The Tribunes
fortify themselves with large immunities, before they went about to change the
Government, Page 668 4. The Tribunes no sooner in their Office, but they set
themselves against the Nobility and the Senate, contrary to the Articles of
their Institution, Page 669 5. The many and dangerous Seditions occasioned by
the Tribunes in the City of Rome, Page 670 6. The Tribunes and the People do
agree together to change the Government of the State, Page 671 7. By what
degrees the People came to be possessed of all the Offices in the State, both
of power and dignity, Page 672 8. The Plots and Practices of the Gracchi, to
put the power of the Judicature and Supreme Majesty of the Senate into the
hands of the People, ibid. 9. The Tribunes take upon them to commit the
Consuls, and bring all the Officers of the State under their command, Page 673
10. The Office and Authority of the Tribunes reduced unto its ancient bounds by
Corn. Sylla; and at last utterly destroyed, Page 674 11. An Application of the
former passage to the point in hand, Page 675
CHAP. IV. Of what Authority the Demarchi were in the State of Athens; and of
the danger and unfitness of the instances produced by Calvin.
1. Athens first governed by Kings, and afterward by one Sovereign Prince
under other titles, Page 676 2. The Annual Magistrates of Athens, what they
were, and of what Authority, Page 677 3. By whom and what degrees the State of
Athens was reduced to a Democratie, Page 678 4. Of the Authority of the Senate,
and the famous Court of the Areopagites, Page 679 5. What the Demarchi were in
the State of Athens, and of what Authority, Page 680 6. The Demarchi never were
of power to oppose the Senate, nor were ordained to that end, ibid. 7. Calvin's
ill luck in making choice of three such instances, which if true, would not
serve his turn. Page 681 8. The danger which lies hidden under the disguise of
such popular Magistrates as are here instanced in by Calvin, Page 682 9. What
moved Calvin to lay these dangerous stumbling blocks in the Subjects way, Page
683 10. The dangerous positions and practices which have hence ensued in most
parts of Europe, Page 684 11. The sect of Calvin professed Enemies to Monarchy,
and the power of Princes. Page 685
CHAP. V. What are the three Estates in each several Kingdom, of which Calvin
speaks, and what particularly in the Realm of England.
1. Of the division of a People into three Estates; and that the Priests or
Clergy have been always one, Page 687 2. The Priests employed in Civil matters
and affairs of State, by the Egyptians and the Persians, the Greeks, Gauls, and
Romans, Page 688 3. The Priests and Levites exercised in affairs of Civil
Government by Gods own appointment, Page 680 4. The Prelates versed in Civil
matters and affairs of State, in the best and happiest times of Christianity,
Page 690 5. The Clergy make the third Estate in Germany, France, Spain, and the
Northern Kingdoms, Page 692 6. That anciently in the Saxon times the
Ecclesiastics of this Realm were called to all public Councils, Page 694 7.
The Prelates an essential fundamental part of the English Parliament, ibid. 8.
Objections answered, and that the word Clerus in the Legal notion, does not
extend unto the Prelates, Page 698 9. That the inferior Clergy of the Realm of
England, had anciently their Votes in Parliament, to all intents and purposes
as the Commons had, Page 700 10. Objections answered; and that the calling of
the Clergy to Parliaments and Convocations, were after different manners, and
by several Writs, Page 703 11. The great Disfranchisement and Slavery obtruded
on the English Clergy, by the depriving of the Bishops of their Votes in
Parliament, Page 705 12. A brief discussion of the question, whether any two of
the three Estates conspiring or agreeing together, can conclude any thing unto
the prejudice of the third. Page 706
CHAP. VI. That the three Estates of every Kingdom whereof Calvin speaks, have
no Authority either to regulate the power, or control the Actions of the
Sovereign Prince.
1. The Bishops and Clergy of England, not the King, make the third Estate, and
of the dangerous consequences which may follow on the contrary Tenet, Page 708
2. The different influence of the three Estates upon conditional Princes, and
an absolute Monarch, Page 710 3. The Sanhedrim of no Authority over the Persons
or the actions of the Kings of Judah, Page 711 4. The three Estates in France,
of how small Authority over the actions of that King, Page 712 5. The King of
Spain not overruled, or regulated by the three Estates, Page 713 6. Of what
Authority they have been anciently in the Parliaments of Scotland, Page 714 7.
The King of England always accounted heretofore for an absolute Monarch, Page
715 8. No part of Sovereignty invested Legally in the English Parliaments, Page
716 9. The three Estates assembled in the Parliament of England, subordinate
unto the King, not coordinate with him, Page 719 10. The Legislative power of
Parliaments is properly and legally in the King alone, Page 720 11. In what
particulars the power of the English Parliament does consist especially, Page
723 12. The Kings of England ordinarily overruled their Parliaments by
themselves, their Council, and their Judges, Page 724 13. Objections answered,
touching the power and practice of some former Parliaments, and the testimonies
given unto them, Page 726 14. No such Authority given by God in Holy Scripture
to any such Popular Magistrates as Calvin dreams of, and pretends, Page 727 15.
The Application and Conclusion of the whole Discourse. Page 728
De jure Paritatis Episcoporum: The Right of Peerage vindicated to the Bishops
of England, Page 739.

FINIS.

