AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Presbyterians.

CONTAINING The Beginnings, Progress and Successes of that active Sect. Their
Oppositions to Monarchical and Episcopal Government. Their Innovations in the
Church: and, Their Imbroylments of the Kingdoms and Estates of Christendom in
the pursuit of their Designs.

From the Year 1536, to the Year 1647.

By PETER HEYLYN D. D. And Chaplain to Charles the First, and Charles the
Second, MONARCHS of GREAT BRITAIN.

OXFORD: Printed for Io. Crosley, and are to be sold in London by Tho. Basset,
at the George near Cliffords-Inne in Fleetstreet, and Chr. Wilkinson, at the
Black-Boy over against S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1670.

To the Right Honorable, The LORDS SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL, and COMMONS in
Parliament assembled.
May it please Your Honors,
YOu are here most humbly implored for the Patronage of a Post-humous birth of
my dear and honored Fathers Laborious mind, in the Cause of this Kingdoms
professed and settled Religion. You may safely believe the Title Page reports to
You the true and genuine Author of the Book, but it is most humbly entreated
that You would not: For if You rather please to read it, You will be assured of
the Parent, by the Lineaments remarkable upon the Child; and therewith too
receive, I hope, such satisfaction as may justly flow from the perusal of an
History, which in some measure confirms the Excellency of those Laws You have
devised, and Sacred Majesty confirmed, for the Protection of that Religion and
Government You profess and stand for. The Beauty, Justice and Prudence of the
Sanctions, will not a little appear in the ill visage of that Party, whose Rude
humor and ungoverned Zeal is here represented. It would be an immodest boldness
in me to press Your belief with my Assertions of the happy performances herein.
And they being for the most part but faithful Collections of matter of Fact,
transacted by the Ancestors of a Sect, to this day more then enough warm in the
Bowels of these Kingdoms, are to stand and fall in Your Grave and Judicious
opinions, according to their correspondency with the Annals of Your own and
other Countries. If I had nothing to plead for the Publication of this History,
but the zeal of a Son to preserve his Fathers Offspring from treading too
close after him to the Grave, I doubt not it would easily prevail with so much
Nobleness as the High and Honorable Court of Parliament does imply: But I am
moreover apt to believe, that when Your Wisdoms please to consider, that the
Party hereby proved peccant, are still so far from Repentance, that they dare
to boast their Innocence, and vie Loyalty and peaceable mindedness at the same
rate (at least) they did before our late Troubles and present Distempers made
their Turbulencies and Seditions notorious; I may then reasonably, I hope, beg
Your favorable acceptance of this Dedication; or at least depend upon that
pardon from you, which the offended Party will be unwilling to allow to him,
who though unworthy so great an honor, craves leave to subscribe himself,

(Right Honorable Lords and Gentlemen) Your most Devoted and Obedient
Servant,Henry Heylyn.

THE PREFACE.
INtending a complete History of the Presbyterians, in all the Principles,
Practices, and most remarkable Proceedings of that dangerous Sect; I am to take
a higher aim then the time of Calvin (though he be commonly pretended for the
Founder of it) and fetch their Pedigree from those whose stepts they follow.
For as our Savior said to some of the Jews, that they were of their Father the
Devil, and the works of their Father they would do: So by their works, that is
to say, by the Opinions which they hold, the Doctrines which they preach, and
the Disturbances by them made in these parts of Christendom, we may best find
from what Original they derive themselves. I know that some, out of pure zeal
unto the Cause, would fain entitle them to a descent from the Jewish Sanhedrim,
ordained by God himself in the time of Moses. And that it might comply the
better with their ends and purposes, they have endeavored to make that famous
Consistory of the Seventy Elders, not only a coordinate power with that of
Moses, and after his decease with the Kings and Princes of that State in this
Public Government; but a Power Paramount and Supreme, from which lay no appeal
to any but to God himself: A power by which they were enabled not only to
control the actions of their Kings and Princes, but also to correct their
persons. Which as I can by no means grant to be invested in the Sanhedrim by
God himself, or otherwise usurped and practiced by them in the times of that
Monarchy; though possibly they might predominate in those times and intervals
in which there was no King in Israel (as such times there were:) so neither can
I yield unto the Presbyterians any such Prerogative, as to derive themselves
and their pretensions, whether it be over Kings or Bishops, from the Jewish
Sanhedrim. And yet I shall not grutch them an Antiquity as great as that which
they desire, as great as that of Moses or the Jewish Sanhedrim, from which they
would so willingly derive themselves.

For if we look upon them in their professed opposition, as well to all
Monarchical as Episcopal Government, we cannot but give them an Extraction from
that famous Triumvirate, Korah, Dathan and Abiram, combined in a Design against
Moses and Aaron, against the Chief-Priest and the Supreme Prince; though
otherwise of different Families, and having different Counsels amongst
themselves. For Dathan and Abiram were descended from the Line of Reuben, the
eldest Son of Father Jacob; and therefore thought themselves more capable of
the Sovereign Power then Moses, who descended from a younger house. And Korah
thought himself as much neglected, in seeing Elizaphan the Son of Vzziel to
have been made the Prince of the Kohathites (the principal Family of the
Levites next to that of Gerson) when he himself descended of the elder Brother.
Nor was he able to discern, but that if there were any such necessity of having
one Priest above the rest in place and power, the Mitre might sit as well upon
his head as on that of Aaron, whose readiness in complying with the peoples
humor in setting up the Golden-Calf, had rendered him incapable of so great a
trust. Having conferred their notes, and compared their grievances, they were
resolved to right themselves, and to have neither any Chief-Priest or Sovereign
Prince to lord it over them; but to erect a parity both in Sacred and Civil
matters, as most agreeable to the temper of a free born Nation. They had got
little, else, by being set at liberty from the House of Bondage, if they should
now become the Vassals of their Fathers Children. But first they were to form
their party; and they did it wisely, drawing no fewer then two hundred and
fifty of the chief men of the Assembly to conspire with them in the Plot. And
that they might allure the people to adhere unto them, they flatter them with
an hope of an absolute Freedom, and such a power in Sacred matters, as should
both authorize and justify their approaches to the holy Altar, without the
intervention of Priest or Prelate. Which being done, they boldly show
themselves against Moses and Aaron; and told them plainly to their faces, that
they took more upon them then belonged to either; that all the Congregation was
holy, every one of them, in regard that God appeared so visibly amongst them;
and therefore that they had done that which they could not justify, in lifting
themselves above the Congregation of the Lord. In which it is to be observed,
that though some of the chief Princes of the House of Dan, and perhaps many
also of the other Tribes, did appear in the Action; yet it is plainly called in
Scripture, The Gainsaying of Korah; either because the practice was of his
Contrivement, or chiefly carried on by the power and credit which he and his
Accomplices of the Tribe of Levi had gained amongst the common people, by
reason of their Interests and Concernments in Sacred matters: so excellent are
the opportunities which are afforded to unquiet and seditious men, when either
by ^ seeming zeal to the Worship of God, or by some special place and interest
in his Public Service, they are become considerable in the eyes of the Vulgar.

These were the first seeds of those dangerous Doctrines, and most
unwarrantable practices, which afterward brought forth such sad effects toward
the latter end of the Jewish State, when the Pharisees began to draw unto
themselves the managing of all affairs, both Sacred and Civil. They were not
ignorant of that high displeasure which God had manifestly shown against the
principal Authors of that first Sedition, who under the pretense of regulating
the Authority of his two Chief Ministers, had put a baffle, as it were, upon
God himself, whose Servants and Ministers they were. The Pharisees therefore
were content, that both the Chief-Priest and the Supreme Prince should still
preserve their rank and station, as in former times; but so, that neither of
them should be able to act any thing of weight and moment, but as directed by
their counsels, and influenced by their assistance. For the obtaining of which
point, what arts they used, what practices they set on foot, and by what
artifices they prevailed upon men's affections; as also into what calamities
they plunged that Nation by the abuse of their Authority, having once obtained
it, shall be laid down at large in the following History. All the particulars
whereof, the Reader is desired to observe distinctly, that he may see how
punctually the Presbyterians of our times have played the Pharisees; as well in
the getting of their power by lessening the Authority both of Prince and
Prelate, as in exasperating the people to a dangerous War for the destruction
of them both; the calling in of Foreign forces to abet their quarrel; the
fractions and divisions amongst themselves; and the most woeful Desolation which
they have brought upon the happiest and most flourishing Church which the Sun
of Righteousness ever shined on since the Primitive times. Nec ovum o^o, nec
lac lacti similius. Jupiter could not make himself more like Amphitrio, nor
Mercury play the part of Sociae with more resemblance, then the ensuing Story
may be paralleled in our late Combustions; Actor for Actor, Part for Part, and
Line for Line; there being nothing altered (in a manner) in that fearful
Tragedy, but the Stage or Theater.

Change the Stage from Palestine, or the Realm of Judah, and we shall see the
same Play acted over again in many parts and Provinces of the Christian Church.
In which we find the Doctrines of the Pharisees revived by some; their
Hypocrisy, or pretended Purity, taken up by others; their Artifices to
increase their party in the gaining of Proselytes, embraced and followed by a
third, till they grew formidable to those powers under which they lived; and
finally, the same Confusions introduced in all parts of Christendom, in which
their counsels have been followed. Which I shall generally reduce under these
four heads; that is to say, The practices of the Novatians in the North; the
Arrians in the East; the Donatists in Afric, or the the Southern parts; and
the Priscillianists in the Western. The arts and subtilties of the Pharisees
were at first supposed to be too Heterogeneous to be all found in any one Sect
of Heretics amongst the Christians, till they were all united in the
Presbyterians; the Sects or Heretics above mentioned, participating more or
less of their dangerous counsels, as they conceived it necessary to advance
their particular ends: In the pursuance of which ends, as the Arrians ventured
upon many points which were not known to the Novatians, and the Donatists upon
many more, which were never practiced by the Arrians; so the Priscillianists
did as much exceed the Donatists in the arts of mischief, as they themselves
have been exceeded by the Presbyterians in all the lamentable consequents and
effects thereof: which I desire the Reader to consider distinctly, that he may
be his own Plutarch, in fitting them, and every one of them with a perfect
parallel in reference to those men, whose History I shall draw down from the
time of Calvin unto these our days, tracing it from Geneva into France, from
France into the Netherlands, from the Netherlands to Scotland, and from thence
to England: And in this search I shall adventure upon nothing but what is
warranted by the Testimony of unquestioned Authors, from whose sense I shall
never vary, though I may find it sometimes necessary not to use their words.
And by so doing, I shall keep my self unto the rules of a right Historian, in
delivering nothing but the Truth; without omitting any thing for fear, or
speaking any thing in favor of the adverse party, but as I shall be justified
by good Authors.

THE CONTENTS.
Lib. I. Containing THe first Institution of Presbytery in the Town of Geneva;
the Arts and Practices by which it was imposed on the neck of that City, and
pressed upon all the Churches of the Reformation; together with the dangerous
Principles and Positions of the chief Contrivers, in the pursuance of their
project, from the year 1536, to the year 1585. Lib. II. Containing Their
manifold Seditions, Conspiracies, and Insurrections in the Realm of France;
their Libelling against the State, and the Wars there raised by their
procurement, from the year 1559, to 1585. Lib. III. Containing Their Positions
and Proceedings in the Higher Germany; their dangerous Doctrines and Seditions;
their Innovations in the Church, and alteration in the Civil Government of the
Belgic Provinces, from the year 1559, to the year 1585. Lib. IV. Containing
Their Beginning, Progress and Positions; their dangerous Practices,
Insurrections, and Conspiracies in the Realm of Scotland, from the year 1544,
to the year 1566. Lib. V. Containing A further discovery of their dangerous
Doctrines; their oppositions to Monarchical and Episcopal Government in the
Realm of Scotland; their secret Practices and Conspiracies to advance their
Discipline; together with their frequent Treasons and Rebellions in the
pursuance of the same, from the year 1565, till the year 1585. Lib. VI.
Containing The beginning, progress and proceedings of the Puritan Faction in
the Realm of England, in reference to their Innovations both in Doctrines and
Forms of Worship; their Opposition to the Church, and the Rules thereof; from
the beginning of the Reign of King Edward VI, 1548, to the fifteenth year of
Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1572. Lib. VII. Containing A Relation of their secret and
open Practices; the Schism and Faction by them raised for advancing the
Genevian Discipline in the Church of England, from the year 1572, to the year
1584. Lib. VIII. Containing The Seditious Practices and positions of the said
English Puritans; their Libelling, Railing, and Reviling, in order to the
setting up of the holy Discipline; from the year 1584, to the year 1589. The
undutiful carriage of the French, and the horrible insolences of the Scottish
Presbyters; from the year 1585, to the year 1592. Lib. IX. Containing Their
Disloyalties, Treasons, and Seditions in France, the Country of East-Friesland,
and the Isles of Britain, but more particularly in England; together with the
several Laws made against them, and the several exceptions in pursuance of
them, from the year 1589, to the year 1595. Lib. X. Containing A relation of
their Plots and Practices in the Realm of England; their horrible Insolences,
Treasons, and Seditions in the Kingdom of Scotland, from the year 1595, to year
1603. Lib. XI. Containing Their successes either good or bad in England,
Scotland, Ireland, and the Isles of Jersey, from the year 1602, to the year
1623; with somewhat touching their affairs, as well in France and Sweden, as
the Belgic Provinces. Lib. XII. Containing Their tumultuating in the Belgic
Provinces; their Practices and Insurrections in the Higher-Germany; the
frustrating their design on the Churches of Brandenberg; the revolts of
Transylvania, Hungary, Austria and Bohemia, and the Rebellions of the French;
from the year 1610, to the year 1628. Lib. XIII. Containing The Insurrection of
the Presbyterian and Puritan Faction in the Realm of Scotland; the Rebellions
raised by them in England; their horrid Sacriledges, Murders, Spoils and
Rapines in pursuit thereof; their Innovations both in Doctrine and Discipline,
and the great Alteration made in the Civil Government; from the year 1536, to
the year 1647, when they were stripped of all Command by the Independants.
Advervisement of Books newly printed.
The History of the late Wars in Denmark; comprizing all the Transactions, both
Military and Civil, during the differences betwixt the two Northern Crowns, in
the years 1657, 1658, 1659, 1660. Illustrated with several Maps. By R. Manley.

To be sold by Tho. Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet.

A Help to English History: Containing a Succession of all the Kings of
England, the English Saxons, and the Britains; the Kings and Princes of Wales,
the Kings and Lords of Man, the Isle of Wight: As also, of all the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls and Bishops thereof; with the description of the places from
whence they had their Titles: continued and enlarged with the names and ranks
of the Viscounts, Barons and Baronets, to the year 1669. By Peter Heylyn.

AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History Of the PRESBYTERIANS. LIB. I Containing The
first institution of Presbytery in the Town of Geneva; the Arts and Practices
by which it was imposed on the neck of that City, and pressed upon all the
Churches of the Reformation; together with the dangerous Principles and
Positions of the chief Countrivers, in the pursuance of that project, from the
year 1536, to the year 1585.
AT such time as it pleased God to raise up Martin Luther, 1517.
a Divine of Saxony, to write against the errors and corruptions of the
Church of Rome; Vlderick Zuinglius, a Cannon of the Church of Zurick,
endeavored the like Reformation amongst the Switzers; but holding no
intelligence with one another, they travailed diverse ways in pursuance of it;
which first produced some Animosities between themselves, not to be reconciled
by a personal Conference, which by the Lantgrave of Hassia was procured between
them; but afterward occasioned far more obstinate ruptures between the
followers of the parties in their several stations. The Zuinglian Reformation
was begun in defacing Images, decrying the established Fasts and appointed
Festivals, abolishing set forms of worship, denying the old Catholic Doctrine
of a real presence, and consequently all external reverence in the
participation of the blessed Sacrament; which Luther seriously labored to
preserve in the same estate, in which he found them at the present: They
differed also in the Doctrine of Predestination, which Luther taught according
to the current of the ancient Fathers, who lived and flourished before the
writings of St. Augustine; so that the Romanists had not any thing to except
against in that particular, when it was canvassed by the Schoolmen in the
Council of Trent. But Zuinglius taught, as was collected from his writings,
That God was the total cause of all our Works, both good and evil; that the
Adultery of David, the cruelty of Manlius, and the treason of Judas, were the
works of God, as well as the vocation of Saul; that no man has power to think
well or ill, but that all comes of absolute necessity; that man does nothing
toward his Predestination, or Reprobation, but all is in the Will of God; that
the Predestinate cannot be condemned, nor the Reprobate saved; that the Elect
and Predestinate are truly justified; that the justified are bound by Faith to
believe they are in the number of the Predestined; that the justified cannot
fall from Grace, but is rather bound to believe, that if he chance to fall from
Grace, he shall receive it again; and finally, that those who are not in the
number of the Predestinate, shall never receive Grace, though offered to them.
Which difference being added unto that of the Sacrament, and eagerly pursued on
both sides; occasioned such a mortal and implacable hatred between the parties,
that the Lutherans have solemnly vowed rather to fall off roundly to the Church
of Rome, then yield to those Predestinarian and Sacramentary pestilences, as
they commonly called them. But Zuinglius in the mean time carried it amongst
the Switzers; five of those thirteen Cantons entertain his Doctrine, the like
did also diverse Towns and Seignories which lay nearest to them; of which Geneva
in a short time became most considerable.

2. Geneva is a City of the Alpian Provinces belonging anciently to the
Allobroges, and from thence called Aurelia Allobrogum by some Latin writers;
situated on the South Side of the Lake Lemane, opposite to the City of Lozanne
in the Canton of Berne, from which it is distant six Dutch Miles: the River
Rhos^o (having passed through the lake with so clear a color, that it seems
not at all to mingle with the waters of it) runeth through the lower part
thereof, over which there is a passage by two fair Bridges; one of them the
more ancient, and the the better fortified, belonging heretofore to the old
Helvetians, but broken down by Julius Caesar, to hinder them from passing that
way into Gallia. The compass of the whole City not above two Miles, the
Buildings fair, and for the most part of Freestone; the number of the
inhabitants about seventeen thousand, and the whole Territory not exceeding a
Diameter of six Leagues where it is at the largest. Brought under the obedience
of the Romans by the power of Caesar, it continued a member of that Empire;
till the Burgundians, in the time of Honorius, possessed themselves of all
those Gallick Provinces which lay toward the Alps. In the Division of those
Kingdoms by Charles the Bald, it was made a part of Burgundy, called
Transjurana, because it lay beyond the Iour; and was by him conferred on
Conrade a Saxon Prince, son of Duke Witibind the third, and younger brother of
Robert the first Earl of Anjow. At the expiring of whose line, by which it had
been held under several Titles of King, Earl and Duke; it was by Rodolph the
last Prince, bestowed on the Emperor Henry, surnamed the Black, as his nearest
kinsman; and by that means united to ^he Germane Empire, governed by such
Imperial Officers as were appointed by those Emperors to their several
Provinces; till by the weakness or improvidence of the Lords in Chief. Those
Officers made themselves Hereditary Princes in their several Territories.

3. In which division of the prey the City and Signiory of Geneva, which before
was governed by Officiary and Titulat Earls, accountable to the German Empire;
was made a Sovereign Estate under its own Proprietary Earls as the sole Lords
of it. Betwixt these and the Bish^ps (Susira^ans to the Archbishop of Vienna in
Daulphine) grew many quarrels for the absolute command thereof. In time, the
Bishops did obtain of the Emperor Frederick the first, that they and their
Successors should be the sole Princes of Geneva, free from all taxes, and not
accountable to any but the Emperors: which notwithstanding, the Earl
continuing still to molest the Bishops, they were fain to call unto their aid
the Earl of Savoy, who took upon him first as Protector only, but afterward
as Lord in Chief. For when the Rights of the Earls of Geneva, by the Marriage
of Thomas, Earl of Savoy, with Beatrix a Daughter of the Earls, fell into that
house; then Ame or Amade, the first of that name, obtained of the Emperor,
Charles the Fourth, to be Vicar General of the Empire in his own Country, and
in that right Superior to the Bishop in all Temporal matters: and Ame, or
Amade the first Duke got from Pope Martin (to the great prejudice of the
Bishops) a grant of all the Temporal jurisdictions of it. After which time the
Bishops were constrained to do homage to the Dukes of Savoy, and acknowledge
them for their Sovereign Lords: the Authority of the Dukes being grown so great
(notwithstanding that the people were immediately subject unto their Bishop
only) that the Money in Geneva was stamped with the Dukes Name and Figure;
capital offenders were pardoned by him; no sentence of Law executed, till his
Officers first made acquainted; nor league contracted by the people of any
validity, without his privity and allowance; and finally, the Keys of the Town
presented him as often as he should please to lodge there; as once for instance
to Charles the Third, coming thither with Beatrix his Wife, Daughter of
Portugal. But still the City was immediately subject to the Bishops only, who
had as well the Civil as the Ecclesiastial jurisdiction over it, as is confessed
by Calvin in a Letter unto Cardinal Sadolet, though as he Habebat jus gladii
and alias civilis jurisdictionis pa^tes, sed magistratui ereptas.
thought, extorted fraudulently, or by force, from the lawful Magistrate: which
lash he added in defense of the Genevians, who had then newly wrested the
Supreme Authority out of the hands of the Bishop, and took it wholly upon
themselves; it being no Felony (as he conceived) to rob the Thief, or to
deprive him of a power, to which he could pretend no title but an usurpation.

1528.
4. In this condition it continued till the year 1528, when those of Berne,
after a public Disputation held, h^d made an Alteration in Religion; defacing
Images, and innovating all things in the Church on the Zuinglian Principles.
Viretus and Farellus, two men exceeding studious of the Reformation, had gained
some footing in Geneva about that time, and labored with the Bishop to admit
of such Alterations, as had been newly made in Berne. But when they saw no
hopes of prevailing with him, they practiced on the lower part of the People,
with whom they had gotten most esteem; and traveled so effectually with them
in it, that the Bishop and his Clergy in a popular tumult are expelled the
Town, never to be restored to their former Power. After which they proceeded to
reform the Church, defacing Images, and following in all points the example of
Berne, as by Viretus and Farellus they had been instructed; whose doings in the
same, were afterward countenanced and Quae a Vireto and Farello facta sunt,
suffragio meo comprobavi.
approved by Calvin, as himself confesses. Nor did they only in that Tumult
alter every thing which had displeased them in the Church, but changed the
Government of the Town; disclaiming all Allegiance either to their Bishop or
their Duke; and standing on their own Liberty as a Free Estate, governed by a
Common Council of 200 persons, out of which four are chosen annually by the
name of Syndicks, who sit as Judges in the Court, the Mayors and Bailiffs (as
it were) of the Corporation. And for this also they were most indebted to the
active counsels of Farellus, whom Calvin therefore calls the father of the
public Liberty Libertatis suae patrem, etc
; and says in an Epistle unto those of Zurick, dated 26 November. 1553, that the
Genevians did owe themselves Farellus, cui se totos debent, etc.
wholly to his care and counsels. And it appears by Calvin also, that the
people could have been content to live under their Bishop, if the Bishop could
have been content to reform Religion; and more then so, that they had deserved
the greatest Censures of the Church, if it had been otherwise. For thus he
writes in his said Letter to Cardinal Sadolet; Talem nobis Hierarchiam si
exhibeant, etc. If, says he, they could offer to us such a Hierarchy, or
Episcopal Government, wherein the Bishops shall so rule, as that they refuse
not to submit themselves to Christ, that they also depend upon him as their
only head, and can be content to refer themselves to him; in which they will
so keep brotherly society amongst themselves, as to be knit together by no
other bond then that of Truth; then surely, if there shall be any that will not
submit themselves to that Hierarchy, reverently, and with the greatest
obedience that may be, I must confess there is no kind of Anathema, or casting
to the devil, which they are not worthy of. But in regard the Bishop could not
satisfy them in their expectations, they are resolved to satisfy themselves
out of his Estate; and either for his sake, or their own, to cast off all
relation to the Duke of Savoy, as their Patron Paramount. And though both Lords
did afterward unite against them, and besieged the Town; yet by the help of
those of Berne, (with whom they joined themselves in a strict Confederacy)
they repulsed them both. Since which time, they have strongly fortified the
Town on all sides, but most especially on that side which lies toward Savoy;
and would never since permit the Duke to arm any Boats or Galleys upon the
Lake, for fear he might make use of them to their disadvantage.

5. The power and dominion of that City being thus put into the hands of the
common people, it could not be expected that any Discipline or good Order
should be kept in the Church. The Common Council of the Town disposed of all
things as they pleased; and if any Crime which anciently belonged to the
Ecclesiastical Discipline, did happen to be committed in it; it was punished by
order from the Council. No Censures Ecclesiastical, no Sentence of
Excommunication, was either thought on at Geneva, or at that time in any other
of the Popular Churches, modelled according to the Form devised by Zuinglius;
as Si quidem Excommunicationi in aliena Ecclesia nullus locus.
Beza has observed in the Life of Calvin. The like affirmed by Calvin also, in
his Letter abovementioned to those of Zurick; who grants it to have been a
received opinion, with some very grave and learned men, Quibus sub Principibus
Christianis non videtur esse necessaria Excommunicatio.
that Excommunication was not necessary under Christian Magistrates. And so it
stood till Calvin's coming to the City, Anno 1536, who being born at Noyon,
(Noviodunum) the chief Town of Picardie, was by his father destined to the
Civil Laws: but his own inclination carried him rather to the study of
Divinity, in the pursuit whereof he first began to fancy the Reformed
Religion* and finding no assurance in the Realm of France resolved to fix
himself in Strasburgh or Basil. But taking Geneva in his way, upon the
importunity of Farellus, he condescended to make that place the Scene of his
actions and endeavors* and his a^^e^^ being once made known, he was forthwith
admitted to be one of their Preachers, and in the Month of August chosen their
Divinity Reader. This done, he presently negotiates with them not only to
abjure the Papacy, with all obedience to their Bishop forth enime to come, but
to admit some heads of Doctrine, and such a Quod Doctrinam and Disciplinam
capitibus aliquot comprehensam admitterent. Bez. in vit. Calv.
Form of Discipline as he and his colleagues had devised for them. And he
prevailed in it at the last, though with no small difficulty; the said
Discipline being generally sworn and subscribed unto, 20 July 1537. Which Form
of Discipline what it was, I have nowhere found; but sure I am, that it had no
affinity with the practice of the Primitive Church; which Disciplinam qualem
vetus habuit Ecclesia apud nos non esse (dicis) neque nos diffitemur.
Calvin plainly does acknowledge in his Letter to Sadolet, 1537.
who had objected it against him. But the people being proud and headstrong,
and not willing to be stripped so easily of the precious Liberty which so
happily they had acquired, became soon weary of the yoke, though they disguised
it under color of not giving offense to those of Berne, Zurick, and the rest
of their neighbors, 1538.
whose friendship was most necessary for them in all time of trouble. But
Calvin being peremptory not to administer the Communion unto any of those, who
could not quietly without contradiction submit themselves unto the Discipline
which themselves had sworn to, and having Farellus and Coraldus, two of his
Associates in conjunction with him; together with his two Associates is
expelled the Town.

6. Three years, or thereabouts, he continued in his excile, being bountifully
entertained at Strasburgh, where by his diligent preaching, and laborious
writings, he grew into a greater reputation then the rest of their Ministers;
the fame whereof being daily posted to Geneva, made them first sensible of the
loss that they suffered in him, and afterward procured them to solicit the
Chief Magistrates of the City of Strasburgh to license his return unto them:
from whence at last with unresistable importunity he was again recalled by that
unconstant multitude: A desire to which by no means he would hearken, unless
both they and all their Ministers would take a solemn Oath, to admit a complete
Form of Discipline, not arbitrary, nor changeable, but to remain in force for
ever after. Upon assurance of their conformity herein, he returns unto them,
like another Tully unto Rome: and certainly we may say of him, as the Historian
Nec quisquam aut expulsus est invidiosius, nec receptus latius. Paterc. Hist.
lib. 2.
does of the other; that never man was banished with greater insolence, nor
welcomed home again with an equal gladness. On the 13 day of September 1541, he
is received into the Town; and on the 20 of November following, he confirmed
his Discipline, which he had modelled in this manner: A standing Ecclesiastical
Court to be established; 1541.
perpetual Judges in that Court to be the Ministers; others of the people
annually chosen (twice so many in number) to be Judges together with them in
the same Court: this Court to have care of all men's Manners, power of
determining all kind of Ec^lesiastical causes, and Authority to convent, to
control, and to punish as far as with Excommunication, whenever they should
think to have deserved it, none either small or great excepted. To this device
he brought the people to submit, without any reluctancie: for what cause had
they to suspect any yoke or bondage to be intended in that project, wherein
they had a double Vote to each single Minister, and consequently a double
number on their side upon all occasions. But when the first year was expired,
and that the Elders of that year were to leave their places, they then
perceived how much they had inthralled themselves by their own facility. And
now they began to have some fear, that the filling up of the Seats in the
Consistory with so geat a number of Laymen, was but to please the minds of
the people, to the end they might think themselves of some power therein; that
their Pastors being men of parts, and practiced in affairs of that nature,
would easily overruled the rest, though the greater number; that the Lay Elders
being only annual, and changed from one year to another, might first or last
come under the severe lash of their Pastors, who were in a perpetua^
residencie, if they should dare at any time to act against them by their double
Vote; and that amongst the Ministers themselves, one being far in estimation
above the rest, the rest of the voices are most likely to be given with
reference to his will and pleasure; which what else were it in effect, but to
bring in Popery again by another name, in setting over them a Supreme Pastor,
or perpetual Residence, with power to carry all before him?

7. But nothing gave them more offense then the confidence of that vast and
unlimited power, which was to be put into the hands of the Presbytery, in
reference unto crimes and persons; and the unhandsome manner of proceeding in
it: for power was given unto them by the Rules of the Discipline, not only to
proceed to Excommunication, if the case required it, against Drunkards,
Whore-masters, Blasphemers of Gods holy Name, disturbers of the peace by
fighting, or contentious words; but also against such as pleased themselves
with modest dancing, which was from henceforth looked on as a grievous crime;
and what disturbances and disquiets did ensue upon it, we shall see anon. Nor
were they only Authorized to take notice of notorious crimes, when they gave
just scandal to the Church, or such as past in that account by the voice of
Fame; but also to inquire into the lives and conversations of all sorts of
persons, even to the private ordering of their several Families. In reference
to which last, they are required to make a diligent and strict enquiry, whether
men lived peaceably with their Wives, and kept their Families in good order;
whether they use constantly some course of morning and evening Prayer in their
several households, sit down at their Tables without saying Grace, or cause
their Children or Servants diligently to frequent the Churches; with many
others of that nature. And to the end they may come the better to the knowledge
of all particulars, it is not only permitted by the Rules of their Discipline
to tamper with men's Neighbors, and corrupt their Servants; but to exact an
Oath of the parties themselves, who are thereby required to make answer unto
all such Articles as may or shall be tendered to them in behalf of the
Consistory: which odious and unneighbourly office is for the most part executed
by those of the Laity, or at the least imputed wholly unto their
pragmaticalness; though the Lay Elders possibly have done nothing in it, but by
direction from their Pastors. For so it was contrived of purpose by the wise
Artificer, that the Ministers might be thereby freed from that common hatred,
which such a dangerous and saucie inquisition might else draw upon them. And
yet these were not all the mischiefs which their submitting to that yoke had
drawn upon them; by which they had enthralled themselves to such hard
conditions, that if a man stood Excommunicate, or in contempt against the
censures of the Church, for the space of a twelve month, he was to suffer a
whole years banishment by Decree of the Senate; not otherwise to be restored,
but upon submission, and that submission to be made upon their knees in the
open Church.

8. These melancholic thoughts had not long possessed them, when an occasion
was presented to try their courage. Perinus Captain of the people, and of great
power in that capacity amongst the multitude, pretends the common liberty to be
much endangered by that new subjection, and openly makes head against him in
defense thereof. Ten years together did it struggle with the opposition, and at
last was almost ruined and oppressed by it. For whereas the Consistory had
given sentence against one Bertilier, even in the highest censure of
Excommunication; the Common council not only absolved him from that censure
under their Town-seal, but foolishly Decreed that Excommunication and
Absolution did properly belong to them. Upon this he is resolved again to quit
the Town, and solemnly takes his leave of them, at the end of one of his
Sermons, which he had fitted for that purpose: but at the last the Controversy
is reduced to these three questions, viz. First, after what manner by Gods
Ordinance, according to the Scripture, Excommunication was to be exercised.
Secondly, whether it may not be exercised some other way then by such a
Consistory. Thirdly, what the use of other Churches was in the like case. And
being reduced to these three questions, it was submitted to the judgment and
determination of four of the Helvetian Churches; to whose Decree both parties
were obliged to stand. But Calvin knew beforehand what he was to trust to,
having before prepared the Divines of Zurick to pronounce sentence on his side;
of whom he earnestly desired that they would seriously respect that cause, on
which the whole State of the Religion of the City did so much depend; that God
and all good men were now inevitably in danger to be trampled on, if those four
Churches did not declare for him and his Associates, when the cause was to be
brought before them; that in the giving of the sentence, they should pass an
absolute approbation upon the Discipline of Geneva, as consonant unto the Word
of God, without any cautions, qualifications, ifs or ands: and finally, that
they would exhort the Genevian Citizen^ from thenceforth not to innovate or
change the same. Upon which pre-ingagement they returned this Answer, directed
to the Common council of Geneva, by which their judgment was required; that is
to say, That they had heard already of those Consistorial Laws, and did
acknowledge them to be godly Ordinances, drawing toward the Prescript or Word
of God: In which respect they did not think it good for the Church of Geneva to
make any innovation in the same, but rather to keep them as they were. This
caution being interposed, that Lay Elders should be chosen from amongst
themselves; that is to say, ten of them to be yearly out of the Council of two
hundred; and the other two (for there were to be but twelve in all) to be
elected out of the more powerful Council of the five and twenty.

9. Now for the quarrel which he had with Captain Perine, it was bri^fly this,
as he himself relates the story in his own Epistles. Dancing had been
prohibited by his solicitation, when he first settled in that Town; and he
resolved to have his will obeyed in that, as in all things else. But on the
contrary, this Perine, together with one Corneus (a man of like power amongst
the people) one of the Syndicks, or chief Magistates in the Commonwealth; one
of the Elders for the year, who was called Henricus, together with other of
their Friends, being merry at an Invitation, fell to dancing: Notice hereof
being given to Calvin by some false Brother, they were all called into the
Consistory, excepting Corneus and Perinus; and being interrogated thereupon,
Impudente^ Deo and ^^bis meu^^^^ sunt.
They lied, said he, most impudently both to God and us (most Apostolically
said.) At that, said he, I grew offended, as the indignity of the thing
deserved; and they persisting in their contumacie, Censui, ut jurejurando ad
very confessionem adigerentur.
I thought it fit to put them to their Oaths about it, ( by which it seems that
the Oath Ex officio may be used in Geneva, though cried down in England) so
said, so done. And they not only did confess their former dancing, but also
that upon that very day they had been dancing in the house of one Balthasal's
Widow. On which confession he proceeded to the censure of all the parties,
which certainly was sharp enough for so small a fault, (for a fault he was
resolved to make it) the Syndick being displaced; the Elder turned out of his
Office; Perine and his Wife clapped up in Prison, and all the rest exposed to
some open shame. So he in his Epistle to his Friend Farellus, Anno 1546. Upon
this ground Perinus always made himself of the opposite party, and thereupon
solicited the relaxation given to Bertilier; but in the end was forced
together w^^h the rest to submit themselves unto this yoke; and the final
sentence of the said four Churches was imposed upon them. And so we have the
true beginning of the Genevian Discipline, begotten in Rebellion, born in
Sedition, and nursed up by Faction.

10. Thus was the Discipline confirmed, and Calvin settled in the jurisdiction
which he had aspired to: But long he could not be content with so narrow a
Diocese as the Town and Territory of Geneva; and would have thought himself
neglected, if all those Churches which embraced the Zuinglian Doctrines had not
withal received the Genevian Discipline; for the confirming whereof at home,
and the promoting it in all parts abroad, there was no passage in the
Scripture, which either spoke of Elders or Excommunication, but he applied the
same for justifying the Authority of his new Presbytery, in which the
Lay Elders were considered as distinct from those which labored in the Word
and Sacraments, but joined with them in the exercise of a Jurisdiction (even
that of Ordination also) which concerned the Church. Assuredly, we are as much
in love with the Children of our Brains, as of our Bodies; and do as earnestly
desire the preferment of them. Calvin had no sooner conceived and brought forth
this Discipline, but he caused it first to be nourished and brought up at the
charge of Geneva; and when he found it strong enough to go abroad of it self,
he afterward commended it to the entertainment of all other Churches, in which
he had attained to any credit; proceeding finally so far, as to impose it upon
the world as a matter necessary, and not to be refused on pain of Gods high
displeasure: by means whereof, what Jealousies, Heart-burnings, Jars and
Discords have been occasioned in the Protestant Reformed Churches, will be made
manifest by the course of this present History: Which, notwithstanding, might
easily have been prevented, if the Orders which he devised for the use of this
City, had not been first established in themselves, and then tendered unto
others, as things everlastingly required by the Law of that Lord of lords,
against whose Statutes there was no exception to be taken. In which respect it
could not choose but come to pass, that his Followers might condemn all other
Churches which received it not, of manifest disobedience to the Will of Christ:
And being once engaged, could not find a way how to retire again with Honor.
Whenas the self-same Orders having been established in a Form more wary and
suspense, and to remain in force no longer then God should give the opportunity
of some general Conference; the Genevians either never had obtruded this
Discipline on the rest of the Churches, to their great disquiet; or left
themselves a fair liberty of giving off, when they perceived what trouble they
had thereby raised to themselves and others.

11. Now for the means by which this Discipline was made acceptable to the many
Churches which had no dependence on Geneva, nor on Calvin neither; they were
chiefly these, that is to say, first, The great contentment which it gave the
Common people, to see themselves entrusted with the weightiest matters in
Religion; and thereby an equality with, if not (by reason of their number,
being two for one) superiority above their Ministers. Secondly, the great
Reputation which Calvin had attained unto for his diligence in Writing and
Preaching, whereby his Dictates came to be as authentic amongst some Divines,
as ever the Popes Ipse dixit was in the Church of Rome. Thirdly, his endeavors
to promote that Platform in all other Churches, which was first calculated for
the Meridian of Geneva only: of which we shall speak more particularly in the
course of this History. Fourthly, the like endeavors used by Beza, who not
content to recommend it as convenient for the use of the Church (higher then
which Calvin did not go) imposed it as a matter necessary upon all the
Churches; so necessary, that it was utterly as unlawful to recede from this, as
from the most material Points of the Christian Faith: of which more hereafter.
Fifthly, the self ends and ambition of particular Ministers, affecting the
Supremacy in their several Parishes; that themselves might lord it over Gods
Inheritance, under pretense of setting Christ in his Throne. Upon which ground
they did not only prate against the Bishops with malicious words (a^
Dieotrephes did against the Apostles) but were resolved to cast them out of the
Church, neither receiving them amongst themselves, nor suffering those that
would have done it if they might. Sixthly, the covetousness of some great
persons, and Lay-Patrons; of which the one intended to raise themselves great
Fortunes, by the spoil of the Bishoprics; and the other to return those Titles
to their own proper use, to which they only were to nominate some deserving
person. For compassing of which three last ends, their followers drove on so
furiously, that rather then their Discipline should not be admitted, and the
Episcopal Government destroyed in all the Churches, they are resolved to depose
Kings, ruin Kingdoms, and subvert the Fundamental Constitutions of all Civil
States.

1537.
12. Thus have we seen the Discipline settled at the last, after many struglings;
but settled only by the forestalled judgment and determination of four
neighboring Churches, which neither then did entertain it, nor could be ever
since induced to receive the same. And we have took a general view of those
Arts and Practices by which it has been practiced and imposed upon other
Nations; as also of those grounds and motives, on which it was so eagerly
pursued by some, and advanced by others. We must now therefore cast our eyes
back on that Form of Worship which was by him devised at first for the Church
of Geneva, commended afterward to all other Churches, which were not of the
Lutheran Model; and finally received, if not imposed upon most Churches which
embraced the Discipline. Which Form of Worship, what it was, may best be
gathered from the summary or brief view thereof, which Beza tendreth to the use
of the French and Dutch Churches, then established in the City of London; and
is this that follows. The public Meetings of the Church to be held
constantly on the Lords Congressus publici Ecclesiae diebus Dominicis, etc.
Bez. Epist. 241
day, to be alike observed both in Towns and Villages; but so, that in the
greater Towns some other day be set apart, on which the Word is to be preached
unto the people at convenient times: Which last I take to be the grounds of
those Week-day-Lectures, which afterward were set up in most of the great
Towns or Cities of this Realm of England; a Prayer to usher in the Sermon, and
another after it; the frame of which two Prayers, both for Words and Matter,
wholly left unto the building of the Preacher: but the whole action to be
sanctified by the singing of Psalms. At all such Prayers the people to kneel
reverently upon their knees. In the Administration of Baptism, a Declaration to
be made in a certain Form, not only of the promises of the Grace of God, but
also of the Mysteries of that holy Sacrament; Testium seu concuratorum, ad
paedo-bap^esmum advo^at. ^b.
Sureties or Witnesses to be required at the Baptizing of Infants. The Lords
Supper to be Ministered on the Lords day, at the Morning-Sermon; and that in
sitting at the Table, (for no other gesture is allowed of) the men sit first,
and the women after or below them: which though it might pass well in the
Gallick Churches, would hardly down without much chewing by the Wives of
England. The publication of intended Marriages, (which we call the bidding of
the Bains) to be made openly in the Church, and the said Marriages to be
solemnized with Exhortation and Prayer. No Holy Days at all allowed of; nothing
directed in relation unto Christian Burials, or the visiting of the Sick, or to
the Thanksgiving of Women after Childbirth; all which were pretermitted, as
either superstitious or impertinent Actions.

14. That naked Form of Worship which Calvin had devised for the Church of
Geneva, not beautified with any of those outward Ornaments which make Religion
estimable in the sight of the people; and by the which, the minds of men are
raised to a contemplation of the glorious Majesty which they come together to
adore: All ancient Forms and Ceremonies which had been recommended to the use
of the Church, even from the times of the Apostles, rejected totally, as
contracting some filth and rubbish in the times of Popery, without being called
to answer for themselves, or defend their innocence. And as for the habit of
the Ministry, whether Sacred or Civil, as there was no course taken by the
Rules of their Discipline, or by the Rubricks of the book of their public
Offices; so did they by themselves, and their Emissaries, endeavor to
discountenance and discredit all other Churches, in which distinct Vestures
were retained. Whence came those manifold quarrels against Coaps and Surplices,
as also against the Caps, Gowns and Tippets of the lower Clergy, the Rochets
and Chimeres of the Bishops, wherewith for more then twenty years they
exercised the patience of the Church of England. But naked as it was, and
utterly void of all outward Ornaments, this Form of Worship looked so lovely in
the eyes of Calvin, that he endeavored to obtrude it on all Churches else.
Having first settled his new Discipline in the Town of Geneva, 1547
Anno 1541, and crushed Perinus and the rest in the dancing business, about five
years after; he thought himself to be of such confidence, that no Church was to
be reformed but by his advice. Upon which ground of self-opinion, he makes an
offer of himself to Archbishop Cranmer Si quis mei usus foret, etc.
, as soon as he had heard of the Reformation which was here intended; but
Cranmer knew the man, and refused the offer. Which though it was enough to have
kept him from venturing any further in the business and affairs of England; yet
he resoved to be of counsel in all matters, whether called or not. And
therefore having taken Order with Martin Bucer, on his first coming into
England, to give him some account of the English Liturgy; he had no sooner
satisfied himself in the sight thereof, but he makes presently his exceptions
and demurs upon it; which afterward became the sole ground of those many
troubles, those horrible disorders and confusions, wherewith his Faction have
involved the Church of England, from that time to this.

15. For presently on the account which he received of the English Liturgy, he
writes back to Bucer, whom he requires to be instant with the Lord Protector,
Vt ritus illos, qui superstiti^nis aliquid redolent, t^llenter e medio.
that all such Rites as savoured of superstition might be taken away: and how
far that might reach, we may easily guess. Next he dispatched a long Letter to
the Protector himself, in which he makes many exceptions against the Liturgy;
as namely against Commemoration of the dead, which he acknowledges,
notwithstanding, to be ancient; also against Chrisme, or Oil in Baptism, and
the Apostolical Rite of Extreme Unction; though the last be rather permitted
then required by the Rules of that Book: which said, he wishes that all these
Ceremonies should be abrogated Illa omnia abscindi semel.
; and that withal he should go forward to reform the Church without fear or
wit, without regard of peace at home, or correspondencie abroad! such
considerations being only to be had in Civil matters, but not in matters of
the Church, In qua nihil non ad Dei verbum exegi ^as est.
wherein not any thing is to be exacted, which is not warranted by the Word;
and in the managing whereof (says he) there is not any thing more distasteful
in the eyes of God, then worldly Wisdom; Vt vel moderemur, vel rese^^damus. etc.
either in moderating, cutting off, or going backward, but merely as we are
directed by his will revealed. In the next place, he touches on the Book of
Homilies, which very faintly he permits for a season only, but not allows of;
and thereby gave the hint to many others, who ever since almost have declaimed
against them. 1551.
But finding nothing to be done by the Lord Protector, he tryes his Fortune
with the King, and with the Lords of the Council, and is resolved to venture
once again on Archbishop Cranmer. In his Letter to the King, he lets him know,
that in the State of the Kingdom there were many things which required a
present Reformation: in that to the most Reverend Cranmer, that in the Service
of this Church there was remaining a whole Mass of Popery, Quae non obscuret
modo, sed propemodum obruat pu^um and geruinum Dei culium. Epist.
which seemed not only to deface, but in a manner to destroy Gods public
Worship: and finally, in those to the Lords of the Council, that they needed
some excitements to go forwards with the Work in hand, in reference to the
Alteration (for that I take to be his aim) of the public Liturgy.

16. But not content to tamper by his Letters with those Eminent Persons; he
had his Agents in the Court, the City, the Uversities, the Country, and the
Convocation; all of them practicing in their distinct and proper Circuits, to
bring the people to dislike that Form of Worship, which at the first was looked
on by them as an Heavenly Treasure, composed by the especial aid of the Holy
Ghost. Their Actings of this kind for bringing down the Communion Table,
decrying the Reverent use of Kneeling at the Participation, inveighing against
the sign of the Cross, abolishing all distinction of days and times into Fasts
and Festivals, with many others of that nature, I purposely omit till I come to
England. Let it suffice, that by the eagerness of their solicitations, more
then for any thing which could be faulted in the book it self, it was brought
under a review, and thereby altered to a further distance then it had before
from the Rituals of the Church of Rome. But though it had much less of Rome
then before it had, (though nothing was merely Roman, and not Primitive also)
yet was it still as far off from the Rules of Geneva, 1554.
as it was at that time; which gave a new Alarm to Calvin, that he should take
so much pains, and trouble so many of his Friends, to so little purpose: And
long it shall not be before he lets us know his resentment of it. The English
Protestants being scattered in the Reign of Queen Mary, betake themselves to
diverse places in Germany, at Geneva, and amongst the Switzers. In Germany some
of them procure a Church in the City of Frankfort; but they were such as had
more mind to conform themselves to Calvin's Models, then to the Liturgy of
England: and such a deviation thereupon was made from the Rules of this Church,
as looked little better then an open Schism. The business bad enough before,
but made much worse, when Knox, that great Incendiary of Scotland, took that
charge upon him; when at his coming he found many not well pleased with those
alterations which had been made by others from the Church of England; which he
resolved not to admit of, how much soever the continuance of it had been
recommended by such Divines as had retired to Strasburgh, Zurick, and
elsewhere. To overbalance whose Authority, which he found much valued, he
flees for succor unto Calvin, sends him a Summary or Abstract of the English
Book (in the Latin Tongue) and earnestly desires his opinion of it; not
doubting but all opponents would submit to his final sentence. What Calvin's
judgment was in the present Point, and what sentence he was like to give in
the case before him, Knox could not but have good assurance, when he wrote that
Letter, having lived with Calvin at Geneva, and published some Seditious Books
from thence with his approbation, before his coming unto Frankfort: and it
succeeded answerably to his expectation, as may appear by Calvin's answer to
that Letter; which in regard it was the ground of all those troubles which
afterward were raised against the Liturgy by the Puritan Faction, I shall here
subjoyn.

17. It is no small affliction to me, and in it self no less inconvenience,
that a contention should be raised between brethren professing the same Faith,
and living as banished men or exiles for the same Religion; especially for such
a Cause, which in this time of your dispersion, ought to have been the Bond of
Peace to bind you the more finally to one another: for what ought rather to be
aimed at by you in this woeful condition, then that being torn away from the
bowels of your native Country, you should put your selves into a Church, which
might receive you in her bosom, conjoined together (like the Children of the
same Parent) both in hearts and tongues? But at this time in my opinion it is
very unseasonable, that troubles should be raised amongst you about Ceremonies
and Forms of Prayer, (as happens commonly amongst those who live in wantonness
and ease) by means whereof, you have been hindered hitherto from growing into
one body. I do not blame the constancy of those men, who being unwillingly
drawn into it, do earnestly contend in an honest Cause; but rather the
stubbornness of those, which hitherto has hindered the holy purpose of forming
and establishing a Church amongst you. For as I use to show my self both
flexible and facile in things indifferent, as all Rites and Ceremonies are; yet
I cannot always think it profitable to comply with the foolish waywardness of
some few men, who are resolved to remit nothing of their Ancient Customs. In
Liturgia Anglicana, qualem mihi describitis, multas video tolerabiles ineptias.
I cannot, but observe many tolerable fooleries in the English Liturgy, such as
you have described it to me. By which two words ( those names of tolerable
fooleries) I mean only this, that there is not such Purity or Perfection, as
was to be desired in it; which imperfections, notwithstanding, not being to be
remedied at the first, were to be born with for a time, in regard that no
manifest impiety was contained in them. It was therefore so far lawful to begin
with such beggarly Rudiments, that the Learned, Grave and Godly Ministers of
Christ might be thereby encouraged for proceeding farther in setting out
somewhat which might prove more pure and perfect. Si hactenus in Anglia
viguisset sincera Religio, aliquid in melius correctum, multaque detracta esse
oportet.
If true Religion had flourished till this time in the Church of England, it
had been necessary that many things in that Book should have been omitted, and
others altered to the better. But now that all such Principles are out of
force, and that you were to constitute a Church in another place, and that you
were at liberty to compose such a Form of Worship which might be useful to the
Church, and more conduce to Edification, then the other did; I know not what to
think of those Quae sibi velint nescio quos (...) Paposh^a rantope^e delectant.
who are so much delighted in the dregs of Popery. But commonly men love those
things best, to which they have been most accustomed. Which though in the first
place it may seem a vain and childish folly; ye^ in the next place it may be
considered, that such a new Model is much different from an alteration.
Howsoever, as I would not have you too stiff and peremptory, if the infirmity
of some men suffer them not to come up unto your own desires; so I must needs
admonish others, not to be too much pleased with their wants and ignorances;
nor to retard the course and progess of so good a work by their own
perverseness; nor finally, to be transported in the manner by such a foolish
Emulation. For what other ground have they for this contention, but that they
think it a disgrace to yield unto better counsels? But possibly I may address
my words in vain to those, who peradventure may not ascribe so much unto me, as
to vouchsafe to hearken unto any advice which does proceed from such a
despicable Author. If any of them fear that any sinister report will be raised
of them in England, as if they had forsaken that Religion for which they put
themselves into a voluntary exile; they are much deceived. For this ingenuous
and sincere Profession will rather compel those godly men which are left
behind, seriously to consider what a deep Abyss they are fallen into; whose
dangerous estate will more grievously wound them, when they shall see that you
have travailed beyond the middle of that course, from which they have been so
unhappily retracted, or brought back again. Farewell my most dear Brethren, the
faithful servants of Jesus Christ; and be you still under the governancce and
protection of the Lord your God.

18. This Letter bearing date on the fifteenth of the Calends of February, and
superscribed in general to the English which remained at Frankfort, carried so
great a stroke with the Knoxian party, that there was no more talk of the
English Liturgy; the Order of Geneva being immediately entertained in the
place thereof. And when the matter was so handled by Dr. Cox, first Tutor, and
then Almoner to King Edward the Sixth, brought thither by the noise of so great
a Schism, that the Liturgy of England was again restored; Knox was so far from
yiedling to the Gravity and Authority of that Learned man, that he inveighed
against him in the Pulpit without fear or wit. But Cox not able to endure a
baffle from so mean a fellow, informs against him to the Senate, touching some
passages in one of his Seditious Pamphlets; in which it is affirmed, that Queen
Mary (whom elsewhere he calls by the odious name of Iesabel, and a Traytoress
to England) ought not to join her self in Marriage with the Emperors Son,
because the Emperor himself maintained Idolatry, and was a greater Enemy to
Christ then ever was Nero. Knox hereupon departs by Moonlight, but howsoever
quits the Town, and retires to Geneva; leaving the Liturgy for the present in
a better condition then he had found it at hi^ first coming thither. But Cox
considering with himself how necessary Calvin's favor might be to him, salutes
him with a civil Letter, subscribed by himself and fourteen others; all of them
being men of Note in their several places: In which they excused themselves for
having set that Church in order without his advice; not without some rejoicing
that they had brought the greatest part of those who withstood their doings to
be of the same Opinion with them. Which how agreeable it was to Calvin, may be
seen by his return to Cox and his adherents, ( Coxo and Gregalibus suis, as the
Latin has it) bearing date June 14. 1555.

19. In which Letter, having first craved pardon for not writing sooner, he
lets them know that he had freely signified to Dr. Sampson, (a very fit man to
be acquainted with his secrets) what he conceived of the Disputes which were
raised at Frankfort; as also that he had been certified by some Friends of his
who complained much of it, that they did stand so strictly on the English
Ceremonies, as showed them to be too much wedded to the Rites of their Country.
And further certified, that he had heard somewhat of those Reasons which they
stood on most, for not receding any thing from the Form established; but they
were such as might receive an easy Answer: that he had writ to those of the
opposite party, to carry themselves with moderation in the present business,
though nothing was therein remitted by Cox and his, and howsoever was now glad
to hear that the difference was at last composed. He speaks next touching their
Cert^lu^ narta (...), and ejus facinae nugas ex supers^^^ ne manas^e, nemo sani
judicii negabit; unde Constitu^, qui eas in libera optione retineant, ^imis
^u^ide and f^ce^ bau^^^^.
retaining of Crosses, Tapers, and such other trifles of that nature,
proceeding at the first from superstition; and thereupon infers, that they who
so earnestly contended for them, when it was in their choice not to do it, did
draw too near upon the dregs. He adds, that he could see no Reason why they
should charge the Church with frivolous and impertinent Ceremonies, which he
should no way wrong if he called them dangerous; when they were left at liberty
to compose an Order for themselves, more pure and simple: that in his judgment
it was done with little Piety, and less brotherly Love; on any clancular
informations to call Knox in question; (for so I understood him by his letter
N) and that they had done better to have stayed at home, then to have kindled
the coals by such a piece of unjust cruelty in a Foreign Country, by which
others also were inflamed: and finally, that he had written howsoever unto some
of the adverse party, of whose intent to leave that place he had been
advertised, that they should continue where they were, and not violate the
League of their Friendship by their separations; with other things to that
effect. But notwithstanding this advice, many of the Schismatical party removed
from Frankfort, and put themselves into Geneva; the principal of which were
Whittingham, Knox, Goodman, and he which afterward was able to do more then
all the rest, Mr. Francis Knollis, allied by Marriage to the Caryes, descended
from a younger Sister of Queen Anne Bullen, and consequently near of Kin to
Queen Elizabeth. These men grew very great with Calvin, with whose good leave
they put themselves into the form of a Congregation, chose Knox and Goodman for
their Brethren, and in all points conformed themselves to the Rules of that
Church; which afterward they labored to promore in England, and actually did
effect in Scotland, to the no small disturbance of either Kingdom. By the
persuasion of these men, he is resolved to try his Fortune once again on the
Church of England, before the resetling of the Liturgy under Queen Elizabeth
might render the design impossible, or at least unprosperous. To which end he
addresseth his desires to the Queen her self, at her first coming to the Crown.
The like he does to Mr. Secretary Cecil, by his Letters bearing date the 17 of
January 1558, in which he makes mention of the other; in both he spurs them on
to a Reformation, complaining that they had not showed such a forwardness in
it, as all good men expected, and that cause required. But above all things he
desires, that a pure Vt vigeat purus and integer Dei cultus -- Ecclesia a
s^^dibus repurgetur, -- deinde ut filiis Dei apud vos liberum sit nomen ejus
pu^e invoca^e.
and perfect Worship of God may be fully settled, that the Church may be
thoroughly purged of its former filth, and that the Children of God in England
might be left at liberty to use such purity in all Acts of public Worship as
to them seemed best. And what else could he aim at by these expressions
(comparing them with the Contents of his two last Letters) but that the former
Liturgy should be abolished, or brought unto a nearer conformity to the Rules
of Geneva; or at the least, that liberty might be left to the godly party, to
use any other Form of Worship which they though more pure? But finding no such
good return to either Letter, as he had promised to himself, he leaves the
cause to be pursued by such English Zealots, as he had trained up at Geneva, or
otherwise had settled their abode amongst the Switzers, where all set Forms of
Worship were as much decryed, as they were with him. And that they might not
slacken in the midst of their course, he recommends the general Superintendents
of the Church of England to the care of Beza, who after his decease succeeded
both in his place and power; of whose pragmaticalness in pursuing this design
against the Liturgy, condemning all established Orders of this Church, his
interposing in behalf of such of his Followers as had heen silenced, suspended,
or deprived for their inconformity, we shall speak more large at when we come
to England.

20. There happened another quarrel in the Church of England, and he must needs
make himself a party in it. Mr. John Hooper having well deserved by his pains
in preaching and publishing some Books, which very much conduced to the peace
of the Church, is nominated by the King to the Sea of Gloucester. Willing enough
he was to accept the charge; but he had lived so long at Zurick, in the Reign
of King Henry, where there was no distinction of Apparel, either Sacred or
Civil, that he refused to wear such Robes at his Consecration, as by the Rules
of the Church were required of him. And by the Rules of the Church it was
required, that for his ordinary Habit he should wear the Rochet and Chimere,
with a square Cap upon his head, and not officiate at the Altar without his
Coap, or perform any Ordination without his Crosier. Encouraged by his refusal,
many of the inferior Clergy take the like exceptions against Caps and
Surplices, as also against Gowns and Tippets, the distinct Habits of their
Order. Upon this ground Archbishop Cranmer makes a stop of his Consecration,
and would not be persuaded to dispute with him in that particular, though he
much desired it. He had fastened some dependence upon Dudley, then Earl of
Warwick, and afterward created Duke of Northumberland; who did not only write
his own Letters, but obtained the Kings, that without pressing him any further
to conform himself to those Robes and Habits, the Bishop should proceed
immediately to his Consecration. But Cranmer weighing the importance of that
ill Example, held off his hand, till he had satisfied the King, and so cooled
the Earl, that Hooper was left unto himself; and still continuing in his
contumacy, was committed Prisoner. The news being brought to Calvin, he must
needs play the Bishop in another man's Diocese, or rather the Archbishop in
another man's Province. But having little hope of prevailing with Cranmer, who
had before rejected his assistance in the Reformation, he totally applies
himself to the Duke of Sommerset: And he writes to him to this purpose, That
the Papists would grow every day more insolent then other, unless the
differences about the Ceremonies were first composed. But then they were to be
composed in such a manner, as rather might encourage the dissenters in their
opposition, then end in the reduction of them to a due conformity. And to this
end, he is unseasonably instant with him, to lend a helping hand to Hooper, as
the head of that Faction. By which encouragement, if not also by his setting
on, the like was done by Peter Martyr, and by John Alasco; the first of which
was made Divinity-Reader in Oxon, and the other Preacher to the Dutch in
London; both engaged in stickling for the unconformable party against the
Vestments of the Church. But they both gained as little by it as Calvin did;
who seeing how little he effected in the Church of England, more then the
getting of the name of a Polypragmon, a medler in such matters as concerned him
not, gave over the affairs thereof to the charge of Beza; who being younger
then himself, and of less discretion, might live to see some good success of
his Travails in it. And he accordingly bestirred himself in this very quarrel,
as if the safety of the Church and the preservation of Religion had been
brought in danger; writing his Letters unto Grindal, when Bishop of London, not
to insist so far on those matters of Ceremony, as to deprive any of his
Ministry upon that account. He also signifies unto the Brethren his dislike of
those Vestments, and thereby strengthened and confirmed them in their former
obstinacy: And finally, left no stone unmoved, no kind of practice
unattempted, by which this Church might be at last necessitated to a
Reformation upon Calvin's Principles, whose counsels he pursued to the very last.

21. But as for Calvin, he had some other game to fly at, and of greater
nature, then to dispute the lawfulness of Caps and Surplices, and other
Vestments of the Clergy; or to content himself with altering the old Forms of
Government and public Worship: The Doctrine was to be refined, and all
Idolatry removed, whether it were Civil or Spiritual. In point of Doctrine he
came nearest unto that of Zuinglius, as well in reference to the Sacrament, as
Predestination; but pitched upon the last for the main concernment, which was
to difference his own Followers from all other Christians. The straining of
which string to so great a height, has made more discord in the harmony of the
Church of Christ, then any other whatsoever. For not content to go the way of
the Ancient Fathers, or to rely upon the judgment of St. Augustine,
Fulgentius, Prosper, or any others which have moderated his excesses in it, he
must needs add so much unto those extravagancies which he found in Zuinglius,
as brought him under a suspicion with some sober men, for making God to be the
Author of sin: For by his Doctrine God is made to lay on our Father Adam an
absolute and an unavoidable necessity of falling into sin and misery; that so
he might have opportunity to manifest his Mercy in Electing some few of his
Posterity, and his Justice in the remediless rejecting of all the rest. In
which as he could find no countenance from the Ancient Fathers, so he
pretends not to any ground for it in the Holy Scripture. For whereas some
objected in Gods behalf, De certis verbis non extare, that the Decree of Adams
Fall, and consequently the involving of his whole Posterity in sin and misery,
was no where extant in the Word; he makes no other answer to it, then a quasi
vero, As if (says he) God had made and created Man the most exact Piece of his
Heavenly Workmanship, without determining of his End, either Heaven or Hell.
And on this point he was so resolutely bent, that nothing but an absolute
Decree for Adams Fall, seconded by the like for the involving of all his Race
in the same perdition, would either serve his turn, or preserve his credit. If
any man shall dare to opine the contrary, as Castillo did, he must be sure to
be disgraced and censured by him, as Castillo was; and as all others since have
been, which presumed to question that determination, for which himself can give
us no better name than that of an Horrible Decree, as indeed it is; a cruel and
Horrible Decree, to pre-ordain so many millions to destruction, and
consequently unto sin, that he might destroy them.

22. I had not stood so long upon this particular, but in regard of those
confusions and distractions which by his Followers have been occasioned in the
Church, by their adhering to this Doctrine, and laboring to obtrude it upon
all men's consciences. The Zuinglian Gospellers, as Bishop Hooper rightly calls
them, began to scatter their predestinary Doctrines in the Reign of King
Edward. But they effected little in it, till such of our Divines as had retired
themselves to Basil, Zurick, and amongst the Switzers, or otherwise had been
brought up at the Feet of Calvin, encouraged by his Authority, and countenanced
by his name, commended them to all the people of this Realm, for sound
Catholic verities. The like diligence was also used by his Disciples in all
places else. By means whereof it came to be generally received, as a truth
undoubted, and one of the most necessary Doctrines of man's Salvation, in all
the Churches of his Platform: In which as his Doctrine in some other points had
first prepared the way to bring in his Discipline; so was it no hard matter for
the Discipline to support these Doctrines, and crush all them that durst oppose
them. Only it was permitted unto Beza and his Disciples to be somewhat milder
then the rest, in placing the Decree of Predestination before the Fall: which
Calvin himself, though in some passages of his Writings he may seem to look the
same way also, has placed more judiciously in Massa corrupta, in the corrupted
mass of mankind, and the more moderate Calvinians as rightly presuppose for a
matter necessary, before there could be any place for Election or Reprobation
of particular Persons. But being they concurred with the rest, as to the
personal Election o^ Reprobation of particular men; the restoring of the
benefit of our Saviors sufferings to those few particulars, (whom only they
had honored with the glorious Name of Gods Elect) the working on them by the
irresistible power of Grace in the act of Conversion, and bringing them
infallibly by the continual assistance of the said Grace unto life everlasting;
there was hardly any notice taken of their Deviation; insomuch that they were
scarce beheld in the condition of erring brethren, though they differed from
them in the main Foundation which they built upon; but generally passed under
the name of Calvinists, as the other did. Which Doctrines, though I charge not
wholly on the score of Presbytery, in regard that many of our English Divines,
who abhorred that Government, appeared in favor of the same; yet I may truly
father them on the two grand Patrons of the Presbyterians, by whom they have
been since exposed as their dearest darling; and no less eagerly contended for,
then the holy Discipline.

23. Another of Calvin's great designs was to cry down that Civil Idolatry,
which he conceived had been committed unto Kings and Princes, in making them
Supreme and uncontrollable in their several Countries. For pulling down of
whose Authority, even in Civil Matters, he attributes such power to such
popular Officers as are by them appointed for the ease of their Subjects, that
by his Doctrine they may call the Supreme Magistrate to a strict account,
whenever they shall chance to exceed those bounds which they had prescribed
unto themselves, only by which they may be circumscribed by others: For having
in the last Chapter of his Institutions, first published in the year 1536,
exceeding handsomely laid down the Doctrine of Obedience, and the unlawfulness
of resistance in what case soever; he gives in the close such a qualification,
as utterly overthrows his former Doctrine, and proved the sole ground of such
Rebellions, Treasons and Assassinates as have disfigured the otherwise
undefiled beauty of the Church of Christ. Which passages I shall here lay down
in the Authors words, with a translation by their side, that the Reader may
perceive there is no wrong done him; and afterward proceed to the discovery of
those sad effects which have ensued upon them in too many places, wherein his
Discipline has either been received or contended for. His Doctrine in which
point is this that follows: Institut lib 4. c 10.8 31.
24. Neque enim si ultio Domini est ^ffraenaiae, dominationis correctio ideo
protinus demandatum nobis arbitremur, quibus nullum aliud quam parendi and
patiendi datum est mandatum. De privatis hominibus semper loquar. Nam si qui
nunc sint Populares Magistratus ad moderandum Regum libidinem constituti
(quales olim erant qui Lacedemoniis Regibus oppositi erant Ephori, aut Romany
Consulibus Tribuni Plebis, aut Atheniensium Senatui Demarchi, and qua etiam
forte potestate, ut nunc res habent, funguntur in singuli Regnis, tres Ordines,
cum primarios conventus peragunt;) adeo illos ferocienti Regum licentiae pro
officio intercedere non veto, ut si Regibus impotenter grassantibus, and humili
plebeculae insultantibus conniverunt, eorum dissimulationem nefaria nefaria
perfidia non carere affirmem, quia populi libertatem (cujus se, Dei
ordinatione, tutores positos norunt) fraudulenter produnt.

24. Nor may we think because the punishment of Licentious Princes belongs to
God, that presently this power is devolved on us, to whom no other warrant has
been given by God, but only to obey and suffer. But still I must be understood
of private persons: For if there be now any Popular Officers ordained to
moderate the licentiousness of Kings (such as were the Ephori set up of old
against the Kings of Sparta, the Tribunes of the people against the Roman
Consuls, and the Demarchy against the Athenian Senate, and with which power
perhaps, as the world goes, the three States are seized in each several
Kingdom, when they are solemnly assembled;) so far am I from hindering them to
put restraints upon the exorbitant power of Kings, as their Office binds them;
that I conceive them rather to be guilty of a persidious dissimulation, if they
connive at Kings when they play the Tyrants, or wantonly insult on the Common
people, in that they treacherously betray the Subjects liberties, of which they
knew they were made Guardians by Gods own Ordinance.



25. Which dangerous Doctrine being thus breathed and broached by Calvin, has
since been both professed and practiced by all his Followers, as either they
had opportunity to declare themselves, or strength enough to put the same in
execution. Some of whose words I shall here add as a taste to the rest, and then
refer the rest to their proper places. And first we will begin with Beza, who
in his twenty fourth Epistle, inscribed to the Outlandish Churches in England,
does resolve it thus: If Si quisqui^ repugnan^bus legibus, and patriae
privilegus, s^se Dominum auc Magistratum constituit, etc. Epist 24.
any man, says he, contrary to the Laws and Liberties of his native Country,
shall make himself a Lord or Supreme Magistrate over all the rest; or being
lawfully invested with the Supreme Magistracy, should either unjustly spoil or
deprive his Subjects of those Rights and Privileges which he has sworn to
them to observe, or otherwise oppress them by open Tyranny; that then the
ordinary and inferior Officers are to oppose themselves against them, who both
by reason of their several Offices, and by Gods appointment, are bound in all
such cases to protect the Subjects, not only against Foreign, but Domestic
Tyrants. Which is as much as could be possibly contrained in so narrow a
compass: And if he were the Author (as some say he was) of the Book called
Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, published under the name of Stephanus Brutus; there
has been no Rebellion raised since that Book was written, or likely to be
raised in the times ensuing, which may not honestly be charged upon his
account. But because the Author of this Book is commonly reported to be merely
French, and none of the Genevian Doctors; we may possibly hear more of him in
that part of our History which relates to the Actings of the Presbyterians in
the Realm of France. What was taught afterward in pursuance of Calvin's
Doctrines by Hottaman, and him that calls himself Eusebius Philadelphos amongst
the French; by Vrsine and Pareus, in the Palatine Churches; by Buchanan and
Knox amongst the Scots, and by some principal Disciplinarians amongst the
English, we shall hereafter see in their proper places: And we shall then see
also what was done in point of practice, first by the Princes on the House of
Bourbon, and afterward by some great Lords of the Hugonot party against
Francis the Second, Charles the Ninth, Henry the Third, and Lewis the
Thirteenth, Kings of France; by William Prince of Orange, and other of the
Belgic Lords, in the final abdication of King Philip the Second; by the
Hungarians and Bohemians, in their revolting from the Princes of the House of
Austria; by the Rebellious Scots, in deposing, imprisoning, and expelling of
their rightful Queen, and finally, by the Genevian Faction in the Realm of
England, in their imbroylments of the Nation under Queen Elizabeth, and that
calamitious War (but more calamitous in the issue and conclusion of it) against
Charles the First. All which are built upon no other ground then this Doctrine
of Calvin, accommodated and applied to their several purposes, as appears
plainly by the Answer of the Scots to Queen Elizabeth, who justified the
deposing of their natural and lawful Queen, on those words of Calvin, which
they relied on for the sole ground of that horrible Treason, and their
Indemnity therein; of which more hereafter.

26. In the mean time I shall content my self with the following passage,
faithfully gathered out of the Common Places of William Bucan, Divinity-Reader
in the small University of Lawsanna, s^ituate on the Lake Lemane, in the Canton
of Berne, and consequently a near Neighbor to the Town of Geneva; who treating
in his forty one Chapter of the Duty of Magistrates, propounds this question
toward the close, viz. What a good Christian ought to do, if by a cruel Prince
he be distressed by some grievous and open injury? To which he thus returns his
Answer: That though Princes and Subjects have relation unto one another; yet
Subjects in the course of nature were before their Princes, and therefore that
such Princes (if they usurp not a plain Tyranny in their several Kingdoms) are
not Superior to the rest by nature, in the right of Father hood, but are
settled by the suffrages and consent of the people, on such conditions as
originally were agreed between them; and that it follows thereupon, (according
unto Buchanans Doctrine) that Subjects are not born for the good of their
Kings, but that all Kings were made to serve for the good of the people: that
it is lawful to defend Religion by force of Arms, not only against the
assaults of such Foreign Nations as have no jurisdiction over us, but also
against any part of the same Commonwealth (the common consent of the Estates
being first obtained) which does endeavor to subvert it: that no violence is
to be offered to the person of the Supreme Magistrate, though he play the
Tyrant, by any private man whatsover, except he be warranted thereunto by some
extraordinary and express command from the Lord himself; but the oppression
rather to be born with patience, then that God should be offended by such rash
attempts: that the Protection of the Supreme Magistrate was to be required
against the unjust oppressions of inferior Officers: and that in a free
Commonwealth the Supreme Magistrate is rather to be questioned in a course of
Law, then by open Force; that Subjects may lawfully take up Arms in defense of
their Wives and Children, if the Chief Magistrate make any violent assault upon
them, as Lions and other brute Creatures sight to defend their young ones; this
last exemplified by that of Trajan, giving the Sword to the Captain of his
Guard, with these following words: Hoc ense pro me justa faciente, injusta
facien^e contra me utaris; that is to say, That he should use the Sword against
him in defense of himself, and for the protection of all those who in regard of
his Office were subject to him: that therefore it was well done by the Switzers
to free themselves of their subjection to the House of Austria, when the
Princes of the House had exercised more then ordinary cruelty in most parts of
the Country; that David might lawfully have killed Saul, because he gave his
Wife to another man, expelled him from his native Country, murdered the Priests
for doing some good Offices to him, and pursued him from one place to another
with his flying Army; but that he did forbear to do it, lest he should give an
Example to the people of Israel of killing their Kings, which other men
prompted by ambition might be like enough to imitate.

27. Such is the Commentary of Buchanus upon Calvin's Text, by which all
Christian Kings are made accountable even in Civil Matters to the three
Estates, or any other ordinary Officers of their own appointing. Which
Doctrines being once by him delivered, and enforced by others, what else could
follow thereupon, but first an undervaluing of their transcendent Authority,
afterward a contempt of their persons; and finally, a reviling of them with
reproachful Language? From hence it was that Calvin calls (...) Amos* cap 7
Mary Queen of England by the name of Proserpine, assuring us that all the
Devils in Hell were not half so mischievous; and that Knox could not find for
her any better titles then that of Iezabel, mischievous Mary of the Spaniards
blood, the professed enemy of God. From hence it was, that Beza calls Mary
Queen of Scots, by the names of Medea and Athaliah; of which the one was no
less infamous in the Sacred, then the other was in the Heathen story; that the
English Puritans compared Queen Elizabeth to an idle slut, who swept the middle
of the room, but left all the dust and filth thereof behind the doors; that
Didoclavius calls King James Infe^sissin^us Eva^ge(...). Ad Altar. Damasc.
Epist.
the greatest and most deadly enemy of the holy Gospel; and positively affirms
Natu^^ ^^situm est (...) omnibus (...) Ch^isti ^di^m. (...).
of all Kings in general, that they are naturally enemies to the Kingdom of
Christ. And finally, from hence it was that the seditious Author of the base
and unworthy Dialogue, entitled Eusebius Philadelphus, has so bespattered the
great Princes of the House of France, that he has made them the most ugly
Monsters in their lusts and cruelty, which ere Nature produced; and could
devise no fitter names for Queen Mary of Scotland, then those of Medea,
Clytemnestra, Proserpine, with that of monstrum Exitiale in the close of all:
And that the late most mighty Monarch of Great Britain, was handled by his
Subjects of this Faction with no less scurrility, then if he had been raised on
high for no other purpose then to be made the mark, against which they were to
shoot their Arrows, even most bitter words, the object of all false tongues,
and calumnious Pens. Thus do they deal with Kings and Princes, as Pilate in the
Gospel did with Christ our Savior, adorned them in their Royal Robes, with
their Crowns and Scepters, and then exposed them to the scorn of the common
Soldiers, the insolences and reproaches of the raskal Rabble.

28. Nor do they deal much better with them, in reference to their power in
Spiritual Matters; which they make either none at all, or such as is
subservient only to the use of the Church. Calvin first leads the way in this,
as he did in the other, and seems exceedingly displeased with King Henry the
Eighth, for taking to him the title of Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of
England. Of this he makes complaint in his Commentary on the 7 of Amos; not
only telling us (...) c^nsiderati, etc. and hoc the s^mper g^avi^er vexavit.
In Amos, cap. 7. v. 13.
what inconsiderate men they were who had conferred upon him any such
Supremacy, but that himself was very much disquieted and offended at it. And
though he be content to yield him so much Authority, as may enable him to make
use of the Civil Sword to the protecting of the Church and the true Religion;
yet he condemns all those of the like inconsiderateness, who make them more
spiritual (that is to say, of greater power, in Sacred Matters) then indeed
they are. The Supreme power according to the Rules of Calvin's Platform, belongs
unto the Consistory, Classes, or Synodical Meetings, to which he has ascribed
the designation of all such as bear public Office in the Church, the
appointing and proclaiming of all solemn Fasts, the calling of all Councils or
Synodical Meetings, the censuring of all misdemeanors in the Ministers of holy
Church; in which last they have made the Supreme Magistrate an incompetent
Judge, and therefore his Authority and final Judgment in such cases of no
force at all. Beza treads close upon the heels of his Master Calvin, and will
allow no other power to the Civil Magistrate, then to protect the Church and
the Ministry of it, in propagating and promoting the True Worship of God. It
is, says Officium magistratus est Ecclesiam Dei gladio tueri ac conservare,
etc. Bez. Epist. 24.
he, the Office of the Civil Magistrate, to use the Sword in maintenance and
defense of Gods holy Church; as it is the duty of the Ministers and Preachers
of it, to implore their aid as well against all such as refuse obedience to the
Decrees and Constitutions of the Church, as against Heretics and Tyrants,
which endeavored to subvert the same. In which particulars if the Magistrate
neglects to do his duty, and shall not diligently labor in suppressing
Heresy, and executing the Decrees of the Church against all opponents; what
can the people do, but follow the Example of the Mother-City, in taking that
power upon themselves, though to the total alteration and subversion of the
public Government. For from the Principles and practice of these great
Reformers, it has ever since been taken up as a Ruled case amongst all their
Followers, that if Kings and Princes should refuse to reform Religion, that
then the inferior Magistrates, or the Common people, by the direction of their
Ministers, both may and ought to proceed to a Reformation, and that by force of
Arms also, if need so require.

29. That by this Rule the Scots did generally walk in their Reformation, under
the Regencie of Mary of Lorreign, Queen-Dowager to James the Fifth; and after
her decease, in the Reign of her Daughter; we shall show hereafter. And we
shall show hereafter also, that it was published for good Genevian Doctrine by
our English Puritans, That if Princes hinder them that travail in the search of
this holy Discipline, they are Tyrants to the Church and the Ministers of it;
and being so, may be deposed by their subjects. Which though it be somewhat
more then Calvin taught as to that particular, yet the conclusion follows well
enough on such faulty Premises; which makes it seem the greater wonder in our
English Puritans, that following him so closely in pursuit of the Discipline,
their disaffection unto Kings and all Sovereign Princes, their manifest
contempt of all public Liturgies, and pertinaciously adhering to his Doctrine
of Predestination; they should so visibly dissent him in the point of the
Sabbath. For whereas some began to teach about these times Moralem esse uniu^
dici observationem in hebd^mada. Institu^. lib. 2. c. 8. Sect. 34.
that the keeping holy of one day in seven, was to be reckoned for the Moral
part of the fourth Commandment; he could not let it pass without some reproof:
for what, says he, can be intended by those men, but in defiance of the Jews
to change the day, and then to add a greater Sanctity unto it then the Jews
ever did? First therefore, he declares for his own Opinion, that he made no
such reckoning of a Seventh-day Sabbath, Numerum Septenarium, non ejus
servi^u^e Ecclesias astringam. Li. Ibid.
as to inthral the Church to a necessity of conforming to it: And secondly,
that he esteemed no otherwise of the Lords-day-Sabbath, then of an
Ecclesiastical Constitution, Quem veteres in eorum subba^um subrogarunt.
appointed by our Ancestors in the place of the Jewish Sabbath, and therefore
alterable from one day to another at the Churches pleasure: Followed therein by
all the Churches of his party, who thereupon permit all lawful Recreations, and
many works of necessary labor on the day it self, provided that the people be
not thereby hindered from giving their attendance in the Church at the times
appointed. Insomuch, that in Geneva if self all manlike exercises, as running,
vaulting, leaping, shooting, and many others of that nature, are as
indifferently indulged on the Lords day, as on any other. How far the English
Puritans departed from their Mother Church, both in Doctrine and Practice (with
reference to this particular) we shall see hereafter, when they could find no
other way to advance Presbytery, and to decry the Reputation of the ancient
Festivals, then by erecting their new Sabbath in the hearts of the people.

De transferenda solenni^ate dominica in feriam quintum, lib. 1. cap. ult.
30. It is reportred by John Barkley, in his Book called Parenes^s ad Scotos,
that Calvin once held a Consultation at Geneva, for transferring the Lords day
from Sunday to Thursday. Which though perhaps it may be true (considering the
inclination of the man to new devices;) yet I conceive, that he had greater
projects in his Head, and could find other ways to advance his Discipline,
then by falling upon any such ridiculous and odious Counsel. He had many Irons
in the fire, but took more care in hammering his Discipline then all the rest;
First by entitling it to some express Warrant from the holy Scripture, and
afterward by commending it to all the Churches of the Reformation. In
reference to the first, he lets us know in his Epistle to Farellus, September.
16. 1543. N^n posse consiste^e Ecclesiam, ni^i c^rtum Regimen constitueretur,
quale ex verbo De^ nobis pres^r^ptum est, and in veteri Ecclesia fuit
observatu^. Epist. ad Far^ll.
that the Church could not otherwise subsist, then under such a Form of
Government, as is prescribed in the Word, and observed in old times by the
Church. And in relation to the other, he was resolved to make his best use of
that Authority, which by his Commentaries on the Scriptures, his Book of
Institutions, and some occasional Discourses against the Papists, he had
acquired in all the Protestant and reformed Churches. Insomuch, that Gasper
Ligerus, a Divine of Witteberge, by his Letters bearing date Feb. 27. 1554,
acknowledges the great benefit which he had received by his Writings,
acquaints him with the peaceable estate of the Church of Saxony; but signifies
withal, Excommunicationem apud no^* adhuc nullam esse.
that Excommunication was not used amongst them: whereunto Calvin makes this
Answer, That he was glad to hear that the Church of Saxony continued in that
condition, but sorry Sed non simul conjunctos esse Disciplinae nervos, docendum
est, etc.
that it was not so strengthened by the Nerves of Discipline, as might preserve
the same inviolated to the times to come. He adds, that there could be no
better way of correcting vice, then by the joint consent of all the Pastors of
one City; Nunquam utile puta^i jus Excommunicandi permitti singulis pastoribus:
nam and res odrosa est, etc. Alium usum Apostoli tradiderunt.
and that he never thought it meet, that the power of Excommunicating should
reside in the Pastors only, (that is to say, not in conjunction with their
Elders;) which last he builds on these three Reasons: First, in regard it is an
odious and ungrateful Office; next, because such a sole and absolute power
might easily degenerate into tyranny; and finally, because the Apostles had
taught otherwise in it. By which we see, that as he builds his Discipline on
the Word of God, or at the least on Apostolical tradition, which comes close
unto it; so he adventureth to commend it to the Lutheran Churches, in which his
Reputation was not half so great, as amongst those which had embraced the
Zuinglian Doctrines.

31. But in the Zuinglian Churches he was grown more absolute; his Writings
being so highly valued, and his person so esteemed of in regard of his
Writings, that most of the Divines thereof depended wholly upon his judgment,
and were willing to submit to any thing of his Prescription. The Church of
Strasbourgh, where he had remained in the time of his exile, received his
Discipline with the first, as soon as it was finally established in Geneva it
self. For it appears by the Letter which Gasper Oberianus sent to Calvin,
bearing date April 12. 1560. De h^^c ^upe^em ab^te common^^fieri, Ecc^esiam
Argentine^s etc* cujus Ecclesiae conside^a^uro^ spero and S^nto^^s, etc.
that the Eldership was then well settled in that Church, and the Elders of it
in a full possession of their power, the exercise whereof they are desired to
suspend in one particular, which is there offered to his view. This Gasper was
chief Minister of the Church of Tryers, so passionately affected to the name of
Calvin, that he accounted it for one of his greatest honors to be De m^
Conciona^ore Calvintana, etc. Ibid.
called a Calvinian Preacher. Acquainting him with the condition of the Church
of Tryers, he tells him amongst other things, that he found the people very
willing to submit to Discipline; and thereupon entreats him for a Copy of those
Laws and Orders Lege^ Co^^^sto^^^ v^st^^ op^avt (...) ad me tra^smi^^i, and^.
which were observed in the Consistory of Geneva, to the end he might
communicate them to such of the Senators as he knew to be zealously affected.
Calvin, who was apt enough to hearken to his own desires, sends him a large
draught of the whole Platform, as well relating to the choice of the Members,
either Lay or Ministers, as to the power and jurisdiction which they were to
exercise, with all the penalties and particularities (with reference unto
crimes and persons) which depended on it. And having given him that account, he
thus closes with him: This summary (says he) I had thought sufficient, by
which, or out of which Ex quo ^ormam aliquam conciperes, quam prescribere non
debu^.
, you may easily frame to your self such a form of Government, as I have no
reason to prescribe. To you it appertains modestly to suggest those counsels,
which you conceive to be most profitable for the use of the Church, that godly
and discreet men, who seldom take it ill to be well advised, may thereupon
consider what is best be to done. Which words of his, though very cautelously
couched, were so well understood by Oberianus, that the Discipline was first
admitted in that Church, and afterward propagated into those of the
Neighboring Provinces.

32. He has another way of screwing himself into the good opinion of such
Kings and Princes as he conceived to be inclinable to the Reformation;
sometimes congratulating with them for their good success; sometimes
encouraging them to proceed in so good a work; of which sort were his Letters
to King Edward the Sixth, to Queen Elizabeth, and Mr. Secretary Cecil; to the
Prince Elector Palatine, Duke of Wir^inburgh, Lantgrave of Hesse. But he
bestirred himself in no place more, then he did in Poland; which though he
never visited in person, yet he was frequent in it by his Lines and Agents. The
Augustane Confession had been brought thither some years before; of which he
took but little notice. But he had heard no sooner that the Doctrines of
Zuinglius began to get some ground upon them, under the Reign of Sigismund,
surnamed Augustus, when presently he posts his Letters to the King, and most of
the great Officers which were thought to incline that way. Amongst which, he
directs his Letters to Prince Radzeville, one of the Chief Palatines, and Earl
Marshal; Spirtetus Castelan of Sunderzee, and Lord high-Treasurer; to John
Count of Tarnaco, Castelan of Craco, and Lord General of his Majesty's Armies:
besides many other Castelans, and persons of great power in the Affairs of that
Kingdom. In his first Letters to that King, dated the fourth of December 1554,
he seems to congratulate with him for embracing the Reformed Religion, (though
in that point he was somewhat out in his intelligence;) and thereupon exhorts
him to be earnest in the propagating of the Faith and Gospel, which in himself
he had impressed; and that he would proceed to reform the Church from the dregs
of Popery, without regard to any of those dangers and inconveniences which
might follow on it. But in his next address (1555) he comes up more close,
speaks Quanti nobis esse debeat sincer a Religio, per quam Christo inter nos
Tribunal e^igitur.
of erecting a tribunal or throne to Christ; setting up such a perfect Form of
the true Religion, as came nearest to the Ordinance of Christ. And we know
well, that in the meaning of his party, the settling of Presbytery was affirmed
to be nothing else then setting Christ upon his Throne, holding the Scepter of
the Holy Discipline in his own right hand. And somewhat to this purpose he had
also written to the Count of Tarnaco, whom in his first Letter he applauds for
his great readiness to receive the Gospel: But in his second, bearing date the
nineteenth of November 1558, he seems no less grieved that the Count demurred
on something which he had recommended to him, under pretense that In statu
Regni nil movendum, quod omnis novitas graves motus and exit^ales mina^eretur.
it was not safe to alter any thing in the State of the Kingdom, and that all
innovations seemed to threaten some great danger to it; which cautelousness in
that great person, could not relate to any alteration in the State of Religion,
in which an alteration had been made for some years before; and therefore must
refer to some Form of Discipline which Calvin had commended to him for the use
of those Churches. And no man can conceive that he would recommend unto them
any other Form then that which he devised for the Church of Geneva.

32. But Calvin did not deal by Letters only in the present business, but had
his Agents in that Kingdom, who busily employed themselves to advance his
projects. Amongst whom, none more practical, or pragmatical rather, then John
Alasco, of a Noble Family in that Country, but a professed Calvinian, both for
Doctrine and Discipline; for the promoting whereof, when he had settled himself
and his Church in London, Anno 1550, he publishes a Pamphlet in defense of
sitting at the Holy Sacrament, encouraged those who had refused conformity to
the Cap and Surplice, and eagerly solicited M. Bucer (a man of greater parts,
but of more moderation) to show himself on their behalf. Driven out of England,
he betakes himself to the Dukedom of Saxony, where he behaved himself with such
indiscretion, that he was fain to quit those parts and retire to Poland, in
which the greatness of his kindred was his best protection. There he sets up
again for Calvin. By the Activity of this man, the diligence of Vtenhorius, and
the compliance of some great persons upon Politic ends; the Eldership is
advanced in many places of that Kingdom, as appears by the Letters of the said
Vtenhorius, bearing date Ian. 27. 1559. In which he signifies unto him, that
the most illustrious Prince, the Palatine of Vil^a in Lithuania, being come to
the Assembly of the States which was held at Petrico, resolved not to depart
from thence before some Convention of the Brethren should be held there also;
to which Ad quem n^stri (...) etiam sut quidem quos serum adduxii, etc.
as well the Elders which his Highness brought thither with him, as those he
found there at his coming, should consult together for the establishing of a
greater purity in Rites and Ceremonies to be used amongst them. For which
admission of the Discipline into Lithuania, Calvin expresses no small joy in
his Letters to a nameless Friend in that Country, bearing date October. 9. 1561.
In which he lets him know how much he did congratulate the happiness of the
Realm of Poland, and more particularly of the Province of Lithuania, that the
Reformed Religion made so great a progress in those Countries, by which
addition Christ's Kingdom had been much enlarged; that his joy was very much
increased, Cum audio Disciplinam Evangelii prof^ssione conjungi.
by hearing that together with the same Religion they received the Discipline;
that it was not without very good cause, that he used to call the Discipline
the Nerves of the Church, in regard of the great strength which it added to it.
By which last words we may perceive what kind of Church Government it was
which he commended to Ligerus before remembered, under this very title of the
Nerves of Discipline, by which Religion was to be preserved inviolable for the
times to come.

33. In the Assembly at Petrico, before remembered, the Palatines, and other
great men of the Kingdom, obtained a Privilege, Vt toti nobil^ati libe^a
reformardi^e su^^^m Ecclesiam Faculias per^mi^^i deb^^t, U^enh. Calv. Jan. 27
1555.
whereby it was made lawful for them to reform all the Churches under their
command, and to reform them in such manner as to them seemed best. It was then
also moved by the Count of Tarnaco, that the Bishops should no longer hold
their place or suffrage in the Assembly of Estates, but keep themselves only to
such matters as concerned the Church: which though it did not take effect, yet
the attempt appeared so dreadful in the eye of those Prelates then present,
that they became more tractable and obsequious to the great State-Officers,
then they had been formerly. And what could follow hereupon, but that the great
men being left to please themselves in their own Religion, and the Bishops not
daring to oppose; not only Zuinglianism and the Discipline, but many other
Sects and Innovations should get ground upon them? In reference to the
Discipline, as it was fitted and accommodated to whole Realms and Nations, they
had not only their Presbyteries, as in Geneva, Strasbourg, and some other
Cities; but their Classical and Synodical Meetings, as in France and Scotland;
wherein they took upon them to make Laws and Ordinances for the directing of
their Churches after Calvin's Model. For in the Synod held at Tzenger, in the
year 1564, it was Decreed that they should use no other Music in their
Churches, then the singing of Psalms (after the manner of Geneva, understand it
so) condemning that which was then used in the Church of Rome, partly because
the Psalms and Hymns were sung in the Latin Tongue, and partly because the
Priests did bellow in them (as they pleased to phrase it) like the Priests of
Baal. Concerning which we are to know, that the device of turning David's Psalms
into Rhyme and Meter, was first taken up by Clement Marrot, one of the Grooms
of the Bedchamber to King Francis the First; who being much addicted to
Poetry, and having some acquaintance with those which were thought to wish well
to the Reformation, was persuaded by the learned Vatablus (Professor of the
Hebrew Tongue in the University of Paris) to exercise his Poetical Fancies in
translating some of David's Psalms. For whose satisfaction and his own, he
translated the first fifty of them into Gallick Meters; and after fleeing to
Geneva, grew acquainted with Beza, who in some tract of time translated the
other hundred also, and caused them to be fi^ted unto several Tunes: Which
thereupon began to be sung in private Houses, and by degrees to be taken up in
all the Churches of the French and other Nations which followed the Genevian
Platform. For first, in imitation of this Work of Marrot's, Sternhold, a Groom
of the Privy-Chamber to King Edward the Sixth, translated thirty seven of them
into English Meeter, Anno 1552, the rest made up by John Hopkins and some
others, in the time of Queen Mary; but most especially by such as had retired
unto Geneva in those very times. Followed therein by some Dutch Zealots, who
having modelled their Reformation by the Rules of Calvin, were willing to
embrace this Novelty amongst the rest. So as in little tract of time, the
singing of these Psalms in Meter became a most especial part of their public
Worship; and was esteemed as necessary to the Service of God, as were the acts
of Prayer and Preaching, and whatsoever else was esteemed most Sacred. In the
next place, to take away all difference in Apparel, whether Sacred or Civil,
and all distinction in the choice of Meats and Drinks; he accounted it Stult^^^
and ridiculum est ^e^edes Domini and omnium creatura^um, etc. Cap. de (...).
a ridiculous and ungodly thing for those which are the Heirs of all things,
(with dominion over all the Creatures) to suffer themselves to be restrained by
any superstitious use of Meats, Drinks, or Vestments. The Temples built unto
their hands, they were contented to make use of for their public Meetings,
being first purged of Idols, Altars, the Bellowings beforementioned, and other
the like dregs of Popery; though formerly they had been abused (who sees not a
Calvinian spirit walking in all these lines?) by the Priests of Baal. They seem
content also to allow their Ministers Meat, Drink and wages; condemning those
which grutch them such a sorry Pittance. But as for Tithes, and Glebes, and
Parsonage-Houses, they kept them wholly to themselves, that being the Fish they
angled for in those troubled waters, and the chief bait that tempted them to
swallow down those alterations in Religion, which afterward made them a
reproach and a byword to the rest of Christendom.

34. I have some reason to believe, that sitting at the Lords Table came first
in with Calvinism, as being most agreeable to the Rules of the Discipline and
the Doctrine of the Zuinglian Church. But afterward, upon consideration of the
scandal which was given thereby, as well to the Lutherans as the Papists; Vt
s^ames and ge^ua ^l^^ctentes, (...) and sanguinem Christi sumani. Syn. Pe^^ico.
number. 4
it was thought fit to change that posture into standing or kneeling; and then
to charge the introduction of that sawey custom on the Arrain Heretics, who
looking on Christ no otherwise then their elder Brother, thought it no robbery
at all to be equal with him, Ce^^menia ^antum A^^^m^^um Domi^^ (...) cantibu^
prop^^a. Synod. W^^ dill^. N^m^
and sit down with him at his Table. And it was well for them, though it
happened very ill for the peace of Christendom, that they could find so fair a
Plaster for so foul a soar. For so it was, that both the Heresies of Arrius,
the impieties of Servetus, the extravagancies of the Anabaptists, and the
exploded errors of the Samosatenians, who from the last reviver of them are now
called Socinians, grew up together in this Kingdom with the Doctrine of Calvin,
and might receive some good encouragement from the Rules of his Discipline, by
which that slovenly gesture or posture of sitting was imposed as necessary. Nor
was the Discipline of force sufficient to repress those Heresies; though Calvin
thought it such a great preservative of the true Religion, and that it was
con^irmed at the Synod of Sendomier 1570, Secundum verbum Dei, -- and manda^um
Jesus Christi, and exemplum Apost^lorum. Number. 11.
as grounded on the Word of God, and warranted both by Christ's command, and the
example of his Apostles; which gives the Presbyterian Discipline more Divine
Institution, then Calvin durst ascribe unto it, or any of our Sabbatarians
could ever find for their Lords-day-Sabbath. Some difference there was in the
choice of their Elders, between these Polish Churches, and the rest of that
Platform; the Government of the rest, being merely popular; but these retaining
somewhat in them of an Aristocracy. For besides the several Presbyteries of
particular Churches, they have a more general superintendencie in every
Diocese, or any other large District, of what name soever. For managing
whereof, some of the principal Ministers are chosen by consent of their Synods,
whom they call by the name of Spiritual Superintendents, each of them being
associated with two or three Elders of the Lay-Nobility; and for the most part,
of the rank or degree of Knights. By means whereof, they keep the ordinary
Presbyteries and Parochial Sessions within the bounds appointed for them, not
suffering them to entrench upon the privileges of Prince or People, as they
have done in other places, where they want this curb.

36. Leaving the Polish Churches under this establishment, we must follow
Calvin into Scotland, where he employed John Knox as his Vicar General. He knew
the spirit of the man by his Factious Writings, his actings in the Schism at
Frankfort, and the long conversation which he had with him in Geneva it self;
and having given him a Commission to return to Scotland, instructed and
encouraged him in his following courses. And Knox applied himself so well to
his Instructions, that presently on his return he inflamed the people to the
defacing of Images, the destroying of Altars, demolishing of Monasteries and
Religious Houses, and making havoc of all things which formerly were accounted
Sacred. This Calvin calls Evangelium apud vos ^am faelices, laetos progressus
facere vehementer ut par est laetor.
the propagation of the Gospel, and by his Letters does congratulate with him
for his good success: So that if Tully's Rule be true, and that there be little
or no difference between the advising of mischief, and the rejoicing at it when
the deed is done Nihil interest otium velim ^ieri, an gaudeam factum. Cicer. in
Phil 2.
; Calvin must be as guilty of those spoils and Sacrileges, as even Knox
himself. And that he might proceed as he had begun, he lays this Rule before
him for his future carriage; that is to say, that the Church was to be cleared
from all that filth which had issued out of error and superstition; Vt
Ecclesia sordibus purgetur, quae ex er^o^e and superstitione manarunt, and ne
faedentur Dei Mysteria ^udicris and insipidis mixturis, Calv. Knoxo, April. 23.
1561.
and that the Mysteries of God were not to be defiled with idle and impertinent
mixtures. Under which general Rule, and such a general Rule as has no
exceptions, there was no Ceremony used in the Church of Rome, though Primitive
and Apostolical in it self, which was not presently to be discharged as impure
or idle, or otherwise abominated, as some part of the filths of Popery. And
because all things must be done to the honor of Galviu, he is consulted with
in all such doubts and emergent difficulties, as could not be sufficiently
determined by a less Authority. It is reported in the History writ by Venerable Bede, that when Augustine the Monk was sent into England by Pope Gregory to
convert the Saxons, he met with many difficult and intricate cases, which he
was not able to resolve. In which respect he sent them all in writing to the
Pope himself, requiring his judgment in the same, that he might have the
better ground to proceed upon; either in ordering of such matters which
concerned the Church, or determining finally such cases as were brought before
him. Knox looks on Calvin with as great a Reverence, as Augustine did upon the
Pope; accounts him for the Supreme Pastor of the Reformation, and therefore
sends his doubts unto him concerning the Baptizing of Bastards, as also of the
Children of Idolaters, and Excommunicate persons. He makes another Querie also,
but such as seemed to be rather a matter of Concupiscence, then a case of
Conscience; Whether the Monks and Parish Priests which remained in Scotland,
were to receive their Tithes and Rents as in former times, considering that
they did no service in the Church of Christ. To which last Query, he returned
such answer (for in the other he was Orthodox and sound enough) as served to
strip the Monks and Priests of all their livelihood; it being clearly his
opinion, (...) C^lv. Knox^, N^. venth. 8. 1^59.
that they ought not to be fed and clothed at the public charge, in regard
they lived in idleness, and did nothing for it; but that they rather were to
get their livings by the sweat of their brows, and by the labor of their
hands. According to which resolution, no man is sure of his Estate, but may be
stripped of it as an idle boy, or an unprofitable servant, when the Brethren
please.

36. But Calvin's thoughts were not confined to Poland or to Scotland only: He
now pretends to a more general or Apostolical care over all the Churches,
sending abroad his Missives like the Decretals of some former Popes; which
being made in reference to those emergent difficulties which were brought
before them, served afterward for a standing Rule to regulate the like cases
for the times to come. It would be thought a matter of impertinency, or
curiosity at the best, to touch upon all particulars of this nature, in which
he signified his good pleasure to the rest of the Churches. The Reader may
satisfy himself out of his Epistles, if he has any list or leisure to co^sult
the same; or otherwise may make a judgment of them by this small scantling, as
the wise Mathematician took the just measure of the body of Hercules, by the
impression which he made in the sand by one of his Feet. And therefore I shall
look no further then upon such specialities as have relation to the Doctrine,
Discipline, or Forms of Worship, which are most proper to the rest. Some of the
Brethren not fully settled in a Church, had laid aside the singing of Psalms,
either for fear of being discovered, or otherwise terrified and discouraged by
the threats of the adversary. For this he reprehends them in a tedious Letter,
dated July 19. 1559. Vestra timiditas. arque pusillanimitas vos ita
constringit, etc -- ut p^tius retro feramini, and gratiae Dei januam ^laudatis.
imputes it to their fearfulness or pasillanimity, accuses them of plain
tergiversation, and shutting up all passages against the entrance of the Graces
of Almighty God. The Brethren of Mont-Pelyard (for I think the former lived in
Mettz, the chief City of Lorrein) were required by the Guardians of their
Prince (that is to say, the Palatine of Zuibrook, and the Duke of Wirtenberge)
to hold conformity in some Ceremonies with the Lutheran Church, as namely in
the Form of their Catechizing, the manner of Administering the Holy Sacrament,
the Form of public Prayers, and Solemnizing of Marriages. They were required
also to employ themselves in Preaching down the errors and corruptions of the
Church of Rome, in some small Signiories which were lately fallen unto their
Prince, and had not formerly been instructed in the Doctrine of the Protestant
Churches. But absolutely they refused the one, and would do nothing in the
other without Calvin's leave; to whose infallible judgment and determination
they refer the points: whereunto he returns such answer by his Letters, bearing
date September 25. 1562, as confirmed them in their first refusal; excepting
more particularly against suffering Midwives to Baptize, and against praying
for the joyful Resurrection of a man deceased, at the time of his Burial. But
in the other he advises them to accept the charge, as visibly conducing to the
propagation of the true Religion, and the enlarging of Christ's Kingdom.

37. So for the Discipline which seemed to be devised at first upon humane
prudence, accommodated to the present condition of Geneva only; the use of
Excommunication had been discontinued in the Protestant Churches, and no such
creatures as Lay Elders heard of in the Primitive times, or glanced at in the
holy Scriptures. So that to trust them with the power of the Churches-censures,
could not pretend to any ground in the Word of God, supposing that the use of
Excommunication was to be every where received. Calvin himself confesses in his
Letter unto those of Zurick, Nec me late^ doctos and pios esse homines, quibus
princi^^^us Christia^^ non videtur esse necessaria Excommunicatio.
that in the judgment of most Learned and Religious men, there was no need of
Excommunication under Christian Princes. Beza acknowledges the like in the
Life of Calvin; and what Ligerus says for the Church of Saxony, has been
showed already. But by degrees it came to be entitled to Divine Authority; at
first commended as convenient, and at last as necessary. With the opinion of
the Sacred and Divine Authority of the holy Discipline, he had so far possessed
Saligniar, a man of Eminent power in the City of Paris, and one that for thirty
years before, had declared himself in favor of the Reformation, that he
acknowledges it in the end to be Apostolical: For in his Letter written unto
Calvin on the Ides of December, he lets him know how vehemently he did desire,
that Eam nos habere Reipub. Christianae formam, uti tu spiras and Apostolicam
fuisse ^egimus.
they might have such a Form of Ecclesiastical Polity, as Calvin seemed to
breath, and could not be denied to be Apostolical. From hence it was that he
declared so positively in his Epistle to Poppius, February 25. 1559, that the
Vt publica Authoritate, Excommunicatio in Ecclesiae vigeat.
Magistrates were to be solicited for the Exercise of Excommunication by
public Authority; which if it could not be obtained, the Ministers were to
make this protestation, that they durst not give the Sacrament to unworthy
receivers, for fear of coming under the censure of casting that which was holy
before Dogs and Swine. More fully in his answer to some questions about the
Discipline; in which we find (and that goes very high indeed) Quam si ad eam
pergendam, etc. -- vigeat Excommnuic^tio, etc.
that the safety of the Church cannot otherwise be provided for, then by the
free use of Excommunication, for the purifying of the same from filth, the
restraint of licentiousness, abolishing enormous crimes, and the correcting of
ill manners; the moderate exercise whereof he that will not suffer, does
plainly show himself to be no sheep of our Saviors Pasture.

38. And so far Calvin had proceeded, but he went no further; neither
condemning the Estate of Bishops as Antichristian and unlawful, nor thinking
his Lay Elders so extremely necessary, that no Decree of Excommunication could
be past without them. But Beza, Pri^^i^io^ sub (...) Calvini Minist^^io. in
cujus (...) successimus. Bez Ep^st. 33.
who succeeded in the Chair of Calvin, is resolved on both: For Calvin having
sat eight and twenty years in the Chair of Geneva, ended his life in the year
1564. During which time he had attained to such an height of Reputation, that
even the Churches of the Switzers lost the name of Zuinglians, and thought it
no small honor to them, as well as those of Germany, France, Pole, or
Scotland, to be called Calvinian. Only the English held it out, and neither
had embraced his Doctrines, nor received his Discipline. And though the Puritan
party in it took the name of Calvinists ( our Divines commonly called
Calvinists, say the two Informers) yet both Saravia stomached it to be so
accounted, Mountague in answer to the two Informers does protest against it,
and all the true sons of the Church of England do as much disclaim it. Beza
endeavored what he could to introduce his Discipline and Forms of Worship into
all the Churches which did pretend to any Reformation of their ancient Errors.
In the pursuit whereof he drives on so furiously, like Iehu in the holy
Scriptures, as if no Kings or Princes were to stand before him. Scarce was he
settled in his Chair, when one of his professed Champions for Presbytery puts
himself into Heidelberg, which had not long before admitted the Calvinian
Doctrines, but not submitted to the Discipline, as extrinsecal to them* This
Champion therefore challenges the Divines thereof to a disputation, publicly
holds forth this proposition, which he then defended; that is to say, That to a
Minister with his Elders, there is power given by express warrant from Gods
Word, to Excommunicate all offenders, even the greatest Prince. From hence
proceeded that dispute which afterward Erastus (of whom more hereafter)
maintained with Beza; the point being put upon this issue: Whether all Churches
ought to have their Eldership invested with a power of Excommunication; and
that Lay Elders were so necessary in every Eldership, that nothing could be
done without them. In which dispute (as it is very well observed by judicious
Hooker) they seemed to divide the whole truth between them; Beza most truly
holding the necessity of Excommunication in a Church well constituted; Erastus
no less truly showing that there was no necessity of Lay Elders to be
Ministers of it.

40. But his main business was to settle the Calvinian Forms in the Realms of
Britain; in which he aimed at the acquiring of as great a name, as Calvin had
obtained in France or Poland. Knox had already so prevailed amongst the Scots,
that though they once subscribed to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, yet he had brought them to admit such a Form of Worship, as came more
near to the Example of Geneva. And he had brought the Discipline to so good a
forwardness, that Beza was rather wanting to confirm then to introduce it, as
shall appear at large when we come to Scotland. But Knox had many opportunities
to effect his business, during the absence of their Queen, the Regencie of
Queen Mary of Lorreign, and the unsettledness of affairs in the State of that
Kingdom, which the Brethren could not find in England, where the Fabric of
the State was joined together with such Ligaments of Power and Wisdom, that
they were able to act little, and effect much less. Some opposition they had
made after their coming back from Frankfort and Geneva, their two chief
Retreats, against the Vestments of the Church, and the distinction of Apparel
betwixt Priests and Laymen: In which some of them did proceed with so vain an
obstinacy, that some of them were for a time suspended, and others totally
deprived of their Cures and Benefices; some of them also had begun to take
exception against some parts and Offices of the public Liturgy, refusing
thereupon to conform unto it; and thereupon likely to incur the very same
penalties which were inflicted on the other. In both these cases they consult
the Oracle, resolving to adhere to his determination in them, whatsoever it
was. First therefore he applies himself to Grindal, then Bishop of London, and
very zealously affected to the name of Calvin: to whom he signifies by his
Letter of the 26 of June 1566, how much he was afflicted with the sad reports
out of France and Germany, by which he was advertised that many Ministers in
England, Multos illi^ Ministros verbi, inculpa^^ alio qu^ ^um (...) ^um
Doctrine homi^es ^de^^co f^^sse Regia Ma^estate exancto^a^os, etc.
being otherwise unblamable both for Life and Doctrine, had been exauctorated
or deprived by the Queens Authority, (the Bishops giving their consent and
approbation) only for not subscribing to some Rites and Ceremonies; but more
particularly, that diverse of them were deprived, not only for refusing to wear
Q^^d vestes ^^oe R^^l^ (...) insigu^a, etc. -- non admittant.
those Vestments which were peculiar to Baals Priests in the times of Popery,
but for not conforming to some Rites which had degenerated into most shameful
superstitions, such as the Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the Communion, and the
like to these: That Baptism was admitted sometimes by Midwives: Quod aliorum
super inducendorum R^t^n^n potestas Regia Ma^esta^^ fi^^et.
That power was left unto the Queen to Ordain other Rites and Ceremonies, as
she saw occasion: and finally, that the Bishops were invested with the sole
Authority for ordering matters in the Church; Q^od solis Episcopis de
constituendis ^ebus Ecclesiasticis, omnis potentia tribuatur, etc. Epist 8.
the other Ministers not advised with, or consulted in them.

41. Such is the substance of his charge; against each particular point whereof
he bends his forces, as if he had a mind to batter down the Bulwarks of the
Church of England, and lay it open to Geneva. I shall not note how much he
blames the Ancient Fathers for bringing in so many Ceremonies into use and
practice, which either had been borrowed from the Jews, or derived from the
Gentiles; or how he magnifieth the nakedness and simplicity of those Foreign
Churches which abominate nothing more then such outward trappings. But the
result of all is this Quicquid a Judaeis, quicquid a Paganis in Ritus
Christianos est translatum, praeter Christii Insti^^tionem and ^^^tum
Ap^stel^rum ex^mpla^, etc. (...) Ibid.
, that whatsoever Rite or Ceremony was either brought into the Church from the
Jews or Gentiles, not warranted by the institution of Christ, or by any
Examples of the Apostles; as also all significant Ceremonies, which by no right
were at first brought into the Church, ought all at once to be prohibited and
suppressed, there being no hope that the Church would otherwise be restored to
her native Beauty. I only note, that he compares the Cross in Baptism to the
Brazen Serpent, abused as much to Superstition and Idolatry; and therefore to
be abrogated with as great a Zeal in a Church well ordered, as that Image was
destroyed by King Hezekiah. He falls soul also on that manner of singing which
was retained in the Queens Chapels, all the Cathedrals, and some
Parish-Churches of this Kingdom, because perhaps it was set forth with Organs,
and such Musical Instruments Ch^reis plerumque (...) quam Sac^^ action^, (...)
de mul^^udis auribus po^ius quam commovendis an^mis accom^n^da^us. Ibid.
as made it sitter (in his judgment) to be used in Dancing, then in Sacred
actions; and tended more to please the ears, then to raise the affections. Nor
seems he better pleased with that Authority which was enjoyed and exercised by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, in granting Licenses for Pluralities,
non-Residence, contracting Marriages in the Church, and eating Flesh on days
prohibited; with many other things of that nature, which he accounts not only
for so many stains and blemishes in the Face of Christendom, Quae non tantum
corruptela Ch^istianismi. sed mani^^^ia a Christo defectio. Ibid.
but for a manifest defection even from Christ himself; in which respect they
rather were to be commended then condemned and censured, that openly opposed
themselves against such corruptions.

42. Yet notwithstanding these complaints, he grants the matters in dispute,
and the Rites prescribed, to be things indifferent, not any way impious in
themselves, nor such as should necessitate any man to forsake his Flock, rather
then yield obedience and conformity to them. But then he adds, that if they do
offend, who rather choose to leave their Churches, then to conform themselves to
those Rites and Vestments against their Consciences, Multo majore reatu coram
Deo and ipsius Angelu teneri, qui greges a pastoribus privati, etc. potius
sustineant, quam Ministros hoc quam illo habitu vestiros ce^nent. Ibid.
a greater guilt must be contracted by those men before God and his Angels, who
rather choose to spoil these Flocks of able Pastors, then suffer those Pastors
to make choice of their own Apparel; or rather, choose to rob the people of the
Food of their souls, then suffer them to receive it otherwise then upon their
knees. But in his Letter of the next year he adventureth further, and makes it
his request unto all the Bishops, that some fit Medicine be forthwith applied
to the present mischief, which did not only give great scandal to the weak and
ignorant, but even to many Learned and Religious Persons. And this he seems to
charge upon them, as they will answer for the contrary at the Judgment Seat of
Almighty God, to whom an account is to be given of the poorest Sheep which
should be forced to wander upon this occasion from the rest of the Flock.
Between the writing of which Letters, some of their brethren had propounded
their doubts unto him, touching the calling of the Ministers, as it was then,
and still is used in the Church of England; the wearing of the Cap and
Surplice, and other Vestments of the Clergy which was then required; the Music
and melodious singing in Cathedral Churches; the interrogatories proposed to
Infants at the time of their Baptism; the signing of them with the sign of the
Cross; kneeling at the Communion, administering the same in unleavened Bread;
though the last were left at liberty by the Rules of the Church, and used in
some few places only. Of all which he not only signified a plain dislike, but
endeavored to show the errors and absurdities contained in them; for such
they must contain, if he pleased to think so. And what could follow hereupon,
but an open Schism (...) tandem in ^^^quam and (...) eva^^^ -- N^n nulla tam
(...) su^s (...) habean^, etc. Bez. Epist 23.
, a separation from the Church, a resort to Conventicles; which he takes notice
of in his last to Grindal, but imputes it unto that severity which was used by
the Bishops, in pressing such a yoke of Ceremonies upon tender Consciences. The
breach not lessened, but made wider by another Letter directed to the French
and Dutch Churches at London Ad peregrina^um in Anglia Ecclesia^u^, s^aties.
Epist 24.
; in which he sets before them the whole Form of Worship which was established
at Geneva, insisteth upon many points, neither agreeable to the Discipline or
Doctrine of the Church of England; and ^inally, so restrains the power of the
Supreme Magistrate, that he is left to the correction and control of his under
Officers. Of which two Letters, that which was writ for satisfaction of the
English brethren, bears date October. 24. 1567, the other June 21, in the year
next following.

43. With great Zeal he drives on in pursuit of the Discipline, the Form and
Power whereof we will first lay down out of his Epistles, and then observe to
what a height he does endeavor to advance the same; excluding the Episcopal
Government, as Antichristian, if not Diabolical. First then he tells us, that
to each Minister which officiates in the Country-Villages within the Signiory
of Geneva, In singulis pag^^ adjuncti sunt duos inspectores, qui una cum
pastore omnes (...), observant. Epist. 20
two Overseers are elected as Assistants to him; and that to them it
appertains to keep a watchful eye over all men in their several Parishes, to
convent such before them as they find blameworthy, to admonish them of their
misdeeds; and finally, if he cannot otherwise prevail upon them, to turn them
over to the censure of the Eldership which resides in the City. This Eldership
he compounds of the six ordinary Pastors, and twelve Lay Elders; the last
continually chosen from amongst the Senators. To whose charge and office it
belongs, to take notice of all scandals and offenses of what sort soever within
the bounds assigned unto them, and every Thursday to report to the Court or
Consistory what they have discovered. The parties thereupon are to be
convented, fairly admonished of their faults, sometimes suspended from the
Sacrament, if the case require it, and excommunicated at the last, if they
prove impenitent. To this Eldership also it belongs, to judge in all cases and
concernments of Matrimony, according to the Word of God, and the Laws of the
City; to repel such from the Communion as do not satisfy the Ministers by a
full confession of their Faith and Knowledge. And in the company of an Officer
of each several Ward, to make a diligent inquiry (over them) in every Family,
Singula^ d^mos and ^amilias ad untes. etc. Ibid.
concerning their proficiencie in the Word of God, and the ways of Godliness.

44. We must next see to what a height he does endeavor to advance this
Discipline, which (if we take it on his word) is not to be received only as a
matter necessary, but to be had in equal Reverence with the Word of God.
Sarnixius had acquainted him with some news from Poland, concerning the
Divisions and subdivisions in the Churches there; whereunto Beza makes his
answer by his Letters of the first of November, 1566, Nisi quaedam s^^ma inter
vos statuatur Disciplina Ecclesiastica, etc. Epist 14.
That unless some Form of Ecclesiastical Discipline, according to the Word of
God, were received among them, he could not see by what means they were able to
remedy their discords, o^ to prevent the like for the time to come; that he had
many times admired, that being warned by the confusion of their Neighbors in
Germany, they had not considered before this time, as well of the necessity to
receive such Discipline, as for the strict observing of it when it was
received; that there was only one and the self-same Author, Sci^ unum and
eandem esse tum Doctrinae tum Disciplini Authorem. Ibid.
both of Doctrine and Discipline; and therefore that it must seem strange
(which I would have the Reader mark with his best attention) to entertain one
part of the Word of God, Quorsum enim unam verbi partem, al^era repud^ata,
recipere. Ibid.
and reject the other; that it was most ridiculous to expect or think, that
either the Laws could be observed, or the Peace maintained, without Rules and
Orders, in which the very life of the Law did so much consist, that for the
avoiding of some new Tyranny Timetur alta tyrannis. etc. Ibid.
which seemed to lie disguised under the Mask and Vizard of the present
Discipline, they should not run themselves into such Anarchy and discords as
were not otherwise to be prevented; and finally, that no severity could be
feared in the use of that Discipline, as long as it was circumscribed within
the bounds and limits assigned unto it by the Word of God, and moderated by the
Rules of Christian charity. So that we are not to admire, if the Discipline be
from henceforth made a Note of the Church, every way as essential to the nature
of it, as the Word and Sacraments; which as it is the common Doctrine of the
Presbyterians, so we must look on Beza as the Author of it; such Doctrine being
never preached in the Church before.

45. But because Beza seems to speak in that Epistle concerning the necessity
of admitting some certain Form of Ecclesiastical Discipline, without pointing
punctually and precisely unto that of Geneva; we must next see what Form of
Discipline he means, and whether a Church Government by Bishops were intended
in it. And first he tells us in a Postscript of a Letter to Knox, dated the
third of July 1569, wherein he much congratulates his good Fortune, Quam recte
illud quod Doctrina simul Disciplina conjungetis, etc. Ep. 674.
for joining the Discipline in his Reformation with the truth of Doctrine,
beseeching him to go forward with it as he had begun, lest it might happen to
him as it did to others, either to slacken in their speed, or not be able to
advance were they never so willing. And we know well what Discipline, what Form
of Government and Worship had been by Knox established in the Kirk of Scotland.
But secondly, many of the Scots being still unsatisfied in the point of
Episcopacy, and not well pleased with any other Government of a late invention;
it was thought fit to send to Beza for his judgment in it, who was now looked
upon as the Supreme Pastor, Successor unto Calvin, both in place and power.
Beza considers of the Business, and by his Letters of the 12 of April, 1572,
returns this Answer, viz. That he beheld it as an extraordinary blessing on the
Church of Scotland Magnum hoc Del munus, quo una and Religionem puram and (...)
Doctrinae, re^inendae vinculum in Sco^iam ^n^ali^tis Epist. 79
, That together with the true Religion, they also had received the Discipline
for the bond thereof. Both which he earnestly conjures them so to hold
together, as to be sure that there is no hope to keep the one, if they lose the
other Haec du^ simul (...), ut (...) di^ p^^menc^le non (...), memine^^is. Ibid
: which being said in reference to the Holy Discipline, he next proceeds to
spend his judgment in the point of Episcopacy. In reference to which, he first
tells them this; that as the Bishops were the first means to advance the Pope,
so the pretended Bishops would maintain the Relics of Popery. And then he
adds, that it concerns all those to avoid that plague Hanc p^st^m (...) qui
(...). Ibid.
(by which he mean^ undoubtedly the Episcopal Order) who pretend to any care of
the Churches safety. And therefore since they had so happily discharged that
calling in the Church of Scotland, Ne quaeso il^am noquam admittas, quamvis
uni^a^is retinende specie ^^andiatur. Ibid.
they never should again admit it, though it might flatter them with some
assurance of peace and unity.

46. What followed thereupon in Scotland, we shall see hereafter. But his
desires of propagating the Genevian Forms, was not to be restrained to that
part of the Island. In his first Letter unto Grindal, he does not only
justify the Genevian Discipline, and the whole Order of that Church in Sacred
Offices, as grounded on the Word of God; but finds great fault with the
Episcopal Government in the Church of England, and the great power which was
ascribed unto the Queen in Spiritual Matters. How so? Because (said he) he
found no warrant for it in the Word of God, or any of the ancient Canons, by
which it might be lawful for the Civil Magistrate (of his own Authority) either
to abrogate old Ceremonies, or establish new; or for the Bishops only to
ordain and determine any thing, Vel solis Episcopis, absq^e sui Presb^terii
judicio and volunta^e, aliquid novi ordina^e, etc. Epist 8
without the judgment and consent of their Presbyteries being first obtained.
And in his answer to the Queries of the English brethren, he finds no less
fault with the manner of proceedings in the Bishops Courts; in regard that
Excommunications were not therein passed by the common consent of a Presbytery
Non e^ Presbyteri sententia sed ^^ quo^^ nd^m (...). Ibid.
, but decreed only by some Civil Lawyers, or other Officers who fa^e as Judges
in the same. But first, the man was ignorant of the course of those Courts, in
which the sentence of Excommunication is never published or pronounced, but by
the mouth of a Minister ordained according to the Rules of the Church of
England. And secondly, it is to be conceived in Reason, that any Bachelor or
Doctor of the Civil Law is far more fit to be employed and trusted in the
exercise of that part of Discipline, then any Tradesman of Geneva, though
possibly of the number of the five and twenty. For the redress of which great
mischief, and of many other, he applies himself unto the Queen, to whom he
dedicates his Annotations on the New Testament, published in the year 1572. In
the Epistle whereunto, though he acknowledges that she had restored unto this
Kingdom the true Worship of God, yet he insinuates that there was wanting a
full Reformation of Ecclesiastical Discipline; that our Temples were not fully
purged; that some high places still remained, not yet abolished: and therefore
wishes that those blemishes might be removed, and those wants supplied.
Finally, understanding that a Parliament was then shortly to be held in
England, and that Cartwright had prepared an Admonition to present unto it; he
must needs interpose his credit with a Peer of the Realm to advance the
service, as appears plainly by his Letter of the same year, and the Nones of
July. In which, though he approves the Doctrine, yet he condemns the Government
of the Church as most imperfect, not only destitute of many things which were
good and profitable, but also of some others which were plainly necessary.

47. But here it is to be observed, that in his Letter to this great person,
whosoever he was, he seems more cautelous and reserved, then in that to
Grindal; but far more modest then in those to Knox, and the English Brethren.
The Government of England was so well settled, as not to be ventured on too
rashly* And therefore he must first see what effect his counsels had produced
in Scotland, before he openly assaults the English Hierarchy: But finding all
things there agreeable to his hopes and wishes, he published his Tract De
Triplici Episcopatu, calculated for the Meridian only of the Kirk of Scotland
(as being writ at the desire of the Lord Chancellor Glammis) but so, that it
might generally serve for all Great Britain: In which Book he informs his
Reader of three sorts of Bishops; that is to say, the Bishop by Divine
Institution, being no other then the Minister of a particular Church or
Congregation; the Bishop by humane appointment, being the same only with the
President of a Convocation, or the Moderator (as they phrase it) in some
Church-assembly; and finally, the Devils Bishops, such as presume to take upon
them the whole charge of a Diocese, together with a superiority and
jurisdiction over other Ministers. Which Book was afterward translated into
English by Field of Wandsworth, for the instruction and content of such of the
Brethren as did not understand the Latin. To serve as a Preface to which Work,
the Presbyterian Brethren publish their Seditious Pamphlets in defense of the
Discipline, some in the English Tongue, some in the Latin; but all of them
Printed at Gen^va: For in the year 1570, comes out The plain and full
Declaration of Ecclesiastical Discipline, according to the Word of God, without
the name of any Author, to gain credit to it. And Traverse, a furious Zealot
amongst the English; had published at Geneva also in the Latin Tongue, a
discourse of Ecclesiastical Discipline, according to the Word of God (as it was
pretended) with the declining of the Church of England from the same, Anno
1574; which for the same reason must be turned into English also, and Printed
at Geneva with Beza's Book, Anno 1580. What pains was took by some of the
Divines of England, but more particularly by Dr. John Bridges Dean of Sarum,
and Dr. Adrian Saravia, preferred upon the merit of this service in the Church
of Westminster, shall be remembered in a place more proper for it, when we shall
come to a review of those disturbances which were occasioned in this Church by
the Puritan Faction. Most of which did proceed from no other Fountain then the
pragmaticalness of Beza, the Doctrines of Calvin, and the Example of Geneva;
which if they were so influential on the Realms of Britain, though lying in a
colder climate, and so far remote; it is to be presumed that they were far more
powerful in France and Germany, which lay nearer to them; and in the last of
which the people were of a more active and Mercurial Spirit.

48. What influence Calvin had upon some of the Princes, Cities, and Divines of
Germany, has been partly touched upon before; and how his Doctrines did
prevail in the Palatine Churches, and his Discipline in many parts and
Provinces of the Germane Empire, may be shown hereafter. In France he held
intelligence with the King of Navar, the Brethren of Rouen, Aix, Mont-Pelier,
and many leading men of the Hugonot party; none of which can be thought to have
asked his counsel about purchasing Lands, the Marriages of their Children, or
the payment of Debts: And when the Fortune of the Wars, and the Kings just
anger necessitated many of them to forsake their Country, they found no place
so open to them as the Town of Geneva, and none more ready to befriend them
then Calvin was, whose Letters must be sent to all the Churches of the
Switzers, and the Neighboring Germany, for raising Contributions and
Collections toward their relief: which so exasperated the French King, that he
threatened to make War upon the Town, as the fomenter of those discords which
embroyled his Kingdom N^b^e (...) ubi (...). Calv. ^ B^^linge^ ^ ^ol. June,
15^^.
, the Receptacle of his Rebels, the Delphos as it were of that Sacred Oracle
which Soveraignly directed all affairs of moment. But of these things, and how
Beza did cooperate to the common troubles which did so miserably distract the
peace of France, shall be delivered more particularly in the following Book.

49. As for the Town and Territory of Geneva it self, it had so far submitted
unto their Authority, that Calvin wanted nothing of a Bishop in it, but the
name and title. The City of Geneva had been anciently an Episcopal See,
consisting of many Parishes and Country Villages; all subject by the Rules of
the Discipline unto one Presbytery, of which Calvin for the term of his life
had the constant Precedence (under the style of Moderator) without whom nothing
could done which concerned the Church. And sitting as chief President in the
Court or Consistory, he had so great an influence on the Common Council, as if
he had been made perpetual Dictator also, for ordering the affairs of the
Commonwealth. The like Authority was exercised and enjoyed by Beza also, for
the space of ten years, or thereabouts, after his decease. At what time
Lambertus Danaeus, one of the Ministers of that City, thinking himself
inferior to him in no part of Scholarship, procured the Presidency in that
Church to go by turns, that he and others might be capable of their courses in
it: By which means the Genevians being freed from those powerful Riders, would
never suffer themselves to be bridled as they had been formerly. For thereupon
it was concluded by a Decree of the Senate, that the Presbytery should have no
power to convent any man before them, till the Warrant was first signed by one
of the Syndicks. Besides which curb, as the Elders are named by the lesser
Council, and confirmed by the greater, the Ministers advice being first had in
the nomination; so do they take an Oath at their admission, to keep the
Ecclesiastical Ordinances of the Civil Magistrate. In which respect their
Consistory does not challenge an exorbitant and unlimited power, as the
Commissioners of Christ (as they did afterward in Scotland) but as
Commissioners of the State or Signiory; by which they are restrained in the
exercise of that Jurisdiction, which otherwise they might and would have
challenged by their first institution, and seemed at first a yoke too
insupportable for the necks of the people. In reference to their Neighboring
Princes, their City was so advantageously sea^ed, that even their Popish
Neighbors were more ready to support and aid them, then suffer the Town to
fall into the power of the Duke of Savoy. And then it is not to be doubted but
such States and Kingdoms as were Zealous in the Reformation, did liberally
contribute their assistance to them. The con^^uence of so many of the French as
had retired thither in the heat of the Civil Wars, had brought a miserable
Plague upon them; by which their numbers were so lessened, and their strength
so weakened, that the Duke of Savoy took the oppornity to lay Siege unto it: In
which distress they supplicate by Letters to all their Friends, or such as they
conceived might wish well unto them in the cause of Religion; and amongst
others, to some Bishops and Noblemen of the Church of England, Anno 1582. But
Beza having writ to Traverse, a most Zealous Puritan to negotiate in it, the
business sped the worse for the Agents sake; no great supply being sent unto
them at that time. But afterward when they were distressed by the Savoyard,
Anno 1589, they were relieved with thirteen thousand Crowns from England,
twenty four thousand Crowns from the State of Venice; from France and Florence,
with intelligence of the enemies purposes: only the Scots, though otherwise
most zealous in advancing the Discipline, approved themselves to be true Scots,
or false Brethren to them. For having raised great sums of money, under pretense
of sending seasonable relief to their friends in Geneva; the most part of it
was assigned over to the Earl of Bothwel, then being in Rebellion against their
King, and having many ways endeavored to surprise his person, and in fine, to
take away his life. But this prank was not played until some years after, and
therefore falls beyond the time of my design; which was, and is, to draw down
the successes of the Presbyterians in their several Countries, till the year
1585, and then to take them all together, as they related unto England, or were
co-incident with the Actions and Affairs thereof. But we must make our way by
France, as lying nearest to the practices of the Mother-City; though Scotland
at a greater distance first took fire upon it, and England was as soon
attempted as the French themselves.

The end of the first Book.
AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History Of the PRESBYTERIANS. LIB. II. Containing
The manifold Seditions, Conspiracies, and Insurrections in the Realm of France,
their Libelling against the State, and the Wars there raised by their
procurement, from the year 1559 to 1585.
1. THe Realm of France, having long suffered under the corruptions of the
Church of Rome, was one of the first Western Kingdoms which openly declared
against those abuses. Beringarius in the Neighboring Italy, had formerly
opposed the Gross and Carnal Doctrines of the Papists in the point of the
Sacrament: Whose opinions passing into France from one hand to another, were at
last publicly maintained by Peter Waldo, one of the Citizens of Lions, who
added thereunto many bitter invectives against the Supremacy of the Pope, the
Adoration of Images, the Invocation of Saints, and the Doctrine of Purgatory.
His Followers, from the place of his Habitation, were at first called in
contempt, The poor men of Lions; as afterward, from the name of their Leader,
they were by the Latins called Waldenses, by the French Les Vandoise. But
Lions proving no safe place for them, they retired into the more desert parts
of Languedock, and spreading on the banks of the River Alby, obtained the name
of Albigenses in the Latin Writers, and of Les Albigeoise in the French:
supported by Raymond the Fourth, Earl of Toulouse, they became so insolent,
that they murdered Trincanel their Viscount in the City Beziers, and dashed out
the teeth of their Bishop, having taken Sanctuary in St. Magdalens Church, one
of the Churches of that City. For which high outrages, and many others of like
nature which ensued upon them, they were warred upon by Lewis the Ninth of
France, Surnamed the Saint, and many Noble adventurers, who sacrificed many of
them in the self-same Church wherein they had spilt the blood of others. After
a long and bloody War, which ended in the year 1250, they were almost rooted
out of the Country also; the residue or remainders of them having betook
themselves into the mountainous parts of Daulphine, Provence, Piemont, and
Savoy, for their greater safety. By means whereof becoming near Neighbors to
the Switzers, and possibly managing some traffic with the Town of Geneva,
their Doctrines could neither be unknown to Zuinglius amongst the one, nor to
many Inhabitants of the other of best note and quality.

2. The rest of France had all this while continued in the Popes obedience, and
held an outward uniformity in all points with the Church of Rome; from which it
was not much diverted by the Writings of Zuinglius, or the more moderate
proceedings of the Lutheran Doctors, who after the year 1517, had filled many
Provinces of Germany with their opinions. But in the year 1533, the Lutherans
found an opportunity to attempt upon it. For Francis the First favoring
Learned men and Learning (as commonly they do, whose Actions are worthy a
learned Pen) resolved to erect a University at Paris, making great offers to
the most Learned Scholars of Italy and Germany for their entertainment. Luther
takes hold of that advantange, and sends Bucer, and some others of his ablest
Followers; who by disputing in such a confluence of Learned men, might give a
strong essay to bring in his Doctrines. Nor wanted there some which were taken
with the Novelty of them, especially because such as were questioned for
Religion had recourse into Aquitaine, to Margaret of Valois, the Kings Sister,
married to Henry of Albert King of Navar, who perhaps out of hatred to the
Bishop of Rome, by whom her Husbands Father was deprived of that Kingdom, might
be the more favorable to the Lutherans; or rather moved (as she confessed
before her death) with commiseration to those condemned persons that fled to
her protection, she became earnest with her brother in defense of their
persons; so that for ten years together she was the chief means of maintaining
the Doctrines of Luther in the Realm of France. Nor was the King so bent in
their Extermination, as otherwise he would have been, in regard of those many
Switz and Germans that served him in his Wars against Charles the Fifth; till
at last, being grievously offended with the contumacie of the men, and their
continual opposition to the Church of Rome, he published many Edicts and
Proclamations against them, not only threatening, but executing his penal Laws,
until he had at last almost extinguished the name of Luther in his Kingdom.

3. But Calvin's stratagem succeeded somewhat better, 1546.
who immediately upon the Death of Francis the First (whilst King Henry was
engaged in the Wars with Charles) attempted France by sending his Pamphlets
from Geneva, writ for the most part in the French Tongue, for the better
captivating and informing of the common people. And as he found many possessed
with Luthers opinions, so he himself inflamed them with a Zeal to his own; the
Vulgar being very proud to be made Judges in Religion, and pass their Votes
upon the abstrusest Controversies of the Christian Faith. So that in short time
Zuinglius was no more remembered, nor the Doctrine of Luther so much followed as
it had been formerly. The name of Calvin carrying it amongst the French. The
sudden propagating of whose Opinions, both by preaching and writing, gave great
offense unto the Papists; but chiefly to Charles Cardinal of Lorrain, and his
Brother Francis Duke of Guise, then being in great power and favor with King
Henry the Second. By whose continual solicitation, the King endeavored by
many terrible and severe executions to suppress them utterly; and did reduce
his Followers at the last to such a condition, that they durst neither meet in
public, or by open day, but secretly in Woods or Private-houses; and for the
most part in the night, to avoid discovery. And at this time it was, and on
this occasion, that the name of Hugonots was first given them; so called from
St. Hugoes Gate in the City of Towrs, out of which they were observed to pass
to their secret Meetings; or from a night-spirit, or Hobgobling, which they
called St. Hugo; to which they were resembled, for their constant night-walks.
But neither the disgrace which that name imported, nor the severity of the
Kings Edicts so prevailed upon them, but that they multiplied more and more in
most parts of the Realm; especially in the Provinces which either were nearest
to Geneva, or lay more open toward the Sea, to the trade of the English. And
though the fear of the danger, and the Kings displeasure, deterred such as
lived within the air of the Court from adhering openly unto them; yet had they
many secret favorers in the Royal Palace, and not a few of the Nobility, which
gave them as much countenance as the times could suffer. The certainty whereof
appeared immediately on the death of King Henry, who left this life at Paris on
the tenth of July, Anno 1559, 1559.
leaving the Crown to Francis his Eldest Son, then being but fifteen years of
age, neither in strength of body, nor in vigor of Spirit, enabled for the
managing of so great an Empire.

4. This young King in his Fathers lifetime had married Mary Queen of Scots,
Daughter and Heir of James the Fifth, by Mary of Lorrain, a Daughter of the
House of Guise, and Sister to the two great Favorites before remembered. This
gave a great improvement to the power and favor which the two brothers had
before, made greater by uniting themselves to Katherine de Medices, the young
Kings Mother; a Woman of a pestilent Wit, and one that studied nothing more
then to maintain her own greatness against all opposers. By this confederacy,
the Princes of the House of Bourbon, Heirs in Reversion to the Crown, if the
King and his three brothers should depart without Islue-Male (as in fine they
did) were quite excluded from all office and employment in the Court or State.
The principal of which, was Anthony Duke of Vendosme, and his brother Lewis
Prince of Conde; men not so near in birth, as of different humors; the Duke
being of an open nature, flexible in himself, and easily wrought upon by
others: but on the other side, the Prince was observed to be of a more
enterprising disposition, violent (but of a violence mixed with cunning in the
carrying on of his designs) and one that would not patiently dissemble the
smallest injuries. These two had drawn unto their side the two Chastilions;
that is to say, Gasper de Collignie Admiral of the Realm of France, and
Monsieur D' Andilot his brother Commander of the Infantry of that Kingdom; to
which Offices they had been advanced by the Duke of Montmorency, into whose
Family they had married, during the time of his Authority with the King
deceased; for whose removal from the Court, by the confederacy of the Queen
Mother with the House of Guise, they were as much disquieted, and as apt for
action, as the Princes of the House of Bourbon for the former Reasons. Many
designs were offered to consideration in their private Meetings; but none was
more likely to effect their business, then to make themselves the Heads of the
Hugonot Faction, which the two Chastilions had long favored as far as they
durst. By whose assistance they might draw all affairs to their own disposing,
get the Kings person into their power, shut the Queen Mother into a Cloister,
and force the Guises into Lorrain out of which they came.

5. This counsel was the rather followed, because it seemed most agreeable to
the inclinations of the Queen of Navar Daughter of Henry of Albret and the Lady
Margaret beforementioned, and Wife of Anthony Duke of Vendosm, who in her
Right acquired the title to that Kingdom. Which Princess being naturally averse
from the Popes of Rome, and no less powerfully transported by some flattering
hopes for the recovery of her Kingdoms, conceived no expedient so effectual to
revenge her self upon the one, and Inthrone her self in the other, as the
prosecuting this design to the very utmost. Upon which ground she inculcated
nothing more into the ears of her Husband, then that he must not suffer such an
opportunity to slip out of his hands, for the recovery of the Crown which
belonged unto her; that he might make himself the Head of a mighty Faction,
containing almost half the strength of France; that by so doing, he might
expect assistance from the German Princes of the same Religion, from Queen
Elizabeth of England, and many discontented Lords in the Belgic Provinces,
besides such of the Catholic party, even in France it self, as were displeased
at the Omni-Regency of the House of Guise; that by a strong Conjunction of all
these interesses, he might not only get his ends upon the Guises, but carry
his Army cross the Mountains, make himself Master of Navar, with all the Rights
and Royalties appertaining to it. But all this could not so prevail on the Duke
her Husband, (whom we will henceforth call the King of Navar) as either openly
or underhand to promote the enterprise, which he conceived more like to hinder
his affairs, then to advance his hopes. For the Queen Mother having some
intelligence of these secret practices, sends for him to the Court, commends
unto his care her Daughter the Princess Isabella, affianced to Philip the
Second King of Spain, and puts him chief into Commission for delivering her
upon the Borders to such Spanish Ministers as were appointed to receive her.
All which she did (as she assured him) for no other ends, but out of the great
esteem which she had of his person, to put him into a fair way for ingratiating
himself with the Catholic King, and to give him such a hopeful opportunity for
soliciting his own affairs with the Grandees of Spain, as might much tend to
his advantage upon this employment. Which device had so wrought upon him, and
he had been so finely fitted by the Ministers of the Catholic King, that he
thought himself in a better way to regain his Kingdom, then all the Hugonots in
France, together with their Friends in Germany and England, could chalk out
unto him.

6. But notwithstanding this great coldness in the King of Navar, the business
was so hotly followed by the Prince of Conde, the Admiral Colligny, and his
brother D' Andelot, that the Hugonots were drawn to unite together, under the
Princes of that House. To which they were spurred on the faster, by the
practices of Godfrey de la Bar, commonly called Renaudie, from the name of his
Signiory; a man of a most mischievous Wit, and a dangerous Eloquence; who being
forced to abandon his own Country for some misdemeanors, betook himself unto
Geneva, where he grew great with Calvin, Beza, and the rest of the Consistory;
and coming back again in the change of times, was thought the fittest
instrument to promote this service, and draw the party to a body. Which being
industriously pursued, was in fine effected; many great men, who had before
concealed themselves in their affections, declaring openly in favor of the
Reformation, when they perceived it countenanced by such Potent Princes. To
each of these, according as they found them qualified for parts and power, they
assigned their Provinces and Precincts, within the limits whereof they were
directed to raise Men, Arms, Money, and all other necessaries, for carrying on
of the design; but all things to be done in so close a manner, that no
discovery should be made till the deed was done. By this it was agreed upon,
that a certain number of them should repair to the King at Bloise, and tender a
Petition to him in all humble manner for the Free exercise of the Religion
which they then professed, and for professing which they had been persecuted in
the days of his Father. But these Petitioners were to be backed with multitudes
of armed men, gathered together from all parts on the day appointed; who on the
Kings denial of so just a suit, should violently break into the Court* seize on
the person of the King, surprise the Queen, and put the Guises to the Sword:
And that being done, Liberty was to be Proclaimed, Free exercise of Religion
granted by public Edict, the managery of affairs committed to the Prince of
Conde, and all the rest of the Confederates gratified with rewards and honors.
Impossible it was, that in a business which required so many hands, none should
be found to give intelligence to the adverse party: which coming to the
knowledge of the Queen Mother, and the Duke of Guise, they removed the Court
from Bloise a weak open Town, to the strong Castle of Amboise, pretending
nothing but the giving of the King some recreation in the Woods adjoining. But
being once settled in the Castle, the King is made acquainted with the threatened
danger, the Duke of Guise appointed Lieutenant General of the Realm of France.
And by his care the matter was so wisely handled, that without making any noise
to affright the Confederates, the Petitioners were admitted into the Town;
whilst in the mean time, several Troops of Horse were sent out by him to fall
on such of their accomplices as were well armed, and ready to have done the
mischief, if not thus prevented.

1560.
7. The issue of the business was, that Renaudie the chief Actor in it was
killed in the fight, many of the rest slain, and some taken Prisoners, the
whole body of them being routed and compelled to flee: yet such was the
clemency of the King, and the di^creet temper of the Guises, in the course of
this business, that a general pardon was proclaimed on the 18 of March, (being
the third day after the Execution) to all that being moved only with the Zeal
to Religion, had entered themselves into the Conspiracy, if within twenty four
hours they laid down their Arms, and retired to their own Houses. But this did
little edify with those hot spirits which had the conduct of the Cause, and
had befooled themselves and others with the flattering hopes of gaining the
Free exercise of their Religion. It cannot be denied but that they were
resolved so to act their parts, that Religion might not seem to have any hand
in it, or at the least might not suffer by it, if the plot miscarried. To which
end they procured the chief Lawyers of France and Germany, and many of the
reformed Divines of the greatest eminence, to publish some Writings to this
purpose; that is to say, that without violating the Majesty of the King, and
the dignity of the lawful Magistrate, they might oppose with Arms the violent
Domination of the House of Guise, who were given out for Enemies to the true
Religion, hinderers of the course of Justice, and in effect no better then the
Kings Jaylors, as the case then stood. But this Mask was quickly taken off, and
the design appeared bare faced without any vizard. For presently upon the
routing of the Forces in the Woods of Amboise, they caused great tumults to be
raised in Poictou, Languedock and Provence. To which the Preachers of Geneva
were forthwith called, and they came as willingly; their Followers being much
increased both in courage and numbers, as well by their vehemence in the
Pulpit, as their private practices. In Daulpheny, and some parts of Provence,
I^ quib. s. d^m P. (...) D^lphina^u^ and (...)bibus nostri homines ^^mp^a
(...). etc.
they proceeded further, seized upon diverse of the Churches for the Exercise of
their Religion, as if all matters had succeeded answerable to their
expectation. But on the first coming of some Forces from the Duke of Guise,
they shrunk in again, and left the Country in the same condition wherein first
they found it. Of this particular, Calvin gives notice unto Bullenger, by his
Letters of the 27 of May, Anno 1560, complaining much of the extreme rashness,
and foolhardiness of some of that party Ab initio (...) gener^ sic ^uptae eran^
(...) mentes. u^ f^us^ a impetum ill^m ^^d^^e conatum si^^.
, whom no sober counsels could restrain from those engagements which might have
proved so dangerous and destructive to the cause of Religion. Which words of
his relate not only to the Action of Daulphine and Provence, but to some of
the attempts preceding, whatsoever they were, by him discouraged and dissuaded,
if we may believe him.

8. But though we may believe him, as I think we may, the Pope and Court of
France were otherwise persuaded of it. Reinadoes going from Geneva to unite the
party, was as unlikely to be done without his allowance, as without his
privity. But certainly the Ministers of Geneva durst not leave their Flocks to
Preach Sedition to the French of Provence and Languedock, if he had neither
connived at it, or advised them to it; Quam long quae^o est a ^ jab^nte
permitteme. Salv. De Guber^^n D^i, li^. 8.
and such connivings differ but little from commands, as we find in Salvian.
Once it is sure that the Pope suggested to the French King by the Bishop of
Viterbo, whom he sent in the nature of a Legate, that all the mischief which
troubled France, and the Poison which infected that Kingdom and the
Neighboring Countries, (for so I find in my Autho^) came from no other
Fountain then the Lake of Geneva; that by digging at the very Root, he might
divert a great part of that nourishment by which those mischiefs were fomented;
and that by prosecuting such a Foreign War, he might evacuate those bad
humors which distempered his Kingdom: and therefore if the King be pleased to
engage herein, his Holiness would not only send him some convenient Aids, but
move the Scotch King, and the Duke of Savoy, to assist him also. But neither
the Queen Mother, nor the Guise (for the King acted little in his own affairs)
could approve the motion, partly for fear of giving offense unto the Switzers,
with whom Geneva had confederated thirty years before; and partly because none
being like to engage in that War, but the Catholics only, the Kingdom would
thereby lie open to the adverse party. But nothing more diverted the three
Princes from concurring in it, then the impossibility of complying with their
several interesses in the disposing of the Town when it should be taken. The
Duke of Savoy would not enter into the War before he was assured by the other
Princes that he should reap the profit of it, that belonging anciently to his
jurisdiction. But it agreed neither with the interest of France nor Spain, to
make the Duke greater then he was, by so fair an addition as would be made to
his Estate, were it yielded to him. The Spaniard knew that the French King
would never bring him into France, or put into his hands such a fortified pass,
by which he might enter when he pleased. As on the other side, the Spaniards
would not suffer it to fall into the power of the French, by reason of its near
Neighborhood unto the County of Burgundy, which both then was, and ever since
has been appendant on the Crown of Spain. By reason of which mutual distrusts
and jealousies, the Pope received no other answer to his motion in the Court of
France, but that it was impossible to apply themselves to matters abroad, when
they were exercised at home with so many concernments.

9. This answer pinched upon the Pope, who found as much confusion in the State
of Avignion, belonging for some hundreds of years to the Sea of Rome, as the
French could reasonably complain in the Bowels of France. For lying as it did
within the limits of Provence, and being visited with such of the French
Preachers as had been studied at Geneva, the people generally became inclined
unto Calvin's Doctrines, and made profession of the same both in private and
public; nay, they resolved upon the lawfulness of taking up of Arms against
the Pope, though their natural Lord; partly upon pretense that the Country was
unjustly taken from the Earls of Toulouse by the Predecessors of the Pope;
partly because the present Pope could prove no true Lineal Succession from the
first Usurper; but chiefly, in regard that persons Ecclesiastical were disabled
by Christ's Commandments from exercising any Temporal Jurisdiction over other
men. Being thus resolved to rebel, they put themselves, by the persuasion of
Alexander Guilatine, a professed Civilian, into the protection of Charles Count
de Mont-brun, who had then taken Arms against the King, in the Country of
Daulphine. Mont-brun accepts of the employment, enters the Territory of
Avignion with three thousand Foot, reduces the whole Country under his
command; the Popes Vice-Legate in the City being hardly able for the present to
make good the Castle. But so it happened, that the Cardinal of Tournon, whose
Niece the Count had married, being near the place, prevailed with him after
some discourse to withdraw his Forces, and to retire unto Geneva; assuring him
not only of his Majesty's pardon, and the restitution of his Goods which had
been confiscated, but that he should have liberty of Conscience also, which he
prized far more then both the other. By which Action the people were
necessitated to return to their old obedience; but with so many fears and
jealousies on either side, that many years were spent before the Pope could be
assured of the love of his Subjects, or they rely upon the Clemency and good
will of their Prince. Such issue had the first attempts of the Calvinians in
the Realm of France.

10. In the mean time it was determined by the Cabinet Council in the Court, to
smother the indignity of these insurrections, that the hot spirits of the
French might have time to cool, and afterward to call them to a sober
reckoning, when they least looked for it. In order whereunto, an Edict is
published in the Kings name, and sent to all the Parliamentary Courts of France
(being at that time eight in all) concerning the holding of an Assembly at
Fountain-bleau on the 21 of August then next following, for composing the
distractions of the Kingdom. And in that Edict he declares, that without any
evident occasion, a great number of persons had risen and taken Arms against
him; that he could not but impute the cause thereof to the Hugonots only, who
having laid aside all belief to God, and all affection to their Country,
endeavored to disturb the peace of the Kingdom; that he was willing,
notwithstanding, to pardon all such, as having made acknowledgement of their
errors, should return to their Houses, and live conformable to the Rites of
the Catholic Church, and in obedience to the Laws; that therefore none of his
Courts of Parliament should proceed in matters of Religion, upon any manner of
information for offenses past, but to provide by all severity for the future
against their committing of the like; and finally, that for reforming all
abuses in Government, he resolved upon the calling of an Assembly, in which the
Princes and most Eminent Persons of the Kingdom should consult together; the
sa^d Assembly to be held at his Majesty's Palace of Fountain-bleau on the 21 of
August then next following, and free leave to be therein granted to all manner
of persons, not only to propound their grievances, but to advise on some
expedient for redress thereof. According unto which appointment the Assembly
holds, but neither the King of Navar nor the Prince of Conde could be persuaded
to be present; being both bent, as it appeared not long after, on some further
projects. But it was ordered, that the Admiral Collignie, and his brother D'
Andelot should attend the service, to the end that nothing should be there
concluded without their privity, or to the prejudice of their Cause. And that
they might the better strike a terror into the Heart of the King; whom they
conceived to have been frighted to the calling of the present Assembly, the
Admiral tenders a Petition in behalf of those of the reformed Religion in the
Dukedom of Normandy, which they were ready to subscribe with one hundred and
fifty thousand hands, if it were required. To which the Cardinal of Lorrain as
bravely answered, that if 150000 seditious could be found in France to
subscribe that paper, he doubted not but that there were a million of Loyal
Subjects, who would be ready to encounter them, and oppose their insolences.

11. In this Assembly it was ordered by the common consent, that for rectifying
of abuses amongst the Clergy, a meeting should be held of Divines and Prelates,
in which those discords might be remedied, without innovating or disputing in
matters of Faith; and that for settling the affairs of the Kingdom, an Assembly
of the three Estates should be held at Orleance, in the beginning of October;
to which all persons interested were required to come. All which the Hugonots
imputed to the consternation which they had brought upon the Court by their
former risings, and the great fear which was conceived of some new
insurrections, if all things were not regulated and reformed according unto
their desires. Which misconceit so wrought upon the principal Leaders, that
they resolved to make use of the present fears, by seizing on such Towns and
places of consequence, as might enable them to defend both themselves and their
parties, against all opponents. And to that end it was concluded, that the King
of Navar should seize upon all places in his way betwixt Bearn and Orleance;
that the City of Paris should be seized on by the help of the Marshal of
Montmorency the Dukes Eldest Son, who was Governor of it; that they should
assure themselves of Picardy by the Lords of Tenepont and Bouchavanne, and of
Britain by the Duke of Estampes, who was powerful in it; that being thus
fortified, well armed, and better accompanied by the Hugonots, whom they might
presume of, they should force the Assembly of the Estates to depose the Queen,
remove the Guises from the Government, declare the King to be in his minority
till he came to twenty two years of age, appoint the King of Navar, the
Constable, and the Prince of Conde, for his Tutors and Governors: which
practice as it was confessed by Jacques de la Sague, one of the Servants of the
King of Navar, who had been intercepted in his journey to him; so the
confession was confirmed by some Letters from the Visdame of Chartres which he
had about him. But this discovery being kept secret, the Hugonots having taken
courage from the first conspiracy at Amboise, and the open profession of the
Admiral, began to raise some new commotions in all parts of the Kingdom; and
laying aside all obedience and respect of duty, not only made open resistance
against the Magistrates, but had directly taken arms in many places, and
practiced to get into their hands some principal Towns, to which they might
retire in all times of danger: Amongst which none was more aimed at then the
City of Lions, a City of great Wealth and Trading, and where great numbers of
the people were inclined to Calvin's Doctrine, by reason of their near
Neighborhood to Geneva, and the Protestant Cantons. Upon this Town the Prince
of Conde had a plot, and was like to have carried it, though in the end it fell
out contrary to his expectation; which forced him to withdraw himself to Bearn,
there to provide for the security of himself and his Brother.

12. But the King of Navar, not being so deeply interested in these late
designs, in which his name had been made use of half against his will, could
not so much distrust himself and his personal safety, as not to put himself
into a readiness for his journey to Orleance. To which he could by no means
persuade the Prince, and was by him much labored not to go in person, till
they were certified that the King was sending Forces to fetch them thence;
which could not be without the wasting of the Country, and the betraying of
themselves unto those suspicions which otherwise they might hope to clear. No
sooner were they come to Orleance, but the Prince was arrested of high Treason,
committed close Prisoner with a Guard upon him, the cognizance of his Cause
appointed unto certain Delegates, his Process formed, and Sentence of death
pronounced against him; which questionless had been executed both on him and
the King of Navar, who was then also under a Guard, if the death of the young
King had not intervened on the fifth of December, which put the Court into new
Counsels, and preserved their lives. For the Queen wisely took into
consideration, that if these two Princes were destroyed, there could be no fit
counterpoise for the House of Guise; which possibly might thereby be temped to
revive the old pretensions of the House of Lorrain, as the direct Heirs of
Charles the Great. For which they could not have a better opportunity, then
they had at the present; the Eldest of her three Sons not exceeding ten years
of age, none of them of a vigorous constitution, and therefore the more likely
to want Friends in their greatest need. Upon these apprehensions she sends
secretly for the King of Navar, and came at last to this agreement, viz. that
during the Minority of her son King Charles the Ninth, the Queen Mother should
be declared Regent, and the King of Navar Lord Lieutenant of France; all
supplications from the Provinces to be made to the Lord Lieutenant; but all
Ambassadors and Letters of Negotiation from Foreign Princes to be presented to
the Queen; that the Prince of Conde, the Visdame of Chartres, with all other
Prisoners of their party to be set at liberty, and the sentences of their
condemnations to be so declared null and void; that the Queen-Regent should
make use of her power and interest with the Catholic King, for restoring to
the King of Navar the entire possession of that Kingdom, or at the least the
Kingdom of Sardinia as a recompense for it. And at last it was also yielded,
though long first, and published by the Edict of the 28 of January, That the
Magistrates should be ordered to release all Prisoners committed for matters of
Religion, and to stop any manner of Inquisition appointed for that purpose
against any person whatsoever; that they should not suffer any disputation in
matters of Faith, nor permit particular persons to revile one another with the
names of Heretic and Papist; but that all should live together in peace,
abstaining from unlawful Assemblies, or to raise scandals or Sedition.

1561.
13. By this Edict the Doctrines of Calvin were first countenanced in the Realm
of France, under the pretense of hindering the effusion of more Christian blood:
which carried an appearance of much Christianity, though in plain truth it was
to be ascribed to the Queens ambition, who could devise no other way to
preserve her greatness, and counterbalance the Authority of the House of Guise.
But the Hugonots not being content with a bare connivance, resolved to drive it
on to a Toleration; and to drive it on in such a manner, and by such means
only by which they had extorted (as they thought) these first concessions. For
thinking the Queen-Regent not to be in a condition to deny them any thing, much
less to call them into question for their future Actings, they presently fell
upon the open exercise of their own Religion, and every where exceedingly
increased both in power and numbers. In confidence whereof, by public
Assemblies, insolent Speeches, and other acts the like unpleasing, they
incurred the hatred and disdain of the Catholic party; which put all places
into tumult, and filled all the Provinces of the Kingdom with seditious
rumors: so that contrary to the intention of those that governed, and contrary
to the common opinion, the remedy applied to maintain the State, and preserve
peace and concord in the Kings minority, fell out to be dangerous and
destructive, and upon the matter occasioned all those dissentions which they
hoped by so much care to have prevented. For as the Cardinal informed the
Council, the Hugonots were grown by this connivance to so great a height, that
the Priests were not suffered to celebrate their daily Sacrifices, or to make
use of their own Pulpits; that the Magistrates were no longer obeyed in their
jurisdictions; and that all places raged with discords, burnings and
slaughters, through the peevishness and presumption of those, who assumed to
themselves a liberty of teaching and believing whatsoever they listed. Upon
which points he so enlarged himself with his wonted eloquence, that neither the
King of Navar, nor any other of that party could make any Reply. And the
Queen Mother also being silent in it, it was unanimously voted by the Lords of
the Council, that all the Officers of the Crown should assemble at the
Parliament of Paris on the thirteenth of July, there to debate in the Kings
presence of all these particulars, and to resolve upon such remedies as were
necessary for the future. At which time it was by general consent expressly
ordered, upon complaint made of the insurrection of the Hugonots in so many
places, that all the Ministers should forthwith be expelled the Kingdom; that
no manner of person should from thenceforth use any other Rites or Ceremonies
in Religion, that were not held and taught by the Church of Rome; and that all
Assemblies of men armed or unarmed should be interdicted, except it were of
Catholics in Catholic Churches, for Divine performances according to the
usual Custom.

14. The Admiral and the Prince of Conde finding themselves unable to cross
this Edict, resolved upon another course to advance their party, and to that
end encouraged the Calvinian Ministers to petition for a Disputation in the
Kings presence, to be held between them and the Adversaries of their Religion.
Which Disputation being propounded, was opposed by the Cardinal of Tournon,
upon a just consideration of those inconveniences which might follow on it;
the rather, in regard of the General Council then convened at Trent, where they
might safely both propose and dispute their opinions. But on the other side,
the Cardinal of Lorrain, being willing to embrace the occasion for making a
general Muster of his own Abilities, his subtilty in Divinity, and his art of
speaking, prevailed so far upon the rest, that the suit was granted, and a
Conference thereupon appointed to be held at Poyssie, on the tenth day of
August, 1561. At which time there assembled for the Catholic party, the
Cardinals of Tournon, Lorrain, Bourbon, Armagnac and Guise, with many Bishops
and Prelates of greatest eminency, some Doctors of the Sorbon, and many great
Divines from the Universities. The Disputants authorized for the other side
were of like esteem, amongst those of their own party and persuasions; as
namely, Theodore Beza, Peter Mar^yr, Francis de St. Paul, John Raimond, and
John Vizelle, with many other Ministers from Geneva, Germany, and others of the
Neighboring Countries. But the result of all was this, as commonly it
happens on the like occasions, that both parties challenged to themselves the
Victory in it, and both indeed were victors in some respects. For the King of
Navar appeared much unsatisfied by noting the differences of the Ministers
amongst themselves, some of them adhering to the Augustane, and others to the
Helvetian Confession, in some points of Doctrine; which made him afterward
more cordial to the interest of the Church of Rome, notwithstanding all the
arguments and insinuations used by his Wife, a most zealous Hugonot, to
withdaaw him from it. But the Hugonots gave out on the other side, that they
had made good their Doctrines, convinced the Catholic Doctors, confounded the
Cardinal of Lorrain, and gotten License from the King to Preach. Which gave
such courage to the rest of that Faction, that they began of their own
Authority to assemble themselves in such places as they thought most
convenient, and their Ministers to preach in public, and their Preachings
followed and frequented by such infinite multitudes, as well of the Nobility as
the common People, that it was thought impossible to suppress, and dangerous to
disturb their Meetings. For so it was, that if either the Magistrates molested
them in their Congregations, or the Catholics attemped to drive them out of
their Temples, without respect to any Authority they put themselves into Arms;
and in the middle of a full Peace, was made a show of a most terrible and
destructive War.

15. This being observed by those which sat at the Helm, and finding that
these tempests were occasioned by the Edict of July, it was resolved to stere
their course by another wind. For the Queen being settled in this Maxim of
State, That she was not to suffer one Faction to destroy the other, for fear
she should remain a prey to the Victor, not only gave order for conventing all
the Parliaments to a Common Council, but earnestly solicited for a
Pacification; which gave beginning to the famous Edict of January, whereby it
was granted, that the Hugonots should have the Free exercise of their Religion;
that they might assemble to hearing of Sermons in any open place without their
Cities, but on condition that they went unarmed, and that the Officers of the
place were there also present. Which Edict so offended the chief Heads of the
Catholic party, that a strict combination and confederacy was concluded on
between the King of Navar, the Constable, and the Duke of Guise, for
maintenance of the Religion of the Church of Rome. And this reduced the
Queen-Regent to the like necessity of making a strict union with the Admiral
and the Prince of Conde, whereby she was assured of the power of the Hugonots,
and they became as confident of her Protection. In which condition they were
able to form their Churches, to cast them into Provinces, Classes, and other
subdivisions of a less capacity; to settle in them their Presbyteries and
Synodical Meetings, grounded according to their Rules of Calvin's Platform, in
Doctrine, Discipline and Worship. The Forms whereof being discribed at large in
the former Book, may there be found without the trouble of a repetition. In so
much, that it was certified to the Fathers in the Council of Trent, that the
French Hugonots were at that time distributed into two thousand one hundred and
fifty Churches, each of them furnished with their proper and peculiar
Preachers, according to a just computation which was taken of them: which
computation was then made, to satisfy the Queen-Regent in the strength of that
party, for which she could not otherwise declare her self, unless she were
first made acquainted with their power and numbers. But being satisfied in
those points, she began to show her self much inclined to Calvinism, gave ear
unto the Discourses of the Ministers in her private Chamber, conferred
familiarly with the Prince, the Admiral, and many others in matters which
concerned their Churches; and finally, so disguised her self, that the Pope was
not able to discover at what port she aimed. For sometimes she would write unto
him for such a Council as by the Calvinians was desired, at other times for a
national one to be held in France; sometimes desiring that the Communion might
be administered under both kinds, otherwhile requiring a Dispensation for
Priests to Marry; now soliciting that Divine Service might be said in the
vulgar tongue, then proposing such other like things as were wished and
preached for by the Hugonots. By which dissimulations she amused the World, but
gave withal so many notable advantages to the Reformation, that next to God she
was the principal promoter and advancer of it; though this prosperity proved
the cause of those many miseries which afterward ensued upon it.

16. For by this means the Preachers having free access into the Court, 1562.
became exceedingly respected in the City of Paris, where in short time their
followers did increase to so great a multitude, as put the Prince of Conde into
such a confidence, that he assumed unto himself the managery of all great
affairs: Which course so visibly tended to the diminution of the King of Navar,
that he resolved by strong hand to remove him from Paris. And to that end,
directed both his Messages and his Letters to the Duke of Guise, to come in to
help him. The Duke was then at Iainville in the Province of Champaigne, and
happened in his way upon a Village called Vassey, where the Hugonots were
assembled in great numbers to hear a Sermon. A scuffle unhappily is begun
between some of the Dukes Footmen, and not a few of the more unadvised and
adventurous Hugonots: which the Duke coming to part, was hit with a blow of a
stone upon one of his Cheeks, which forced him with the loss of some blood to
retire again. Provoked with which indignity, his Followers, being two Companies
of Lances, charge in upon them with their Fire-looks, kill sixty of them in the
place, and force the rest for preservation of their lives into several houses.
This accident is by the Hugonots given out to be a matter of design; the
execution done upon those sixty persons, must be called a Massacre; and in
revenge thereof, the Kingdom shall be filled with Blood and Rapine, Altars and
Images defaced, Monasteries ruined and pulled down, and Churches bruitishly
polluted. The Queen had so long juggled between both parties, that now it was
not safe for her to declare for either. Upon which ground she removed the Court
to Fountain-bleau, and left them to play their own Games, as the Dice should
run: The presence of the King was looked upon as a matter of great importance,
and either party labored to get him into their power. The City of Orleance
more especially was aimed at by the Prince of Conde, as lying in the heart of
the Kingdom, rich, large and populous, sufficiently inclined to novelty and
innovations; and therefore thought the fittest Stage for his future Actings.
Being thus resolved, he first sends D' Andelot with some Forces to possess the
Town, and posts himself toward Fountain-Bleau with three thousand Horse. But
the Catholic Confederates had been there before him, and brought the King off
safely to his City of Paris: which being signified to the Prince as he was on
his way, he diverts toward Orleance, and came thither in a luckie hour to
relieve his Friends: which having seized upon one of the Gates, and thereby got
possession of that part of the City, was in apparent danger to be utterly
broken by the Catholic party, if the Prince had not come so opportunely to
renew the fight: but by his coming they prevailed, made themselves Masters of
the City, and handselled their new Government with the spoil of all the
Churches and Religious Houses, which either they defaced, or laid waste and
desolate. Amongst which, none was used more coursely then the Church of St.
Cross, being the Cathedral of that City; not so much out of a dislike to all
Cathedrals (though that had been sufficient to expose it unto Spoil and Rapine)
as out of hatred to the name. Upon which furious piece of Zeal, they afterward
destroyed all the little Crosses which they found in the way between
Mont-Martyr and St. Denis, first raised in memory of Denis the first Bishop of
Paris, and one that passes in account for the chief Apostle of the Gallick
Nations.

17. But to proceed: to put some fair color upon this foul action, a Manifest
is writ and published; in which the Prince and his adherents signify to all
whom it might concern, that they had taken arms for no other reason, but to
restore the King and Queen to their personal liberty, kept Prisoners by the
power and practice of the Catholic Lords; that obedience might be rendered in
all places to his Majesty's Edicts, which by the violence of some men had been
infringed; and therefore that they were willing to lay down Arms, if the
Constable, the Duke of Guise, and the Marshal of St. Andrews should retire from
Paris, leaving the King and Queen to their own disposing; and that liberty of
Religion might be equally tolerated and maintained unto all alike. These false
Colors were wiped off by a like Remonstrance made by the Parliament of Paris:
In which it was declared amongst other things, that the Hugonots had first
broke those Edicts by going armed to their Assemblies, and without an Officer;
That they had no pretense to excuse themselves from the crime of Rebellion,
considering they had openly seized on many Towns, raised Soldiers, assumed the
Munition of the Kingdom, cast many pieces of Ordnance and Artillery, assumed
unto themselves the Coining of Money; and in a word, that they have wasted a
great part of the public Revenues, robbed all the rich Churches within their
power, and destroyed the rest, to the dishonor of God, the scandal of
Religion, and the impoverishing of the Realm. The like answer was made also by
the Constable and the Duke of Guise in their own behalf, declaring in the same,
that they were willing to retire, and put themselves into voluntary exile, upon
condition that the Arms taken up against the King might be quite laid down, the
places kept against him delivered up, the Churches which were ruined restored
again, the Catholic Religion honorably preserved, and an entire obedience
rendered to the lawful King, under the Government of the King of Navar, and the
Regencie of the Queen his Mother. Nor were the King and Queen wanting to make
up the breach, by publishing that they were free from all restraint, and that
the Catholic Lords had but done their duty in waiting on them into Paris; that
since the Catholic Lords were willing to retire from Court, the Prince of
Conde had no reason to remain at that distance; that therefore he and his
adherents ought to put themselves, together with the places which they had
possessed, into the obedience of the King; which if they did, they should not
only have their several and respective Pardons for all matters past, but be
from thenceforth looked upon as his Loyal Subjects, without the least
diminution of State or honor.

18. These Paper-pellets being thus spent, both sides prepare more furiously to
charge each other. But first the Prince of Conde, by the aid of the Hugonots,
makes himself Master of the great Towns and C^ties of chief importance; such as
were Rouen, the Parliamentary City of the Dukedom of Normandy; the Ports of
Diepe and New Haven; the Cities of Angiers, Towers, Bloise, Vendosme, Bourges
and Poictiers; which last were reckoned for the greatest of all the Kingdom,
except Rouen and Paris; after which followed the rich City of Lions, with that
of Valence in the Province of Daulphiny, together with almost all the strong
places in Gascoigne and Languedock, Provinces in a manner wholly Hugonot,
except Toulouse, Bourdeaux, and perhaps some others. But because neither the
Contributions which came in from the Hugonots, though they were very large, nor
the spoil and pillage of those Cities which they took by force, were of
themselves sufficient to maintain the War; the Prince of Conde caused all the
Gold and Silver in the Churches to be brought unto him, which he coined into
Money. They made provision of all manner of Artillery and Ammunition which they
took from most of the Towns, and laid up in Orleance, turning the Covent of the
Franciscans into a Magazine, and there disposing all their stores with great
art and industry. The Catholics on the other side drew their Forces together,
consisting of 4000 Horse and six thousand Foot, most of them old experienced
Soldiers, and trained up in the War against Charles the Fifth. The Prince had
raised an Army of an equal number, that is to say, three thousand Horse, and
seven thousand Foot; but, for the most part, raw and young Soldiers, and such
as scarcely knew how to stand to their Arms: And yet with these weak Forces he
was grown so high, that nothing would content him but the banishment of the
Constable, the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Duke of Guise; free liberty for the
Hugonots to meet together for the Exercise of their Religion in walled Towns;
Cities and Churches to be publicly appointed for them; the holding of the
Towns which he was presently possessed of as their absolute Lord, till the King
were out of his Minority, which was to last till he came to the age of two and
twenty. He required also that the Popes Legate should be presently commanded to
leave the Kingdom; that the Hugonots should be capable of all Honors and
Offices; and finally, that security should be given by the Emperor, the
Catholic King, the Queen of England, the State of Venice, the Duke of Savoy,
and the Republic of the Switzers, by which they were to stand obliged, that
neither the Constable nor the Duke of Guise should return into France, till the
King was come unto the age before remembered.

19. These violent demands so incensed all those which had the Government of
the State, that the Prince and his Adherents were proclaimed Traitors, and as
such to be prosecuted in a course of Law, if they laid not down their Arms by a
day appointed. Which did as little benefit them, as the proposals of the Prince
had pleased the others. For thereupon the Hugonots united themselves more
strictly into a Confederacy to deliver the King, the Queen, the Kingdom, from
the violence of their opposites; to stand to one another in the defense of the
Edicts, and altogether to submit to the Authority of the Prince of Conde, as
the head of their Union: publishing a tedious Declaration with their wonted
confidence, touching the motives which induced them to this Combination. This
more estranged the Queen from them then she was at first; and now she is
resolved to break them by some means or other, but rather to attempt it by Wit
then by Force of Arms: And to this end she deals so dexterously with the
Constable and the Duke of Guise, that she prevailed with them to leave the
Court, and to prefer the common safety of their Country before their own
particular and personal greatness: which being signified by Letters to the
Prince of Conde, he frankly offered under his hand, that whenever these great
Adversaries of his were retired from the Court (which he conceived a matter of
impossibility to persuade them to) he would not only lay down Arms, but quit
the Kingdom. But understanding that the Constable and the Duke had really
withdrawn themselves to their Country-houses, divested of all power both in
Court and Council, he stood confounded at the unadvisedness and precipitation
of so rash a promise as he had made unto the Queen. For it appeared
dishonorable to him not to keep his word, more dangerous to relinquish his
command in the Army, but most destructive to himself and his party to dissolve
their Forces, and put himself into a voluntary exile, not knowing whither to
retreat. At which dead lift he is refreshed by some of his Calvinian Preachers
with a Cordial comfort. By which learned Casuists it was resolved for good
Divinity, that the Prince having undertaken the maintenance of those who had
embraced the purity of Religion, and made himself by Oath Protector of the Word
of God, no following obligation could be of force to make him violate the
first. In which determining of the Case, they seemed to have been guided by
that Note in the English Bibles, translated and printed at Geneva, where in the
Margin to the second Chapter of St. Matthews Gospel, it is thus advertised:
viz. That promise ought not to be kept, when Gods honor and the preaching of
the Truth is hindered; or else it ought not to be broken. They added, to make
sure work of it (at the least they thought so) that the Queen had broken a
former promise to the Prince, in not bringing the King over to his party, as
she once assured him; and therefore that he was not bound to keep faith with
her, who had broke her own.

20. But this Divinity did not seem sufficient to preserve his honor; another
temperament was found by some wiser heads, by which he might both keep his
promise, and not leave his Army. By whose advice it was resolved, that he
should put himself into the power of the Queen, who was come within six Miles
of him with a small re^inue, only of purpose to rec^ive him; that having done
his duty to her, he should express his readiness to forsake the Kingdom, as
soon as some Accord was settled; and that the Admiral, D' Andelot, and some
other of the principal Leaders, should on the sudden show themselves, forcibly
mount him on his Horse, and bring him back into the Army. Which Lay-device,
whether it had more cunning or less honesty then that of the Cabal of Divines,
it is hard to say: But sure it is, that it was put in execution accordingly;
the Queen thereby deluded, and all the hopes of Peace and Accommodation made
void and frustrate. But then a greater difficulty seized upon them. The King
had reinforced his Army by the accession of ten Cornets of German Horse, and
six thousand Switz. The Princes Army rather diminished then increased, and,
which was worse, he wanted Money to maintain those Forces which he had about
him; so that being neither able to keep the Field for want of men, nor keep his
men together for want of Money, it was resolved that he must keep his men upon
free quarter in such Towns and Cities as followed the Fortune of his side, till
he was seconded by some strength from England, or their Friends in Germany. The
Queen of England had been dealt with; but she resolved not to engage on their
behalf, except the Port of Havre-de-grace, together with the Town of Diepe were
put into her hands, and that she might have leave to put a Garrison of English
into Rouen it self. Which Proposition seemed no other to most knowing men, then
in effect to put into her power the whole Dukedom of Normandy, by giving her
possession of the principal City, and hanging at her Girdle the two Keys of the
Province, by which she might enter when she pleased with all the rest of her
Forces. But then the Ministers being advised with, who in all public
Consultations were of great Authority, especially when they related unto Cases
of Conscience; it was by them declared for sound Doctrine, That no
consideration was to be had of worldly things, when the maintenance of
Celestial Truths, and the propagation of the Gospel was brought in question;
and therefore that all other things were to be contemned, in reference to the
establishment of true Religion, and the freedom of Conscience. According to
which notable determination, the Seneschal of Rouen, and the young Visdame of
Chartres are dispatched to England; with whom it was accorded by the Queens
Commissioners, that the Queen should presently supply the Prince and his
Confederates with Moneys, Arms and Ammunition; that she should aid him with an
Army of eight thousand Foot, to be maintained at her own pay, for defense of
Normandy; and that for her security, in the way of caution, the Town of New
haven, (which the French call Havre-de-grace, as is before said) should be
forthwith put into her hands, under a Governor or Commander of the English
Nation; that she should place a Garrison of two thousand English in the City of
Rouen, and a proportionable number in the Town of Diepe; but the Chief
Governors of each to be natural French. Which Covenants were accordingly
performed on both sides, to the dishonor of the French, and the great damage
and reproach of the Realm of England, as it after proved. For so it was, that
the Prince of Conde being forced to disperse his Soldiers, and to dispose of
them in such manner as before was noted, the King being Master of the Field,
carried the War from Town to Town, and from place to place; and in that course
he speeds so well, as to take in the Cities of Angiers, Tours, Bloise,
Poictiers, and Bourges, with diverse others of less note; some of which were
surrended upon composition, some taken by assault, and exposed to spoil. And
now all passages being cleared, and all rubs removed, they were upon the point
of laying Siege to the City of Orleance, when at the Queens earnest
solicitation, they changed that purpose for the more profitable expedition to
the King and Kingdom. Normandy was in no small danger of being wilfully
betrayed into the hands of the English, who therefore were to be removed, or at
the least to be expulsed out of Rouen before the Kings Army was consumed in
Actions of inferior consequence. The issue of which War was this, That though
the English did brave service for defense of the City, and made many gallant
attempts for relief thereof by their men and shipping from New Haven; yet in
the end the Town was taken by assault, and for two days together made a prey to
the Soldiers. The joy of the Royalists for the reduction of this great City to
the Kings obedience, was much abated by the death of the King of Navar, who had
unfortunately received his deaths wound in the heat of the Seige, and dyed in
the forty fourth year of his age, leaving behind him a young Son called Henry,
who afterward succeeded in the Crown of France. And on the contrary, the sorrow
for this double loss was much diminished in the Prince of Conde and the rest of
his party, by the seasonable coming of four thousand Horse and five thousand
Foot, which Monsieur d' Andelot with great industry had raised in Germany, and
with as great courage and good fortune had conducted safely to the Prince.

22. By the accession of these Forces, the Hugonots are encouraged to attempt
the surprising of Paris; from which they were dissuaded by the Admiral, but
eagerly inflamed to that undertaking by the continual importunity of such
Preachers as they had about them. Repulsed from which with loss both of time
and honor, they were encountered in a set battle near the C^ty of Dreux, in the
neighboring Province of Le Beausse. In which battle their whole Army was
overthrown, and the Prince of Conde taken prisoner; but his captivity sweetened
by the like misfortune which befell the Constable, took prisoner in the same
battle by the hands of the Admiral; who having drawn together the remainder of
his broken Army, retires toward Orleance, and leaving there his Brother D'
Andelot with the Foot to make good that City, takes with him all the German
Horse, and so goes for Normandy, there to receive such Moneys as were sent from
England. But the Moneys not coming at the time, by reason of cross winds and
tempestuous weather, the Germans are permitted to spoil and plunder in all the
parts of the Country, not sparing places either Profane or Sacred, and
reckoning no distinction either betwixt Friends or Enemies. But in short time
the Seas grew passable, and the Moneys came (an hundred and fifty thousand
Crowns according to the French account) together with fourteen pieces of
Cannon, and a proportionable stock of Ammunition; by which supply the Germans
were not only well paid for spoiling the Country, but the Admiral was thereby
enabled to do some good service, from which h^ had been hindered for want of
Cannon. In the mean time the Duke of Guise had laid Siege to Orleance, and had
reduced it in a manner to terms of yiedling, where he was villanously murdered
by one Poltrot, a Gentleman of a good Family and a ready Wit; who having lived
many years in Spain, and afterward embracing the Calvinian Doctrines, grew into
great esteem with Beza and the rest of the Consistorians, by whom it was
thought fit to execute any great Attempt. By whom commended to the Admiral, and
by the Admiral excited to a work of so much merit, he puts himself without much
scruple on the undertaking; enters on the Kings service, and by degrees became
well known unto the Duke. Into whose favor he so far insinuated, that he could
have access to him whenever he pleased; and having gained a fit opportunity
to effect his purpose, dispatched him by the shot of a Musket laden with no
fewer then three bullets, in the way to his lodging.

23. This murder was committed on Feb. 24. an. 1562. and being put to the Rack,
he on the Rack confessed upon what incentives he had done the fact. But more
particularly he averred, that by the Admiral he was promised great rewards,
and that he was assured by Beza, that by taking out of the world such a great
persecutor of the Gospel, he could not but exceedingly merit at the hands of
Almighty God. And though both Beza and the Admiral endeavored by their
Manifests and Declarations to wipe off this stain; yet the confession of the
murderer, who could have no other ends in it then to speak his conscience,
left most men better satisfied in it, then by both their writings. But as it is
an ill wind which blows no body good, so the Assassinate of this great person,
though very grievous to his friends, served for an Introduction to the peace
ensuing. For he being taken out of the way, the Admiral engaged in Normandy,
the Constable Prisoner in the City, and the Prince of Conde in the Camp; it was
no hard matter for the Queen to conclude a peace upon such terms, as might be
equal to all parties. By which accord it was concluded, that all that were
free Barons in the Lands and Castles which they were possessed of, or held them
of no other Lord then the King himself, might freely exercise the Reformed
Religion in their own jurisdictions; and that the other which had not such
Dominions might do the same in their own Houses and Families only, provided
that they did not the same in Towns and Cities: that in every Province certain
Cities should be assigned, in the Suburbs whereof the Hugonots might have the
free exercise of their Religion: that in the City of Paris, and in all other
Towns and places whatsoever, where the Court resided, no other Religion should
be exercised but the Roman Catholic; though in those Cities every man might
privately enjoy his conscience without molestation: that those of the Reformed
Religion should observe the Holy Days appointed in the Roman Calendar, and in
their Marriages the Rites and Constitutions of the Civil Law; and finally, that
a general pardon should be granted to all manner of persons, with a full
restitution to their Lands and Liberties, their Honors, Offices and Estates.
Which moderation or restriction of the Edict of January, did much displease
some zealous Hugonots, but their Preachers most; who as they loved to exercise
their gifts in the greatest Auditories, so they abominated nothing more then
those observances.

24. After this followed the reduction of New Haven to the Crown of France,
1563.
and the expulsion of the English out of Normandy; the Prince of Conde, and
some other leading men of the Hugonot faction, contributing both their presence
and assistance to it; which had not been so easily done, had not God fought
more against the English, then the whole French Armies: for by cross winds it
did not only hinder all supplies from coming to them, till the surrendry of the
Town; but hastened the surrender by a grievous Pestilence, which had extremely
wasted them in respect of number, and miserably dejected them in point of
courage. And yet the anger of God did not stay here neither, that Plague being
carried into England at the return of the Soldiers, which raged extremely both
in London and most parts of the Realm, beyond the precedent and example of
former ages. It was on the 17 of July, an. 1563, that New Haven was yielded to
the French, that being the last day of the first war which was raised by the
Hugonots, and raised by them on no other ground, but for extorting the free
exercise of their Religion by force of Arms, according to the doctrine and
example of the Mother-City. In the pursuit whereof, they did not only with
their own hands ruinate and deface the beauty of their native Country, but gave
it over for a prey to the lust of Strangers. The calling in of the English to
support their faction, whom they knew well to be the ancient enemies of the
Crown of France, and putting into their hands the chief strength of Normandy,
of whose pretensions to that Dukedom they could not be ignorant; were two such
actions of a disloyal impolitick nature, as no pretense of zeal to that which
they called the Gospel, could either qualify or excuse. Nor was the bringing
in of so many thousand German Soldiers of much better condition, who though
they could pretend no title to the Crown of France, nor to any particular
Province in it, were otherwise more destructive to the peace of that Country,
and created far more mischief to the people of it, then all the forces of the
English; for being to be maintained on the pay of the Hugonots, and the
Hugonots not being able to satisfy their exorbitant Arrears, they were
suffered to waste the Country in all parts where they came, and to expose the
whole Kingdom, from the very borders of it toward Germany, to the English
Channel, unto spoil and rapine; so that between the Hugonots themselves on the
one side, and these German Soldiers on the other, there was nothing to be seen
in most parts of the Kingdom, but the destruction of Churches, the profanation
of Altars, the defacing of Images, the demolishing of Monasteries, the burning
of Religious Houses, and even the digging up of the bones of the dead,
despitefully thrown about the fields and unhallowed places.

1566.
25. But this first was only raked up in the Embers, not so extinguished by the
Articles of the late agreement, but that it broke out shortly into open flames;
for the Hugonots pressing hard for the performance of the Edict of January, and
the Romanists as earnestly insisting on some clauses of the pacification; the
whole Realm was filled in a manner with such fears and jealousies, as carried
some resemblance of a War in the midst of Peace. The Hugonots had some thoughts
of surprising Lions, but the Plot miscarryed: they practiced also upon
Narbonne, a chief City of Languedock, and openly attempted the Popes Town of
Avignion; but were prevented in the one, and suppressed in the other. A greater
diffidence was raised against them by the unseasonable Zeal of the Queen of
Navar, who not content with settling the reformed Religion in the Country of
Berne, when she was absolute and supreme, suffered the Catholics to be
infested in her own Provinces which she held immediately of the Crown; insomuch
that at Pamiers the chief City of the Earldom of Foix, the Hugonots taking
offense at a solemn Procession held upon Corpus Christi day, betook themselves
presently to Arms; and falling upon those whom they found unarmed, not only
made a great slaughter amongst the Churchmen, but in the heat of the same fury
burnt down their Houses. Which outrage being suffered to pass unpunished, gave
both encouragement and example to some furious Zealots to commit the like in
other places, as namely at Montaban, Gaelion, Rodez, Preieux, Valence, etc.
being all situate in those Provinces in which the Hugonots were predominant
for power and number. But that which most alarmed the Court, was a seditious
Pamphlet, published by a Native of Orleance; in which it was maintained
(according to the Calvinian Doctrines) that the people of France were absolved
from their Allegiance to the King then Reigning, because he was turned an
Idolater. In which reason it is lawful also to kill him, as opportunity should
be offered. Which Doctrine being very agreeable unto some designs which were
then every where in agitation amongst the Hugonots, was afterward made use of
for the justifying of the following Wars, when the opinion grew more general,
and more openly maintained both from Press and Pulpit.

1567.
26. The Catholics on the other side began to put themselves into a posture of
Arms, without so much as taking notice of those misdemeanors; which they seemed
willing to connive at, not so much out of any inclinations which they had in
themselves, but because they found it not agreeable to the will of the Court,
where such dissimulations were esteemed the best arts of Government. The
Catholic King had sent the Duke of Alva with a puissant Army, to reduce the
Low Countries to obedience, where the Calvinians had committed as great spoils
and Rapines as any where in France or Scotland. This Army being to pass in a
long march near the Borders of France, gave a just color to the King to arm
himself; for fear lest otherwise the Spaniards might forget their errand, and
fall with all their Forces into his Dominions. To this end he gives order for a
Levy of six thousand Switz, which he caused to be conducted through the heart
off the Kingdom, and quartered them in the Isle of France, as if they were to
serve to a Guard for Paris, far enough off from any of those parts and
Provinces by which the Spaniards were to pass. But this gave such a jealousy
to the heads of the Hugonots, that they resorted to Chastillion to consult with
the Admiral. By whose advice it was resolved, that they must get the King and
Queen into their power, and make such use of both their names, as the
Catholics had made of them in the former War. This to be done upon the sudden,
before the opening of a War, by the raising of Forces, should render the
surprise impossible, and defeat their purposes. The King and Queen lay then at
Monceux, an House of pleasure within the Territory of Byre in Champaigne, not
fearing any the least danger in a time of peace, and having the Switz near
enough to secure their persons against any secret Machinations. And thereupon
it was contrived, that as many Horse as they could raise in several places,
should draw together at Rosay, not far from Monceux, on the 27 of September;
that they should first surprise the King, the Queen, and her younger Sons, and
then fall in upon the Switz, who being quartered in several places, and
suspecting nothing less then the present danger, might very easily be routed;
and that being done, they should possess themselves of Paris, and from thence
issue out of all Mandates which concerned the Government both of Church and
State. Some Hugonots which afterward were took in Gascoyne, and by the Marshal
of Monluck were exposed to torture, are said to have confessed upon the Rack,
that it was really intended to kill the King, together with the Queen and the
two young Princes; and having so cut off the whole Royal Line, to set the Crown
upon the head of the Prince of Conde. But Charity and Christianity bids me
think the contrary, and to esteem of this report as a Popish Calumny, devised
of purpose to create the greater hatred against the Authors of those Wars.

27. But whether it were true or not, certain it is, that the design was
carried with such care and closeness, that the Queen had hardly time enough to
retire to Meux, a little Town twelve Leagues from Paris, before the whole Body
of the Hugonots appeared in sight; from whence they were with no less
difficulty conducted by the Switz (whom they had suddenly drawn together) to
the Walls of Paris; the Switz being charged upon the way by no fewer then
eleven hundred Horse, and D' Andelot in the head of one of the parties; but
gallantly making good their March, and serving to the King and the Royal Family
for a Tower or Fortress; no sooner were they come to Paris, but the Hugonots
take a resolution to besiege the City before the Kings Forces could assemble to
relieve the same. To which end they possessed themselves of all the passes upon
the River by which provisions came into it, and burned down all the Windmills
about the Town, which otherwise might serve for the grinding of such Corn as
was then within it. No better way could be devised to break this blow, then to
entertain them with a Parley for an accommodation, not without giving them some
hope of yiedling unto any conditions which could be reasonably required. But
the Hugonots were so exorbitant in their demands, that nothing would content
them, but the removing of the Queen from public Government; the present
disbanding of the Kings Forces; the sending of all strangers out of the
Kingdom; a punctual execution of the Kings Edict of January; liberty for their
Ministers to Preach in all places, even in Paris it self; and finally, that
Calice, Metz and Havre-de-grace might be consig^ed unto them for Towns of
caution; but in plain truth, to serve them for the bringing in of the English
and Germans when their occasion so required. The Treaty notwithstanding was
continued by the Queen with great dexterity, till the King had drawn together
sixteen thousand men, with whom the Constable gives battle to the Enemy on the
10 of November, compels them to dislodge, makes himself master of the Field,
but dyed the next day after, in the eightieth year of his age, having received
his deaths wound from the hands of a Switz, who most unmanfully shot him when
he was not in condition to make any resistance.

1568.
28. In the mean time the City of Orleance was surprised by the Hugonots, with
many places of great importance in most parts of the Realm; which serving
rather to distract then increase their Forces, they were necessitated to seek
out for some Foreign aid. Not having confidence enough to apply themselves to
the Queen of England, whom in the business of Newhaven they had so betrayed,
they send their Agents to solicit the Elector Palatine, and prevailed with
him for an Army of seven thousand Horse, and four thousand Foot, to which the
miserable Country is again exposed. Encouraged with which great supplies, they
laid Siege to Chartres, the principal City of La Beaue, the loss whereof must
of necessity have subjected the Parisians to the last extremities. The chief
Commanders in the Kings Army were exceeding earnest to have given them battle,
thereby to force them from the Siege. But the Queen not willing to venture the
whole State of the Kingdom upon one cast of the Dice, especially against such
desperate Gamesters who had nothing to lose but that which they carried in
their hands, so plied them with new Offers for accommodation, that her
conditions were accepted, and the Germans once again disbanded, and sent back
to their Country. During which broyls, the Town of Rochel strongly s^ituated on
a bay of the Ocean, had declared for the Hugonots, and as it seems had gone so
far, that they had left themselves no way to retreat. And therefore when most
other places had submitted to the late Accord, the Rochellers were resolved to
stand it out, and neither to admit a Garrison, nor to submit to any Governor
of the Kings appointment; in which rebellious obstinacy they continued about
sixty years, the Town being worthily esteemed for the safest sanctuary, to
which the Hugonots retired in all times of dange^, and most commodious for the
letting in of a foreign army, when they found any ready to befriend them in
that cause and quarrel. The standing out of which Town in such obstinate
manner, not only encouraged many others to do the like, but by the fame
thereof drew thither both the Admiral and the Prince of Conde, with many other
Gentlemen of the Hugonot Faction, there to consult about renewing of the war
which they were resolved on. To whom repaired the Queen of Navarre with the
Prince her Son, then being but fifteen years of age, whom she desired to train
up in that holy war, upon an hope that he might one day come to be the head of
that party, as he after was. And here being met, they publish from hence two
several Manifests; one in the name of all the Hugonots in general, the other in
the name of that Queen alone; both tending to the same effect, that is to say,
the putting of some specious color upon their defection, and to excuse the
breaking of the peace established, by the necessity of a war.

29. This rapture so incensed the King and his Council, that they resolved no
longer to make use of such gentle medicines as had been formerly applied in the
like distempers; which resolution was the parent of that terrible Edict by
which the King does first revoke all the former Edicts which had been made
during his minority in favor of the Reformed Religion; nullifying more
particularly the last capitulations, made only in the way of Provision to
redress those mischiefs for which no other course could be then resolved on.
And that being done, it was ordained and commanded, That the exercise of any
other Religion then the Roman Catholic (ever observed by him and the King his
Predecessors) should be prohibited, and expressly forbidden, and interdicted in
all places of the Kingdom; banished all the Calvinist Ministers and Preachers
out of all the Towns and places under his Dominion, and within fifteen days
upon pain of death to avoid the Realm; pardoned through special grace all
things past in matters of Religion, but requiring for the future under pain of
death a general Conformity to the Rites of the Catholic Church; and finally
ordained that no person should be admitted to any office, charge, dignity, or
magistracy whatever, if he did not profess and live conformable in all points
to the Roman Religion. And for a Preamble hereunto, the King was pleased to
make a long and distinct Narration of the indulgence he had used to reduce the
Hugonots to a right understanding, and of the ill requital they had made unto
him, by the seditions and conspiracies which they raised against him; their
bringing in of foreign forces, and amongst others the most mortal enemies of
the French Nation, putting into their hands the strongest places and most
flourishing parts of the Kingdom, to the contempt of his authority, the
despising of his grace and goodness, and the continual disquieting of his
Dominions, and the destruction of his subjects. To counter-poise which terrible
Edict, the Princes and other Leaders of the Hugonots which were then at Rochel,
entered into a solemn Covenant or Association, by which they bound themselves by
Oath to persevere till death in defense of their Religion, never to lay down
arms, or condescend to any agreement without the general consent of all the
Commanders; and not then neither, but upon sufficient security for the
preservation of their lives, and the enjoying of that Liberty of Conscience for
which they first began the war.

30. But the Admiral well knowing that the business was not to be carried by
Oaths and Manifests, and that they wanted money to proceed by arms, advised the
Rochellers to send their Navy to the sea, which in a time when no such danger
was expected, might spoil and pillage all they met with, and by that means
provide themselves of money, and all other necessaries to maintain the war.
Which Counsel took such good effect, that by this kind of Piracy they were
enabled to give a fair beginning to this new Rebellion; for the continuance
whereof, it was thought necessary to solicit their Friends in Germany, to
furnish them with fresh recruits of able men, and Queen Elizabeth of England
for such sums of money as might maintain them in the service. And in the first
of these designs there appears no difficulty; the inclination of the Prince
Elector, together with the rest of the Calvinian Princes, and Imperial Cities,
were easily entreated to assist their Brethren of the same Religion. And the
same spirit governed many of the people also, but on different grounds; they
undertaking the employment upon hope of spoil, as Mercenaries, serving for
their Pay, but more for Plunder. In England their desires were entertained with
less alacrity, though eagerly solicited by Odet Bishop of Beauvais, a younger
Brother of the Admiral; who having formerly been raised to the degree of a
Cardinal, therefore called most commonly the Cardinal of Chastillon, had some
years since renounced his Habit and Religion, but still kept his Titles. By the
continual solicitation of so great an Advocate, and the effectual interposing
of the Queen of Navar, Elizabeth was persuaded to forget their former
ingratitude, and to remember how conducible it was to her personal interest to
keep the French King exercised in perpetual troubles; upon which Reason of
State she is not only drawn to accommodate the Hugonots with Ships, Corn, Arms
and Ammunition, but to supply them with a hundred thousand Crowns of ready
money for the maintaining of their Army, consisting of fourteen thousand
Germans, and almost as many more of the natural French. And yet it was to be
believed, that in all this she had done nothing contrary to the League with
France, which she had sworn not long before; because, forsooth, the Forces of
the Hugonots were raised to no other end but the Kings mere service, and the
assistance of the Crown against the Enemies of both, and the professed
Adversaries of the true Religion. But neither this great lone of money, nor
that which they had got by robbing upon the Seas, was able to maintain^ War of
so long continuance. For maintenance whereof, they were resolved to sell the
Treasures of the Churches in all such Provinces as they kept under their
Command; the Queen of Navar engaging her Estate for their security, who should
adventure on the purchase.

31. I shall not touch on the particulars of this War^ which ended with the
death of the Prince of Conde in the battle of Iarnar; the rigorous proceedings
against the Admiral, whom the King caused to be condemned for a Rebel, his
Lands to be confiscated^ his Houses plundered and pulled down, and himself
executed in Effigy; the loss of the famous battle of Mont-Contour by the
Hugonots party Anno 1569, 1569.
which forced them to abandon all their strong holds, except Rochel,
Angoulesme, and St. Iean^d Angeli, and finally to shut themselves up within
Rochel only; after which followed such a dissembled reconciliation between the
parties, as proved more bloody then the War: The sudden and suspected death of
the Queen of Navar, the Marriage of the Prince her Son with the Lady Margaret
one of the Sisters of the King; the celebrating of the wedding in the death of
the Admiral on St. Bartholomews day 1572, and the slaughter of thirty thousand
men within few days after; the reduction of the whole Kingdom to the Kings
obedience, except the Cities of Nismes, 1572.
Montauban and Rochel only; the obstinate standing out of Rochel, upon the
instigation of such Preachers as fled thither for shelter, and the reduction of
it by the Duke of Anjon to the last extremity; the raising of the Siege, and
the Peace ensuing, on the Election of that Duke to the Crown of Poland; the
resolution of the Hugonots to renew the War, as soon as he had left the
Kingdom; and their engaging in the same, on the Kings last sickness. In all
which traverses of State there is nothing memorable in reference to my present
purpose, but only the conditions of the Pacification which was made at the
Siege of Rochel; by which it was accorded between the parties on the 11 of
July, Anno 1573, 1573.
that all offenses should be pardoned to the said three Cities, on their
submission to the King; and that it should be lawful for them to retain the
free Exercise of their Religion, the people meeting in the same unarmed, and
but few in number^ that all the inhabitants of the said three Cities should be
obliged to observe, in all outward matters (except Baptism and Matrimony) the
Rites and Holy Days of the Church; that the use of the Catholic Religion
should be restored in the said Cities and all other places, leaving unto the
Clergy and Religious persons their Houses, Profits, and Revenues; that Rochel
should receive a Governor of the Kings appointment, (but without Garrison)
renounce all correspondencies and confederacies with Foreign Princes, and not
take part with any of the same Religion against the King; and finally, that the
said three Towns should deliver Hostages for the performance of the Articles of
the present Agreement, to be changed at the end of every three months, if the
King so pleased: It was also condescended to in favor of particular persons,
that all Lords of free* Manors throughout the Kingdoms, might in their own
Houses lawfully celebrate Marriage and Baptism, after their own manner,
provided that the Assembly exceeded not the number of ten; and that there
should be no inquisition upon men's Consciences, Liberty being given to such as
had no mind to abide in the Kingdom, that they might sell their Lands and
Goods, and live where they pleased.

1574.
32. Such were the Actings of the French Calvinians, as well by secret practices
as open Arms, during the troublesome Reign of Francis the Second and Charles
the Ninth, and such their variable Fortunes according to the interchanges and
successes of those broken times, in which, for fifteen years together, there
was nothing to be heard but Wars and rumors of Wars; short intervals of Peace,
but such as generally were so full of fears and jealousies, that they were
altogether as unsafe as the Wars themselves. So that the greatest calm of
Peace, seemed but a preparation to a War ensuing; to which each party was so
bent, that of a poison it became their most constant Food. In which distraction
of affairs dyed King Charles the Ninth, in the ^ive and twentieth year of his
age, and fourteenth of his Reign, leaving this life at Paris on the 30 of May,
Anno 1574. He had been used for some months to the spitting of blood, which
brought him first into a Fever, and at last to his grave, not without some
retaliation of the Heavenly Justice, in punishing that Prince by vomiting up
the blood of his Body natural, which had with such prodigious cruelty exhausted
so much of the best blood of the body Politic. After whose death, the Crown
descended upon Henry the new King of Poland, who presently upon the news
thereof forsook that Kingdom, and posted with all speed to Venice, and from
thence to France, where he was joyfully received by all loyal Subjects. At his
first coming to the Crown, he resolved to put an end to those combustions which
had so often inflamed his Kingdom, and extinguish all those heats which had
exasperated one party against another; that he might sit as Umpire or Supreme
Moderator of the present differences, and draw unto himself an absolute
Sovereignty over both alike: which to effect, he resolves to prosecute the War
so coldly, that the Hugonots might conceive good hopes of his moderation; but
still to keep the War on foot, till he could find out such a way to bring on
the peace, as might create no suspicion of him in the hearts of the Catholics.
By which means hoping to indulge both parties, he was perfectly believed by
none, each party showing it self distrustful of his inclinations, and each
resolving to depend on some other Heads.

33. About this time, when all men stood amazed at these proceedings of the
Court, the State began to swarm with Libels and Seditious Pamphlets, published
by those of the Hugonot Faction, full of reproach, and fraught with horrible
invectives, not only against the present Government, but more particularly
against the persons of the Queen and all her Children. Against the Authors
whereof, when some of the Council purposed to proceed with all severity, the
Queen Mother interposed her power, and moderated by her prudence the intended
rigors; affirming, as most true it was, that such severity would only gain the
greater credit to those scurrilous Pamphlets, which would otherwise vanish of
themselves, or be soon forgotten. Amongst which Pamphlets, there was none more
pestilent then that which was composed in the way of a Dialogue, pretending one
^usebius Philadelphus for the Author of it. Buchanan buildin^ first upon
Calvin's Principles, had published his Seditious Pamphlet De jure Regni apud
Scotos, together with that scurrilous and infamous Libel which he called The
Detection, repleat with nothing but reproaches of his lawful Sovereign. But
this Eusebius Philadelphus, or whosoever he was that masked himself under that
disguise, resolved to go beyond his pattern in all the acts of Malice,
Slandering and Sedition; but be out gone by none that should follow after him
in those ways of wickedness. Two other Tracts were published about this time
also, both of them being alike mischievous, and tending to the overthrow of all
public Government; but wanting something of the Libel in them, as the other
had: Of these, the one was called Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, or the rescuing of
the people from the power of Tyrants; published under the name of Stephanus
Brutus, but generally believed to be writ by Beza, the chief surviving Patron
of the Presbyterians. In which he prostitutes the dignity of the Supreme
Magistrate to the lusts of the people, and brings them under the command of
such popular Magistrates, as Calvin makes to be the Conservators of the public
Liberty. The other was entitled De jure Magistratos in subditos, built on the
same grounds, and published with the same intention as the others were. A piece
so mischievous in it self, and so destructive of the peace of Humane Society,
that each side was ashamed to own it; the Papists fathering it upon Hottoman a
French Civilian, the Presbyterians on Hiclerus a Romish Priest* But it appears
plainly by the Conference at Hampton Court, that it was published by some of
the Disciplinarians, at whose doors I leave it.

34. But for Eusebius Philadelphus, he first defames the King and Queen in a
most scandalous manner, exposes next that flourishing Kingdom for a prey to
strangers; and finally, lays down such Seditious Maxims, as plainly tend to
the destruction of Monarchical Government. He tells us of the King himself,
that he was trained up by his Tutors in no other qualities then drinking,
whoring, swearing and forswearing, frauds and falsehoods, and whatsoever else
might argue a contempt both of God and Godliness; that as the Court by the
Example of the King, so by the Example of the Court all the rest of the Kingdom
was brought into a reprobate sense, even to manifest Atheism; and that as some
of their former Kings were honored with the Attributes of fair, wise,
debonaire, well-beloved, etc. so should this King be known by no other name
then Charles the treacherous. The Duke of Anjou he sets forth in more ugly
colors then he does the King, by adding this to all the rest of his Brothers
vices, that he lived in a constant course of Incest with his Sister the
Princess Margaret, as well before as after her Espousal to the King of Navar.
For the Queen Mother he can find no better names then those of Fredegond,
Brunechild, Iezabel, and Messalina; of which the two first are as infamous in
the stories of France, as the two latter in the Roman and Sacred Histories. And
to expose them all together, he can give the Queen Mother and her Children
(though his natural Princes) no more cleanly title then that of a Bitch-wolfe
and her Whelps; L^pa illa cum catulis suis, part 1. p. 87.
affirming, that in Luxury, Cruelty and Perfidiousness, they had exceeded all
the Tyrants of preceding times Part 1. page 11.
: which comes up close to those irreverent and lewd expressions which
frequently occur in Calvin, Beza, Knox, etc. in reference to the two Mary's
Queens of England and Scotland, and other Princes of that age; which have been
formerly recited in their proper places.

35. The Royal Family being thus wretchedly exposed to the public hatred, he
next applies himself to stir up all the world against them both at home and
abroad. And first he labors to excite some desperate Zealot to commit the
like assassinate on the King then Reigning, as one Bodillus is reported in some
French Histories to have committed on the person of Chilprick one of the last
Kings of the Merovignians, which he commemorates for a Noble and Heroic
action, and sets it out for an example and encouragement to some gallant
Frenchman, for the delivery of his Country from the Tyranny of the House of
Valois, Qui d^mum Valesium t^ndit^s d^lea^t, (...) semel fur^^ exara^sect. p.
75.
the ruin whereof he mainly drives at in his whole design. And though he seem
to make no doubt of prevailing in it, yet he resolves to try his Fortune
otherwise if that should fail. And first beginning with their next neighbor
the King of Spain, he he puts them in remembrance of those many injuries which
he and his Ancestors had received from the House of Valois; acquaints him with
the present opportunity which was offered to him of revenging of those wrongs,
and making himself Master of the Realm of France; and chalks him out a way how
he might effect it; that is to say, by coming to a present Accord with the
Prince of Orange Non sol^m i^lo* Belgiam p^^catum ^^aituros, sed ante annum
Fr^^c^am ipsa^ri (hodie a reg^s am^citiae alienatam) ^llius imperio
adjunct^ros, page 68.
, indulging Liberty of Conscience to the Belgic Provinces, and thereby drawing
all the Hugonots to adhere unto him: which counsel if he did not like, he might
then make the same use of the Duke of Savoy (for whom the Hugonots in France
had no small affection) Ut ulli cedant Lugdunisis tr^ct^s, Delplinatus and
Provincia, fi^iti^^ Regiones, etc. p 69.
and by bestowing on him the adjoining Regions of Lyonoise, D^ulphine and
Provence, might make himself Lord of all the rest without any great trouble.
The like temptation must be given to the Queen of England, by putting her in
mind of her pretenses to the Crown it self, and showing how easy a thing it
might be for her Facile pote^it ca^ Regiones recipere quarum nomina and
stemmata gestat. p. 71.
to acquire those Countries, whose Arms and Titles she assumed: with like
disloyalty he excites the Princes of the Empire Facile recuperare possit Metas,
Vmod^rum and Tullum, etc. p. 71.
to husband the advantage which was offered to them, for the recovering of
Metz, Toule and Verdun, three Imperial Cities, by this Kings Father wrested
betwixt fraud and force from Charles the Fifth, and ever since incorporated
with the Realm of France. If all which failed, he is resolved to cast himself
on the Duke of Guise, though the most mortal and implacable enemy of the
Hugonot Faction; and makes a full address to him in a second Epistle prefixed
before the Book it self; in which he puts him in remembrance of his old
pretensions to the Crown of France, extorted by Hugh Capet from his Ancestors
of the House of Loraigne, offers him the assistance of the Hugonot party for
the recovery of his Rights; and finally, beseeches him to take compassion of
his ruined Country Regnum ^^pessere velis a Tyranno muli^r^ulis, Ital^s,
ganeonibu^, and lenon^bus d^la^pdatum. Pref.
, cheerfully to accept the Crown, and free the Kingdom from the spoil and
tyranny of Boys and Women, together with that infinite train of Strangers,
Bawdes and Leachers which depend on them: which was as great a Masterpiece in
the art of mischief, as the wit of malice could devise.

36. As for his Doctrines in reference to the common duties between Kings and
Subjects, we may reduce them to these heads, that is to say, 1. That the
Authority of Kings and Supreme Magistrates is circumscribed and limited by
certain bounds, which if they pass, their Subjects are no longer tied unto
their obedience; that Magistrates do exceed those bounds, when either they
command such things as God forbids, or prohibit that which he commands; that
therefore they are no longer to be obeyed, if their Commands are contrary to
the Rules of Piety or Christian Charity; of which the Subjects must be thought
the most competent Judges. 2. That there were companies and societies of men
before any Magistrates were set over them; which Magistrates were no otherwise
set over them then by common consent; that every Magistrate so appointed was
bound by certain Articles and Conditions agreed between them, which he was tied
by Oath to preserve inviolable; that the chief end for which the people chose a
Superior Magistrate, was, that they might remain in safety under his
protection; and therefore if such Magistrates either did neglect that end, or
otherwise infringe the Articles of their first Agreement, the Subjects were
then discharged from the bond of obedience; and that being so discharged from
the bond of obedience, it was as lawful for them to take up Arms against their
King in maintenance of their Religion, Laws and Liberties, if endangered by
him, as for a Traveller to defend himself by force of Arms against Thieves and
Robbers. 3. That no Government can be rightly constituted, in which the
Grandeur of the Prince is more consulted then the weal of the People; that to
prevent all such encroachments on the Common Liberty, the people did reserve a
power of putting a curb upon their Prince or Supreme Magistrates, to hold them
in, such as the Tribunes were in Rome to the Senate and Consuls, and the Ephori
to the Kings of Sparta: that such a power as that of the Spartan Ephori is
vested in the seven Electors of the German Empire, which gives them an
Authority to depose the Emperor, if they see cause for it; and that the like
may be affirmed of the English Parliaments, who oftentimes have condemned their
Kings, but he knows not whom. 4. That by the first constitutions of the Realm
of France, the Supreme power was not entrusted to the King, but the three
Estates; so that it was not lawful for the King to proclaim a War, or to lay
Taxes on the people, but by their consent; that these Estates assembled in a
Common Council, did serve instead of eyes and ears to a prudent Prince, but to
a wicked and ungoverned, for Bit or Bridle; and that according to this power
they dethroned many of their Kings for their Lusts, Luxuries, Cruelty,
Slothfulness, Avarice, etc. that if they proceeded not in like manner with the
King then Reigning, it was because they had an high esteem (with scorn and
insolence enough) of his eminent Virtues, his Piety, Justice and Fidelity, and
the great commendations which was given of his Mothers Chastity: and therefore
finally (which was the matter to be proved by those Factious Principles) that
it was altogether as lawful for the French to defend themselves, their Laws and
Liberties, against the violent assault of a furious Tyrant (so he calls their
King) as a Traveller by Thieves and Robbers. Which Aphorisms he that lists to
consult in the Author, may find them from page 57. to 66. of the second
Dialogue, and part 1. page 8.

37. But notwithstanding these indignities and provocations, the King resolved
to proceed in his former indifferency, hoping thereby to break the Hugonots
without blows and bloodshed, and thereby to regain the good opinion of his
Popish Subjects. To which end he was pleased to grant such privileges to the
Hugonot Faction as they durst not ask, and never had aspired unto in their
greatest heats; which he conceived he had more reason to do in the present
pinch, then any of his Predecessors had in far less extremities: For the
Hugonots had not only brought in a formidable Army of Switz and Germans, under
the conduct of Prince Casimir one of the younger sons of Frederick the Third
then Elector Palatine, but had also made a fraction in the Court it self, by
drawing Francis Duke of Alanzon his youngest Brother to be Head of their Party,
who brought along with him a great number of Romish Catholics, who then past
under the name of the Malcontents. To break which blow, and free his Kingdom
from the danger of so great an Army, he first capitulates to pay the Germans
their Arrears, amounting to a million and two hundred thousand Ducats; to
gratify Prince Casimir with the Signory of Chasteau-Thierry in the Province of
Champaigne, with a Pension of fourteen thousand Crowns, and a Command of a
hundred Lances: To confer the Government of Picardie with the strong Town of
Perrone on the Prince of Conde, and settle on his Brother the Duke of Alanzon
the Provinces of Berry, Touraine and Anjou, together with one hundred thousand
Crowns of yearly Pension, and made him also Duke of Anjou for his greater
honor. And then to pacify and oblige the Hugonots (if such men could be
gained or pacified by acts of favor) he grants unto them by his Edict of the
14 of May 1576, that they should peaceably enjoy the exercise of their
Religion, together with full power for erecting Colleges and Schools, for
holding Synods, of Celebrating Matrimony, and Administering the Sacraments, with
the same freedom as was used by his Catholic Subjects: that those of the
Reformed Religion should be permitted to execute any Places or Offices, and
enjoy any Dignities of what sort soever, without such distinction betwixt them
and the rest of that Nation, as had been of late times observed: that in each
Parliament of France a new Court should be presently erected, consisting
equally of Judges and Officers of both Religions, and they to have the
Cognizance of all Causes which concerned the Hugonots: that all sentences past
against the Admiral, the Count of Montgomery, and the rest of that party,
should be revoked and made null; and the eight cautionary Towns, being all
places of great strength and consequence, should remain with the Hugonots, till
all these Articles were confirmed, and the Peace concluded.

38. The passing of this Edict gave great scandal to the Catholic party, which
thereupon was easily united by the Duke of Guise into a common Bond or League
for maintenance and defense of their Religion, apparently endangered by those
large Indulgences; by the first Article whereof they bound themselves for the
Establishment of the Law of God in its first Estate; to restore and settle his
holy Service according to the Form and Manner of the Catholic Apostolic Roman
Church; and to abjure and renounce all errors contrary thereunto. Then followed
many other Articles, relating to the preservation of the Kings Authority, the
maintenance of the common liberties and Privileges of their Country; the
mutual defense of one another in defense of this League against all persons
whatsoever; the constancy of their obedience to any one whom they should choose
to be the Head of their Con^ederacie; and finally, the prosecuting of all those
without exception, who should endeavor to oppose and infringe the same. And
for the keeping of this League, they severally and jointly bound themselves by
this following Oath, viz. I swear by God the Creator (laying my hand upon the
holy Gospel) and under pain of Excommunication and eternal Damnation, that I
enter into this holy Catholic League according to the Form thereof now read
unto (...) and that I do faithfully and sincerely enter into it with a will
either to command or to obey, and serve as I shall be appointed: and I promise
upon my life and honor unto the last drop of my blood never to depart from it,
or transgress it, for any command, pre^ence, excuse or occasion, which by any
means whatsoever can be represented to me. And as the Hugonots had pu^
themselves under the Protection of the Queen of England, and called the ^^^mans
to their aid; so they resolved according unto this example to put themselves
under the Patronage of the Catholic King, and to call in the Forces of the
King, Pope, and the Princes of It^ly, if their occasions so required. The news
of which con^ede^acy so amazed the King, that he proceeded not to the
performance of those Indulgences contained in the E^i^t of the 14 of May, which
seemed most odious and offensive in the eyes of the Catholics; so that both
sides being thus ^xa^perated against one another, and each side jealous of the
King, the old confusions were revived, the disorders multiplied, and all things
brought into a worse condition then at his first coming to the Crown. For
though the Catholic King had willingly consented to be head of the League, yet
to b^^ak ^ff all such dependence as was by that means to be fastened on him by
the rest of the Leaguers, the French King finds himself necessitated to assume
that honor to himself. And thereupon, in the Assembly held at Blois, having in
vain tried many ways to untie this knot, he publicly declared himself to be
the Principal Head and Protector of it, with many specious protestations that
he would spend his last breath in a cause so glorious, as the reducing of his
people unto one Religion: which as it raised many jealousies in the minds of
the Hugonots, so it begot no confidence of him in the hearts of their opposites.

39. Hereupon a new War breaks out, and a new Peace follows, by which some
Clauses in the former Edict were restrained and moderated, though otherwise
sufficiently advantageous to all those of the Reformation; so as now hoping
that all matters were accorded between the parties, the King pretends to betake
himself wholly to his private Devotions; falls on the institution of a new
Order of Knighthood, called The Order of the Holy Ghost; commends his Brother
for a Su^ter to the Queen of England, to keep him out of harms way for the time
to come; and finally, failing of the project, procures his advancement to the
Dukedom of Brabant, and to be made the General-Governour of the Belgic
Provinces, which had withdrawn themselves from their Obedience to the King of
Spain.

40. But in the midst of these devices, the Leaders of the Hugonots are again
in Arms, under color that the former Edict had not been observed; but in plain
truth, upon a clear and manifest experience, that Peace was the ruin of their
Party, and that they could not otherwise preserve their power then by open War.
The Prince of Conde seizes on La Fere in Picardy, and the King of Navar makes
himself Master by strong hand on the City of Cahors; which draws the King again
from his Meditations, under which must be covered his retirement from all
public business. But La Fere being regained from the Prince of Conde, the
sacking of Cahors was connived at, and the breach made up, that so the Hugonots
might be tempted to consume their Forces in the Wars of Flanders, to which they
were invited by their Brethren of the Belgic Provinces, who had called in the
Duke of Anjou against their King. And so long France remained in quiet, as that
War continued. But when the Duke returned after two or three years, and that
there was no hopes of his reverting to so great a charge; 1581.
the Hugonots wanting work abroad, were furnished with this occasion to break
out at home. The Catholic League had now layn dormant for some years, none
seeming more Zealous then the King in the Cause of Rome. But when it was
considered by the Duke of Guise, 1584.
and the rest of the League, that the Duke of Anjou being dead, and the King
without any hope of Issue, the Crown must fall at last to the King of Navar; it
was resolved to try all means by which he might be totally excluded from the
right of Succession. For what hope could they give themselves to preserve
Religion, when the Crown should fall upon the head of an Heretic, an Heretic
relapsed, and therefore made incapable of the Royal Dignity by the Canon-Laws?
Of these Discourses and Designs of the Guisian Faction, the King of Navar
takes speedy notice, and prepares accordingly, thinking it best to be
beforehand, and not to be taken unprovided when they should come. 1585.
And to that end, having first cleared himself by a Declaration from the crime
of Heresy, and now particularly from being a relapsed Heretic, with many foul
recriminations on the House of Guise, he sends his Agents to solicit the
German Princes to come in to aid him against the oppressions of the League,
which seemed to aim at nothing but the ruin of the Realm of France: which so
exasperated those of the Guisian Faction, that they prevailed by their
Emissaries with Pope Sixtus the Fifth, to Excommunicate the King of Navar, and
the Prince of Conde, and to declare them both incapable of the Royal
Succession, as relapsed Heretics: Which he performed in open Consistory on the
ninth of September 1585, and published the sentence by a special Bull within
three days after.

41. The French King in the mean time finds himself so entangled in the Snares
of the League, and such a general defection from him in most parts of the
Kingdom, that he was forced by his Edict of the ninth of July, to revoke all
former grants and capitulations which had been made in favor of the Hugonot
party. After which followed a new War; in which the Switz and Germans raise
great Levies for the aid of the Hugonots, 1586.
solicited thereunto amongst many others by Theodore Beza; who by his great
Eloquence and extraordinary diligence, did prevail so far, that the Princes
Palatine, the Count Wirtemberge, the Count of Montbelguard, and the Protestant
Cantons of the Switz, agreed to give them their assistance. 1587.
Amongst whom, with the helps which they received from the King of Denmark, and
the Duke of Saxony, a mighty Army was advanced, consisting of thirty two
thousand Horse and Foot; that is to say, twelve thousand German Horse, four
thousand Foot, and no fewer then sixteen thousand Switz. For whose advance,
besides a general contribution made on all the Churches of France, the sum of
sixty thousand Crowns was levied by the Queen of England, and put into the
hands of Prince Casimire before remembered, who was to have the Chief Command of
these Foreign Forces. These Foreign Forces made much greater by the accession
of eight thousand French which joined unto them, when they first showed
themselves upon the Borders; Of which, two hundred Horse and eight hundred Foot
were raised by the Signory of Geneva. But before this vast Army could come up
to the King of Navar, the Duke of Ioyeuse gives him battle near a place called
Coutrasse; at which time his whole Forces were reduced to four thousand Foot,
and about two thousand five hundred Horse; with which small Army encountered a
great power of the Duke of Ioyeuse, and obtained a very signal Victory, there
being slain upon the place no fewer then three thousand men, of which the Duke
of Ioyeuse himself was one; more then three thousand taken prisoners, together
with all the Baggage, Arms and Ammunition which belonged to the Enemy. After
which followed the defeat of the Germans by the Duke of Guise, and the violent
proceedings of the Leaguers against the King, which brought him to a necessity
of joining with the King of Navar, and craving the assistance of his Hugonot
Subjects, whose Arms are now legitimated, and made acts of Duty. In which
condition I shall leave them to their better Fortunes; first taking a survey of
the proceedings of the Calvinists in the neighboring Germany, passing from
thence to the Low Countries, and after crossing over to the Isles of Britain.

The end of the third Book.
AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History Of the PRESBYTERIANS. LIB. III. Containing
Their Positions and Proceedings in the Higher Germany; their dangerous
Doctrines and Seditions; their Innovations in the Church, and alteration of the
Civil Government; of the Belgic Provinces, from the year 1559, to the year
1585.
1. THe Doctrine of the Reformation begun by Luther, and pursued by Zuinglius,
was entertained in many Provinces of the Higher Germany, according as they
stood affected to either party, or were transported by the ends and passions of
their several Princes: But generally at the first they inclined to Luther,
whose way of Reformation seemed less odious to the Church of Rome, and had the
greatest approbation from the States of the Empire; the Duke of Saxony adhered
unto him at his first beginning, as also did the Marquess of Brandenbourg, the
Dukes of Holsteine, the two Northern Kings, and by degrees the rest of the
German Princes of most power and value, except only those of Austria, and the
Duke of Bavaria, the three Elector Bishops, the Duke of Cleve, the Marquess of
Baden, and generally all the Ecclesiastics which were not under the Command of
the Lutheran States. The Prince Electo^ Palatine came not in to the party, till
the year 1546. 154^.
At which time Frederick the Second, though scarce warm in his own Estate, on
which he entered Anno 154^. took the advantage of the time to reform his
Churches; the Emperor being then brought low by the change of Fortune, and
forced not long after to abandon Germany. Upon the 1^ of January, he caused
Divine Offices to be celebrated in the Mother Tongue, in the chief Church of
Heidelberg, the principal City of the lower Palatinate, and the chief Seat of
his (...). The news whereof encouraged all the rest of the Protestant Princes
to congratulate with him, and to desire him to embrace the Confession of
Ausberge; to which he read^ly accorded, and settled all things in his Countries
by the Lutheran Model, as well for Government and Doctrine, 15^^^
as for Forms of Worship. In which condition it continued during the residue of
his life, and the short Government of Otho-Henry, who succeeded him in those
Estates, and was the last of the direct Line of the House of Bavaria. 1559.
After whose death, Anno 1559, succeeded Frederick Duke of Simmeren, descended
from Steven Palatine of Zuidbrook, or Bipont, younger son of the Emperor
Rupert: From whom the Princes of the other House had delivered their Pedigree:
Which Prince succeeding by the name of Frederick the Third, appeared more
favorable to the Zuinglian then the Lutheran Forms, animated thereunto by some
^eedy Courtiers, in hope to make a prey of ^lebe and Tithes, and other poor
remainders of the Churches Patrimony.

2. For the advancing of this Work, Gual^er a very moderate and learned man is
desired from Zurick, and cheerfully undertakes the Service; in which he
prospered so well, that he took off most of the Princes from their former
opinions, and brought them to conform their judgments in all points of
Doctrine, to the Confession of the Switzer or Helvetian Churches. The
Discipline of which Churches differed at that time from Cal^ins Platform, as
appears clearly by some passages in a Letter of Bullingers, bearing date
December. 13. 1553, when Calvin was necessitated to beg some tolerable
approbation of his new Device. For there it is expressly said, that though ^
their Discipline at Zurick, and the rest of the Cantons, agreed not in all
points with that of the Consistory which had been settled at Geneva, but was
accommodated to the temper of their own Dominions; yet they desired not the
subversion of Calvin's Model, which seemed so necessary at that time for the
Town of Geneva, that they advised not to have it altered. But more particularly
it appears by Beza in the life of Calvin, and by the Letter of Ligerus before
remembered, that Excommunications were not used in any of the Reformed Churches,
whether they were of Lutheran or Zuinglian judgment. But scarce had Gualter so
settled Zuinglianism in the Church of Heidelberg, and those which did depend
upon it, when a bold Challenger from Geneva de^ies them all, and undertakes to
prove this Proposition in the public Schools, That to a Minister assisted with
the help of his Eldership, does appertain the power of Excommunication by the
Law of God. Hereupon followed that famous Disputation in the Schools of
Heidelberg, the substance whereof we find drawn up in Vrsines Catechism, from
page 835. to page 847. of the English Edition. By which it does appear, that
the name of the Respondent was George Withers a Native of England, and that one
Peter Boquine was the Moderator; and therefore Withers must be taken to have
made the Challenge. The Theses then maintained by Withers, were these two that
follow, viz That to the sincere preaching of the Word, and the lawful
administration of the Sacraments, is required an Office or Power of Government
in the Church. 2. That a Minister with his Eldership ought to enjoy and
exercise a Power of Convicting, Reproving, Excommunicating and Executing any
part of Ecclesiastical Discipline, or any Offenders whatsoever, even on Princes
themselves.

3. The Arguments by which the Respondent was assaulted, together with the
answers which were made unto them, were taken by the pen of Vrsine, a Divine of
Heidelberg, who was present at the Disputation, and by his means transmitted to
the use of the Church; the Title of his Abstract this, viz. (...) Arguments
assoyled, whereby some in a publi^k Disputation held in Heidelberg 1568, June
10. ( Dr. Peter Boquine being Moderator, and Mr. George Withers English man
Respondent) endeavored to abolish Ecclesiastical Discipline: Which Arguments
and their solutions were taken word for word from the mouth of Dr. Ursine, at
the repetition of this disputation on the next day privately made in Colleg.
Sapient. For further satisfaction, I refer the Reader to the Book it self, and
shall now only add this note, viz. that as the Arguments were not found
sufficient to beat down that power which Christ had left unto his Church for
excommunicating scandalous and notori^us sinners; so neither were the Answers
strong enough to preserve Lay Elders in the possession of a power that belonged
not to them. Which was in time the issue of the disputation, which afterward
was so hotly followed, between Theodore Beza on the one side, and Dr. Thomas
Erastus, (whom Calvin mentions in his Epistle to Olerianus) Doctor of
Physic, on the other; Beza evincing the necessity of Excommunication in the
Church of Christ, and Erastus proving nothing to the contrary, but that
Lay Elders were not necessary to the exercise of it. Which disputation lasted
long, and effected little, managed on both sides in Printed Tractates; the last
of which was that of Beza, first published at Geneva, reprinted afterward at
London, An. 1590. But in the mean time the Genevian Discipline was admitted in
both Palatinates, the Country divided into Classes and Synodical meetings;
those Classes subdivided into their Presbyteries, and each Presbytery furnished
with a power of Excommunication, and exercising such Church Censures as the
Fact required. But then we are to know withal, that those wise Princes being
loath to leave too much Authority in the hands of the Elderships, with whose
encroachments on the power of the Civil Magistrate they were well acquainted,
appointed some Superior Officers of their own nomination to sit as Chief
amongst them, without whom nothing could be done; and they were sure that by
them nothing would be done, which either might entrench upon their Authority,
or their people's Liberty. A temperament for which they were beholden to the
said Erastus, who being a Doctor of Physic (as before was noted) devised this
Pill to purge Presbytery of some Popish humors, which secretly lay hid in the
body of it.

4. The like alloy was mixed with the Genevian Discipline in the Churches of
Hassia, Nassaw, and those other petite Estates and Signories, which make up the
Confederacy of the Wetter^vians. Which having once received the Doctrine of
Zuinglius, did shortly after entertain the Calvinian Elderships, but moderated
and restrained in those Exorbitancies which the Presbyterians actually
committed in the Realm of Scotland, and in most places else subjected unto
their Authority. But in regard the Palatine Churches are esteemed as a Rule to
the rest (the rest of Germany I mean) in all points of Doctrine; and that the
public Catechism thereof is generally reckone^ for Authentic, not only in
the Churches of the Higher Germany, but in the Netherland-Churches also; it
will not be amiss to take notice of them in such Doctrinal Points, in which
they come up close to Calvin, and the Rules of Geneva. First therefore taking
them for Zuinglians in the point of the Sacrament, and Anti-Lutherans in
defacing Images, abolishing all distinction of Fasts and Festivals, and utterly
denying all set-Forms of public Worship; they have declared themselves as high
in maintenance of Calvin's Doctrines touching Predestination, Grace, Free Will,
etc. as any sub-lapsarian or supra-lapsarian, which had most cordially Espoused
that Quarrel. For proof whereof, the Writings of Vrsine and Parcus, Alsted,
Piscator, and the rest, Professors in the Schools of Heidelberg, Herborne and
Sedan (being all within the limits of the Higher German^) might be here
produced, did I think it necessary. But these not being the proper Cognizances
of the Presbyterians, and better to be taken by their actings in the Synod of
Dort, then in scattered Tractates; I shall take notice only of those points of
Doctrine which are mere Genevian, in reference to their opposition to
Monarchical Government; a Doctrine not unwelcome to the Zuinglian Princes in
either Germany, because it gives them a fit ground for their justification, not
only for proceeding to reform their Churches without leave of the Emperor,
whom they must needs acknowledge for their Supreme Lord; but also for departing
from the Confession of Ausberge, which only ought to be received within the
bounds of the Empire.

5. First then, beginning with Vrsine, public Professor for Divinity in the
Chair of Heidelberg, he thus instructs us in his Commentary on the Palatine
Catechism. Albeit (says he) that wicked men sometimes bear Rule, and therefore
are unworthy of honors; yet the Office is to be distinguished from their
persons, and that the man whose vices are to be detested, ought to be honored
for his Office, as Gods Spiritual Ordinance: which is a truth so consonant to
the Holy Scriptures, that nothing could be said more piously in so short a
position. But then he gives us such a Gloss as corrupts the Text, telling us in
the words next following, That since Superiors are to be honored in respect
of their Office, it is therefore manifest, that so far only we must yield
obedience unto their commands, as they exceed not in the same the bounds of
their Offices. Which plainly intimates, that if Princes be at any time
transported beyond the bounds of their Offices, of which the people and their
popular Magistrates are the only Judges, the Subjects are not bound to yield
obedience unto their commands, under pretense that they are past beyond their
bounds, and have no influence on the People, but only when they shine within
the compass of their proper Spheres.

6. More plainly speaks Parcus, who succeeded him both in place and Doctrines;
out of whose Commentary on the 13 Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans,
the following propositions were extracted by some Delegates and Divines of
Oxon, when the unsoundness of his Judgment in this particular was questioned
and condemned by that University. First then it was declared for a truth
undoubted, That Bishops and other Ministers or Pastors in the Church of Christ,
both might and ought, with the consent of their several Churches, to
Excommunicate, or give over to the power of Satan, their Superior Magistrates,
for their impiety toward God, and their injustice toward their Subjects, if
they continued in those errors after admonition, till they gave some manifest
signs of their repentance. 2. That subjects being in the condition of mere
private men, ought not without some lawful calling either to take arms to
assault a Tyrant, before their own persons be endangered; or to de^end
themselves though they be endangered, if by the ordinary Magistrates they may
be defended from such force and violence. 2. That Subjects being in the
condition of mere private men, may lawfully take Arms to defend themselves
against a Tyrant, who violently shall break in upon them as a Thief or
Ravisher, and expedite themselves from the present danger, as against a common
Thief and Robber, when from the ordinary Magistrates there appears no defense
or succor. 4. That such Subjects as are not merely private men, but are placed
in some inferior Magistracy may lawfully by force of Arms defend themselves,
the Commonwealth, the Church and the true Religion, against the pleasure and
command of the Supreme Magistrate: These following conditions being observed,
that is to say, if either the Supreme Magistrate become a Tyrant, practices to
commit Idolatry, or blaspheme Gods Name; or that any great and notable
injustice be offered to them, as that they cannot otherwise preserve their
consciences and lives in safety: conditioned finally, that under color of
Religion, and a Zeal to Justice, they do not rather seek their private ends
then the public good. And this last Proposition being so agreeable to Calvin's
Doctrines, he flourishes over, and inforceth with those words of Trajan, which
before we cited out of Buchan, when he required the principal Captain of his
Guard to use the Sword in his defense, if he governed well; but to turn the
point thereof against him, if he did the contrary.

7. Building their practice on these Doctrines, 1567.
we find the Palatine Princes very forward in aiding the French Hugonots
against their King upon all occasions. In the first risings of that people,
Monsieur d' Andelot was furnished with five thousand Horse, and four thousand
Foot, most of them being of the Subjects of the Prince Elector, Anno 1562, when
he had out newly entertained the thoughts of Zuinglianism, and had not fully
settled the Calvinian Doctrines. But in the year 1566, when the Hugonots were
upon the point of a second War, he joins with others of the German Princes in a
common Ambathe, by which the French King was to be desired, that the Preachers
of the Reformed Religion might Preach both in Paris and all other places of the
Kingdom without control, and that the people freely might repair to hear them
in what numbers they pleased. To which unseasonable demand, the King, though
naturally very Choleric, made no other answer, then that he would preserve a
friendship and affection for those Princes so long as they did not meddle in
the Affairs of his Kingdom, as he did not meddle at all in their Estates After
which, having somewhat recollected his Spirits, he subjoyned these words, with
manifest show of his displeasure, that it concerned him to solicit their
Princes to suffer the Catholics to say Mass in all their Cities. With which
nipping answer the Ambassadors being sent away, they were followed immediately
at the heels by some of the Hugonots, who being Agents for the rest, prevailed
with Prince John Casimir the second Son of the Elector, to raise an Army in
defense of the common Cause. To which purpose they had already furnished him
with a small sum of money, assuring him that when he was come unto their
Borders, they would pay down one hundred thousand Crowns more toward the
maintenance of his Army. Which promises persuading more then the greatest
Rhetoric, excited him, with many Captains and Commanders, who for the most
part lived upon spoil and plunder, to raise an Army of seven thousand Horse and
four thousand Foot, with which they made foul work in France, wasting and
spoiling all Countries wheresoever they came: for being joined unto the rest of
the Hugonots Army, they found them brought to such a poor and low condition,
that they were not able to advance the least part of that sum which they had
promised to provide against their coming. 1563.
Somewhat was raised by way of Contribution, to keep them in some present
compliance; and for the rest, they were permitted to pay themselves in the
spoil of the Country, especially Churches, Monasteries, and Religious Houses.
But the Queen offering terms of Peace, none were more forward then these
Germans to embrace the offer, and Casimir more forward in it then all the rest.
The King had offered to disburse a great part of the money which belonged to
the Soldiers for their pay; which to those mercenary spirits was too strong a
temptation to be resisted or neglected.

8. These Germans were scarcely settled in their several Houses, when the
Hugonots brake out again, and a new Army must be raised by the Duke of
Zudibruck (whom the French call the Duke of Deuxponts) a Prince of the
Collateral Line to the Electoral Family; 1569.
who upon hope of being as well paid as his Cozen Casimir, tempted with many
rich promises by the Heads of the Hugonots, and secretly encouraged by some
Ministers of the Queen of England, made himself Master of a great and puis^ant
Army, consisting of eight thousand Horse and six thousand Foot. With this Army
he wastes all the Country, from the very edge of Burgundy to the Banks of
Loire; crosses that River, and commits the like outrages in all the Provinces
which lie between that River and the Aquitain Ocean. In which action, either
with the change of Air, the tediousness of his Marches, or excessive drinking,
he fell into a violent Fever, which put a period to his travails within few
days after. Nor did this Army come off better, though it held out longer: for
many of them being first consumed with sickness, arising from their own
intemperance, and the delicious lusts of the Strumpets of France; the rest were
almost all cut off at the Battle of Mont-counter, in which they lost two
Colonels, and twenty seven Captains of Foot, and all their Horse except two
thousand, which saved themselves under Count Lodowick of Nassaw. But the love
of money prevailed more with them then the fear of death: For within few years
after, Anno 1575, we find them entering France again under Prince John Casimir,
in company with the young Prince of Conde, who had solicited the Cause. The
Army, at that time consisting of eight thousand Horse, three thousand French
Firelocks, and no fewer then fourteen thousand Switz and Germane Foot, joined
with the Hugonots, and a new Faction of Politics or Malcontents, under the
Command of the Duke of Alanzon, who had revolted from his Brother; became so
terrible to the King, that he resolved to buy his Peace upon any rates. To
which end, having somewhat cooled the heats of his Brother, he purchases the
departure of the Germane Soldiers, by engaging to pay them their Arrears,
which came in all to twelve hundred thousand Crowns on a full computation:
Besides the payment of which vast sum, he was to gratify Prince Casimir with
the Siguory of ^has^eau-Thierry in the Province of Champagne, the command of
one hundred French Lances, and an annual pension of fourteen thousand Crowns,
as before was said.

9. In the mean time the flames of the like civil War consumed a great part of
Flanders, to which the Prince Elector must bring Fuel also: For being well
affected to the House of Nassaw, and more particularly to the Prince of Orange,
and knowing what encouragements the Calvinians in the Netherlands had received
from them; he hearkened cheerfully to such Propositions as were made to him at
the first by Count ^odowick his Ministers, and after by the Agents of the
Prince himself. But those small Forces which he sent, at their first engaging
doing no great service, he grants them such a large supply after the first
return of Prince Casimirs Army, Anno 1568, as made them up a Body of French and
Germans, consisting of seven thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse; with which
he sent Prince Christopher a younger Son, to gain experience in the War, and to
purchase Honor. And though he might have been discouraged by the loss of that
Army, and the death o^ his Son into the bargain, from meddling further in that
quarrel; yet the Calvinian spirit so predominated in his Court and Counsels,
that another Army should be raised, and Casimir employed as Commander of it, as
soon as he could give himself the least assurance that the French required not
his assistance. During the languishing of which Kingdom between Peace and War,
the War in Flanders grew more violent and fierce then ever, which moved the
Provinces confederated with the Prince of Orange to enter into a strict union
with the Queen of England, who could not otherwise preserve her self from the
plots and practices of Don John of Austria, by which he labored to embroyl her
Kingdom. By the Articles of which League or Union, 1573.
she bound her self to aid them with one thousand Horse and five thousand Foot;
the greatest part whereof she raised in the Dominions of the Prince Elector, or
indeed rather did contribute to the payment of so much money for his Army which
was drawn together for the service of the Prince of Orange, as might amount
unto that number. And that they might receive the greater countenance in the
eye of the World, she sends for Casimir into England, where he arrived about
the latter end of January 1578, is Royally feasted by the Queen, rewarded with
an annual Pension, and in the next year made Knight of the Garter also. By
these encouragements he returns to his charge in the Army, which he continued
till the calling in of the Duke of Anjou, and then retired into Germany to take
breath a while; where he found such an alteration in the State of affairs, as
promised him no great assurance of employment on the like occasion.

10. For Lodowick the fifth succeeding Prince Elector in the place of his
Father, and being more inclined to the Lutheran Forms, did in time settle all
his Churches on the same Foundation on which it had been built by the Electors
of the former Line; so that it was not to be thought that either he could aid
the Hugonots, or the Belgic Calvinists in any of their Insurrections against
their Princes, if either of them possibly could have had the confidence to have
moved him in it. But he being dead, and Frederick the Fourth succeeding, the
Zuinglian Doctrines and the Genevian Discipline are restored again; and then
Prince Casimir is again solicited to raise a greater power then ever for the
aid of the French. The Catholics of which Realm had joined themselves in a
common League not only to exclude the King of Navar and the Prince of Cond^
from their Succession to the Crown, but wholly to extirpate the Reformed
Religion. To counterpoise which Potent Faction, the King of Navar and his
Associates in that Cause implored the assistance of their Friends in Germany,
but more particularly the Prince Elector Palatine, the Duke of Wirtemberge, the
Count of Mombelliard, and the Protestant Cantons; who being much moved by the
danger threatened unto their Religion, and powerfully stirred up by Beza, who
was active in it, began to raise the greatest Army that ever had been sent from
thence to the aid of the Hugonots: And that the action might appear with some
Face of Justice, it was thought fit to try what they could do toward an
atonement, by sending their Ambassadors to the Court of France before they
entered with their Forces. But the Ambassador of Prince Casimir carried himself
in that employment with so little reverence, and did so plainly charge the King
with the infringing of the Edicts of Pacification, that the King dismissed them
all with no small disdain; telling them roundly, that he would give any man the
lie which should presume to tax him of the breach of his promise. This short
dispatch hastened the coming in of the Army, compounded of twelve thousand
German Horse, four thousand German Foot, sixteen thousand Switz, and about
eight thousand French Auxiliaries which staid their coming on the Borders. With
which vast Army they gained nothing but their own destruction; for many of them
being consumed by their own intemperance, more of them wasted by continual
skirmishes with which they were kept exercised by the Duke of Guise, most of
the rest were miserably slaughtered by him near a place called Auneaw (a Town
of the Province of La Beausse) or murdered by the common people, as they came
in their way.

11. Such ill success had Frederick the Fourth in the Wars of France, as made
him afterward more careful in engaging in them, until he was therein
solicited on a better ground to aid that King against the Leaguers, and other
the disturbers of the Common Peace. Nor did some other of the petty Princes
speed much better in the success of this Affair; the Country of Montbelguard
paying dearly for the Zeal of their Count, and almost wholly ruined by the
Forces of the Duke of Guise. Robert the last Duke of Bouillon, of the House of
Mark, had spent a great part of his time in the acquaintance of Beza, and
afterward became a constant follower of the King of Navar, by whom he was
employed in raising this great Army of Switz and Germans, and destined to a
place of great Command and Conduct in it: Escaping with much difficulty in the
day of the slaughter, he came by many unfrequented ways to the Town of Geneva;
where, either spent with grief of mind, or toil of body, he dyed soon after,
leaving the Signory of Sedan to his Sister Charlot, and her to the disposing of
the King of Navar, who gave her in Marriage, not long after, to the Viscount
Turenne; but he had first established Calvinism both for Doctrine and
Discipline in all the Towns of his Estate; in which they were afterward
confirmed by the Marriage of Henry Delatoure Viscount of Turenne, Sovereign of
Sedan, and Duke of Bouillon by his former Wife, with one of the Daughters of
William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, a professed Calvinian; the influence of
which House, by reason of the great Command which they had in the Netherlands,
prevailed so far on many of the Neighboring Princes, that not only the
Counties of Nassaw and Hanaw, with the rest of the Confederacy of Vetteravia,
but a great part of Hassia also gave entertainment to those Doctrines, and
received that Discipline, which has given so much trouble to the rest of
Christendom. Which said, we have an easy passage to the Belgic Provinces,
where we shall find more work in prosecution of the Story, then all the
Signories and Estates of the Upper Germany can present unto us.

12. The Belgic Provinces, subject in former times to the Dukes of Burgundy,
and by descent from them to the Kings of Spain, are on all sides environed with
France and Germany, except toward the West, where they are parted by the
Intercurrent-Ocean from the Realm of England, with which they have maintained
an ancient and wealthy Traffic. Being originally in the hands of several
Princes, they fell at last by many distinct Titles to the House of Burgundy;
all of them, except five, united in the person of Duke Philip the good, and
those five added to the rest by Charles the Fifth. From hence arose that
difference which appears between them in their Laws and Customs, as well as in
distinct and peculiar Privileges; which rendered it a matter difficult, if not
impossible, to mould them into one Estate, or to erect them into an absolute
and Sovereign, though it was diverse times endeavored by the Princes of it. The
whole divided commonly into seventeen Provinces, most of them since they came
into the power of the Kings of Spain, having their own proper and subordinate
Governors accountable to their King, as their Lord in Chief, who had the sole
disposal of them, and by them managed all Affairs both of War and Peace,
according to their several and distinct capacities: All of them privileged so
far, as to secure them all (without a manifest violation of their Rights and
Liberties) from the fear of Bondage. But none so amply privileged as the
Province of Brabant, to which it had been granted by some well-meaning, but
weak Prince amongst them, that if their Prince or Duke (by which name they
called him) should by strong hand attempt the violation of their ancient
privileges, the Peers and People might proceed to a new Election, and put
themselves under the Clyentele or Patronage of some juster Governor.

13. The whole Estate thus laid together, is reckoned to contain no more in
compass then twelve hundred miles; but is withal so well planted, and
extremely populous, that there are numbered in that compass no fewer then three
hundred and fifty Cities, and great Towns equal unto Cities; besides six
thousand and three hundred Villages of name and note, (some of them equal to
great Towns) not taking in the smaller Dorps, and inferior Hamlets. But
amongst all the Cities and great Towns, there were but four which anciently
were honored with Episcopal Sees, that is to say, the Cities of Vtrecht,
Cambray, Tournay, and Arras; and of these four, they only of Arras and Tournay
were naturally subject to the Princes of the House of Burgundy; the Bishop of
Cambray being anciently a Prince of the Empire, and Vtrecht not made subject to
them till the Government of Charles the Fifth. Which paucity of the Episcopal
Sees in so large a Territory, subjected some of the Provinces to the Bishops of
Liege, some to the jurisdiction of the Archbishops of Rheims and Colen, and
others under the Authority of the Bishops of Munster. Of which the first were
in some sort under the Protection of the Dukes of Burgundy, the three last
absolute and independent, not owing any suite or Service at all unto them. By
means whereof, concernments of Religion were not looked into with so strict an
eye, as where the Bishops are accomptable to the Prince for their
Administration, or more united with and amongst themselves in the public
Government. The inconvenience whereof being well observed by Charles the Fifth,
he practiced with the Pope then being, for increasing the number of the
Bishoprics, reducing them under Archbishops of their own, and Modeling the
Ecclesiastical Polity under such a Form, as might enable them to exercise all
manner of spiritual jurisdiction within themselves, without recourse to any
Foreign Power or Prelate but the Pope himself. Which being first designed by
him, was afterward effected by King Philip the Second, though the event proved
contrary to his expectation. For this enlargement of the number of the Sees
Episcopal, being projected only for the better keeping of the Peace and Unity
of the Belgic Churches, became unhappily the occasion of many Tumults and
Disorders in the Civil State, which drew on the defection of a great part of
the Country from that Kings obedience.

14. For so it was, that the Reformed Religion being entertained in France and
Germany, did quickly find an entrance also into such of the Provinces as lay
nearest to them; where it found people of all sorts sufficiently ready to
receive it. To the increase whereof the Emperor Charles himself gave no small
advantage, by bringing in so many of the Switz and German Soldiers to maintain
his Power, either in awing his own Subjects, or against the French, by which
last he was frequently invaded in the bordering Provinces. Nor was Queen Mary
of England wanting (though she meant it not) to the increasing of their
numbers. For whereas many of the Natives of France and Germany, who were
affected zealously to the Reformation, had put themselves for Sanctuary into
England in the time of King Edward; they were all banished by Proclamation in
the first year of her Reign. Many of which not daring to return to their
several Countries, dispersed themselves in most of the good Towns of the
Belgic Provinces (especially in such as lay most near unto the S^a) where they
could best provide themselves of a poor subsistence. By means whereof, the
Doctrine of the Protestant and Reformed Churches began to get much ground upon
them; to which the continual intercourses which they had with England, gave
every day such great and manifest advantage, that the Emperor was fain to
bethink himself of some proper means for the suppressing of the inconveniences
which might follow on it. And means more proper he found none in the whole
course of Government, then to increase the number of the former Bishoprics, to
reinforce some former Edicts which he made against them, and to bring in the
Spanish Inquisition, which he established and confirmed by another Edict
bearing date April 20. 1548. Which notwithstanding, the Professors of that
Doctrine, though restrained a while, could not be totally suppressed; some
Preachers out of Germany, and others out of France and England, promoting
underhand those Tenants, and introducing those opinions, which openly they
durst not own in those dangerous times. But when the Emperor Charles had
resigned the Government, and that King Philip the Second, upon some urgent
Reasons of State had retired to Spain, and left the Chief Command of his
Belgic Provinces to the Duchess of Parma, they then began to show themselves
with the greater confidence, and gained some great ones to their side, whom
discontent by reason of the disappointment of their several aims had made
inclinable to innovation both in Church and State.

15. Amongst the great ones of which time, there was none more considerable for
Power and Patrimony, then William of Nassaw Prince of Orange, invested by a
long descent of Noble Ancestors in the County of Nassaw, a fair and goodly
Territory in the Higher Germany; possessed of many good Towns and ample Signories
in Brabant and Holland, derived upon him from Mary Daughter and Heir of Philip
Lord of Breda, etc. his great Grandfathers Grandmother; and finally, enriched
with the Principality of Orange in France, accruing to him by the death of his
Cozen Rene; which gave him a precedencie before all other Belgic Lords in the
Court of Brussels. By which advantages, but more by his abilities both for Camp
and Counsel, he became great in favor with the Emperor Charles; by whom he
was made Governor of Holland and Zealand, Knight of the Order of the Fleece;
employed in many Ambassies of weight and moment, and trusted with his dearest
and most secret purposes. For Rivals in the Glory of Arms, he had the Counts of
Horn and Egmond, men of great Prowess in the Field, and alike able at all
times to Command and Execute. But they were men of open hearts, not practiced
in the Arts of Subtilty and dissimulation, and wanted much of that dexterity
and cunning which the other had for working into the affections of all sorts of
people. Being advanced unto this eminency in the Court, and knowing his own
strength as well amongst the Soldiers as the common people, he promised to
himself the Supreme Government of the Belgic Provinces on the Kings returning
into Spain. The disappointment of which hope, obliterated the remembrance of
all former favors, and spurred him on to make himself the Head of the
Protestant party, by whose assistance he conceived no small possibility of
raising the Nassovian Family to as great an height as his ambition could aspire
to.

16. The Protestants at that time were generally divided into two main bodies,
not to say any thing of the Anabaptists and other Sectaries who thrust in
amongst them. Such of the Provinces as lay toward Germany, and had received
their Preachers thence, embraced the Forms and Doctrines of the Luther^^
C^^^ches, in which not only Images had been still retained, together with
set-Forms of Prayer, kneeling at the Communion, the Cross in Baptism, and many
other laudable Ceremonies of the Elder times; but also most of the ancient
Fasts and F^^tivals of the Catholic Church, and such a Form of Eccle^^tical
Polity, as was but little differing from that of Bishops: which Forms and
Doctrines being tolerated by the Edicts of Paussaw and Ausberg, made them less
apt to work disturbance in the Civil State, and consequently the less obnoxious
to the fears and jealousies of the Catholic party. But on the other side, such
Provinces as lay toward France participated of the humor of that Reformation
which was there begun, modelled according unto Calvin's Platform both in
Doctrine and Discipline. More stomacked then the other, by all those who
adhered to the Church of Rome, or otherwise pretended to the peace and safety
of the Commonwealth: For the French Preachers being more practical and
Mercurial then the other were, and not well principled in respect of
Monarchical Government, were looked upon as men more likely to beget
commotions, and alienate the peoples hearts from their natural Governor. And
at the first the Prince of Orange inclined most to the Lutheran party, whose
Forms and Doctrines had been settled by his Father in the County of Nassaw: And
for the clear manifestation of the good opinion which he harbored of them, he
Married Anne the Daughter of Maurice Duke Elector of Saxony, the greatest of
the Lutheran Princes. At which when the Duchess of Parma seemed to be
displeased, he openly assured her of his Adhesion to the Catholic Cause, and
caused his Eldest Son which he had of that Marriage to be Baptized according to
the Prescript of the Church of Rome; but underhand promoted for a time the
Lutheran Interest, which he had sucked in as it were with his Mothers Milk. But
it was only for a time that he so promoted it: For finding the Calvinians to
be men of another Metal, more quick and stirring of themselves, more easily
exasperated against their Governors, and consequently more fit to advance his
purposes; he made himself the great Protector of that faction, and spared not
to profess himself for such upon all occasions; insomuch, that being afterward
questioned about his Religion by the Duke of Arescot, he discovered to him his
bald head, and told him plainly, that there was not more Calvism on his head,
then there was Calvinism in his heart.

17. But to make way for these designs, 156^.
there were two obstacles to be removed, without which nothing could be done in
pursuance of them. King Philip at his going for Spain, had left three thousand
Spanish Soldiers (the only remainder of those great Armies which had served
his Father and himself against the French) in Garrison upon the Borders, under
pretense of shutting up the backdoor against the French, but generally thought
to be left of purpose for a curb to the Natives, in case of refractoriness or
opposition unto his Commands. They must be first removed, and the Country
cleared of all such rubs as otherwise would have made the way less passable
unto private ends. For though the King had put those Soldiers under the
Command of two Lords of the Netherlands, that is to say, the Prince of Orange
himself, and the Count Egmont, that they might rather seem to be the natural
Militia of the Country, then a power of strangers; yet that device did little
edify amongst them: for the two Lords, especially the Prince of Orange,
expressed such contentment in the trust and honor which was therein conferred
upon them, that they excited the whole Country both to move the King before his
going, and the Governess after his departure to dismiss those Soldiers which
could not be imposed upon them without breach of their Privileges. To this
request the King had given a gracious answer, and promised to remove them
within four months after his going into Spain; but secretly gave order to the
Lady Regent to retain them longer, till the new Bishops and the Inquisition
were confirmed amongst them. And she conceived her self so bound to those
instructions, and their ^etaining there so necessary for his Majesty's Service,
that she delayed time as long as possibly she could: Which being observed by
those which were of greatest power and credit with the common people, it was
resolved that no more contribution should be raised on the several Provinces
toward the payment of their wages; and on the other side, the Regent was so
constant to her resolution, that she took up money upon interest for their
satisfaction. But being wearied in the end by the importunity of all sorts of
people, counseled by her Husband the Duke of Parma to give way unto it, and
authorized at last by the King himself to hearken unto their desires; she gives
order to have them drawn out of their several Garrisons, and Shipped at Flushing;
from thence to be transported into Spain with the first fair wind.

18. The easy removing of this rub, encouraged those who managed the design
for innovating in the Church and State, to make the like attempt against the
Cardinal Granvel; whose extraordinary parts and power they were more afraid
of, then of all the Spaniards in the Country. This man being of the ^erenots of
Granvel in the Country of Burgundy, was trained up by a Father of such large
abilities, that he was by Charles the Fifth made Chancellor of the German
Empire, and trusted by him in Affairs of the greatest moment: And he declared
himself to be such a quick proficient in the Schools of Learning, that he
became the Master of no fewer then seven Languages; (in all which he was able
to express himself with a fluent eloquence) and at twenty four years of age was
made Bishop of Arras: commended by his Father to the Emperor Charles, and by
him unto King Philip the Second, he served them both with great fidelity and
courage; and had withal such a dexterity of dispatch in all concernments, as
if he had been rather born then made a Statesman. And unto these he added such
a moderation in his pleasures, such abstinence both from food and sleep when
the case required it, such extraordinary pains in accommodating all the
difficulties which came before him, and such a diligent observance of his
Princes motions, that his greatest Adversaries could not choose but say, that he
was a Jewel, fit to be owned by none but the greatest Kings. By means whereof,
he so prevailed upon the King whilst he staid amongst them, that he did nothing
either at home or abroad, made neither Peace nor League with Kings or Nations,
concluded no Marriage, quieted no Seditions, acted nothing that related to
Religion or the Church, in which the counsels of this m^n were not influential.
The like Authority he held with the Duchess of Parma, not only out of that
report which the King made of him, but her own election, who found his counsel
so applyable to all occasions, that seldom any private or public business came
in agitation, in which his judgment had not been previously required, before
it was openly delivered. And though his previous resolutions in matters of
counsel, were carried with all imaginable care and closeness from the eyes of
the Courtiers; yet no man doubted but that all Affairs were t^ansacted by him,
imputing many things unto him, as it often happens, which he had no hand ^n.

19. In the first risings of this man, he was d^spised for an upstart by the
Prince of Orange, and some other great men of the Country; not fearing any
thing from him as an alien born, unfurnished of dependants, and who by reason
of his ca^ling could make no strong Alliance to preserve his Power. But when
they found that his Authority increased, that all things bended to that point
at which he aimed, and that some of the Nobility began to apply themselves unto
him, and became his Creatures; they then conceived it necessary to make head
against him, for fear of being brought to the like submissions. First therefore
they began to clash with him at the Councel-Table, and to dissent from many
things which he appeared in, though otherwise of great advantage in themselves
to the public Service. But finding that those oppositions did rather serve to
strengthen his power, th^n take any thing from it, they misreport him to the
King in their several Letters for a turbulent spirit, a man of proud thoughts,
and one that hated the Nobility. By whose depressing, he aspired to more
personal greatness then was consistent either with his Majesty's safety or the
Belgic Liberties. And that being d^ne, they generally traduce him by their
Whisperers amongst the people, to be the only man that labored for the
bringing in of the Inquisition, and for establishing the new Bishops in their
several Sees, under pretense of stopping the increase of Sects and Heresies:
And unto these reports of him, he gave some fair color, by prosecuting the
concernments of the Church with more zeal then caution; lying the more open to
the practices of the growing party, by a seeming neglect of their intendments,
and a reliance only on his Masters favor. From hence it was, that such as did
pretend to any licentiousness in Life or Doctrine, exclaimed against him as the
Author of those severities wherewith the King had formerly proceeded against
diverse of them; as on the other side, they cried up all the Lords which
appeared against him, as the chief Patriots of the Country, the Principal
Patrons and Assertors of the public Liberty.

20. The people being thus corrupted, it was no hard matter for the Lords to
advance the Project, in rendering Granvel as unpleasing in the eyes of the King,
as they had made him odious in the sight of the people. In order whereunto,
some of them showed themselves less careful of the Cause of Religion, by
smothering the publication of his Majesty's Edicts which concerned the Church
in the Provinces under their command. Others dealt underhand with the common
people, persuading them not to yield submission to those new Tribunals, which
only served for the exercise of superstition, and the Popes Authority. And
some again connived at the growth of Heresy (by which name they called it) by
suffering the maintainers of those new opinions to get ground amongst them;
encouraged secretly some seditious practices; and finally omitted nothing, by
which the King might understand by a sad experiment how much he had misplaced
his favors, and to what imminent danger he exposed the Netherlands, by putting
such Authority over them in the hands of a Forreigner. Of all which practices
the Cardinal was too intelligent, and had too many Friends abroad to be kept in
ignorance; which made him carry a more vigilant eye upon their designs, to
cross their Counsels, and elude their Artifices, when any thing was offered to
the prejudice of the public Peace: but in the end, the importunity of his
Adversaries became so violent, and the breach had such a face of danger in the
fight of the Governess, that she moved the King for his dismission; to prevent
which, he first retired into Burgundy, and from thence to Rome; preferred not
long after to be Viceroy of the Realm of Naples; and finally, made President
of the Council for Italy in the Court of Spain.

21. In the mean time the Calvinists began to try their Fortunes in those
Provinces which lay next to France, by setting up two of their Preachers on the
same day in two great Cities, Valenciennes the chief City of Haynalt, and
Tournay the chief City of Flanders Gallicant: In the first of which, the
Preacher having finished in the Marketplace where he made his Sermon, was
followed in the Streets by no fewer then one hundred people; but in the other,
by a train of six hundred, or thereabouts, all of them singing David's Psalms of
Marots Translation, according to the custom of the Hugonots amongst the French.
Some tumults hereupon ensued in either City; for the repressing whereof,
Florence of Momorancy Lord of Montigny, being the Governor of that Province,
rides in post to Tournay, hangs up the Preacher, seizes on all such Books as
were thought Heretical, and thereby put an end to the present Sedition. But
when the Marquess of Bergen was required to do the like at Valenciennes, he
told the Governess in plain terms, that it was neither agreeable to his place
or nature to put an Heretic to death. All that he did was the committing of
two of their Preachers to the common Prison; and that being done, he made a
journey unto Liege to decline and business: Which so encouraged the Calvinian
party to proceed in their purposes, that they threatened mischief to the Judges,
if any harm happened to the Prisoners. But sentence at the seven months end
being past upon them to be burnt, and all things being made ready for the
execution, the Prisoners brought unto the Stake, and the sire ready to be
kindled, there presently arose a tumult so fierce and violent, that the
Officers were compelled to take back their Prisoners, and to provide for their
own safety, for fear of being stoned to death by the furious multitude. But the
people having once begun, would not so give over; for being inflamed by one of
their company, whom they had set up in the midst of the Marketplace to preach
an extemporary Sermon, two thousand of them ran tumultuously to the common
Goal, force open the doors, knock off the Shackles of the Prisoners, restore
them to their former Liberty, and so disperse themselves to their several
dwellings. The news of which Sedition being brought to Brussels, the Governess
dispatcheth certain Companies of Foot, and some Troops of Horse, with order to
the Marquess of Bergen to appease the disorders in the Town. But they found all
things there so quiet, that there was little need of any other Sword then the
Sword of Justice; by which some of the chief Ringleaders of the Tumult, and
one of their Preachers (who had unhappily fallen into their hands) were
sentenced to that punishment which they had deserved.

22. The Calvinists conceiving by this woeful experiment, that it was not safe
jesting with Edged-tools, and that they were not of sufficient power for so
great a business, betook themselves to other courses. And finding that some of
the principal Lords were much offended at the exorbitant power of Granvel, that
others showed no good affection to his Majesty's Government, and that the rest
had no desire to see the new Bishops settled in their several Sees, for fear of
being overpowered by them in all public Councils; they seriously applied
themselves to foment those discords, and make the rupture greater then at first
it was. The new Bishops being fourteen in number, were in themselves so eminent
in point of Learning, and of a conversation so unblameable in the eyes of all
men, that malice it self could make no just exception against the persons: A
quarrel therefore must be picked against the Form and Manner of their
indowment, which was by founding them in such wealthy Monasteries as were best
able to maintain them; the Patrimony which anciently was allotted to the use of
the Abbot, being to be inverted (after the death of the incumbent) to the use
of the Bishop. This was presented to the Monks as a great disfranchisement, a
plain devesting of them of their Native Privileges; not only by depriving
them of the choice of their Governor, but by placing over them an imperious
Lord instead of an indulgent Father. The Magistrates and people of such of the
Cities as were designed for the Sees of the several Bishops, were practiced on
to protest against their admission; by whose establishment the common people
must be subject to more Masters then before they were, and the Magistrates must
grow less in power and reputation then they had been formerly. They represented
to the Merchants, that without liberty of Conscience it was not possible there
could be liberty of Trade; the want whereof must needs bring with it their
impoverishing, a sensible decay of all sorts of Manufactures; and consequently,
an exposing of the common people to extremest beggary. Which consideration, as
appeared soon after, was alone sufficient, not only to engage the Merchants,
but to draw after them that huge rabble of Mechanical people (which commonly
make up the greatest part of all populous Cities) that depended on them. But
nothing better pleased the discontented Nobility, then their Invectives against
Granvel, against whom, and such of the Court-Lords as adhered unto him, they
fastened their most scandalous and infamous Libels upon every post; not sparing
through his sides to wound the honor of the King, and reproach the Government,
which by this means they made distasteful to the common subjects.

An. 1564.
23. By these devices, and some others of like dangerous nature, they gained not
only many of the common people, but diverse of the greatest Lords; some also of
the principal Cities, and not a few of the Regulars, or Monastic Clergy. By
means whereof, their Friends and Factors grew so powerful, as to oppose such
motions both in Court and Council, as tended to the prejudice of the
Reformation; insomuch, that when King Philip had given order to the Duchess of
Parma to send two thousand Horse to the aid of Charles the French King against
the Hugonots; the Prince of Orange and his party did openly oppose, and finally
overruled it at the Council Table. This gave encouragement to the Calvinists to
try their Fortune once again, not in Valenciennes as before, but in the
principal Cities of Brabant and Flanders. At Rupelmond, a chief Town of
Flanders, a Priest which had been gained unto their opinions, and was
imprisoned for the same, fell on a desperate design of ^i^ing the next room
unto him, wherein were kept the Monuments and Records of the Prince; to the end
that while the Guards were busied in preserving things that concerned the
public, he might find a handsome opportunity to get out of their hands. But
the fire being sooner quenched then he had imagined, both he and his
Accomplices, which were nine in number, were brought unto the place of
Execution, and there justly suffered; the Priest himself declaiming bitterly
against Calvin at his Execution, and charging all his sufferings upon upon that
account. At Antwerp one Fabricius, once a Carmelite Friar, but now a great
promoter of Calvin's Doctrines, had gained much people to that side; for which
being apprehended, he had judgment of death. But being brought unto the Stake,
such a shower of Stones was seen to fall upon the head of the Hangman, that
not daring to abide the storm till the fire had done, he drew his Sword and
sheathed it in the Prisoners body, and after saved himself by seeming to make
one in the Tumult. And the next day they caused some Verses writ in blood to be
posted up, in which was signified, that there were some in Antwerp who had
vowed revenge for the death of Fabricius; though afterward they surceased,
upon the executing of one of the Mutineers, and entertained more sober and
religious counsels. But the distemper seemed much greater in the Town of
Bruges, where the Inquisitors Deputy had sent a man to prison, on a suspicion
of Heresy, with a Guard of three Officers to attend him; at which the Senate
was so moved, that they commanded the Officers to be seized upon, to be
committed close prisoners, and to be fed with nothing but bread and water; the
party in the mean time being set at liberty.

24. Startled with Tumult after Tumult, 1565.
but more with the unhandsome carriage of the Senate of Bruges; the King gives
order to his Sister the Lady Governess, to see his Fathers Edicts severely
executed, and more particularly to take special care that the Decrees and
Canons of the Council of Trent be presently received and obeyed in all the
Provinces: Against which Orders of the King, though many of the great Lords
opposed at the Council Table, yet the Governess carried it at the last. And
thereupon the opposite party incensed the Brabanters against admitting the
Edicts or the Tridentine Council, as tending manifestly to the violation of
their ancient privileges: At which though most of them took fire, yet it
burned but slowly, proceeding only at the first in the way of Remonstrance,
which for the most part carried more smoke then flame. But after the Ministers
and Agents of Lodowick Count of Nassaw (one of the younger brothers of the
Prince of Orange) were returned from Heidelberg, there appeared a kind of new
spirit amongst the people. He had before with certain other Noblemen of his
age and quality betook himself unto Geneva, either for curiosity or study, or
for some worse purpose, where being wrought upon by the Calvinians which
conversed with them, and finding their own people to be very inquisitive after
new opinions, they were not sparing in the commendation of the Religion which
they found exercised in that City, and seemed to wish for nothing more then
that they might have liberty of Conscience to profess the same. But knowing
that so great a business could not be carried on successfully but by force of
Arms, he had his Agents in the Court of the Prince El^ctor for getting some
assistance, if it came to blows, or under color of his name to awe the
Governess. And it fell out according unto his desire: for hereupon the party
animated with new hopes, renewed their former course of libelling against the
present Government with greater acrimony then before, dispersing no fewer then
five thousand of those scandalous Pamphlets within the compass of a year, by
which the people were exasperated and fitted for engaging in any action, which
by the cunning of their Leaders, and the insinuations of their Preachers,
should be offered to them.

25. But these were only the preparatives to the following Tumults; for in the
middle of these heats, nine of the Lords not being Officers of State, convened
together at Breda, the principal Seat and most assured hold of the Prince of
Orange, where they drew up a Form of an Association, which they called the
Covenant, contrived by Philip Marnixius Lord of Aldegand, a great admirer of
the person and parts of Calvin. In the preamble whereof they inveighed bitterly
against the Inquisition, as that which being contrary to all Laws both Divine
and Humane, did far exceed the cruelty of all former Tyrants: they then
declared in the name of themselves and the rest of the Lords, that the care of
Religion appertained to them as Counselors born, and that they entered into
this Association for no other reason, but to prevent the wicked practices of
such men, as under color of the sentences of death and banishment, aimed at
the Fortunes and destructions of the greatest persons: that therefore they had
taken an holy Oath not to suffer the said Inquisition to be imposed upon their
Country: praying therein, that as well God as man would utterly forsake them,
if ever they forsook their Covenant, or failed to assist their Brethren which
suffered any thing in that Cause; and finally, calling God to witness, that by
this Covenant and Agreement amongst themselves, they intended nothing but the
Glory of God, Honor of their King, and their Countries peace. And to this
Covenant as they subscribed before their parting, so by their Emissaries they
obtained subscription to it over all their Provinces; and for the credit of the
business, they caused the same to be translated into several Languages, and
published a Report that not only the Chief Leaders of the Hugonots in France,
but many of the Princes of Germany had subscribed it also: which whether it
were true or not, certain it is, that the Confederacy was subscribed by a
considerable number of the Nobility, some of the Lords of the Privy Council,
and not a few of the Companions of the Golden Fleece.

26. Of the nine which first appeared in the design, the principal were Henry
Lord of Brederode, descended lineally from Sigefride, the second Son of Arnold,
the fourth Earl of Holland; Count Lodowick of Nassaw before mentioned; and
Florence Count of Culemberg, a Town of Gueldres, but anciently privileged from
all subjection to the Duke thereof. Accompanied with two hundred of the
principal Covenanters, each of them having a case of Pistols at his Saddle-bow,
Brederode enters Brussels in the beginning of April, to which he is welcomed by
Count Horn and the Prince of Orange, which last had openly appeared for them
at the Council Table, when the unlawfulness of the confederacy was in
agitation. And having taken up their Lodging in Culemberg-house, they did not
only once again subscribe the Covenant, but bound themselves to stand to one
another by a solemn Oath. The tenor of which Oath was to this effect, That if
any of them should be imprisoned, either for Religion or for the Covenant,
immediately the rest all other business laid aside, should take up arms for his
assistance and defense. Marching the next day by two and two till they came to
the Court, they presented their petition to the Lady Regent, by the hands of
Brederode, who desired her in a short Speech at the tendry of it, to believe
that they were honest men, and propounded nothing to themselves, but obedience
to the Laws, Honor to the King, and safety to their Country. The sum of the
Petition was, That the Spanish Inquisition might be abolished, the Emperors
Edicts repealed, and new ones made by the advice of the Estates of the
Countries. Concerning which we are to know, that the Emperor had past several
Edicts against the Lutherans, the first of which was published in the year
1521, and the second about five years after, Anno 1526, by means whereof many
well-meaning people had been burnt for Heretics: but that which most extremely
gaulled them, was the Edict for the bringing in of the Inquisition, published
upon the 29 of April as before was said. Against these Edicts they complained
in the said Petition. To which upon the morrow she returned such an answer by
the consent of the Council, as might give them good hopes that the Inquisition
should be taken away, and the Edicts moderated; but that the King must first be
made acquainted with all particulars before they passed into an Act. With which
answer they returned well satisfied unto Culemberg-house, which was prepared
for the entertainment of the chief Confederates.

27. To this House Brederode invites the rest of his Company, bestows a
prodigal Feast upon them; and in the middle of their Cups it was put to the
question, by what name their Confederacy should be called. Those of their
party in France were differenced from the rest by the name of Hugonots, and in
England (much about that time) by the name of Puritans; nor was it to be
thought but that their followers might be as capable of some proper and
peculiar appellation, as in France or England. It happened that at such time as
they came to tender their Petition, the Governess seemed troubled at so great a
number, and that Count Barlamont (a man of most approved fidelity to his
Majesty's service) advised her not to be discouraged at it; telling her in the
French tongue betwixt jest and earnest, that they were but Gueux (or Gheuses,
as the Dutch pronounced it) that is to say, men of dissolute lives and broken
fortunes, or in plain English Rogues and Beggars. Upon which ground they
animated one another by the name of Gheuses, and calling for great bowls of
Wine, drank an health to the name; their Servants and Attendants crying out
with loud acclamations, Vive les Gueus, long live the Gheuses. For the
confirming of which name, Brederode takes a Wa^let which he spyed in the place,
and laid it on one of his Shoulders as their Beggars do, and out of a Wooden
dish brim-full drinks to all the Company; thanks them for following him that
day with such unanimity, and binds himself upon his honor to spend his life,
if need should be, for the generality of the Confederates, and for every member
of them in particular: Which done, he gave his Dish and Wallet to the next unto
him, who in like manner past it round, till they had bound themselves by this
ridiculous Form of initiation to stand to one another in defense of their
Covenant; the former acclamation of Long live the Gheuses, being doubled and
redoubled at every Health. The jollity and loud acclamations which they made in
the House, brought thither the Prince of Orange, Count Egmont, and Count Horn,
men of most Power and Reputation with the common people; who seemed so far from
reprehending the debauchery which they found amongst them, that they rather
countenanced the same; the former Healths and Acclamations being renewed and
followed with more heat and drunken bravery then they were a first: on which
encouragement they take upon themselves in earnest the name of Gheuses, and by
that name were solemnly proclaimed by that Raskal Rabble at their coming out;
which name being taken thus upon them, as the mark of their Faction, was
afterward communicated to all those of the same Religion.

28. Returning to their several dwellings, they caused a mischievous report to
be spread abroad, not only that they had obtained a suspension of the
Emperors Edicts, and an exemption from the power of the Inquisition; but that
the Companions of the Order of the Golden Fleece, being men of most Authority
both in Court and Council, had declared for them in the Cause. To gain belief
to which report, a false and counterfeit paper is dispersed amongst them, in
which it was notified to all that should read the same, that the Lords and
Companions of the Fleece had sworn by their Order to the Gentlemen chosen by
the Estates of the Country, to present the desires of the people to the Lady
Regent, That from thenceforth the Ecclesiastical Inquisitors and other
Magistrates should punish no man for his Religion, neither by imprisonment,
exile, or death, unless it were joined with a popular tumult, and the public
ruin of their Country; of which the Covenanters themselves were to be the
Judges. And though the Governess took the wisest and most speedy course both to
discover and proclaim the danger of so lewd a practice, and used all honest
ways for the undeceiving of the people in that Particular; yet either she
obtained no credit to her Anti-Remonstrances, or found the Venom too far
spread for so weak an Antidote. For presently upon the scattering and
dispersing of the said Declaration, as many of the Reformed parties as had fled
the Country, returned again unto their Houses; and such as had concealed
themselves, or otherwise dissembled their Religion, began more confidently to a
vow the profession of it. For whose encouragement and increase, there was no
want of diligence in such of the Ministers as resorted to them out of France;
first preaching to them in the Fields, and afterward in some of their open
Towns; but every where bitterly inveighing against the Tyranny of the Pope, the
pride of Spain, and the corruptions of the Clergy; but most especially of the
Bishops, whom they chiefly aimed at. By these invectives, and their continual
preaching up of a popular liberty, their followers so exceedingly increased in
a very short time, that in the Fields near the City of To^rnay, there were
seen no fewer then eight thousand persons at a Sermon; a greater multitude then
that in the Fields near Lisles, and sometimes more then double that number in
the fields near Antwerp. But in such Parts and Provinces as lay nearest France,
they took greater liberty, and fell from Preaching to the Ministration of the
Sacraments and Sacramentals; Marrying some, and Baptizing others, according to
the Form devised by Calvin; but Sanctifying all by a continual intermixture of
David's Psalms, translated into French Meter as before was said.

Together with these French Preachers and Calvinian Ministers, there entered
several Emissaries sent from the Admiral Colligni, the Prince of Conde, and
others of the Heads of the Hugonot Faction, whose interest it was to imbroyl
the Netherlands, that they themselves might fear no such danger on that side,
as formerly they had received. And these men played their parts so well, that a
confused Rabble of the common people, furnished with Staves, Hatchets, Hammers
and Ropes, and armed with some few Swords and Muskets, upon the Eve of the
Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, fell violently into the Towns and Villages
about St. Omers, one of the chief Cities of Artois, forced open all the Doors
of Churches and Religious Houses, if they found them shut; demolished all the
Altars, and defaced the Shrines, and broke the Images in pieces, not sparing
any thing which in the Piety of their Ancestors was accounted sacred.
Encouraged by which good success, they drive on to Ipres, a Town of Flanders,
where they were sure to find a party prepared for them, by which the Gates of
the City were set open to give them entrance: no sooner were they entered, but
they went directly to the Cathedral, (their multitudes being much increased all
the way they came) where presently they fell to work; some beating down the
Images with Staves and Hammers, some pulling down the Statues of our Savior
with Ropes and Ladders; other defacing Pulpits, Altars, and the Sacred
Ornaments, burning the Books, and stealing the Consecrated Plate. With the same
fury they proceeded to the burning of the Bishops Library, and the destroying
of all Churches and Religious Houses within that City; in which they found as
little opposition from the hands of that Magistrate, as if they had been hired
and employed in that service by the Common Council. About the same time, that
is to say, on the morrow after the Assumption, another party being of the same
affections, and taking both example and encouragement from this impunity, fall
into Menim, Commines, Vervich, and other Towns upon the Lys: In all which they
committed the like impious outrages, carrying away with them Plate and
Vestments, and all other consecrated things which were easily portable; but
burning or destroying what they could not carry. The like they would have done
also at the Town of Seclin, but that the people rose in Arms, assaulted them,
and drove them back, not without great slaughter of that mutinous and seditious
Rabble, and some loss of themselves.

30. In Antwerp the chief City of Brabant they found better Fortune. They had
before attained to so great a confidence, that having assembled in the Fields
to hear a Sermon according to their usual custom, and finding their number to
amount unto fifteen thousand; they mounted their Preacher on a Horse, and
brought him triumphantly into the City, attended by a strong Guard both of
Horse and Foot, to the great terror and affrightment of the principal
Magistrates. For remedy of which disorders, the Governess sent thither the
Count of Megen, and afterward the Prince of Orange with some slender Forces;
on the approaching of which last (for the first was presently recalled, as a
man less popular) infinite multitudes of the people went out to meet him;
entertained him with the accustomed acclamation of Vive les Gueux, and cried
him up for the great Patron and Protector of the Belgic Liberty. At which
though he seemed outwardly to be somewhat offended, yet it was easy to be seen
that he received a secret contentment in it; and therefore acted nothing whilst
he stayed amongst them, by which he might become less gracious in the eye of
that Faction then he was before. Encouraged by which remisness, and being
privately excited by some of his Followers, they abate little or nothing of
their former insolences, which they discovered not long after his departure to
the Court of Brussels, by their violent disturbance of a solemn Procession made
by the Clergy of that City, in honor of their supposed Patroness the Blessed
Virgin; and that too on the very Festival of her Assumption, when the like
outrages were committed in other places: For not content to jeer and taunt them
in the Streets as they passed along, they follow them into the principal Church
of that City; where first they fall to words, and from words to blows, and from
blows to wounds; to the great scandal of Religion, and the unpardonable
profanation of that holy Place.

31. But this was only an Essay of the following mischief. For on the same day
Sennight, being not only more numerous, but better armed, they flocked to the
same Church at the Evening-Service; which being ended, they compel the people
to forsake the place, and possess themselves of it. Having made fast the Doors
for fear that some disturbance might break in upon them, one of them begins to
sing a Psalm in Marots Meter, wherein he is followed by the rest; that such a
holy exercise as they were resolved on, might not be undertook without some
preparation: which fit of Devotion being over, they first pulled down a massy
Image of the Virgin, afterward the Image of Christ, and such other Saints as
they found advanced there, on their several Pedestals; some of them treading
them underfoot, some thrusting Swords into their sides, and others hagling of
their Heads with Bills and Axes: In which work as many were employed in most
parts of the Church, so others got upon the Altars, cast down the sacred Plate,
defaced the Pictures, and disfigured the paintings on the Walls, whilst some
with Ladders climbed the Organs, which they broke in pieces; and others with
like horrible violence, destroyed the Images in the Windows, or rather brake
the Windows in despite of the Images. The Consecrated Host they took out of
the Pixes, and trampled under their feet; carouse such Wine as they brought
with them in the sacred Chalices, and greased their shoes with that Chrysome,
or anointing Oil, which was prepared for some Ceremonies to be used at Baptism,
and in the visiting of the sick. And this they did with such dispatch, that one
of the fairest Churches in Europe, richly adorned with Statues and massy
Images of Brass and Marble, and having in it no fewer then seventy Altars, was
in the space of four hours defaced so miserably, that there was nothing to be
seen in it of the former beauties. Proud of which fortunate success, they brake
into all other Churches of that City, where they acted over the same spoils and
outrageous insolences; and afterward forcing open the doors of Monasteries
and Religious Houses, they carried away all their Consecrated Furniture, entered
their Storehouses, seized on their Meat, and drank off their Wine; and took
from them all their Money, Plate, and Wardrobes, both Sacred and Civil, not
sparing any public Library wheresoever they came: a ruin not to be repaired
but with infinite sums: the havoc which they made in the great Church only,
being valued at four hundred thousand Ducates by indifferent rates. The like
outrages they committed at the same time in Gaunt and Oudenard, and all the
Villages about them; the severalties whereof would make up a Volume: let it
suffice, that in the Province of Flanders only, no fewer then four hundred
Consecrated places were in the space of ten days thus defaced, and some of them
burnt down to the very ground.

32. The news of these intolerable outrages being posted one after another to
the Court at Brussels, occasioned the Governess (when it was too late) to see
her error in sending back her Spanish Soldiers, and yiedling to the
improvident dismission of the prudent Cardinal, by whose Authority and Counsel
she had so happily preserved those Provinces in peace and quiet; and then she
found that she had good reason to believe all the information which Count
Mansfield gave her, touching a plot of the Calvinian party in France (from
whence came most of these new Preachers) to imbroyl the Netherlands; which till
that time she looked on as a groundless jealousy. But as it is in some
Diseases, that when they are easy to be cured, they are hard to be known; and
when they are easy to be known, they are hard to be cured: so fared it at that
time with these distempers in the Belgic Provinces; which now were grown unto
that height, that it was very difficult, if not almost impossible, to find out
a remedy. For having called together the great Council of State, and acquainted
them with the particulars before remembered, she found the Counts of Mansfield,
Aremberg, and Barlamont, cheerfully offering their assistance to reduce the
people to obedience by force of Arms; but Egmont, Horn and Orange, (whose
Brother Count Lodowick was suspected for a chief contriver of the present
mischief) of a contrary judgment, so that she could proceed no further; and
indeed she durst not; for presently a secret Rumor was dispersed, that if she
did not so far gratify the Covenanters and their adherents, that every man
might have liberty to go to Sermons, and no man be punished for Religion, she
should immediately see all the Churches in Brussels fired, the Priests
murdered, and her self imprisoned. For fear whereof, though she took all safe
courses for her own security, yet she found none so safe as the granting of
some of their demands to the Chief Conspirators, by which the Provinces for the
present did enjoy some quiet. But this was only like an Intermission in the
fit of an Ague: For presently hereupon she received advertisement that those of
the Reformed party were not only suffered to take unto themselves some
Churches in Machlin, Antwerp and Tournay, which till then had never been
permitted; but that at Vtrecht they had driven the Catholics out of their
Churches, and at the Bosch had forced the Bishop to forsake the City, as their
holy Fathers in Geneva had done before them. And in a word, to make up the
measure of her sorrows, and complete their insolences, she had intelligence of
the like Tumult raised at Amsterdam, where some of the Reforming Rabble had
broken into a Monastery of the Franciscans, defaced all Consecrated things,
beat and stoned out the Religious persons, not without wounding some of the
principal Senators who opposed their doings.

33. Provoked with these indignities, she resolves upon the last remedy, which
was, to bring them to obedience by force of Arms: and therein she had no small
encouragement from the King himself, and good assurance of assistances from
such Princes of Germany as still adhered unto the Pope. The news whereof so
start^es the chief of the Covenanters, that they enter into consultation of
Electing a new Prince, or putting themselves under the power of some potent
Monarch, by whom they might be countenanced against their King, and privileged
in the cojoyment of their Religion. It was advised also, that three thousand
Books of Calvinian Doctrine should be sent into Spain, and dispersed in the
chief Cities of it; to the end, that whi^st the King was busied in looking to
his own peace at home, he might the less regard the Tumults which were raised
in the Netherlands: and yet for fear that Project might not take effect, it was
agreed upon that a combination should be made between the heads of the
Covenanters, and the principal Merchants; between whom it was finally
concluded, and the conclusion ratified by a solemn taking of the Sacrament on
either side, that the Covenanters should protect the Merchants against all men
whatsoever, who labored to restrain them in the freedom of Conscience; and
that the Merchants should supply the Covenanters with such sums of money as
might enable them to go through with the Work begun. It also was agreed upon,
that the Calvinian party for a time should suppress their own, and make
profession of conformity to the Lutheran Doctrines, contained in the Confession
of Ausberg, in hope thereby of having succor and relief from the Lutheran
Princes, if the King should seek to force them in the way of Arms: which was
accordingly performed. And that being done, they cast themselves into a
separate and distinct Republic from that of the State, erect a Supreme
Consistory in the City of Antwerp, and some inferior Judicatories in the other
Cities, (but all subordinate unto that of Antwerp) in which they take upon them
the choice of Magistrates, for managing and directing all Affairs which
concerned the Faction.

34. Of all these Plots and Consultations, the King is punctually informed by
the vigilant Governess; and thereupon caused a report to be dispersed, that he
intended to bestow a Royal visit on his Belgic Provinces; but first to smooth
the way before him by a puissant Army. On this advertisement the Governess
resumes her courage, complains how much the Covenanters had abused her favors;
and publicly declares, that she had only given them leave to meet together
for hearing Sermons of their own; but that their Ministers had took upon them
to Baptize and Marry, and perform all other Sacred Offices in a different
manner from that allowed of by the Church; That they had set up diverse
Consistories and new Forms of Government, not warranted by the Laws of the
several Provinces; That they had opened diverse Schools for training up their
Children in Heretical Principles; That they had raised great sums of Money
under pretense of purchasing a toleration of the King (whose Piety was too well
known to be so corrupted) but in plain truth, to levy Soldiers for a War
against him; That therefore she commands all Governors and Deputy-Governours
in their several Provinces, not only to dissolve Heretical Meetings (otherwise
then for Sermons only) in the time to come, but to put Garrisons into such of
the Towns and Cities as were held suspected, or were most likely to be seized
on to the Kings disservice. By this Remonstrance, seconded with the news of the
Kings intention, the leading Covenanters were so startled, that they resolved
on the beginning of the War, and were accordingly in Arms, before the Governess
had either raised Horse or Foot, more then the ordinary Train bands, which were
to be maintained in continual readiness, by the Rules of that Government. But
first, they thought it most agreeable to the State of Affairs, to possess
themselves of such strong Towns as either stood convenient for the letting in
of Foreign Succors, or otherwise for commanding the adjoining Territories. In
which design they speed so well, that many great Towns declare for them of
their own accord; some were surprised by such of the Calvinian Leaders as had
friends amongst them; and some were willing to stand neutral till they saw more
of it. But none fared better at the first then Anthony of Bomberg, one of the
Calvinists of Antwerp, who having formerly served the Hugonot Princes in the
Wars of France, had put himself into the Bosch, from whence the Faction had not
long before expelled their Bishop: And there he played his game with such fraud
and cunning, that he put the people into Arms, made himself Master of the Town,
and turned the Cannon upon Count Meghen, who was Commissionated by the
Governess, amongst other things, to plant a Garrison in the same.

35. This good success encouraged many of the rest to the like attempts, but
few of them with so good Fortune. The Count of Brederode having Fortified his
own Town of Viana, a small Town of Holland, stretches his Arms from thence to
embrace the rest, and takes in Amsterdam it self without opposition; but having
the like aim on Vtrecht, he found his hopes defeated by the Count of Meghen,
who got in before him. Worse fared ^t with Philip de Marnix, Lord of Toulouse,
another of the Antwerpian Calvinists, of greater power then Bomberg, but of
less dexterity: holding intelligence with the Provost of Middleberg, he
entertained a design of surprising Vlushing, and therewith the whole Isle of
Walcheren, and the rest of Zealand. To which end he embarks his men, and sails
down the Scheldt, not without some good hope of effecting his enterprise before
any discovery was made of it. But the Governess knew of what importance the
said Island was, and was there before him in her Forces, though not in her
person. Repulsed from thence, he marches back again toward Antwerp, takes up
his Quarters in the Borough of Ostervill, the Southwark as it were of Antwerp,
and from thence so named; where he is set upon by Lanoy, another of the Regents
Captains; the Borough fired about his ears, himself burned in a Barn, fifteen
thousand of his Soldiers killed in the flight, three hundred of them taken and
then put to the Sword: Which execution was thought necessary as the case then
stood, for fear the Calvinists in the City might renew the fight, and put him
worse to it then before: Nor were they wanting to their Friends in that
desperate exigent, whose slaughter they beheld from the Walls of the City. But
when they thought to pass the Bridge, they found no Bridge at all to give them
passage: the Prince of Orange being then at Antwerp, had caused it to be broken
down the day before, not out of any design to prevent the Calvinists from
assisting their Brethren, but rather to hinder the Victorious Catholics (if it
should so happen) from making any use of it to possess the City. But the
Calvinists not knowing of his secret purposes, tumultuously assembled to the
number of fourteen thousand men, fell foul upon him in the Streets, reviled him
by the name of Traitor, and clapped a Pistol to his Breast, and questionless
had proceeded to some greater outrage, if the Lutherans (hating the Calvinists,
and as hateful to them) had not joined with the Papists, and thereby
overpowered them both in strength and numbers.

36. But none fared worse then the Calvinians of Tournay and Valenciennes,
though they were both stronger and more numerous then in other places. Those of
Valencienn^s had refused to admit a Garrison, encouraged by their French
Preachers to that disobedience. But being besieged by Norcarmius,
Deputy Governor of Haynalt for the Marquess of Bergen, they were compelled in
the end to submit to mercy; which was so intermixed with justice, that thirty
six of the principal Incendiaries were beheaded, some of their Preachers
hanged, and some Soldiers executed; the Liberties of the City being seized,
and declared to be forfeit till the King should be pleased to restore them.
Those of Valenciennes had been animated by the Consistories of some other
Cities to make good the Town against Norcarmius, as long as they could;
assuring them that he must shortly raise the Siege, to quench the fire that
would be kindled in another Province. Accordingly it was contrived that some
Foot-Companies which lay in Armentieres should waste the Country about Lisle in
Flanders Gallicant; and that whilst Rassinghen the Governor of Lisle drew out
of the City to suppress them, the Calvinists of Tournay by the aid of their
Brethren within that City should possess themselves of it. And so far it
succeeded as they had projected, that the Armenterians, being conducted by one
Cornelius, who of a Smith became a Preacher, and would needs make himself a
Commander also, acted their part in the design, but easily were subdued by
Rassinghen at the first assault. The news whereof not only terrified the
Consistorians within Lisle it self, but so disheartened those of Tournay, who
hoped to have made themselves Masters of it, that they thought it best for them
to retire; but being set upon by Norcarmius, who had drawn some Forces from his
Camp before Valenciennes to perform this service, they were utterly routed,
most of their men (amounting to four thousand) either killed or taken; two
Barrels of Powder, twenty Field-peeces, and nine Colors, falling into the
hands of the Conquering Army: with which Norcarmius marching on directly to the
Gates of Tournay, commands them in the name of the Governess to receive a
Garrison, entered the Town, disarms the people, imprisoned the Incendiaries,
restored the Bishop and Clergy to their former power; and finally, imposed such
a Governor over them, as was like to give a good account of them for the times
ensuing.

1567.
37. The taking of these Towns to mercy, the like success in other places, and a
report that Ferdinand of Toledo Duke of Alva was coming forwards with an Army
to make way for the King, did so deject the Heads of the Gheuses, and the rest
of the Covenanters, that most of them began to droop; whereof the Governess did
not need to be advertised, and was resolved to make some present use of the
Consternation. She therefore causes a new Oath or Protestation to be forthwith
made, and to be taken by all Magistrates and Officers both of Peace and War; by
which they were to bind themselves without exception to obey any who should be
appointed in the Kings name for their Supreme Governor. And this she was
resolved upon against all disswasions; not that she meant to use it for a
discrimination, by* which she might discover how they stood affected to his
Majesty's Service; but that she might with less envy displace all such as
wilfully refused the Oath, or punish them with death and confiscation if they
brake their Faith. Being propounded to the Council, it was cheerfully approved
and subscribed by some, and resolutely opposed by others, under pretense that
they had formerly took the Oath of Allegiance to the King himself, and that
Oaths were not to be multiplied without just necessity. But none more
pertinaciously refused it then the Prince of Orange, who devised many plausible
reasons in his justification, but such as were of little weight when they came
to the balance. Count Egmont for a while demurred, but at last submitted, and
took the Oath as others of the Council had done before: the falling off of
which great man so amazed the rest, that every one thought it now high time to
provide for himself. The Prince of Orange with his Family retireth unto his
County of Nassaw, but leaves his Ministers behind him to maintain his
Interest: Count Brederode departs for Germany, where he dyed soon after: Count
William de la March, commonly called the Baron of Lume, takes Sanctuary in the
Realm of England: Bomberg not finding any safety to be had in the Bosch,
abandoneth it to the Regents Empire, by whom it was not only forced to receive
a Garrison, but also to redeem their privileges for a sum of money. After
which most of the revolted Cities came in so speedily, that there was nothing
to be seen of the late Rebellion.

38. And here the Country might have been resetled in its firm obedience, 1568.
if either the King had gone in person to confirm the Provinces, or had
employed a Minister less odious then the Duke of Alva, the cruelty of whose
nature was both known and feared; or rather, if the Prince of Orange, and the
rest of that Faction, had not preserved themselves for an afterga^e. But the
King stays behind, and the Duke comes forward. And coming forward with an Army
of experienced Soldiers, enters the Provinces, assumes the Government,
imprisoneth many of the Nobility; the Counts of Horn and Egmont amongst the
rest, whom he after executed. The news whereof being brought unto Cardinal
Granvel, he is reported to have said, That if one Fish (by which he meant the
Prince of Orange) had escaped the Net the Duke of Alva 's draught would be
nothing worth. And so it proved in the event; for the Prince being strong in
Kindred and Alliances in the Higher Germany, made use of all his interest in
them for the securing of his life, and the recovery of his Lands and Honors,
of which he was judicially deprived by the Duke of Alva, who caused the
sentence of condemnation to be passed upon him, confiscates his Estate,
pro^cribes his person, places a Garrison in Breda, enters on all the rest of
his Towns and Lands; and finally, seizes upon Philip Earl of Buren his eldest
Son, whom he sent prisoner into Spain. The news whereof gave little trouble to
the Prince, because it made his taking Arms the more excusable in the sig^t of
men: For now, besides the common quarrel of his Country, and the cause of
Religion, he might pretend an unavoidable necessity of fighting for his Life,
Lands, Honors, and Posterity, unless he would betray them all by a wilful
sluggishness. Besides, he was not without hope, that if he should miscarry in
the present enterprise, his Eldest Son, being brought up in the Court of Spain,
might be restored to those Estates which himself had lost; but if he prospered
in his work, and that the King should still think fit to detain him Prisoner,
he had another Son by the Daughter of Saxony, who might succeed him, as he
did, in his power and greatness.

39. But first, he thought it most agreeable to his present condition, to
employ other hands and heads besides his own; to which end he had so contrived
it, that whilst his brother Lodowick invaded Friesland, and Count Hostrat out
of Iuliers and the Lower Palatinate crossed over the Mose, an Army of the
French Hugonots should fall into Artois, to give the Spaniards the more work by
this treble invasion. But the French Forces being followed at the heels by some
Troops of Horse whom the King sent after them, were totally defeated near the
Town of St. Vallery; their Chief Commanders brought to Paris, and there
beheaded. Count Hostrat with his Forces had the like misfortune, first broken,
and afterward totally vanquished by Sancho d' Avila one of Alva's Generals:
Only Count Lodowick had the honor of a signal Victory, but bought it with the
death of his brother Adolph whom he lost in the Battle; though afterward
encountering with the Duke himself, he lost six thousand of his men, besides all
his Baggage, Ordnance and Ammunition, hardly escaping with his life. And now it
is high time for the Prince to enter; who having raised an Army of eight and
twenty thousand Horse and Foot (increased not long after by the addition of
three thousand Foot and five hundred Horse, which the French Hugonots out of
pure Zeal unto the Cause had provided for him) takes his way toward Brabant,
which he had marked out for his Quarters; but there he found the Dukes whole
Army to be laid in his way, whom he could neither pass by, nor engage in fight;
the Duke well knowing, that such great Armies wanting pay, would disband
themselves, and were more safely broken by delay then battle; only he watched
their motions, and engaged by parties, in which he always had the better: And
by these Arts so tired the Prince, that in the end he was compelled to dissolve
his Forces, and retire once more into Nassaw. But whilst the Duke was thus
employed in securing the passages of the Country which lay next to Germany, he
left the Ports and Sea-Towns open to the next Invadour: Which being observed by
William de March Baron of Luma, who with few Ships kept himself upon the Seas
out of Alva's reach, he suddenly seized upon the Brill, a Port of Holland,
where he defaced such Images as he found in their Churches, omitting no
irreverence unto any thing which was accounted Sacred; but otherwise so
fortified and entrenched the Town, that it proved impregnable. This happened on
Palm Sunday, Anno 1570; and on the Sunday following, being Easter Day, the
Spanish Garrison is turned out of Vlushing, the chief Port of Zealand: by
gaining of which two places, it might not be unfitly said, that they carried
the Keys of Holland and Zealand at their Girdles, and were enabled by that
means to receive succors from all Parts and Nations which lay toward the Sea,
as they after did.

40. The loss of these two Ports drew along with it a defection of most of the
strong Towns in Holland, which at the instigation of the Baron of Luma, put
themselves under the command of the Prince of Orange, and at his motion took
the Oath of fidelity to him; from him they received their Garrison, Shipping
and Arms, and to him they permitted the disposing of all places of Government,
making of Laws, and the distributing of the Revenues which belonged to the
Clergy: To him such multitudes repaired out of France and England, (besides
Auxiliary Scots) that within less then four months, a Navy of one hundred and
fifty Sail lay rigged in Vlushing, and from thence spoiled and robbed all
Merchants of the Spanish party. Nor were the Dukes Affairs in much better order
in the parts next France, in which Count Lodowick with the help of some French
Hugonots had made himself Master of Mons, the chief City of Haynalt; which
seemed the more considerable in the eyes of Alva, because the French King
openly, but for different ends, had avowed the Action. By whose permission,
Gasper Colligny, the great Admiral of France, and one of the chief Leaders of
the Hugonot party, had raised an Army in the Borders, consisting of six or
seven thousand men, which he put under the command of the Lord of I^nlis, who
had before conducted the French Succors to the Prince of Orange. But Ienlis
being defeated by Don Frederick the Dukes Eldest Son, and the Prince of Orange
wanting power to relieve the besieged, the Town was re-delivered into the hands
of the Spaniards upon terms of honor, and Lodowick retires to Dilemberg, the
chief Town of Nassaw.

41. The Prince of Orange in the mean time, animated by the General revolt of
almost all the strong Towns in Holland, raised a new Army of no fewer then
eleven thousand Foot and six thousand Horse; with which he entered into Brabant,
possessed himself of some of the principal Towns, and suffered others to redeem
themselves with great sums of money, with which he satisfied his Soldiers for
their pains and hazard in the obtaining of the rest. Dendermond and Oudenard,
two strong Towns of Flanders which had made some resistance, he both stormed
and plundered; the Soldiers in all places making spoil of Churches, and in
some tyrannizing over the dead, whose Monuments they robbed and pillaged. But
none fared worse then the poor Priests, whom out of hate to their Religion,
they did not only put to death, but put to death with tortures; and in some
places which fell under the power of the Baron of Luma, hanged up their mangled
Limbs or Quarters, as Butchers do their small Meats in a common Shambles: which
spoils and cruelties so alienated the affections of all the people, that his
power in those parts was not like to continue long; and having failed of his
attempt in relieving Mons, crossed the Country into Holland, as his surest
receptacle; on whose retreat the Duke recovers all the Towns which he had taken
in Brabant and Flanders, follows him into Holland, and besieges Harlem; in
which the Soldiers, to demonstrate of what Sect they were, made a mere Pageant
of Religion: for setting up Altars on the Bulwarks, they dressed them with
Images and representations of the Saints; and being attired in Copes and
Vestments, they sung Hymns before them, as if they were offering Devotions.
After which mockery they brought out the resemblances of Priests and Religious
persons made of straw, whipped them, and stabbed them into the body; and finally,
cutting off their heads, flung them into the Leaguer: Sometimes they also
placed the Images of Christ, and many of the Saints, against the mouth of the
Cannon, with many other Arts of the like impiety; for which they were brought
to a dear reckoning when the Town was taken; at which time most of them were
either put to the Sword, or hanged, or drowned.

42. Frederick the Prince Elector Palatine had hitherto engaged no further in
the Belgic troubles then the rest of his Neighbors. But now he does more
cordially espouse the quarrel, upon some hope of propagating the Calvinian
Doctrines, which he had lately introduced into his Dominions. And being well
affected to the House of Nassaw, and knowing what encouragements the Calvinian
Faction in the Netherlands had received from them, cheerfully hearkened to such
propositions as were made to him at the first by Count Lodowick his Ministers,
and alter by the Agent of the Prince himself. He had sent some aid not long
before to support the Hugonots: But now his Soldiers being returned from
France, and grown burdensome to him, are drawn together into a body; and with
the help of some others out of France and Germany, compound an Army of seven
thousand Foot and four thousand Horse, with which he sends Prince Christopher a
younger son, under the conduct of Count Lodowick and his Brother Henry. But
they had scarce entered within the Borders of Gelderland, where they expected an
addition of fresh Forces from the Prince of Orange, when they were set upon by
Sanchio d' Avila before mentioned, and routed with so great a slaughter, that
almost all the whole Army were either taken prisoners, remedilesly wounded, or
slain outright: and as for their three Generals, Lodowick of Nassaw, Grave
Henry, and the young Prince Christopher, they were either slain fighting in the
battle, or trampled under the Horses Feet, or finally, stisled in the flight,
as they crossed the Fens; the last more probable, because their bodies were not
to be found on the strictest search.

43. But not withstanding this misfortune, neither the Prince Elector nor the
Prince of Orange could be moved to desert the Cause, which by the temptation of
revenge was grown dearer to them. For after this we find Prince Casimir,
another of the Palatine Princes, in the Head of an Army raised for assisting
the Confederates in the Belgic Provinces, (by which name they began to be
commonly called) after the death of Requesenes, who had succeeded Alva in the
public Government; but wanting time before his death to settle the command in
some trusty hands, till some Supreme Officer might be sent unto them from the
Court of Spain; the Government devolved for the present on the Council of
State, and was invaded afterward by the States themselves, whose Deputies
assembling in the Council-house or Court of Brussels, made up the body of that
Council which governed all Affairs both of Peace and War. But great contentions
growing betwixt them and the Soldiers, and those contentions followed on
either side with great animosities, the Prince of Orange had a most excellent
opportunity for the establishing of his new Dictatorship over Holland and
Zealand, and some of the adjoining Provinces of less name and note. But being
weary at the last of their own confusions, and more impatient of the
insupportable insolences of the Spanish Soldiers, an Association is first
made in the Provinces of Brabant, Flanders, Artois and Haynalt. By which it was
agreed in Writing, and confirmed by Oath, that they should mutually assist each
other against the Spaniards till they had cleared the Country of them. And with
these Provinces, consisting for the most part of such as were counted
Catholics, Holland and Zealand, with the rest, though esteemed heretical, did
associate also: which Union is called commonly the Pacification of Gaunt,
because agreed on in that City, and was so much insisted on by the Heads of the
Leaguers, that it was counseled by the Prince, not to admit of Don John for
their Supreme Governor, till he had ratified and confirmed that Association.

44. But because there was no mention of maintaining the Kings Authority, or
preserving the Catholic Religion in the Originals of the League; it was found
necessary to provide for both by some explication, to take away the envy and
suspicion of that great disloyalty which otherwise must have fallen upon them.
And by that explication it was thus declared, viz. that they would faithfully
from thenceforth maintain the League, for the conservation of their most Sacred
Faith, and the Roman Catholic Religion; for preserving the Pacification made
at Gaunt; for the expulsion of the Spaniards and their adherents; their due
obedience to the Kings most excellent Majesty being always tendered. According
to which explication, it was confirmed by Don John under the name of the
perpetual Edict, with the Kings consent; who thought his own Authority and the
Roman Religion to be thereby sufficiently provided for, but he found the
contrary. For when the Prince of Orange was required to subscribe to the
Pacification, with the addition of two Clauses for constancy in this Religion,
and the Kings obedience, he refused it absolutely, assuring such as moved it to
him, that the Provinces under his command or consederacie with him were barred
in Conscience from subscribing to the preservation of the Romish Faith. And at
this time it was, that he merrily told the Duke of Arescot, who was one of the
Delegates, that there was not more Calvism on his head, then there was
Calvinism in his heart. He well foresaw that the agreement betwixt Don John and
the Estates of the Country would not long continue; and he resolved to make
some advantage of the breach, whenever it happened. Nor was he any thing
mistaken in the one or the other; for discontents and jealousies increasing
mutually between the parties, Don John leaves Brussels, and betakes himself to
the Castle of Namure for fear of an Assassinate (as it was given out) which was
intended on his person: which so incensed the Estates, that by a general
consent, a Dictatorian or Sovereign power was put into the hands of the Prince
of Orange by the name Ruart, according to the privilege and practice of the
Brabanters in extreme necessities. Invested with which power, he instituteth a
new face of Government both in Brussels it self, and many of the Towns
adjoining, modelled after the Example of Holland and Zealand. He demolished
also the great Fort at Antwerp, which had been raised with so great Pride and
Ostentation by the Duke of Alva: The like done also in demolishing the Castles
of Gant, Vtrecht, Lisle, Valenciennes, and some other places; performed by such
alacrity by them that did it, as if they had shaken off the Yoke of some
Foreign servitude. An Oath was also framed for renouncing all obedience to Don
John their Governor, and people of all sorts compelled to take it; for the
refusal whereof by the Jesuits of Antwerp, a Rabble of Calvinian Zealots, on
the day of Pentecost, forced open the doors of that Society, plundered their
houses of all things Sacred and Profane, and set the Father on board a Ship of
the Hollanders with great scorn and insolency, to be landed in some other
Country.

45. The like done also to the Fathers of Tournay, Bruges, and Maestricht,
banished on the same account from their several Cities; with whom were also
exiled in some places Franciscan Friars, in others many secular Priests, who
would not easily be persuaded to abjure their Loyalty. By whose departure
diverse Churches were left destitute, and unprovided of incumbents to instruct
the people: which so increased the confidence and hopes of the Calvinians, that
they not only petitioned the Estates for liberty of Conscience, but for the
public use of Churches in their several Territories: but being refused in
their desires, (though the Prince of Orange openly appeared for them) they were
resolved no longer to expect the lazy temper of Authority, but actually took
possession of some of the Churches in Brabant, Gelderland and Flanders, and
openly exercised that Religion, which till then they had professed in secret;
nor durst the Estates do any thing in vindication of their own Authority,
considering what necessary use they might have of them, in the present War
against Don John, and from how great a person they received encouragement. But
in the midst of this career, they received a stop; for the Confederates being
vanquished by Don John at the battle of Gemblack, Brussels and all the Towns
of Brabant submitted themselves one after another to the power of the
conqueror. Philipivil, a strong Town of Haynalt* Limburg and Dalem, with some
others, not so easily yiedling, were either forced by long siege, or some
violent storming, or otherwise surrended upon capitulations. During which
Sieges and Surrendries, the Prince of Orange, who had escaped with safety from
the battle of Gemblack, was busied in establishing his Dominion on the Coast
of Holland: In which design he found no opposition but at Amsterdam, constant
at that time, even to miracle, both to their old Religion and their old
Obedience. But being besieged on all sides both by Sea and Land, they yielded
on condition of enjoying the free exercise of their former Faith, and of the
like Freedom from all Garrisons, but of Native Citizens: But when they had
yielded up the Town, they were not only forced to admit a Garrison, but to
behold their Churches spoiled, their Priests ejected, and such new Teachers
thrust upon them as they most abominated. But liberty of Religion being first
admitted, a confused liberty of opinions followed shortly after; till in the
end that Town became the common Sink of all Sects and Sectaries which hitherto
have disturbed the Church, and proved the greatest scandal and dishonor of the
Reformation.

46. Holland had lately been too fruitful of this viperous brood, but never
more unfortunate, then in producing David George of Delfe, and Henry Nicholas
of Leiden, the two great Monsters of that age: but the impieties of the first
were too gross and horrid to find any followers; the latter was so smoothed
over as to gain on many, whom the Impostor had seduced. The Anabaptists out of
Westphalia had found shelter here in the beginning of the Tumults; and possibly
might contribute both their hearts and hands to the committing of those spoils
and outrages before remembered. In imitation of whose counterfeit piety, and
pretended singleness of heart, there started up another Sect as dangerous and
destructive to humane Society as the former were; for by insinuating themselves
into the heart of the ignorant multitude, under a show of singular Sanctity and
Integrity, did afterward infect their minds with damnable Heresies, openly
repugnant to the Christian Faith. In ordinary Speech they used new and
monstrous kinds of expressions, to which the ears of men brought up in the
Christian Church had not been accustomed, and all men rather wondered at then
understood. To difference themselves from the rest of mankind, they called
their Sect by the name of the Family of Love, and labored to persuade their
hearers, that those only were elected unto life Eternal, which were by them
adopted Children of that Holy Family; and that all others were but Reprobates
and Damned persons. One of their Paradoxes was (and a safe one too) that it was
lawful for them to deny upon oath whatsoever they pleased, before any
Magistrate, or any other whomsoever, that was not of the same Family or Society
with them. Some Books they had, in which their dotages were contained and
propagated; first writ in Dutch, and afterward translated into other Languages
as tended most to their advantage; that is to say, The Gospel of the Kingdom;
The Lords Sentences; The Prophecy of the Spirit of the Lord; The publication
of peace upon earth: by the Author H. N. But who this H. N. was, those of the
Family could by no fair means be induced or enforced by threatenings to reveal.
But after, it was found to be this Henry Nicholas of Leiden, whom before we
spoke of: Who being emulous of the Glories of King John of Leiden, that most
infamous Botcher, had most blasphemously preached unto all his followers, that
he was partaker of the Divinity of God, as God was of his humane nature. How
afterward they past over into England, and what reception they found there,
may be told hereafter.

50. By giving freedom of Conscience to all Sects and Sectaries, and amongst
others, to these also, the Prince of Orange had provided himself of so strong a
party in this Province, that he was able to maintain a defensive War against
all his opposites, especially after he had gained the Ports of Brill and
Vlushing, which opened a fair entrance unto all adventurers out of England and
Scotland. For on the Rumor of this War, the Scots in hope of prey and plunder,
the English in pursuit of Honor and the use of Arms, resorted to the aid of
their Belgic Neighbors, whose absolute subjugation to the King of Spain was
looked on as a thing of dangerous consequence unto either Nation. And at the
first they went no otherwise then as Volunteers of their own accord, rather
connived at then permitted by their several Princes: But when the Government
was taken into the hands of the States, and that the War was ready to break out
betwixt them and Don John; the Queen of England did not only furnish them with
large sums of money, but entered into a League or Confederation; by which it was
agreed, That the Queen should send unto their aid one thousand Horse and five
thousand Foot; that they should conclude nothing respecting either Peace or
War, without her consent and approbation; that they should not enter into
League with any person or persons, but with her allowance, and she, if she
thought good, to be comprehended in the same; that the States should send the
like aid unto the Queen, if any Prince attempted any act of Hostility against
her or her Kingdoms; and that they should furnish her with forty Ships of
sufficient burden, to serve at her pay under the Lord Admiral of England,
whenever she had any necessary occasion to set forth a Navy; and finally (not
to insist upon the rest) that if any difference should arise amongst
themselves, it was to be referred and offered unto her Arbitrament. And to this
League she was the rather induced to grant her Royal assent, because she had
been certainly advertised by the Prince of Orange that Don John was then
negotiating a marriage with the Queen of Scots, that under color of her Title
he might advance himself to the Crown of England. And yet she ventured neither
men nor money, but on very good terms; receiving in the way of pawn the
greatest part of the rich Jewels and massy Ornaments of Plate which anciently
belonged unto the Princes of the House of Burgundy.

51. This League exceedingly increased the reputation of the new Confederacy,
and made the States appear considerable in the eye of the world. And more it
might have been, if either Don John's improsperous Government had continued
longer, or if the Prince of Orange had not entertained some designs apart for
himself. But Don John dies in the year 1578, and leaves his Forces in the power
of Alexander Farneze Prince of Parma, Son to that Duchess whom we have so
often mentioned in this part of our History. A Prince he was of no less parts
and Military Prowess, then any of his Predecessors; but of a better and more
equal temper then the best amongst them; whereof he gave sufficient testimony
in his following Government, in which he was confirmed (after the Kings
occasioned lingrings) with great state and honor: For having regained from the
States some of the best Towns of which they had possessed themselves before the
arrival of Don John, he forced them to a necessity of some better counsels then
those by which they steered their course since they came to the Helm. And of
all counsels none seemed better to the Prince of Orange, then that the Country
should be so cantoned amongst several Princes, that every one being engaged to
defend his own, the whole might be preserved from the power of the Spaniards.
To this end it had been advised that Flanders and Artois should return to the
Crown of France, of which they were holden, and to the Kings whereof the Earls
of both did homage in the times foregoing. The Queen of England was to have
been gratified with the Isles of Zealand; the Dukedom of Gueldres to divert to
the next Heirs of it; Groaning and Deventer to be incorporated with the Hans;
Holland and Friesland, together with the districht of Vtrecht, to be
appropriated wholly to the Prince of Orange, as the reward of his deservings:
the Brabanters to a new Election, according to their native rights: the rest of
the Provinces to remain to the German Empire, of which they had anciently
Eleired.

52. This distribution I confess had some cunning in it, and must have quickly
brought the Spanish pride to a very low ebb, if he that laid the plot could
have given the possession. It is reported that when the Pope offered the Realms
of Naples and Sicily to King Henry the Third, for Edmond Earl of Lancaster his
youngest Son, he offered them on such hard conditions, (and so impossible in a
manner to be performed) that the Kings Ambassadors merrily told him, he might
as well create a Kingdom in the Moon, and bid his Master climb up to it, for it
should be his. And such a Lunary conceit was that of the division and
subdivision of the Belgic Provinces, in what Calvinian head soever it was
forged and hammered. For being that each of the Donces was to conquer his part
before he could receive any benefit from it, the device was not like to procure
much profit, but only to the Prince of Orange, who was already in possession,
and could not better fortify and assure himself in his new Dominion, then by
cutting out so much work for the King of Spain, as probably might keep him
exercised to the end of the world. But this device not being likely to succeed,
it seemed better to the Prince of Orange to unite the Provinces under his
command into a Solemn League and Association, to be from thenceforth called the
Perpetual Union. Which League, Association, or perpetual Union, bears date at
Vtrecht on the 23 of January 1578, and was then made between the Provinces of
Holland, Zealand, Guelders, Zutphen, Vtrecht, Friesland and Overyssel, with
their Associates, called ever since that time the United Provinces. 1579.
In the first making of which League or perpetual Union, it was provided in the
first place, that they should inseparably join together for defense of
themselves, their Liberty and Religion, against the power of the Spaniard. But
it was cautioned in the second, that this Association should be made without
any diminution or alteration of the particular Privileges, Rights, Freedoms,
Exemptions, Statutes, Customs, Uses, Preheminencies, which any of the said
Towns, Provinces, Members, or Inhabitants at that time enjoyed. Liberty of
Religion to be left to those of Holland and Zealand, in which they might govern
themselves as to them seemed good: and such a Freedom left to those of other
Provinces, as was agreed on at the Pacification made at Gaunt; by which it was
not lawful to molest those of the Church of Rome in any manner whatsoever.

53. But more particularly it was provided and agreed on, that such
Controversies as should grow between the said Provinces, Towns, or Members of
this Union, touching their Privileges, Customs, Freedoms, etc. should be
decided by the ordinary course of Justice, or by some amicable and friendly
composition amongst themselves; and that no other Countries, Provinces, Members
or Towns, whom those Countries did no way concern, shall in any part meddle by
way of friendly intermission tending to an accord. Which caution I the rather
note in this place and time, because we may perhaps look back upon it in the
case of Barnevelt, when they had freed themselves from the power of the
Spaniards, and were at leisure to infringe the public Liberties, in the
pursuit of their particular Animosities against one another. But to proceed:
this Union, as it was more advantageous unto Queen Elizabeth, then the general
League; so was it afterward more cordially affected by her, when their
necessities enforced them to cast themselves and their Estates upon her
protection. But these proceedings so exasperated the King of Spain, that he
proscribed the Prince of Orange by his public Edict, bearing date June 18.
1581. 1581.
And on the other side, the Prince prevailed so far upon those of the Union, as
to declare by public Instrument, that the King of Spain, by reason of his many
violations of their Rights and Liberties, had forfeited his Estate and Interest
in the several Provinces, and therefore that they did renounce all manner of
fidelity and obedience to him. Which Instrument bears date on the twenty sixth
of July then next following. Upon the publishing whereof, they brake in pieces
all the Seals, Signets, and Counter-signets of the King of Spain; appointed
others to be made by the States General; for dispatch of such business as
concerned the Union or Confederation; requiring all subjects to renounce their
Oaths to the said King of Spain, and to take a new Oath of Fidelity to the
general Estates, against the said King and his adherents: the like done also by
all Governors, Superintendents, Chancellors, Counselors, and other Officers,
etc. They had before drawn the Sword against him, and now they throw away the
Scabberd. For to what end could this action aim at, but to make the breach
irreparable between them and the King, to swell the injury so high, as not to
be within the compass of future pardon? And when men once are brought unto such
a condition, they must resolve to fight it out to the very last, and either
carry away the ^arland as a sign of Victory, or otherwise live like Slaves, or
dye like Traitors. But this was done according to Calvin's Doctrine in the Book
of Institutes, in which he gives to the Estates of each several Country such a
Coercive Power over Kings and Princes, as the Ephori had exercised over the
Kings of Sparta, and the Roman Tribunes sometimes put in practice against the
Consuls. And more then so, he does condemn them of a betraying of the Peoples
Liberty, whereof they are made Guardians by Gods own appointment (so he says
at least) if they restrain not Kings when they play the Tyrants, and want only
insult upon, or oppress the Subjects. So great a Master could not but meet with
some apt Scholars in the Schools of Polity, who would reduce his Rules to
practice, and justify their practice by such great Authority.

54. But notwithstanding the unseasonable publication of such an unprecedented
sentence, few of the Provinces fell off from the Kings obedience; and such
strong Towns as still remained in the hands of the States, were either forced
unto their duty, or otherwise hard put to it by the Prince of Parma. To keep
whom busied in such sort, that he should not be in a capacity of troubling his
Affairs in Holland, the Prince of Orange puts the Brabanders (whose privileges
would best bear it) to a new Election: And who more fit to be the man then
Francis Duke of Anjou, Brother to Henry the Third of France, and then in no
small possibility of attaining to the Marriage of the Queen of England?
Assisted by the Naval power of the one, and the Landforces of the other, What
Prince was able to oppose him? and what power to withstand him? The young Duke
passing over into England, found there an entertainment so agreeable to all
expectations, that the Queen was seen to put a Ring upon one of his Fingers;
which being looked on as the pledge of a future Marriage, the news thereof
posted presently to the Low Countries by the Lord Aldegund who was then present
at the Court, where it was welcomed both in Antwerp and other places with all
signs of joy, and celebrated by discharging of all the Ordnance both on the
Walls, and in such Ships as then lay on the River. After which triumph comes
the Duke, accompanied by some great Lords of the Court of England, and is
invested solemnly by the Estates of those Countries, in the Dukedoms of Brabant
and Limburg, the Marquisate of the holy Empire, and the Lordship of Machlin:
which action seems to have been carried by the power of the Consistorian
Calvinists; for besides that it agrees so well with their common Principles,
they were grown very strong in Antwerp, where Philip Lord of Aldegund, a
professed Calvinian, was Deputy for the Prince of Orange, as they were also in
most Towns of consequence in the Dukedom of Brabant. But on the other side, the
Romish party was reduced to such a low estate, that they could not freely
exercise their own Religion, but only as it was indulged unto them by Duke
Francis, their new-made Sovereign, upon condition of taking the Oath of
Allegiance to him, and abdicating the Authority of the King of Spain; the grant
of which permission had been vain and of no significancie, if at that time they
could have freely exercised the same without it. But whosoever they were that
concurred most powerfully in conferring this new honor on him, he quickly
found that they had given him nothing but an airy Title, keeping all power unto
themselves: So that upon the matter he was nothing but an honorable Servant,
and bound to execute the commands of his mighty Masters. In time perhaps he
might have wrought himself to a greater power; but being young, and ill
advised, he rashly enterprised the taking of the City of Antwerp; of which
being frustrated by the miscarriage of his plot, he returned ingloriously into
France, and soon after dies.

55. And now the Prince of Orange is come to play his last part on the public
Theater: his winding Wit had hitherto preserved his Provinces in some terms of
peace, by keeping Don John exercised by the General States, and the Prince of
Parma no less busied by the Duke of Anjou; nor was there any hope of recovering
Holland and Zealand to the Kings obedience, but either by open force, or some
secret practice; the first whereof appeared not possible, and the last ignoble.
But the necessity of removing him by what means soever, prevailed at last above
all sense and terms of Honor. And thereupon a desperate young Fellow is
engaged to murder him; which he attempted by discharging a Pistol in his face,
when he was at Antwerp attending on the Duke of Anjou; so that he hardly
escaped with life. But being recovered of that blow, he was not long after shot
with three poison Bullets by one Balthazar Gerard a Burgundian born, whom he
had lately taken into his service: which murder was committed at Delph in
Holland, on the 10 of June 1584, when he had lived but fifty years, and some
months over. He left behind him three Sons, by as many Wives. On Anne the
Daughter of Maximilian of Egmont Earl of Bucen, he begat Philip Earl of Bucen
his eldest Son, who succeeded the Prince of Orange after his decease. By Anne
the Daughter of Maurice Duke Elector of Saxony, he was Father of Grave Maurice,
who at the age of eighteen years was made Commander General of the Forces of
the States United, and after the death of Philip his Elder Brother, succeeded
him in all his Titles and Estates. And finally, by his fourth Wife Lovise
Daughter of Gasper Colligny great Admiral of France (for of his third, being a
Daughter to the Duke of Montpensier, he had never a Son) he was the Father of
Prince Henry Frederick, who in the year 1625 became Successor unto his Brother
in all his Lands, Titles, and Commands. Which Henry by a Daughter of the Count
of Solmes, was Father of William Prince of Orange, who married the Princess
Mary, Eldest Daughter of King Charles the second Monarch of great Britain: And
departing this life in the flower of his youth and expectations, Anno 1650, he
left his Wife with Child of a Post-humous Son, who after was baptized by the
name of William, and is now the only surviving hope of that famous and
illustrious Family.

56. But to return again to the former William, 1584.
whom we left weltring in his blood at Delph in Holland: He was a man of great
possessions and Estates, but of a soul too large for so great a Fortune: For
besides the Principality of Orange in France, and the County of Nassaw in
Germany, he was possessed in right of his first Wife of the Earldom of Bucen in
Gelderland, as also of the Town and Territories of Lerdame and Iselstine in
Holland; and in his own Patrimonial Right, was Lord of the strong Towns and
goodly Signories of Breda, Grave and Die, in the Dukedom of Brabant. In the
right of which last Lordship, he was Burgrave of Antwerp. He was also Marquess
of Vere and Vlushing, with some jurisdiction over both, in the Isle of
Walcheren; by Charles the Fifth made Knight of the Golden Fleece, and by King
Philip Governor of Holland, Zealand, and the County of Burgundy. All which he
might have peaceably enjoyed with content and honor, as did the Duke of
Areschot, and many others of the like Nobility, if he had aimed only at a
personal or private greatness. But it is possible that his thoughts carried him
to a higher pitch, and that perceiving what a general hatred was born by the
Low Countrymen against the Spaniard, he thought it no impossible thing to
dispossess them at the last of all those Provinces, and to get some of them for
himself. And he had put fair for it, had not death prevented him, by which his
life and projects were cut off together. For compassing which projects, he made
use of that Religion which best served his turn: being bred a Lutheran by his
Father, he professed himself a Romanist under Charles the Fifth; and after
finding the Calvinians the more likely men to advance his purposes, he declared
himself chiefly in their favor, though he permitted other Sects and Sectaries
to grow up with them; in which respect he openly opposed all Treaties,
Overtures, and Propositions, looking toward a peace, which might not come
accompanied with such a liberty of Conscience, both in Doctrine and Worship, as
he knew well could never be admitted by the Ministers of the Catholic King.
But the Calvinians of all others were most dear unto him. By his encouragement,
the Belgic Confession was drawn up and agreed upon 1567. By his countenance,
being then Burgrave and Governor of Antwerp (as before is said) they set up
their Consistory in that City, as afterward in many others of the Dukedom of
Brabant; and by his favor they attained unto such Authority, and took such
deep root in Holland, Zealand, and the rest of the Provinces under his command,
that they prevailed in fine over all Religious Sects and Sectaries which are
therein tolerated.

57. And that they might the better be enabled to retain that power which under
him they had acquired, they were resolved not to return again to their first
obedience, which they conceived so inconsistent with it, and destructive of it:
To this end they commit the Government to some few amongst them, under the name
of the Estates, who were to govern all affairs which concerned the public in
the nature of a Commonwealth, like to that of the Switzers; so much the more
agreeable to them, because it came more near to that form or Polity which they
had erected in the Church. And in this posture they will stand as long as they
can; which if they found themselves unable to continue with any comfort, and
that they needs must have a Prince, they will submit themselves to the French
and English, or perhaps the Dane; to any rather then their own. And to this
point it came at last; for the Prince of Parma so prevailed, that by the taking
of Gaunt and Bruges, he had reduced all Flanders to the Kings obedience,
brought Antwerp unto terms of yiedling, and carried on the War to the Walls of
Vtrecht. In which extremity they offered themselves to the French King; but his
affairs were so perplexed by the Hugonots on the one side, and the Guisian
Faction on the other, that he was not in a fit capacity to accept the offer. In
the next place they have recourse to the Queen of England; not as before, to
take them into her protection, but to accept them for her Subjects; and that
the acceptance might appear with some show of justice, they insist on her
descent from Philip Wife to King Edward the Third, Sister, and some say Heir of
William the Third, Earl of Holland, Haynalt, etc. Which Philip, if she were the
Eldest Daughter of the said Earl William (as by their Agents was pretended)
then was the Queens Title better then that of the King of Spain, which was
derived from Margaret the other Sister: Or granting that Philip was the
younger; yet on the failer, or other legal interruption of the Line of
Margaret, (which seemed to be the case before them) the Queen of England might
put in for the next Succession: and though the Queen upon very good reasons and
considerations refused the Sovereignty of those Countries, which could not
without very great injury to public justice be accepted by her; yet so far she
gave way to her own fears, the ambition of some great persons who were near
unto her, and the pretended Zeal of the rest, that she admitted them at the
last into her protection.

58. The Earl of Leicester was at that time of greatest power in the Court of
England, who being a great favourer of the Puritan Faction, and eagerly
affecting to see himself in the head of an Army, solicited the affair with all
care and cunning; and it succeeded answerably to his hopes and wishes. The
Queen consents to take them into her protection, to raise an Army of five
thousand Foot and one thousand Horse, to put it under the Command of a
sufficient and experienced General, and to maintain it in her pay till the War
were ended. And it was condescended to on the other side, that the Towns of
Brill and Vlushing, with the Fort of Ramekins, should be put into the hands of
the English; that the Governor whom the Queen should appoint over the
Garrisons, together with two other persons of her nomination, should have place
and suffrage in the Council of the States United; that all their own Forces
should be ranged under the Command of the English General; and that the States
should make no peace without her consent. By which transaction, they did not
only totally withdraw themselves from the King of Spain, but suffered the
English to possess the Gates of the Netherlands, whereby they might imbar all
Trade, shut out all Supplies, and hold them unto such conditions as they
pleased to give them. But any Yoke appeared more tolerable then that of the
Spaniard; and any Prince more welcome to them, then he to whom both God and
Nature had made them subject. According unto which agreement, Vlushing is put
into the hands of Sir Philip Sidney, the English Army under the Command of the
Earl of Leicester; and (which is more then was agreed on) an absolute Authority
over all Provinces is committed to him, together with the glorious Titles of
Governor and Captain General of Holland, Zealand, and the rest of the States
United: which how it did displease the Queen; what course was took to mitigate
and appease her anger; what happened in the war, betwixt him and the Prince of
Parma; and what cross Capers betwixt him and the States themselves, is not my
purpose to relate. It is sufficient that we have presented to the eye of the
Reader, upon what principles the Netherlands were first embroyled, whose hands
they were by which the Altars were profaned, the Images defaced, Religious
Houses rifled, and the Churches ruinated: And finally, by what party, and by
whose strange practices, the King of Spain was totally divested of all those
Provinces, which since have cast themselves into the form of a Commonwealth.

59. Which being thus shortly laid together in respect of their Politics, we
must look back and take another view of them in their Ecclesiastics. In which
we shall find them run as cross to all Antiquity, as they had done to Order
and good Government in their former Actings. And the first thing we meet with
of a Church-concernment, was the publishing of their Confession of their Faith
and Doctrine, Anno 1565, or thereabouts (as many national and provincial
Churches had done before) but differing in many great points from that of
Ausberg; and therefore the less acceptable unto the Lutheran party, and the
more distasteful to the Romish. In which Confession, to be sure, they must hold
forth a parity of Ministers in the Church of Christ; they had not else come up
to the Example and design of the Mother-City, which was to lay all flat and
level in the public Government: For in the XXXI Article Quantum v^ro attinet
divini verbi Ministros, u^i^un, ^e l^corum sint, Eandem illi potestatem and
Authoritatem habent, etc. Con^ess. Belg. Art. 31.
it is said expressly, that for as much as concerns the Ministers of Gods holy
Word, in what place soever they shall execute that Sacred Calling, they are all
of them to enjoy the same Power and Authority, as being all of them the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, the only Universal Bishop, and the only Head of
his Body which is the Church. And for the Government of the Church, it was
declared to be most agreeable to that Sacred and Spiritual Polity by God
prescribed in his Word, that a Consistory, or Ecclesiastical Senate should be
Ordained in every Church, consisting of Pastors, Elders and Deacons, Senio^es
quoque sint and Diaconi, qu^ cum pastoribus Senatum quasi Ecclesia constituant.
ut hac rations vera Religio conse^va^i potest, etc. Ibid. Art. 30.
to whose charge and care it should belong, that true Religion be preserved*
sound Doctrine preached, and that all vicious and lewd livers should be
restrained and punished by the Churches Censures. For turning which Aerian
Doctrines into use and practice, they did not only animate all Orders and
Degrees of men not to admit their new Bishops where they were not settled, or to
expel them where they were; but alienated and dismembered all such Lands and
Rents by which they were to be maintained. This they conceived the readiest way
to make sure work with them; for when the maintenance was gone, the Calling
was not like to hold up long after. And this being done, as they had first set
up their Consistories in Antwerp, and such other Cities in which they were
considerable for power and number; so by degrees they set up their Presbyteries
in the lesser Towns, which they united into Classes, and ranged those Classes
into National and Provincial Synods: In which they made such Laws and Canons
(if some of their irregular Constitutions may deserve that name) as utterly
subverted the whole Frame of the ancient Discipline, and drew unto themselves
the managery of all Affairs which concerned Religion.

60. But that they might not be supposed therein to derogate from the Authority
of the Civil Magistrate, they are content to give him a coercive power in some
matters which were merely Civil; and therefore in plain terms condemn the
Anabaptists for seditious persons, Enemies to all good Order and public
Government. But then they clog him with some Duties, in which he was to be
subservient to their own designs; that is to say Vt Sacrum Ministerium
^ueau^ur, omnem Idolatriam a Dei cultu submoveant, Regnum Anti^hristi d^^uan^,
etc. Ibid. Art 36.
, the countenancing of the Sacred Ministry; removing all Idolatry from the
Worship of God; the ruinating and destroying of the Kingdom of Antichrist. And
what they meant by Antichrist, Idolatry, and the Sacred Ministry, is easy to
be understood, without the help of a Commentary. Which Duties if the Magistrate
shall discharge with care and diligence, he would ease them of much labor,
which otherwise they meant to take upon themselves; if not, they must no longer
stay his leisure, nor expect his pleasure, but put their own hands unto the
work: and so it was delivered for good Doctrine by Snecanus, a Divine of
West-Friesland, for which see lib. 8. number. 23. Which though it be the general
Doctrine of all the party, yet never was it preached more plainly then by
Cleselius a Calvinian of Rotterdam, who openly maintained, that if the
Magistrates took no care to reform the Church, Nece^se est tum id face^e
plebeios Israelit^^.
that then it did belong to the common people: And they, as he informs us, were
obliged to do it even by force and violence, not only to the shedding of their
own, but their Brethrens blood Lic^ ad Sanguinem usque pro eo pugnent.
. So principled, it could be no marvail if they turned out the Bishops to make
room for their own Presbyteries, defaced all Churches that retained any thing
in them of the old Idolatries; and finally, pulled down even the Civil
Magistrate, when his advancing did not stand with their ends and purposes.
Flacius Ilyricus, the founder of the Stiff or Rigid Lutherans, had led the way
unto them in the last particular: By whom it was held forth for a Rule in all
Church-Reformations, Principes potius me^u seditionum ^errendos, quam vel
minimum pacis causa indulgend^m. Necess. Respons. p 83.
that Princes should be rather terrified with the fear of Tumults, then any
thing which seemed to savor of Idolatry or Superstition should either be
tolerated or connived at for quietness-sake. Concurring with him as they did,
in his Doctrines of Predestination, Grace, Freewil, and things indifferent,
they were the better fitted to pursue his Principles in opposition unto all
Authority, by which their Councils were controuled, or their Power restrained.
And by this means, the publishing of their Confession with these Heads and
Articles, they did not only justify their exorbitancies in the time then
past, but made provision for themselves in the times to come.

61. In such other points of their Confession as were merely doctrinal, and
differing from the general current of the Church of Rome, they show themselves
for the most part to be Anti-Lutheran; that is to say, Zuinglians in the point
of the Holy Supper, and Calvinists in the Doctrine of Predestination. In which
last point, they have expressed the Article in such modest terms, as may make it
capable of an Orthodox and sober meaning: For presupposing all mankind by the
Fall of Adam to be involved by Gods just judgment in the Gulf of Perdition,
they make them only to be Quo Deus immutabili si^ consilio, in Christo Elegit
ac selegit. Con^ess. Art. 16.
predestinate to eternal life, whom God by his eternal and immutable counsel
has elected in Christ, and separated from the rest by the said Election. But
when the differences were broken out betwixt them and such of their Brethren
which commonly past amongst them by the name of Remonstrants, and that it was
pretended by the said Remonstrants that the Article stood as fair to them as
the opposite party; the words were then restrained to a narrower sense then the
generality of the expression could literally and Grammatically comport withal.
It was then pleaded, that they only were to expound the Article, who had
contributed their assistance to the making of it; and that it did appear by the
succession of their Doctrine from the first Reformation, that no other method
of Predestination had been taught amongst them, then as it was maintained by
Calvin and his Followers in their public Writings; under which name, as those
of Beza's judgment which embraced the Supralapsarian way desired to be
comprehended; so did they severally pretend, that the words of the Confession
did either countenance their Doctrines, or not contradict them. But on the
other side, it was made as plainly to appear, that such of their first
Reformers as were of the old Lutheran stamp, and had precedencie of time before
those that followed Calvin's judgment, embraced the Melancthonian way of
Predestination, and looked upon all such as Innovators in the public
Doctrines, who taught otherwise of it. By them it was declared, that in the
year 1530, the Reformed Religion was admitted into the Neighboring Country of
East-Friesland under Enno the First, upon the Preaching of Harding Bergius a
Lutheran Divine of great Fame and Learning, and one of the principal Reformers
of the Church of Embden, a Town of most note in all that Earldom; that from him
Clemens Martini took those Principles, which he afterward propagated in the
Belgic Provinces; that the same Doctrine had been publicly maintained in a
Book called Odegus Laicorum, or the Lay man's Guide, published by Anastatius
Velluanus, Anno 1554, which was ten years before the French Preachers had
obtruded on them this Confession; that the said Book was much commended by
Henricus Antonides, Divinity-Reader in the University of Franeka; that
notwithstanding this Confession, the Ministers successively in the whole
Province of Vtrecht adhered unto their former Doctrines, not looked on for so
doing as the less reformed; that Gallicus Snecanus, a man of great fame for his
Parts and Piety in the County of West-Friesland, esteemed no otherwise of those
which were of Calvin's judgment in the points disputed, then as of Innovators
in the Doctrine which had been first received amongst them; that Johannes
Isbrandi, one of the old Professors of Rotterdam, did openly declare himself to
be an Anti-Calvinian; and that the like was done by Holmannus Professor of
Leiden, by Cornelius Meinardi, and Cornelius Wiggeri, men of principal esteem
in their times and places. Which I have noted in this place, because it must be
in and about these times, namely before the year 1585, in which most of these
men lived and writ who are here remembered. What else was done in the pursuance
of this controversy between the parties, will fall more properly under
consideration in the last part of this History, and there we shall hear further
of it.

62. Next, look upon them in their Tacticks, and we shall find them as
professed Enemies to all public Liturgies and Forms of Prayer, as the rest of
their Calvinian Brethren. They thought there was no speedier way to destroy the
Mass, then by abolishing the Missals; nor any fitter means to exercise their
own gifts in the acts of Prayer, then by suppressing all such Forms as seemed
to put a restraint upon the Spirit. Only they fell upon the humor of
translating David's Psalms into Dutch Meter, and caused them to be sung in their
Congregations, as the French Psalms of Marrots and Beza's Meter were in most
Churches of that people. By which it seems, that they might sing by the Book,
though they prayed by the Spirit; as if their singing by the Book in set Tunes
and Numbers, imposed not as great a restraint upon the Spirit in the acts of
Praising, as reading out of Book in the acts of Praying. But they knew well the
influence which Music has on the souls of Men: And therefore though they had
suppressed the old manner of singing, and all the ancient Hymns which had been
formerly received in the Catholic Church; yet singing they would have, and
Hymns in Meter, as well to please their Ears, as to cheer their Spirits, and
manifest their alacrity in the Service of God. And though they would not sing
with Organs, for fear there might be somewhat in it of the old superstition;
yet they retained them still in many of their Churches; but whether for civil
entertainment when they met together, or to compose and settle their affections
for Religious Offices, or to take up the time till the Church were filled, I am
not able to determine. The like they also did with all the ancient weekly and
set-times of Fasting, which (following the Example of Aerius) they devoured at
once, as contrary to that Christian Liberty, or licentiousness rather, to which
they inured the people, when they first trained them up in opposition to the Sea of Rome. No Fast observed, but when some public great occasion does
require it of them; and then but half-Fast neither, as in other places, making
amends at night for the days forbearance. And if at any time they feed most on
fish, as sometimes they do, it rather is for a variety to please themselves in
the use of Gods Creatures, or out of State-craft to encourage or maintain a
Trade which is so beneficial to them; and rather as a civil then Religious Fast.

63. But there is no one thing wherein they more defaced the outward state of
the Church, then in suppressing all those days of public Worship which
anciently were observed by the name of Festivals, together with their Eves or
Vigils. In which they were so fearful of ascribing any honor to the Saints
departed, whose names were honored by those days, that they also took away
those Anniversary Commemorations of Gods infinite Mercies in the Nativity,
Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of our Savor Christ: which though retained
amongst the Switzers, would not down with Calvin, and being disallowed by him,
were reprobated without more ado in all the Churches of his Platform, and in
these with others. And though they kept the Lords day, or rather some part of
it, for Religious meetings; yet either for fear of laying a restraint on their
Christian Liberty, in Attributing any peculiar holiness to it which might
entitle them to some superstition, they kept that neither but by halfs; it was
sufficient to bestow an hour or two of the morning in Gods public Service, the
rest of the day should be their own, to be employed as profit should advise, or
their pleasures tempt them. And whereas in some places they still retained
those afternoon-Meetings to which they had been bound of Duty by the Rules of
the Church of Rome; it was decreed in one of their first Synods (that namely
which was held at Dort, 1574) Publicae vespertin^ pr^ces non sunt introducendae
ubi non sunt introdu^ae, and ubi sunt tollan^ur. Colla^. Hag. cap. 68.
that in such Churches where public Evening-Prayers had been omitted, they
should continue as they were; and where they had been formerly admitted, should
be discontinued. And if they had no Evening-Prayers, there is no question to be
made but they had their Evening Pastimes, and that the afternoon was spent in
such employment as was most suitable to the condition of each several man. Nor
was the morning so devoted to Religious uses, but that in some of their good
Towns they kept upon that day the ordinary Fairs and Markets, ( Kirk-Masses, as
they commonly called them) which must needs draw away a great part of the
people to attend those businesses, to which their several Trades and
Occupations did most especially oblige them. What alterations happened in the
change of times, we shall see hereafter.

64. Nor was that portion of the day which they were pleased to set apart for
Religious Duties, observed with much more reverence by those in the Church,
then it was by others in the Market; the head uncovered very seldom, and the
knee so little used to kneeling, as if God had created it for no such purpose.
And whereas once Tertullian did upbraid the Gentiles for their irreverence in
sitting before some of those Gods whom they pretended to adore; so might this
people be reproached for using the same posture in all acts of Worship, but
that they do it purposely to avoid all outward signs of Adoration: even in the
Sacrament of the Supper, in which it cannot be denied but that our Savior is
more eminently present then in any other Divine Ordinance of what name soever,
they are so fearful of relapsing to their old Idolatries (if by that name they
may be called) that they choose rather to receive it in any posture, sitting or
standing, yea, or walking, then reverently upon their knees. For so they have
ordained it in another Synod, mentioned by Daniel Angelocratur in his Epitome
Consiliorum. By the decrees whereof Liberum est stando, sedendo vel eundo,
coenam celebrare, non autem geniculand^, etc. Cap. 13. Ar^. 8
it was left at liberty to receive that Sacrament standing, sitting, or
walking, but by no means kneeling: And kneeling was prohibited, Ob (...)
periculum, for fear of falling into a new kind of Idolatry, (which was never
thought of in the world till they found it out) that is to say, Bread-worship,
or the Adoration of Bread it self. The Conference at Hampton Court has told us
somewhat, but obscurely, of these Ambling-Communions; but I never understood
them rightly till I saw this Canon. For Canon they will have it called, though
most uncanonical. More of the like stuff might be produced from the Acts of
their Synods, but that this little is too much to inform the Reader how
different they are, both in their Discipline and Doctrine, in point of
speculation, and matter of practice, from that which was most countenanced by
the piety of the Primitive times, and recommended to them by the constant and
uniform tradition of the ages following.

65. As is their work, such is the wages they received; and as the reverence is
which they give to Christ in his holy Sacrament, such is the honor which is
paid them by the common people. They had abolished the daily Sacrifice of
Praise and Prayer, which might have been continued, though the Mass was
abrogated; disclaimed the hearing of Confessions, the visitation of the Sick,
and Sacerdotal Absolution, as inconsistent with the purity of their Profession;
took away all the annual Festivals, with their Eves and Vigils; and in a word,
reduced the whole Service of their Ministry to the Sunday-Morning: Which hardly
taking up the tenth part of time expended formerly by the Priests on Religious
Offices, they were so conscientious as to rest contented with little more then
the tenth part of those yearly profits which by the Priest had been received.
They had besides so often preached down Tithes as a Jewish maintenance
improper and unfit for Ministers of the holy Gospel, when they were paid unto
the Clergy of the Church of Rome, that at the last the people took them at
their word, believe them to be so indeed; and are spurred on the faster to a
change of Religion, in which they saw some glimmering of a present profit. Of
these mistakes the Prince of Orange was too wise not to make advantage; giving
assurance ^o the Land-holders and Country-Villagers, that if they stood to him
in the Wars against the Spaniard, they should from thenceforth pay no Tithes
unto their Ministers, as before they did. The Tithes in the mean time to be
brought into the common Treasury toward the charges of the War, the Ministers
to be maintained by contributions at an easy rate. But when the War was come
to so fair an issue, that they thought to be exempted from the payment of
Tithes, answer was made, that they should pay none to the Ministers, as they
had done formerly, whereby their Ministers in effect were become their Masters;
but that the Tithes were so considerable a Revenue to the Commonwealth, that
the State could not possibly subsist without them; that therefore they must be
content to pay them to the States Commissioners, as they had done hitherto; and
that the State would take due care to maintain a Ministry. By means whereof
they do not only pay their Tithes as in former times; but seeing how much the
public allowance of the State does come short of a competencie (thoughby that
name they please to call it) they are constrained, as it were, out of common
charity, if not compelled thereto by order, to contribute over and above with
the rest of the people, for the improvement and increase of the Ministers
maintenance. But as they Bake, so let them Brew, to make good the Proverb. And
so I leave them for the present, till we have traced the Presbyterian practices
and positions both in England and Scotl^nd (but in Scotland first) to that
point of time to which we have deduced their successes in these Belgic
Provinces, and then we shall hear further of them as they come in our way.

The end of the third Book.
AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History Of the PRESBYTERIANS. LIB. IV. Containing
Their beginning, Progress and Positions; their dangerous Practices,
Insurrections, and Conspiracies in the Realm of Scotland, from the year 1544 to
the year 1566.
1. CRoss we next over into Scotland, where the Genevian Principles were first
reduced into use and practice. In which respect the Presbyterians of that Realm
should have had precedencie in the present story, not only before any of their
Brethren in the Belgic Provinces, but even before the French themselves,
though nearest both in situation and affection to the Mother-City. For though
the Emissaries ^f Geneva had long been tampering with that active and unquiet
people; yet such a strict hand was held upon them both by Francis the First,
and Henry the Second his Successor, that they durst not stir, till by the death
of those two Kings they found the way more free and open to pursue those
counsels, which by the industry of those men had been put into them, before
which time the Scots had acted over all those Tumults, Riots and Rebellions, in
which not long after they were followed by the French and Netherlands. But
howsoever I have purposely reserved them to this time and place, because of
that influence which they had on the Realm of England, and the connection of
affairs between both the Kingdoms, till they were both united under the command
of one Sovereign Prince. And this being said, I shall without more preamble
proceed to the following History.

1527.
2. It was about the year 1527, that the Reformation of Religion begun by
Luther, was first preached in Scotland, by the Ministry of one Patrick
Hamilton, a man of eminent Nobility in regard of his birth, as being Brothers
Son to James Earl of Arran; but far more eminent in those times for his parts
and piety, then the Nobility of his House: spending some time at Witteberg in
the pursuit of his Studies, he grew into acquaintance with Martin Luther,
Philip Melancthon, and other men of name and note in that University; and being
seasoned with their Doctrine, he returned into Scotland, where he openly
declared himself against Pilgrimages, Purgatory, Prayer to the Saints, and for
the dead, without going further. And further as he did not go, so indeed he
could not. For on the noise of these his preachings, he was prevailed with by
James Beton Archbishop of St. Andrews to repair to that City; but was so
handled at his coming, that after some examinations he was condemned to the
fire: which sentence was inflicted on him on the last of February. But the
Church is never made more fruitful, then when the soil thereof is watered with
the blood of Martyrs. For presently upon the commi^ting of this Fact, most men
of Quality beg^n to look into the Reasons of such great severities, and were
the more inquisitive after all particulars, because they had not been
affrighted with the like Example in the memory of the oldest man which then
lived amongst them. By this means the opinions of this man being known abroad,
found many which approved, but very few which had just reason to condemn them;
and passing thus from hand to hand, gave further cause to those of the Popish
Party to be watchful over them. And for long time they were on the suffering
hand, patiently yiedling up their lives to the Executioners, wheresoever any
sentence of death was past upon them. And it stood till the decease of King
James the Fifth, Anno 1542, when the unsetledness of Affairs, the tender
infancy of the young Queen, not above nine days old at the death of her
Father, and the conferring of the Regencie after some disputes on James Earl of
Arran, who was thought to favor their opinions, imboldned them to appear more
openly in defense of themselves, and to attempt upon the Chiefs of the contrary
party; whereof they gave a terrible Example in the death of Cardinal David
Beton, immediately or not long after the cruel burning of George Wischart
(whose name is mollified by Buchanan into Sofocardius) a man of great esteem
amongst them, who having spent some time in France, and being conversant with
some Calvinists of that Nation, returned into his Native Country with such
French Commissioners as were sent unto the Earl of Arran, Anno 1544. In little
time he had gained unto himself so many followers, that he became formidable to
the greatest Prelates; but unto none more then unto Cardinal David Beton,
Archbishop of St. Andrews also, and Nephew unto James his Predecessor. By whose
Authority and procurement he was condemned to the like death as Hamilton before
had suffered, in the year next following.

3. Amongst the followers of this man (the most remarkable in reference to my
present purpose) were Norman Lesly eldest Son to the Earl of Rothes, John Lesly
Uncle unto Norman, James Melvin, and the Kirkaldies Lairds of Grange. By whom
and others of that party, a plot was laid to surprise the Castle, and take
revenge upon the Cardinal for the death of Wishart. Having possessed themselves
of the Gates of the Castle, they forced their way into his Chamber, and were
upon the point of striking the fatal blow, when James Melvin told them with
great shows of gravity, that the business was not to be acted with such heat
and passion. And thereupon holding a Poniard at his breast, put him in mind of
shedding the innocent blood of that famous Martyr Mass George Wishart, which
now called loud to God for vengeance, in whose name they were come to do
justice on him: which said, he made this protestation, That neither hatred to
his person, nor love to his Riches, nor the fear of any thing concerning his
own particular, had moved him to the undertaking of that execution; but only
because he had been, and still remained an obstinate enemy against Christ Jesus
and his holy Gospel. Upon which words, without expecting any answer, or giving
the poor man any time of application to the Father of Mercies, he stabbed him
twice or thrice into the body with so strong a malice, that he left him dead
upon the place. 1546.
In the relating of which Murder in Knox h^s History, a note was given us in
the Margent of the first Edition, printed at London in Octavo, which points us
to the godly act and saying of James Melvin; for so the Author calls this most
wicked deed. But that Edition being stopped at the Press by t^^ Queens command,
the History never came out perfect till the year of our Lord 1644, when the
word godly was left out of the Marginal Note, for the avoiding of that horrible
scandal which had been thereby given to all sober Readers. But to proceed unto
my story: it was upon the 29 of May, that the Murderers possessed themselves of
that strong piece, into which many flocked from all parts of the Realm, both to
congratulate the act, and assist the Actors: So that at last they cast
themselves into a Congregation, and chose John Rough, (who after suffered death
in England) to be one of their Preachers; 1547.
John Knox, that great incendiary of the Realm of Scotland, for another of
them. And thus they stood upon their guard till the coming of one and twenty
Galleys, and some Landforces out of France, by whom the Castle was besieged,
and so fiercely battered, that they were forced to yield on the last of July,
without obtaining any better conditions then the hope of life.

4. The Castle being yielded, and the Country quieted, the French returned with
their booty, of which their Prisoners which they brought along with them made
the principal part; not made the tamer by their sufferings in the enemies
Galleys; insomuch that when the Image of the Virgin Mary was offered to them to
be kissed on some solemn occasion, one of them snatched it into his hands,
flung it into the Sea, and said unto them that brought it, in a jeering manner,
That her Ladyship was light enough, and might learn to swim. Which desperate
and unadvised action (as it was no other) is said by Knox to have produced this
good effect, that the Scots were never after tempted to the like Idolatries.
1550.
Knox at this time was Prisoner in the Galleys amongst the rest, and with the
rest released upon the Peace made between France and England, at the delivering
up of Bulloigne; from whence he past over into England, where he was first made
Preacher at Barwick, next at New Castle, afterward to some Church of London;
and finally, in some other places of the South: so that removing like our late
Itinerants from one Church to another, as he could meet with entertainment, he
kept himself within that Sanctuary till the death of King Edward, and then
betook himself to Geneva for his private Studies: From hence he published his
desperate Doctrine of Predestination, which he makes not only to be an
impulsive to, but the compulsive cause of men's sins and men's wickednesses: From
hence he published his traiterous and seditious Pamphlet, entitled, The first
blast of the Trumpet, in which he writes most bitterly, amongst other things,
against the Regiment of Women, aiming therein particularly at the two M^ries
Queens of Scotland, Queen Mary of England, and Mary Q^e^n Dowager of Hungary,
Governess of the Low Countries for Charles the Fifth: and finally, from hence
he published another of the like nature, entitled, An Admonition to
Christians: In which he makes the Emperor Charles to be worl^ then Nero, and
Mary Queen of England nothing better then Iesabel. According to which good
beginning, he calls her in his History (but not published hence) that
Idolatrous and Mischievous Mary of the Spaniards blood, a cruel persecutrix of
Gods people, as the Acts of her unhappy Reign did sufficiently witness. In
which he comes as close to Calvin as could be desired.

5. By this means he grew great with Calvin, and the most leading men of the
Consistorians, who looked upon him as a proper Engine to advance their
purposes: But long he had not stayed amongst them, when he received an
invitation from some Friends of his of the same temper and affections, as it
after proved, to take charge of the Church of Frankfort; to which some learned
men and others of the English Nation had retired themselves in the Reign of
Queen Mary: which call he first communicated unto Calvin, by whose
encouragement and persuasion he accepted of it, and by his coming rather
multiplied then appeased the quarrels which he found amongst them: But siding
with the inconformable party, and knowing so much of Calvin's mind touching the
Liturgy and Rites of the Church of England, he would by no means be persuaded
to officiate by it; and for that cause was forced by Dr. Cox, and others of the
Learned men who remained there, to forsake the place, as has been shown at
large in another place. 1555.
Outed at Frankfort, he returns again to his Friends at Geneva; and being
furnished with instructions for his future carriage in the cause of his
Ministry, he prepares for his journey into Scotland, passes to Dieppe, form
thence to England, and at last came a welcome man to his Native Country, which
he found miserably divided into sides and factions. Mary their Infant Queen had
been transported into France at six years of age; the Regency taken from James
Earl of Arran, given to Mary of ^orraign the Queens Mother; not well obeyed by
many of the N^bility and great men of the Country, but openly opposed and
reviled by those who seemed to be inclinable to the Reformation. To these men
Knox applied himself with all ca^e and cunning, preaching from place to place,
and from house to house, as opportunity was given him. In which he gathered
many Churches, and set up many Congregations, as if he had been the
Ap^stle-General of the Kirk of Scotland; in all points holding a conformity
unto Calvin's Platform, even to the singing of David's Psalms in the English
Meter, the only Music he allowed of in Gods public Service. From Villages
and private Houses, he ventured into some of the great Towns and more eminent
Cities; and at the last appeared in Edenborough it self, preaching in all, and
ministering the Communion in many places, as he saw occasion. This was
sufficient to have raised a greater storm against him then he could have been
able to endure; but he must make it worse by a new provocation. For at the
persuasion of the Earl of Glencarne, and some others of his principal
followers, he writes a long Letter to the Queen Regent, in which he earnestly
persuades her to give ear to the Word of God, according as it was then preached
by himself and others: which Letter being communicated by the Queen to the
Archbishop of Glasco, and dispersed in several Copies by Knox himself, gave
such a hot Alarm to the Bishops and Clergy, that he was cited to appear in
Blackfryars Church in Edenborough, on the 15 of May: and though upon
advertisement that he came accompanied with so great a train, that it could not
be safe for them to proceed against him, he was not troubled at that time; yet
he perceived that having made the Queen his enemy, he could not hope to remain
longer in that Kingdom, but first or last he must needs fall in their hands.

6. But so it happened, that when he was in the midst of these perplexities, he
received a Letter from the Schismatical English which repaired to Geneva, when
they had lost all hope of putting down the English Liturgy in the Church of
Frankfort, by which he was invited to return to his former charge: this Letter
he communicated to his principal Friends, resolves to entertain the offer, and
prepares all things for his journey. And to say truth, it was but time that he
should set forwards; for the danger followed him so close, that within few days
after his departure, he was condemned for not appearing, and burnt in his
Effigies at the Cross in Edenborough. But first he walks his round, visits all
his Churches, takes a more solemn farewell of his especial Friends; and having
left sufficient instructions with them for carrying on the Reformation in
despite of Authority, in the latter end of July he sets sail for France. His
party was by this time grown strong and numerous, resolved to follow such
directions as he left behind him. To which encouraged by the preaching of one
Willock, whom Knox had more especially recommended to them in the time of his
absence, they stole away the Images out of most of their Churches; and were so
venturous, as to take down the great Image of St. Gyles in the chief Church of
Edenborough, which they drowned first in the Northlake, and burnt it
afterward. But this was but a Prologue to the following Comedy. The Festival
of St. Gyles draws near, in which the Image of that Saint was to be carried
through the chief Streets of Edenborough in a solemn Procession, attended by
all the Priests, Friars, and other Religious persons about that City: another
Image is borrowed from the Gray-Fryars to supply the place; and for the honor
of the day, the Queen Regent her self was pleased to make one in the Pageant.
But no sooner was she retired to her private repose, when a confused Rabble of
the Knoxian Brethren brake in upon them, dismounted the Image, brake off his
head against the stones, scattered all the Company, pulled the Priests
Surplices over their Ears, beat down their Crosses; and, in a word, so
discomposed the Order of that mock-Solemnity, that happy was the man who could
first save himself in some House or other; neither their Bag-pipes, nor their
Banners, their Tabrets, nor their Trumpets, which made a Principal part in that
days triumph, though free enough from superstition in themselves, could escape
their fury, but ran the same Fortune with the rest. And though no diligence was
wanting for finding out the principal actors in that Commotion; yet as the
story has informed us, the Brethren kept themselves together in such
Companies, singing of Psalms, and openly encouraging one another, that no body
durst lay hands upon them.

7. Finding by this experiment that they were strong enough to begin the work,
it was thought fit to call back Knox to their assistance; to which end they
dispatched their Letters to him in the March next following, to be conveyed by
one James Sym, whom they had thoroughly instructed in all particulars touching
their affairs. In May the Letters are delivered, the contents whereof he first
communicates to his own Congregation, and afterward to Calvin, and the rest
of the Brethren of that Consistory, by whom it was unanimously declared unto
him, that he could not refuse that Vocation, unless he would show himself
rebellious unto his God, and unmerciful to his native Country. He returned
answer thereupon, That he would visit them in Scotland with all convenient
expedition, and comes accordingly to Dieppe in October following; 1557.
where contrary to expectation he is advertised by Letters from some secret
Friends, that all affairs there seemed to be at a stand, so that his coming to
them at that time might be thought unnecessary. Highly displeased with such a
cooling Card as he did not look for, he sends his Letters thence to the
Nobility and principal Gentry; in which he lets them know how much he was
confounded for travailing so far in their Affairs, by moving them to the most
Godly and most Learned men (by which he means Calvin and the Consistorians) who
at that time did live in Europe, whose judgments and grave counsels he
conceived expedient, as well for the assurance of their own Consciences as of
his own; that it must needs redound both to his shame and theirs, if nothing
should succeed in such long consultations; that he left his Flock and Family at
Geneva to attend their service, to whom he should be able to make but a weak
account of his leaving them in that condi^ion, if he were asked at his return
concerning the impediment of his purposed Journey; that he foresaw with grief
of spirit, what grievous plagues, what misery and bondage would most inevitably
befall that miserable Realm, and every Inhabitant thereof, if the power of God
with the liberty of his Gospel did not deliver them from the same; that though
his words might seem sharp, and to be somewhat undiscreetly spoken, yet wise
men ought to understand, that a true Friend can be no flatterer, especially
when the question is concerning the Salvation both of body and soul, not only
of a few men, but of States and Nations; that if any persuade them for fear of
dangers which might follow to faint in their intended purpose, though otherwise
he might seem to be wise and friendly, yet was he to be accounted foolish, and
their mortal enemy, in laboring to persuade them to prefer their worldly rest
to Gods Praise and Glory, and the friendship of the wicked before the salvation
of their Brethren; that they ought to hazard their own lives, be it against
Kings or Emperors, for the deliverance of the people from spiritual bondage;
for which cause only they received from their Brethren Tribute, Honor and
Homage, at Gods Commandment. Finally, having laid before them many strong
inducements to quicken them unto the work, he ends with this most memorable
Aphorism, (which is indeed the sum and substance of the whole Consistorian
Doctrine in the present case) that the Reformation of Religion, and of public
enormities, does appertain to more then the Clergy, or chief Rulers called
Kings.

8. On the receiving of these Letters, they are resolved to proceed in their
former purpose, and would rather commit themselves and all theirs to the
greatest dangers, then suffer that Religion which they called Idolatry any
longer to remain amongst them, or the people to be so defrauded as they had
been formerly, of that which they esteemed to be the only true preaching of
Christ's Gospel. And to this end they entered into a common Bond or Covenant, in
the name of themselves, their Vassals, Tenants and dependants, dated upon the
third of December. and subscribed by the Earls of Arguile, Glencarne and Morton,
the Lords Lorne, Ereskin of Dun, etc. the Tenor of which was as follows, viz.

9. We perceiving how Satan in his members, the Antichrists of our time,
cruelly do rage, seeking to over^hrow and destroy the Gospel of Christ and his
Congregation, ought according to our bounden duty to strive in our Masters
cause, even unto the death, being certain of the victory in him: The which one
duty being well consider^d, we do promise before the Majesty of God and his
Congregation, that we (by his Grace) shall with all diligence continual^y apply
our whole power* substance, and our very lives, to maintain, set forward, and
establish the most blessed Word of God and his Congregation. And shall labor
according to our power to have faithful Ministers, truly and purely to
minister Christ's Gospel and Sacraments to his people: we shall maintain them,
nourish them, and defend them, the whole Congregation of Christ, and every
Member thereof, according to our whole powers, and waging of our lives against
Satan, and all wicked power that does intend tyranny or trouble against the
aforesaid Congregation. Unto the which holy Word and Congregation we do join
us: and so do forsake and renounce the Congregation of Antichrist, with all the
Superstitious Abomination and Idolatry thereof. And moreover, shall declare our
selves manifest enemies thereto by this our faithful promise before God,
testified to this Congregation by our subscription of these presents.

10. Having subscribed unto this Bond, their next care was to issue out these
directions following, for the promoting of the work which they were in hand
with: 1. That in all Parishes of that Realm, the Common Prayer Book (that is to
say, the Common Prayer book of the Church of England) should be read upon the
Sundays and Holydays in the Parish Church, together with the Lessons of the Old
and New Testament by the same appointed: 2. That preaching and interpretation
of Scripture be had and used in private Houses, without any great convention of
the people at them, till it should please God to put it into the heart of the
Prince to allow thereof in public Churches. And had they stood to that, they
had been unblameable; but finding by the Subscriptions which they had received
from all parts of the Kingdom, that they were nothing inferior to their
Adversaries in power and number, they were not able to hold long in so good an
humor. Howsoever it was thought expedient, for the avoiding of Scandal, 1558.
that they should first proceed in the way of supplication to the Queen and
Council; in which it was desired, that it might be lawful for them to meet
publicly or privately for having the Common Prayers in the vulgar tongue; that
the Sacrament of Baptism might be administered in the same Tongue also; the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both kinds, according to Christ's Institution;
and that a Reformation might be made of the wicked lives of Prelates, Priests,
and other Ecclesiastical persons. The Queen of Scots was in the mean time
Married to the Daulphin of France, upon whose head it was desired by the French
that at the least the Matrimonial Crown should be solemnly placed; and that all
the French Nation should forthwith be naturalized in the Realm of Scotland. For
the better effecting whereof, in the following Parliament, the Queen Regent
thought it no ill piece of Statecraft so far to gratify the Petitioners in
their desires, as to license them to meet in public or private for the
exercise of their own Religion, so that it were not in the City of Edenborough,
or the Port of Leith, for fear some Tumult or Sedition might ensue upon it. But
not content with this Indulgence, they were resolved to move the Parliament for
an Abrogation of all former Laws made against Sects and Heresies, by which they
might incur the loss of Life, Land or Liberty; and that none of their
profession should be condemned for Heresy, unless they were first convinced by
the Word of God to have erred from the Faith which the holy Spirit witnesses
to be necessary to man's Salvation.

11. But hereunto they could not get the Queens consent. And thereupon they
caused a Protestation to be drawn, and openly pronounced in the face of the
Parliament, in which it was declared, amongst other things, that neither they,
nor any other of the Godly who pleased to join with them in the true Faith
grounded upon the Word of God, should incur any danger of Life or Lands, or
other particular pains, for not observing such acts as have passed heretofore
in favor of their Adversaries, or for violating such Rites as have been
invented by man without the Commandment of God; that if any Tumult or Uproar
should happen to arise in the Realm, or that any violence should be used in
reforming of such things as were amiss in the state of the Church, the blame
should not be laid on them, who had desired that all things might be rectified
by public Order: And finally, that they pretended to no other end, but only
for the reforming of such abuses as were found in Religion; and therefore that
they might no otherwise be thought of, then as faithful and obedient Subjects
to Supreme Authority. And now the Scheme begins to open: the Town of Perth, by
some called St. Iohnstone, declared in favor of the Lords of the Congregation,
which name they had took unto themselves; the news whereof was so unpleasing to
the Queen, that she commanded the Lord Ruthuen, a man of principal Authority in
the parts adjoining, to take some order for suppressing those Innovations in
Religion which some busy people of that Town had introduced: To which he
answered, That he was able, if she pleased, to force their bodies, and to seize
their goods; but that he had no power to compel their Consciences: which answer
did not more displease the Queen, 1559.
then it encouraged those of the Congregation; who now from all parts flocked
to Perth, as a Town strong by situation, well fortified, and standing in a
fruitful Country, from whence they might receive all necessaries, if any open
force or violence should be used against them.

12. Knox in the mean time had retreated to his charge at Geneva, not thinking
fit to tempt that danger by an unseasonable return, which he had so narrowly
escaped at his being there. He only waited opportunity to go back with safety,
and would not stir, though frequently solicited by his Friends in Scotland. In
so much, that means was made to Calvin by especial Letters, to re-ingage him in
the Cause: Which Letters were brought to him in the Month of November, Anno
1558. And that it may appear what influence Calvin had upon all the counsels
and designs of the Congregation, he is advertised from time to time of their
successes, of the estate of their Affairs, whether good or bad; in so much,
that when the Queen Regent had fed them with some flattering hopes, Calvin is
forthwith made acquainted with their happiness in it. And who but he must be
desired to write unto her? that by his Grave counsel and exhortation, she might
be animated to go forward constantly in promoting the Gospel. But though these
Letters came to Calvin in the Month of November, yet we find not Knox in
Scotland till the May next following, when those of his party had possessed
themselves of the Town of Perth: though he loved Calvin well, and the Gospel
better, yet all that a man has he will give for his life; and Knox was dearer
to himself then either of them. But unto Perth he comes at last, on the fifth
of May. In the chief Church whereof he preached such a thundering Sermon against
the Adoration of Images, and the advancing of them in places of Gods public
Worship, as suddenly beat down all the Images and Religious Houses within the
Precincts of that Town. For presently after the end of the Sermon, when almost
all the rest of the people were gone home to dinner, some few which remained in
the Church pull^d down a glorious Tabernacle which stood on the Altar, broke it
in pieces, and defaced the Images which they found therein. Which being
dispatched, they did the like execution on all the rest in that Church; and
were so nimble at their work, that they had made a clear riddance of them,
before the tenth man in the Town was advertised of it. The news hereof causes
the Rascal Multitude (so my Author calls them) to resort in great numbers to
the Church. But because they found that all was done before they came, they
fell with great fury on the Monastery of Carthusian Monks, and the Houses of
the Preaching and Franciscan Friars, beginning wi^h the Images first, but after
spoiling them of all their provisions, Bedding, and Furniture of Household,
which was given for a prey unto the poor. And in the ruinating of these Houses,
they continued with much force and eagerness, so that within the compass of two
days, they had left nothing standing of those goodly Edifices but the outward
Walls.

13. It was reported that the Queen was so enraged when she heard the news,
that she vowed utterly to destroy the Town, Man, Woman and Child, to consume
the same with ^ire, and after, to sow Salt upon it, in sign of perpetual
desolation. And it is possible she might have been as good as her word, if the
Earl of Glencarne, the Lords Vchiltrie and Boyd, the young Sheriff of Air, and
many other men of eminent Quality, attended by two thousand five hundred Horse
and Foot, had not come very opportunely to the aid of their Brethren. Perth
being thus preserved from the threatened danger, but forced to receive a
Garrison of the Queens appointment; Knox leaves the Town, and goes in company
with the Earl of Arguile, and the Lord James Steward, toward the City of St.
Andrews. In the way to which, he preached at a Town called Cra^le, inveighs
most bitterly against such French Forces as had been sent thither under the
Command of Monsieur d' Osselle; exhorting his Auditors in fine to join together
as one man, till all strangers were expulsed the Kingdom; and either to prepare
themselves to live like men, or to dye victorious. Which exhortation so
prevailed upon most of the hearers, that immediately they betook themselves to
the pulling down of Altars and Images; and finally, destroyed all Monuments of
Superstition and Idolatry which they found in the Town. The like they did the
next day at a place called Anstruther. From thence they march unto St. Andrews,
in the Parish^Church whereof Knox preached upon our Saviors casting the Buyers
and Sellers out of the Temple, and with his wonted Rhetoric so inflamed the
people, that they committed the like outrages there as before at Perth,
destroying Images, and pulling down the Houses of the Black and Gray-fryars
with the like dispatch. This happened upon the 11 of June. And because it could
not be supposed but that the Queen would make some use of her French Forces to
Chastise the chief Ringleaders of that Sedition; the Brethren of the
Congregation flock so fast unto them, that before Tuesday night, no fewer then
three thousand able men from the parts adjoining were come to Cooper to their
aid. By the accession of which strength, they first secured themselves by a
Capitulation from any danger by the French, and then proceeded to the removing
of the Queens Garrison out of Perth, which they also effected. Freed from which
y^ke, some of the Townsmen joining themselves with those of Dundee, make an
assault upon the Monastery of Scone, famous of long time for the Coronation of
the Kings of Scotland; and for that cause more sumptuously adorned, and more
richly furnished then any other in the Kingdom. And though the Noblemen, and
even Knox himself, endeavored to appease the people, and to stop their fury,
that so the place might be preserved; yet all endeavors proved in vain, or
were coldly followed. So that in fine, a ter some spoil made in defacing of
Images, and digging up great quantity of hidden goods which were buried there,
to be preserved in expectation of a better day; they committed the whole House
to the Mercy of Fire; the flame whereof gave grief to some, and joy to others
of St. John stones, situate not above a Mile from that famous Abbey.

14. They had no sooner played this prize, but some of the Chiefs of them were
advertised that Queen Regent had a purpose of putting some French Forces into
Sterling, the better to cut off all intercourse and mutual succors which those
of the Congregation on each side of the Fryth might otherwise have of one
another. For the preventing of which mischief, the Earl of Arguile and the Lord
James Steward were dispatched away: Whose coming so inflamed the zeal of the
furious multitude, that they pulled down all the Monasteries which were in the
Town; demolished all the Altars, and defaced all the Images in the Churches of
it. The Abbey of Cambuskenneth, near adjoining to it, was then ruined also:
Which good success encouraged them to go on to Edenborough, that the like
Reformation might be made in the capital City. Taking Linlithgow in their way,
they committed the like spoil there, as before at Sterling; but were prevented
of the glory which they chiefly aimed at in the Saccage of Edenborough. Upon
the news of their approach, though their whole Train exceeded not three hundred
persons, the Queen Regent with great fear retires to Dunbar; and the Lord
Seaton being then Provest of the Town, staid not long behind. But he was scarce
gone out of the City, when the Rascal Rabble fell on the Religious Houses,
destroyed the Covents of the Black and Gray-fryars, with all the other
Monasteries about the Town, and shared amongst them all the goods which they
found in those Houses: In which they made such quick dispatch, that they had
finished that part of the Reformation, before the two Lords and their
attendants could come in to help them.

15. The Queen Regent neither able to endure these outrages, nor of sufficient
power to prevent or punish them, conceived it most expedient to allay these
humors for the present by some gentle Lenitive, that she might hope the better
to extinguish them in the time to come: which when she had endeavored, but
with no effect, she caused a Proclamation to be published in the name of the
King and Queen; in which it was declared, That she perceived a seditious Tumult
to be raised by a part of the Lieges, who named themselves the Congregation,
and under pretense of Religion had taken Arms; That by the advice of the Lords
of the Council, for satisfying every man's Conscience, and pacifying the present
troubles, she had made offer to call a Parliament in January then following
(but would call it sooner if they pleased) for establishing an Universal Order
in Affairs of Religion; That in the mean time every man should be suffered to
live at liberty, using their own Consciences without trouble until further
order; That those who called themselves of the Congregation, rejecting all
reasonable offers, had made it manifest by their actions, that they did not so
much seek for satisfaction in point of Religion, as the subversion of the
Crown. For proof whereof, she instanced in some secret intelligence which they
had in England, seizing the Irons of the Man's, and Coining Money, that being
one of the principal Jewels of the Royal Diadem. In which regard she straightly
wills and commands all manner of persons (not being Inhabitants of the
City) to depart from Edenborough within six hours after publication thereof,
and live obedient to her Authority, except they would be holden and reputed
Traitors.

16. This Proclamation they encountered with another, which they published in
their own names for satisfaction of the people, some of which had begun to
shrink from them at the noise of the former. And ^herein they made known to all
whom it may concern, That such crimes as they were charged with, never entered
into their hearts; That they had no other intention then to banish Idolatry, to
advance true Religion, and to defend the Preachers of it; That they were ready
to continue in all duty toward their Sovereign, and her Mother there Regent,
provided they might have the free exercise of their own Religion. In reference
to their meddling with the Irons of the Mint, and the Coining of Money, they
justified themselves, as being most of them Counselors born, and doing nothing
in it but for the good of the people. To which effect they writ their Letters
also to the Regent her self, whom they assured in the close, that if she would
make use of her authority for the abolishing of Idolatry and Superstitious
abuses which agreed not with the Word of God, she should find them as obedient
as any Subjects within the Realm. Which in plain truth was neither more nor
less then this, that if they might not have their wills in the point of
Religion, she was to look for no obedience from them in other matters: whereof
they gave sufficient proof by their staying in Edenborough, her command to the
contrary notwithstanding; by pressing more then ever for a toleration, and
adding this over and above to their former demands, that such French Forces as
remained in Scotland might be disbanded and sent back to their native Country.
In the first of which demands they were so unreasonable, that when the Queen
offered them the exercise of their own Religion, upon condition that when she
had occasion to make use of any of their Churches for her own Devotions, such
exercise might be suspended, and the Mass only used in that conjuncture; they
would by no means yield unto it: And they refused to yield unto it for this
Reason only, because it would be in her power, by removing from one place unto
another, to leave them without any certain Exercise of their Religion, which in
effect was utterly to overthrow it. And hereto they were pleased to add, that,
as they could not hinder her from exercising any Religion which she had a mind
to (but this was more then they would stand to in their better Fortunes) so
could they not agree that the Ministers of Christ should be silenced upon any
occasion, and much less, that the true Worship of God should give place to
Idolatry. A point to which they stood so stiffly, that when the Queen Regent had
resetled her Court at Edenborough, she could neither prevail so far upon the
Magistrates of that City, as either to let her have the Church of St. Gyles to
be appropriated only to the use of the Mass, or that the Mass might be said in
it at such vacant times in which they made no use of it for themselves or their
Ministers.

17. But in their other demands for sending the French Soldiers out of
Scotland, they were not like to find any such compliance as had been offered
in the former. Henry the Third of France dyed about that time, and left the
Crown to Francis the Second, Married not long before to the Queen of Scots; the
preservation of whose power and prerogative Royal must be his concernment. And
he declared himself so sensible of those indignities which had been lately put
upon her, as to protest, that he would rather spend the Crown of France, then
not be revenged of the seditious Tumults raised in Scotland: in pursuance of
which resolution, he sends over a French Captain, called Octavian, who brought
with him a whole Regiment of Soldiers, great sums of money, and all provisions
necessary to maintain a War. Followed not long after with four Companies more,
which made up twenty Ensigns complete, together with four Ships of War, both to
defend the Town of Leith, and command the Haven. Encouraged with whose coming,
the Queen Regent did not only fortify that Town, but put a strong Garrison of
the French into it; which gave a new grievance unto those of the Congregation;
the Trade and Town of Edenborough being like by this means to be brought under
her command, and to rest wholly in a manner at her devotion. The breach made
wider on the one side by the taking of the Fort of Boughty Crag into the hands
of those of the Congregation; which was pretended to be done, for fear lest
otherwise it might have been seized on by the French; and on the other side, by
the coming of two thousand French Soldiers out of France, under pretense of
being a Convoy to the Bishop of Amiens, and some other persons, sent thither to
dispute (as it was given out) with the Scottish Ministers. Which great accession
of French Forces so amazed the Lords of the Congregation, that they excited the
whole Kingdom by a public Writing to arm against them; requiring all those
which were, or desired to be accounted for n^tural Scotch-men, to judge betwixt
the Queen and them, and not abstract the just and dutiful support from their
Native Country in so needful a time; assuring them, that whosoever did
otherwise, should be esteemed betrayers of their Country to the power of
strangers.

18. And that the people might not cool in the midst of this heat, they draw
their Forces together, and march toward Edenborough on the 18 of October; upon
the news whereof, the Queen Regent put her self into Leith as the safer place,
and leaves them Masters of the City: From whence they send a Letter to her,
requiring in a peremptory and imperious manner, that the fortifications about
Leith be forthwith slighted, the Forts about the same to be demolished, and all
strange Soldiers to be immediately removed: Which if she not pleased to do,
they must bethink themselves of some such other remedies as they thought most
necessary. But when their Messenger returned unsatisfied, and that Lion King at
Arms was sent presently after him, commanding them amongst other things to
remove from Edenborough, they then resolve for putting that in execution which
had been long before in deliberation; that is to say, the deposing of the Queen
Regent from the public Government. But first, they must consult with their
Ghostly Fathers, that by their countenance and authority, they might more
certainly prevail upon all such persons as seemed unsatisfied in the point.
Willock and Knox are chosen above all the rest to resolve this doubt, if at the
least any of them doubted of it, which may well be questioned. They were both
Factors for Geneva, and therefore both obliged to advance her interest. Willock
declares, that albeit God had appointed Magistrates only to be his Lieutenants
on Earth, honoring them with his own title, and calling them Gods; yet did he
never so establish any, but that for just causes they might be deprived. Which
having proved by some Examples out of holy Scripture, he thereupon inferred,
that since the Queen Regent had denied her chief Duty to the Subjects of this
Realm, which was to preserve them from invasion of Strangers, and to suffer the
Word of God to be freely preached: seeing also she was a maintainer of
superstition, and despised the counsel of the Nobility; he did think they might
justly deprive her from all Regiment and Authority over rhem. Knox goes to work
more cautiously, but comes home at last: For having first approved whatsoever
had been said by Willock, he adds this to it, That the iniquity of the Queen
Regent ought not to withdraw their hearts from the obedience due to their
Sovereign; nor did he wish that any such sentence against her should be
pronounced, but that when she should change her course, and submit her self to
good counsels, there should be place left unto her of regress to the same
honors from which for just cause she ought to be deprived.

19. So said the Oracle: and as the Oracle decreed, so the sentence passed; for
presently upon this judgment in the case, a public Instrument is drawn up, in
which the most part of the passages in the course of her Government were
censured as grievances and oppressions on the Subjects of Scotland, to the
violating of the Laws of the Land, the Liberty of the Subjects, and the
enslaving of them to the power and domination of strangers. In which respect,
they declare her to be fallen from the public Government; discharge all
Officers and others from yiedling any obedience to her; subscribing this
Instrument with their hands, requiring it to be published in all the
Head-Boroughs of the Kingdom, and causing it to be proclaimed with sound of
Trumpet. Thus they began with the Queen Regent; but we shall see them end with
the Queen her self, their anointed Sovereign. This Instrument bears date on
the 23 of October, a memorable day for many notable occurrences which have
happened on it in our British Stories. Of all these doings, they advertised her
by express Letters, sent back by the same Herald who had brought her last
message to them; and having so done, they resolve immediately to try their
fortune upon Leith in the way of Scalada. But the worst was, the Soldiers
would not ^ight without present money, and money they had none to pay them on
so short a warning. Somewhat was raised by way of Contribution, but would not
satisfy. And thereupon it was advised, that the Lords and other great men
should bring in their Plate, and cause it to be presently melted, to content
the Soldiers. But they who had so long made a gain of Godliness, did not love
Godliness so well, as not to value and prefer their gain before it. And
therefore some had so contrived it, that the Irons of the Mint were missing;
and by that handsome fraud they preserved their Plate.

20. It was not to be thought that the Scots durst have been so bold in the
present business, if they had not been encouraged underhand from some Friends
in England; which the Queen Regent well observed, and pressed it on them in her
Declaration, as before was noted. To which particular, though the Confederates
made no reply in their Anti-remonstrance at that time, yet afterward they both
acknowledged and defended their intelligence with the English Nation. For in a
subsequent Declaration, They acknowledge plainly, that many Messages had past
betwixt them, and that they had craved some support from thence; but that it
was only to maintain Religion, and suppress Idolatry. And they conceived that
in so doing, they had done nothing which might make them subject unto any just
censure; it being lawful for them, where their own power failed, to seek
assistance from their Neighbors. And now or never was the time to make use of
such helps, their Contribution falling short, and the Plate not coming to the
Mint, as had been projected. In which extremity it was advised to try some
secret Friends at Barwick, especially Sir Ralph Sudlieur and Sir James Crofts;
by whose encouragement it may be thought they had gone so far, that now there
was no going back without manifest ruin. By the assistance of these men, they
are furnished with four thousand Crowns in ready Money. But the Queen Regent
had advertisement of the negotiation, and intercepts it by the way. The news of
this ill Fortune makes the Soldiers desperate; some of them secretly steal
away, others refuse to venture upon any service; so that the Lords and others
of the chief Confederates are put upon a necessity of forsaking Edenborough.
The French immediately take possession of it, compel the Ministers, and most of
those who professed the Reformed Religion, to desert their dwellings; restore the
Mass, and reconcile with many Ceremonies the chief Church of the City (I mean
that dedicated unto St. Gyles) as having been profaned by Heretical
Preachings. But the abandoning of Edenborough proved the ruin of Glasgow. To
which Duke Hamilton repairing, he caused all the Images and Altars to be pulled
down, and made himself Master of the Castle; out of which, upon the noise of
the Bishops coming with some Bands of French, he withdraws again, and quits the
Town unto the Victor. No way now left to save their persons from the Law, their
Estates from forfeiture, their Country from the French, and their Religion from
the Pope, but to cast themselves upon the favor of the Qeeen of England. And
to that course as the Lord James did most incline, and Knox most preached for,
so there might be some probable Reasons which might assure them of not failing
of their expectations.

21. No sooner was Queen Mary of England dead, but Mary the young Queen of
Scots, not long before Married to the Daulphin of France, takes on her self the
name and title of Queen of England; the Arms whereof she quarters upon all her
Plate, some of her Coin, and upon no small part of her Houshold-Furniture.
Which though she did not (as she did afterward allege) of her own accord, but
as she was overruled in it by the persuasion of her Husband, and the Authority
(which was not in her to dispute) of the King his Father; yet Queen Elizabeth
looked upon it as a public opposition to her own Pretensions, an open
disallowing of her Title to the Crown of this Realm. She had good reason to
presume that they by whose Authority and Counsel she was divested of her Title,
would leave no means untryed, nor no stone unmoved, by the rouling whereof she
might be tumbled out of her Government, and deprived also of her Kingdom. Which
jealousy so justly settled, received no small increase, from the putting over
of so many French, distributing them into so many Garrisons, but more
especially, by their fortifying of the Town of Leith; at which Gate all the
strengths of France might enter when occasion served: And then how easy a
passage might they have into England? divided only by small Rivers in some
places, and in some other places not divided at all. But that which most
assured her of their ill intentions, was the great preparations lately made by
the Marquess of Elboeuf one of the Brothers of the Queen Regent, and
consequently Uncle to the Queen of Scots. For though he was so distressed by
tempests, that eighteen Ensigns were cast away on the Coast of Holland, and
the rest forced for the present to return into France, yet afterward, with one
thousand Foot, and some remainders of his Horse, he recovered Leith, and joined
himself unto the rest of that Nation, who were there disposed of. Of all which
passages and provocations, the Chief Confederates of the Congregation were so
well informed, as might assure them that Queen Elizabeth would be easily moved
for her own security to aid them in expelling the French, and then the
preservation of Religion, and the securing of themselves, their Estates and
Families, would come in of course.

1560.
22. It was upon this Reason of State, and not for any quarrel about Religion,
that Queen Elizabeth put her self into Arms, and lent the Scots a helping hand
to remove the French. And by the same she might have justified her self before
all the World, if she had followed those advantages which were given her by it,
and seized into her hands such Castles, Towns, and other places of importance
within that Kingdom, as might give any opportunity to the French-Scots to
infest her Territories. For when one Prince pretends a Title to the Crown of
another, or otherwise makes preparations more then ordinary both by Land and
Sea, and draws them together to some place, from whence he may invade the other
whenever he please; the other party is not bound to sit still till the War be
brought to his own doors, but may lawfully keep it at a distance, as far off as
he can, by carrying it into the Enemies Country, and getting into his power all
their strong Passes, Holds, and other Fortresses, by which he may be hindered
from approaching nearer. But this can no way justify or excuse the Scots,
which are not to be reckoned for the less Rebels against their own undoubted
Sovereign, for being subservient in so just a War to the Queen of England; as
neither the Caldeans or the wild Arabians could be defended in their thieving,
or Nebuchadnezzar justified in his pride and Tyranny, because it pleased
Almighty God for trial of Jobs faith and patience to make use of the one; and
of the other, for chastising his people Israel. The point being agitated with
mature deliberation by the Council of England, it was resolved that the French
were not to be suffered to grow strong so near the Border; that the Queen could
not otherwise provide for her own security, then by expelling them out of
Scotland; and that it was not to be compassed at a less expense of blood and
Treasure, then by making use of the Scots themselves, who had so earnestly
supplicated for her aid and succors. Commissioners are thereupon appointed to
treat at Barwick: Betwixt whom, and the Agents for the Lords of the
Congregation, all things in reference to the War are agreed upon: The sum and
result whereof was this, That the English with a puissant Army entered into
Scotland, reduced the whole War to the Siege of Leith, and brought the French
in short time into such extremities, that they were forced in conclusion to
abandon Scotland, and leave that Country wholly in a manner to the Congregation.

23. These were the grounds, and this the issue of those counsels, which proved
so glorious and successful unto Queen Elizabeth in all the time of her long
Reign: For by giving this seasonable Aid to those of the Congregation in their
greatest need, and by feeding some of the Chiefs amongst them with small annual
Pensions, she made her self so absolute, and of such Authority over all the
Nation, that neither the Queen Regent, nor the Queen her self, nor King James
her son, nor any of their Predecessors, were of equal power, nor had the like
Command upon them. The Church was also for a while a great gainer by it; the
Scots had hitherto made use of the English Liturgy in Gods public Worship;
the fancy of extemporary Prayers not being then taken up amongst them, as is
affirmed by Knox himself in his Scottish History. But now upon the sense of so
great a benefit, and out of a desire to unite the Nations in the most constant
bonds of friendship, they bind themselves by their subscription to adhere unto
it: For which I have no worse a Witness then their own Buchanan. And that they
might approach as near unto it in the Form of Government as the present
condition of the times would bear, as they placed several Ministers for their
several Churches, (as Knox in Edenborough, Goodman at St. Andrews, Aeriot at
Aberdeen, etc.) so they ordained certain Superintendants for their Ministers;
all the Episcopal Sees being at that time filled with Popish Prelates. And
happy it had been for both, had they continued still in so good a posture; and
that the Presbyterian humor had not so far obliterated all remembrance of
their old affections, as in the end to prosecute both the Liturgy and
Episcopacie to an extermination. And there accrued a further benefit by it to
the Scots themselves; that is to say, the confirmation of the Faith which they
so contended for by Act of Parliament: for by difficulties of Agreement between
the Commissioners authorized on all sides to atone the differences, it was
consented to by those for the Queen of Scots, that the Estates of the Realm
should convene and hold a Parliament in the August following, and that the said
Convention should be as lawful in all respects, as if it should be summoned by
the particular and express command of the Kings themselves. According to which
Article they hold a Parliament, and therein pass an Act for the ratification of
the Faith and Doctrine, as it was then drawn up into the Form of a Confession
by some of their Ministers. But because this Confession did receive a more
plenary Confirmation in the first Parliament of King James, we shall refer all
further speech of it till we come to that. They also passed therein other Acts
to their great advantage; first for abolishing the Popes Authority; the second
for repealing all former Statutes which were made and maintained of that which
they called Idolatry; and the third against the saying or hearing of Mass.

24. It was conditioned in the Articles of the late agreement, that the Queen
of Scots should send Commissioners to their present Parliament, that the
results thereof might have the force and effect of Laws; but she intended not
for her part to give their Acts the countenance of Supreme Authority; and the
Chief-leading-men of the Congregation did not much regard it, as thinking
themselves in a capacity to manage their own business without any such
countenance: For though they had addressed themselves to the King and Queen for
confirmation of such Acts as had passed in this Parliament; yet they declared
that what they did was rather to express their obedience to them, then to beg
of them any strength to their Religion. They had already cast the Rider, and
were resolved that neither King nor Queen should back them for the time to
come. The Queen Regent wearied and worn out with such horrid insolences,
departed this life at Edenborough on the 10 of June; and none was nominated to
succeed with like Authority: The French Forces were embarked on the 16 of July,
except some few which were permitted to remain in the Castle of Dunbar, and the
Isle of Inchkeeth; so few, that they seemed rather to be left for keeping
possession of the Kingdom in the name of the Queen, then either to awe the
Country, or command obedience. And that they might be free from the like fears
for the times ensuing, Francis the Second dies on the 5 of December, leaving
the Queen of Scots a desolate and friendless Widow, assisted only by her
Uncles of the House of Guise, who though they were able to do much in France,
could do little out of it. This put the Scots (I mean the leading Scots of the
Congregation) into such a stomach, that they resolved to steer their course by
another compass, and not to Sail only by such Winds as should blow from
England. They knew full well that the breach between the two Queens was not
reconcilable, and that their own Queen would be always kept so low by the
power of England, that they might trample on her as they pleased, now they had
her under. And though at first they had embraced the Common Prayer Book of the
Church of England, and afterward confirmed the use of it by a solemn
Subscription; yet when they found themselves delivered from all fear of the
French by the death of their King, and the breach growing in that Kingdom upon
that occasion; they then began to tack about, and to discover their affections
to the Church of Geneva, Knox had before devised a new book of Discipline,
contrived for the most part after Calvin's platform, and a new Form of
Common Prayer was digested also, more consonant to his infallible judgment
then the English Liturgy. But hitherto they had both lain dormant, because
they stood in need of such help from England, as could not be presumed on with
so great a confidence, if they had openly declared any dissent or disaffection
to the public Forms which were established in that Church. Now their estate is
so much bettered by the death of the King, the sad condition of their Queen,
and the assurances which they had from the Court of England (from whence the
Earls of Morton and Glencarne were returned with comfort) that they resolve to
perfect what they had begun; to prosecute the desolation of Religious Houses,
and the spoil of Churches; to introduce their new Forms, and suspend the old.
For compassing of which end, they summoned a Convention of the Estates to be
held in January.

25. Now in this Book of Discipline they take upon them to innovate in most
things formerly observed and practiced in the Church of Christ, and in some
things which themselves had settled, as the groundwork of the Reformation. They
take upon them to discharge the accustomed Fasts, and abrogate all the ancient
Festivals, not sparing those which did relate particularly unto Christ our
Savior, as his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, etc. They condemned the use of
the Cross in Baptism, give way to the introduction of the New Order of Geneva,
for ministering the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and commend sitting for the
most proper and convenient gesture to be used at it. They require that all
Churches not being Parochial should be forthwith demolished, declare all Forms
of Gods public Worship, which are not prescribed in his Word, to be mere
Idolatry, and that none ought to administer the holy Sacraments, but such as
are qualified for preaching. They appoint the Catechism of Geneva to be taught
in their Schools, Ordained three Universities to be made and continued in that
Kingdom, with Salaries proportioned to the Professors in all Arts and Sciences,
and time assigned for being graduated in the same. They decree also in the
same, that Tithes should be no longer paid to the Romish Clergy, but that they
shall be taken up by Deacons and Treasurers, by them to be employed for
maintenance of the poor, the Ministers, and the said Universities. They
complained very sensibly of the Tyranny of Lay-Patrons and Impropriators in
exacting their Tithes, in which they are said to be more cruel and unmerciful
then the Popish Priests; and therefore take upon them to determine, as in point
of Law, what Commodities shall be Tythable, what not; and declare also that all
Leases and Alienations which formerly had been made of Tithes, should be
utterly void.

26. Touching the Ministration of the Word and Sacraments, and the performance
of other Divine Offices, it is therein ordered, That Common Prayers (by which
they mean the new Form of their own devising) be said every day in the greater
Towns, except it be upon the days of public Preaching; but then to be forborne,
that the Preachers own Prayer before and after Sermon may not be despised or
disrespected: That Baptism be Administered only upon the Sundays, and other
days of public Preaching, for the better beating down of that gross Opinion of
the Papists (so they pleased to call it) concerning the necessity of it: That
the first Sundays of March, June, September and December should be from
thenceforth set apart for the holy Communion, the better to avoid the
superstitious receiving of it at the Feast of Easter: That all persons exercise
themselves in singing Psalms, to the end they may the better perform that
service in the Congregation: That no singing of Psalms, no reading of
Scriptures should be used at burials: That no Funeral-Sermon shall be preached,
by which any difference may be made between the rich and the poor; and that no
dead body for the same cause shall be buried in Churches: That Prophesyings and
Interpreting of the holy Scriptures shall be used at certain times and places,
according to the custom of the Church of Corinth: That in every Church there
shall be one Bell to call the people together, one Pulpit for the Word, and a
Basin for Baptism: And that the Minister may the better attend these Duties, it
is ordered that he shall not haunt the Court, nor be of the Council, nor bear
charge in any Civil Affairs, except it be to assist the Parliament when the
same is called.

27. Concerning Ecclesiastical persons, their Function, Calling, Maintenance
and Authority, it was ordered in the said Book of Discipline, That Ministers
shall from thenceforth be elected by the Congregation where they are to preach:
that having made trial of their Gifts, and being approved of by the Church
where they are to Preach, they shall be admitted to their charge, but without
any imposition of hands as in other Churches: That some convenient pension be
assigned to every Minister for the term of life (except he deserve to be
deprived) with some provision to be made after his decease for his Wife and
Children: That the bounds of the former Diocesses being contracted or enlarged,
there shall be ten or twelve Superintendents appointed in the place of the
former Bishops, who are to have the visitation of all the Ministers and
Churches in their several bounds, to fix their dwellings in the chief Towns or
Cities within the same, and to be chosen by the Burgesses of the said Towns or
Cities, together with the suffrages of the Ministers of their several Circuits;
and more particularly, that the County or Province of Lothaine shall be
abstracted from the Diocese of St. Andrews, and have a Superintendent of its
own, who was to keep his Residence in the City of Edenborough (which afterward
in the year 1633 was erected by King Charles into a Bishops See, and Lothaine
assigned him for his Diocese, as was here devised:) That for the better
maintenance of the Ministers and Superintendents, as also for defraying of all
other public charges which concerned the Churches, the lands belonging unto
the Bishops, as also to all Cathedral and Conven^^al Churches, and to the
Houses of Monks and Friars, shall be set apart, not otherwise to be employed:
That in all Churches there be two Elders annually chosen to be associate with
the Ministers in the Cognizance of all Ecclesiastical Causes, and in the
Censures of the Church: That the said Elders shall have power not only to
admonish, but correct their Ministers, if occasion be; but not to proceed to
deprivation without the allowance and consent of the Superintendent; and that
the Deacons shall be joined as Assistants in judgment with the Elders and
Ministers: That no man presume to eat or drink, or otherwise to converse
familiarly with excommunicate persons, except those of his own Family only:
That their Children should not be Baptized till they came unto the years of
discretion: And that all Murderers, and other Malefactors punishable by death
according to the Laws of the Land, though they be pardoned for the same by the
supreme Magistrates, shall notwithstanding be esteemed as excommunicate
persons, and not received into the Church without such satisfaction and
submission as is required of other notorious offenders by the Rules of the
Discipline. It appears also by this Book, that there was one standing Supreme
C^uncil for ordering the Affairs of the Church, and by which all public
grievances were to be redressed; but of what persons it consisted, and in what
place it was held, is not mentioned in it.

28. This Book being tendered to the consideration of the Convention of
Estates, was by them rejected; whether it were because they could not make such
a manifest separation from the Polity of the Church of England, or that it
concerned them more particularly in their own proper interest, in regard of the
Church Lands and Tithes which they had amongst them, or perhaps for both.
Certain it is, that some of them past it over by no better Title then that of
some devout Imaginations, which could not be reduced to practice. This so
offended Knox and others, who had drawn it up (if any other but Knox only had
a hand therein) that they spared not bitterly to revile them for their coldness
in it, taxing them for their carnal liberty, their love unt^^ their worldly
Commodities, and their corrupt imaginations: Some of them are affirmed to have
been licentious; some greedily to have griped the possessions of the Church,
and others to be so intent upon the getting of Christ's Coat, that they would
not stay till he was crucified. Of the Lord Erskin who refused to subscribe to
the Book, it is said particularly, that he had a very evil woman to his Wife;
and that if the Schools, the poor, and the Ministry of the Church had their
own, his Ki^^h^n would have lacked two parts of that which he then possessed.
Of all of them it was admired, that for such a long continuance they could hear
the threatenings of God against Thieves and Robbers, and that knowing themselves
to be guilty of those things which were most rebuked, they should never have
any remorse of Conscience, nor intend the restoring of those things which they
had so stolen. For so it was (if they may be believed that said it) that none
in all the Realm were more unmerciful to the poor Ministers, then they that had
invaded and possessed themselves of the greatest Rents of right belonging unto
the Church, and therein verified as well the old Proverb, That the belly has
no ears at all, as a new observation of their own devising, That nothing would
suffice a wretch. Such were the discontents and evaporations of these zealous
men, when they were crossed in any thing which concerned them in their power or
profit.

1561.
30. But in another of their projects they had better Fortune. They had
solicited the Convention of Estates for demolishing of all Monuments of
Superstition and Idolatry, in which number they accounted all Cathedral
Churches, as well as Monasteries and other Religious Houses; which they
insisted on the rather, because it was perceived, and perhaps given out, that
the ^apists would again erect their old Idolatry, and take upon them a command
(as before they did) upon the Consciences of the people; that so as well the
great men of the Realm, as such whom God of his Mercy (so they tell us) had
subjected to them, should be compelled to obey their lawless appetites. In
this, some hopes were given them that they should be satisfied, but nothing
done in execution of the same, till the May next following: And possibly enough
it might have been delayed to a longer time, if the noise and expectation of
the Queens return had not spurred it on: For either fearing, or not knowing
what might happen to them, if she should interpose her power to preserve those
places, whose demolishing they so much desired* they introduce that Discipline
by little and little, which they could not settle all at once. They begin first
planting Churches, and nominating Superintendents for their several Circuits;
they superinduce their own Ministers over the heads of the old incumbents;
establish their Presbyteries, divide them into several Classes, and hold their
general Assemblies without any leave desired of the Queen or Council. They
proceed next to execute all sorts of Ecclesiastical Censures, and arrogate
Authority to their selves and their Elders to Excommunicate all such as they
found unconformable to their new devices. For the first trial of their power,
they convent one Sanderson, who had been accused to them for Adultery, whom
they condemned to be carted, and publicly exposed unto the scorn of Boys and
Children. An uproar had been made in Edenborough about the choosing of a
Robbinhood (or a Whitson-Lord) in which some few of the preciser sort opposed
all the rest; and for this crime they excommunicate the whole multitude;
wherein they showed themselves to be very unskilful in the Canon Law, in which
they might have found, that neither the Supreme Magistrate, nor any great
multitudes of people are to be subject to that Censure. They proceed afterward
to the appointing of solemn Fasts, and make choice of Sunday for the day; which
since that time has been made use of for those Fasts, more then any other: and
in this point they showed themselves directly contrary to the practice of the
Primitive Church, in which it was accounted a great impiety to keep any Fast
upon that day, either private or public. They Interdict the Bishops from
exercising any Ecclesiastical Jurisdict^on in their several Diocesses; and
openly quarrel with their Queen, for giving a Commission to the Archbishop of
St. Andrews to perform some Acts which seemed to them to savor of Episcopal
power. Having attained unto this height, they maintain an open correspondence
with some Foreign Churches, give audience to the Agents of Berne, Basil and
Geneva; from whom they received the sum of their Confessions, and signified
their consent with them in all particulars, except Festivals only, which they
had universally abolished throughout the Kingdom; and finally, they take upon
them to write unto the Bishops of England, whom they admonished not to vex or
suspend their Brethren for not conforming to the Rules of the Church,
especially in refusing the Cap and Surplice, which they call frequently by the
name of trifles, vain trifles, and the old badges of idolatry. All which they
did, and more, in pursuit of their Discipline, though never authorized by Law,
or confirmed by the Queen, nor justified by the Conven^ion of Estates, though
it consisted for the most part of their own Prosessors. A Petition is directed
to the Lords of secret Council, from the Assemblies of the Church, in which
their Lordships are solicited to dispatch the business. But not content with
that which they had formerly moved, it was demanded also that some severe
course might be taken against the Sayers and Hearers of Mass; that fit
provision should be made for their Superintendents, Preachers, and other
Ministers; and that they should not be compellable to pay their Tithes as
formerly to the Popish Clegy, with other particulars of that nature. And that
they might not trifle in it as they had done hitherto, the Petition carried in
it more threats and menaces, then words of humble supplication as became
Petitioners. For therein it said expressly, That before those Tyrants and dumb
Dogs should have Empire over them, and over such as God had subjected unto
them, they were fully determined to hazard both life, and whatsoeever they had
received of God in Temporal things; that therefore they besought their
Lordships to take such order, that the Petitioners (if they may be called so)
might have no occasion to take the Sword of just defense into their hands,
which they had so willingly resigned, after the Victory obtained, into those of
their Lordships; that so doing, their Lordships should perceive they would not
only be obedient unto them in all things lawful, but ready at all times to
bring all such under their obedience, as should at any time rebel against their
Authority; and finally, that those enemies of God might assure themselves, that
they would no no longer suffer Pride and Idolatry; and that if their Lordships
would not take some order in the premises, they would then proceed against them
of their own Authority after such a manner, that they should neither do what
they list, nor live upon the sweat of the brows of such as were in no sort
debtors to them.

31. On the receipt of this Petition, an Order presently is made by the Lords
of the Council, for granting all which was desired; and had more been desired,
they had granted more: so formidable were the Brethren grown to the opposite
party. Nor was it granted in words only which took no effect, but execution
caused to be done upon it, and warrants to that purpose issued to the Earls of
Arrane, Arguile and Glencarne, the Lord James Steward, etc. Whereupon followed
a pitiful devastation of Churches and Church-buildings in all parts of the
Realm; no difference made, but all Religious Edifices of what sort soever, were
either terribly defaced, or utterly ruinated; the holy Vessels, and whatsoever
else could be turned into money, as Lead, Bells, Timber, Glass, etc. was
publicly exposed to sale; the very Sepulchers of the dead not spared; the
Registers of the Church, and the Libraries thereunto belonging, defaced, and
thrown into the fire. Whatsoever had escaped the former tumults, is now made
subject to destruction; so much the worse, because the violence and
sacrilegious actings of these Church-robbers had now the countenance of Law.
And to this work of spoil and rapine, men of all Ranks and Orders were observed
to put their helping hands; m^n of most Note and Quality being forward in it,
in hope of getting to themselves the most part of the booty; those of the
poorer sort, in hope of being gratified for their pains therein by their Lords
and Patrons. Both sorts encouraged to it by the Zealous madness of some of
their sedirious Preachers, who frequently cried out, that the places where
Idols had been worshipped, ought by the Law of God to be destroyed; that the
sparing of them was the reserving of things execrable; and that the Commandment
given to Israel for destroying the places where the Canaanites did worship
their false Gods, was a just warrant to the people for doing the like. By which
encouragements, the madness of the people was transported beyond the bounds
which they had first prescribed unto it. In the beginning of the heats, they
designed only the destruction of Religious Houses, for fear the Monks and
Friars might otherwise be restored in time to their former dwellings: But they
proceeded to the demolition of Cathedral Churches, and ended in the ruin of
Parochial also; the Chancels whereof were sure to be levelled in all places,
though the Isles and bodies of them might be spared in some.

32. Such was the entertainment which the Scots prepared for their Queens
coming over. Who taking no delight in France, where every thing renewed the
memory of her great loss, was easily entreated to return to her native Kingdom.
Her coming much desired by those of the Popish party, in hope that by her power
and presence they might be suffered at the least to enjoy the private Exercise
of their Religion, if not a public approbation and allowance of it. Solicited
as earnestly by those of the Knoxian interest, upon a confidence that they
should be better able to deal with her when she was in their power, assisted
only by the Counsels of a broken Clergy, then if she should remain in France,
from whence by her Alliances and powerful Kindred she might create more
mischief to them then she could at home. On the 19 day of August she arrives in
Scotland, accompanied by her Uncles the Duke of Aumales, the Marquess of
Elboeuf, and the Lord grand Pryor, with other Noblemen of France. The time of
her arrival was obscured with such Fogs and Mists, that the Sun was not seen to
shine in two days before, nor in two days after. Which though it made her
passage safe from the Ships of England, which were designed to intercept her,
yet was it looked upon by most men as a sad presage of those uncomfortable
times which she found amongst them. Against Sunday, being the 24, there were
great preparations made for celebrating Mass in the Chappel-Royal of
Holy^ood-House. At which the Brethren of the Congregation were so highly
offended, that some of them cried out aloud, so as all might hear them, That
the Idolatrous Priests should dye the death according to Gods Law; others
affirming with less noise, but with no less confidence, That they could not
abide, that the Land which God by his power had purged of Idolatry, should in
their sight be polluted with the same again. And questionless some great
mischief must have followed on it, if the Lord James Steward (to preserve the
honor of his Nation in the eye of the French) had not kept the door: which he
did, under a pre^ence that none of the Scottish Nation should be present at the
hearing of Mass, contrary to the Laws and Statutes made in that behalf; but in
plain truth, to hinder them by the power and reputation which he had amongst
them, from thronging in tumultuously to disturb the business.

33. For remedy whereof for the time to come, an Order was issued the next day
by the Lords of the Council, and Authorized by the Queen, in which it was
declared, that no manner of person should privately or openly take in hand to
alter or innovate any thing in the State of Religion which the Queen found
publicly and universally received at her Majesty's arrival in that Realm, or
attempt any thing against the same upon pain of death. But then it was required
withal, that none of the Leiges take in hand to trouble or molest any of her
Majesty's Domestic Servants, or any other persons which had accompanied her
out of France at the time then present, for any cause whatsoever, in word,
deed, or countenance; and that upon the pain of death, as the other was. But
notwithstanding the equality of so just an Order, the Earl of Arrane in the
name of the rest of the Congregation professed openly on the same day at the
Cross in Edenborough, That no protection should be given to the Queens
Domestics, or to any other person that came out of France, either to violate
the Laws of the Realm, or offend Gods Majesty, more then was given to any other
subjects. And this he did, as he there affirmed, because Gods Law had
pronounced death to the Idolater, and the Laws of the Realm had appointed
punishment for the sayers and hearers of Mass; from which he would have none
exempted, till some Law were publicly made in Parliament, and such as was
agreeable to the Word of God, to annul the former. The like distemper had
possessed all the rest of the Lords at their first coming to the Town to attend
her Majesty to congratulate her safe arrival; but they cooled all of them by
degrees, when they considered the unreasonableness of the Protestation, in
denying that Liberty of Conscience to their Sovereign Queen, which every one of
them so much desired to enjoy for himself: Only the Earl Arrane held it out to
the last. He had before given himself some hopes of marrying the Queen, and
sent her a rich Ring immediately on the death of the King her Husband; but
finding no return agreeable to his expectation, he suffered himself to be as
much transported to the other extreme, according to the natural Genius of the
Presbyterians, who never yet knew any mean in their loves or hatred.

34. John Knox makes good the Pulpit in the chief Church at Edenborough on the
Sunday following, in which he bitterly inveighed against Idolatry, showing what
Plagues and Punishments God had inflicted for the same upon several Nations.
And then he adds, that one Mass was more fearful to him, then if ten thousand
armed Enemies were landed in any part of the Realm on purpose to suppress their
whole Religion; that in God there was strength to resist and confound whole
multitudes, i^ unfeignedly they depended on him, of which they had such good
experience in their former troubles; but that if they joined hands with
Idolatry, they should be deprived of the comfortable presence and assistance of
Almighty God. A Conference hereupon ensued betwixt him and the Queen, at the
hearing whereof there was none present but the Lord James Steward, besides two
Gentlemen which stood at the end of the Room. In the beginning whereof, she
charged him with raising Sedition in that Kingdom, putting her own Subjects
into Arms against her, writing a Book against the Regiment of Women; and in the
end, descend^d to some points of Religion. To all which Knox returned such
answers, or else so favorably reports them to his own advantage (for we must
take the whole story as it comes from his pen) that he is made to go away with
as easy a victory, as when the Knight of the Boot encounters with some Dwarf
or Pigmy in the old Romances. All that the Queen got by it from the mouth of
this Adversary, was, that he found in her a proud mind, a craf^y wit, and an
obdurate heart against God and his Truth. And in this Character be thought
himself confirmed by her following actions: For spending the rest of the Summer
in visiting some of the chief Towns of her Kingdom, she carried the Mass with
her into all places wheresoever she came; and at her coming back, gave order
for setting out the Mass with more solemnity on Alhallows day, then at any time
or place before. Of this the Min^sters complain to such of the Nobility as were
then Resident in the City, but find not such an eagerness in them as in former
times. For now some of them make a doubt whether the Subjects might use force
for suppressing the Idolatry of their Prince; which heretofore had passed in
the affirmative as a truth infallible. A Con^erence is thereupon appointed
between some of the Lords, and such of the Ministers as appeared most Z^alous
against the Mass; the Lords disputing for the Queen, and urging that it was not
lawful to deprive her of that in which she placed so great a part of her
Religion. The contrary was maintained by Knox, and the rest of the Ministers;
who seeing that they could not carry it, as before, by their own Authority,
desired that the deciding of the point might be referred to the godly Brethren
of Geneva; of whose concurring in opinion with them, they were well assured.
And though the drawing up of the point, and the Inditing of the Letter, being
committed unto Ledington the principal Secretary, was not dispatched with such
po^^ haste as their Zeal required; yet they showed plainly by insisting on that
proposition, both from whose mouth they had received the Doctrines of making
Sovereign Princes subject to the lusts of the people, and from whose hands they
did expect the defense thereof.

35. A general Assembly being indicted by them about that time, or not long
after, a question is made by some of the Court-Lords, whether such Assemblies
might be holden by them without the Queens notice and consent. To which it was
answered, that the Assembly neither was, nor could be held without her notice,
because she understood that there was a Reformed Church within the Realm, by
the Orders whereof they had appointed times for their public Conventions. But
as to her allowance of it, it was then objected, that if the Liberty of the
Church should stand upon the Queens allowance or disallowance, they were
assured that they should not only want Assemblies, but the preaching of the
Word it self; for if the ^reedom of Assemblies was taken away, the Gospel in
effect must be also suppressed, which could not long subsist without them. The
putting in of the demurrer concerning the Authority in calling and holding
their Assemblies, prompted them to present the Book of Discipline to her
Majesty's view, and to solicit her by all the Friends and means they could
for her Royal-Assent: But finding no hope of compassing their desires for that
Book in general, it was thought best to try their Fortune in the pursuit of
some particulars contained in it. And to that end it was propounded to the
Lords of the Council, that Idolatry might be suppressed, the Churches planted
with true Ministers, and that certain provision should be made for them
according to equity and good Conscience* The Ministers till that time had liv^d
for the most part upon such Benevolences as were raised for them on the people;
the Patrimony of the Church being seized into the hands of private persons, and
alienated in long Leases by the Popish Clergy. The Revenue of the Crown was
small when it was at the best, exceedingly impaired since the death of King
James the Fifth, and not sufficient to defray the necessary charge and expense
of the Court. To satisfy all parties, it was ordered by the Lords of the
Council, that the third part of all the Rents of Ecclesiastical Benefices
should be taken up for the use of the Queen; that the other two parts should
remain to the Clergy, or to such as held them in their Right; and that the
Queen, out of the part assigned to her, should maintain the Ministers. This
Order bears date at Edenborough, December 20, but gave no satisfaction to the
Ministers or their Sollicitors, who challenged the whole Patrimony, by the
Rules of the Discipline, to belong only to themselves. Knox amongst others so
disliked it, that he affirmed openly in the Pulpit of Edenborough, That the
Spirit of God was not the Author of that Order, by which two parts of the
Church-Rents were given to the Devil, and the third part was to be divided
between God and the Devil; adding withal, that in short time the Devil would
have three parts of the third, and that a fourth part only should be left to
God.

36. But notwithstanding these seditious and uncharitable ^ur^^ses of their
hotheaded Preachers, a Commission is granted by the Queen to certain of her
Officers, and other persons of Quality, not only to receive the said third
part, but cut of ^t to assign such yearly stipends to their Ministers as to
them seemed meet. They were all such as did profess the Reformed Religion, and
therefore could not but be thought to be well-affected to the Ministers
maintenance; to some of which they allowed one hundred Marks by the year, unto
some three hundred; insomuch, that it was said by Ledington principal Secretary
of Estate, that when the Ministers were paid the Stipends assigned unto them,
the rest would hardly find the Queen a new pair of Shoes. But on the other
side, the Ministers vehemently exclaimed against these assignments; and openly
professed it to be very unreasonable, that such dumb Dogs and Idle-bellies as the
Popish Clergy should have a thousand Marks per annum; and that themselves (good
men) who spent their whole time in preaching the Gospel, should be put off with
two or three hundred. They railed with no less bitterness against the Lord of
Pittarow, who was appointed by the Queen for their Play Master General; and used
to say in common Speech, that the good Lord of Pittarow, Comptroller of her
Majesty's Household, was a Zealous Professor of Jesus Christ; but that the pay
Master or Comptroller would fall to the Devil. And for the Queen, so far they
were from acknowledging the receipt of any favor from her, in the true payment
of their Stipends, that they disputed openly against that Title which she
pretended to the thirds, out of which she paid them. By some it was affirmed,
that no such part had appertained to any of her Predecessors in a thousand
years; by others, that she had no better Title thereunto (whether she kept them
to her self, or divided them amongst her Servants) then had the Soldiers by
whom Christ was crucified to divide his Garments.

37. It happened not long after these debates, 1562.
that upon the receiving of some good news from her Friends in France, the
Queen appeared to be very merry, betook her self to dancing, and continued in
that recreation till after midnight. The news whereof being brought to Knox,
who had his Spies upon her at all times to observe her actions; the Pulpit must
needs ring of it, or else all was marred: He chooses for his Text these words
of the second Psalm, viz. And now understand O ye Kings, and be learned ye that
judge the earth. Discoursing on which Text, he began to tax the ignorance, the
vanity, and the despite of Princes against all Virtue, and against all those
in whom hatred of Vice and love of Virtue appeared. Report is made unto the
Queen, and this report begets a second Conference betwixt her and Knox, in
which she must come off with as little credit as she did in the first. Knox
tells her in plain terms, that it is oftentimes the just recompense that God
gives the stubborn of the World, that because they will not hear God speaking
to the comfort of the Penitent, and for the amendment of the wicked, they are
often compelled to hear the false reports of others to their great displeasure.
To which immediately he subjoyned, that it could not choose but come to the Ears
of Herod, that our Savior Jesus Christ had called him Fox; but that the men
who told him of it, did not also tell him what an odious act he had committed
before God, in causing John the Baptist to be beheaded, to recompense the
dancing of an Harlots Daughter. The Queen desired (after much other talk
between them) that if he heard any thing of her which distasted him, he would
repair to her in private, and she would willingly hear what he had to say. To
which he answered with as little reverence and modesty as to all the rest, that
he was appointed by God to rebuke the vices and sins of all, but not to go to
every one in particular to make known their offenses; that if she pleased to
frequent the public Sermons, she might then know what he liked or disliked, as
well in her self as any others; but that to wait at her Chamber Door, or
elsewhere, and then to have no further liberty then to whisper in her ear what
he had to say, or to tell her what others did speak of her, was neither
agreeable to his vocation, nor could stand with his Conscience.

38. At Midsummer they held a general Assembly, and there agreed upon the Form
of a Petition to be presented to the Queen in the name of the Kirk; the
substance of it was for abolishing the Mass, and other superstitious Rites of
the Romish Religion; for inflicting some punishment against Blasphemy,
Adultery, contempt of the Word, the Profanation of Sacraments, and other like
vices condemned by the Word of God, whereof the Laws of the Realm did not take
any hold; for referring all actions of Divorce to the Churches judgment, or at
the least to men of good knowledge and conversation; for excluding all Popish
Churchmen from holding any place in Council or Session; and finally, for the
increase and more assured payment of the Ministers Stipends, but more
particularly for appropriating the Glebes and Houses unto them alone. This was
the sum of their desires, but couched in such irreverent, coarse, and bitter
expressions, and those expressions justified with such animosities, that
Lethington had much ado to prevail upon them for putting it into a more dutiful
and civil Language. All which the Queen knew well enough, and therefore would
afford them no better answer, but that she would do nothing to the prejudice of
that Religion which she then professed; and that she hoped to have Mass
restored, before the end of the year, in all parts of the Kingdom. Which being
so said, or so reported, gave Knox occasion in his preachings to the Gentry of
Kyle and Galloway (to which he was commissioned by the said Assembly) to
forewarn some of them of the dangers which would shortly follow; and thereupon
earnestly to exhort them to take such order, that they might be obedient unto
Authority, and yet not suffer the Enemies of Gods (...) to have the upper-hand.
And they, who understood his meaning at half a word* assembled themselves
together on the 4 of September, at the Town of Air, where they entered into a
common Bond, subscribed by the Earl of Glencarne, the Lords Boyd and V^hiliry,
with one hundred and thirty more of Note and Quality, besides the Provost and
Burgesses of the Town of Air, which made forty more. The tenor of which Bond
was this that follows.

39. We whose names are under written, do promise in the presence of God, and
in the presence of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, that we, and every one of us,
shall and will maintain the Preaching of his holy Evangel, now of his mercy
offered and granted to this Realm; and also will maintain the Ministers of the
same against all persons, Power and Authority, that will oppose themselves to
the Doctrine proposed, and by us received. And further, with the same solemnity
we protest and promise that every one of us shall assist another, yea, and the
while Body of the Protestants within this Realm, in all lawful and just
occasions, against all persons; so that whosoever shall hurt (...), or trouble
any of our bodies, shall be reputed enemies to the whole, except that the
offender will be content to submit himself to the Government of the Church now
established amongst us. And this we do, as we desire to be accepted and
favored of the Lord Jesus, and accepted worthy of credit and honesty in the
presence of the Godly.

40. And in pursuance of this Bond, they seize upon some Priests, and give
notice to others, that they would not trouble themselves of complaining to the
Queen of Council, but would execute the punishment appointed to Idolaters in
the Law of God, as they saw occasion, whenever they should be apprehended. At
which the Queen was much offended; but there was no remedy. All she could do,
was once again to send for Knox, and to desire him so to deal with the Barons,
and other Gentlemen of the West, that they would not punish any man for the
cause of Religion, as they had resolved. To which he answered with as little
reverence as at other times, That if her Majesty would punish Malefactors
according to the Laws, he durst assure her, that she should find peace and
quietness at the hand of those who professed the Lord Jesus in that Kingdom:
That if she thought or had a purpose to illude the Laws, there were some who
would not fail to let the Papists understand, that they should not be suffered
without punishment to offend their God. Which said, he went about to prove in a
long discourse, that others were by God entrusted with the Sword of Justice,
besides Kings and Princes; which Kings and Princes, if they failed in the right
use of it, and drew it not against Offenders, they must not look to find
obedience from the rest of the Subjects.

41. It is not to be doubted, but that every understanding Reader will be able
to collect out of all the premises, both of what Judgment Knox and his
Brethren were, touching the Sovereignty of Kings, or rather the Supreme Power
invested naturally in the people of a State or Nation; as also from what
Fountain they derived their Doctrine, and to whose sentence only they resolved
to submit the same. But we must make a clearer demonstration of it, before we
can proceed to the rest of our History; that so it may appear upon what ground,
and under the pretense of what Authority so many Tumults and Discords were
acted on the Stage of Scotland by the Knoxian Brethren. It pleased the Queen to
hold a Conference with this man, in the pursuit whereof they fell upon the
point of resisting Princes by the Sword, the lawfulness whereof was denied by
her, but maintained by him. The Queen demands whether Subjects having power may
resist their Princes: Yea, (Madam) answered Knox; if Princes do exceed their
bounds, and do against that wherefore they should be obeyed, there is no doubt
but that they may be resisted even by power. For (said he) there is neither
greater honor, nor greater obedience to be given to Kings and Princes, then
God has commanded to be given unto our Fathers and Mothers; and yet it may so
happen, that the Father may be stricken with a Frenzy, and in some fit
attempt the slaying of his Children. In which case, if the Children join
themselves together, apprehend their Father, take the Sword out of his hand,
and keep him in Prison till his Frenzy be over-past; it is not to be thought
that God will be offended with them for their actings in it. And thereupon he
does infer, that so it is with such Princes also, as out of a blind Zeal would
murder the Children of God which are subject to them. And therefore to take
the Sword from them, to bind their hands, and to cast them into Prison, till
that they may be brought to a more sober mind, is not disobedience against
them, but rather is to be accounted for a just obedience, because it agrees
with the Word of God.

42. The same man preaching afterward at one of their General Assemblies, made
a distinction between the Ordinance of God, and the persons placed by him in
Authority; and then affirmed that men might lawfully and justly resist the
persons, and not offend against the Ordinance of God. He added as a Corollary
unto his discourse, That Subjects were not bound to obey their Princes, if they
Command unlawful things; but that they might resist their Princes, and that
they were not bound to suffer. For which being questioned by Secretary
Ledington in the one, and desired to declare himself further in the other
point; he justified himself in both, affirming that he had long been of that
opinion, and did so remain. A Question hereupon arising about the punishment of
Kings, if they were Idolaters; it was honestly affirmed by Ledington, That
there was no Commandment given in that case to punish Kings, and that the
people had no power to be judges over them, but must leave them unto God alone,
who would either punish them by death, imprisonment, war, or some other
Plagues. Against which Knox replied with his wooted confidence, that to affirm
that the people, or a part of the people may not execute Gods Judgments against
their King being an offender, the Lord Ledington could have no other Warrant,
except his own imaginations, and the opinion of such, as rather feared to
displease their Princes, then offend their God. Against which when Ledington
objected the Authority of some eminent Protestants; Knox answered, that they
spoke of Christians subject to Tyrants and Infidels, so dispersed, that they
had no other force but only to cry unto God for their deliverance: That such
indeed should hazard any further then those godly men willed them, he would not
hastily be of counsel. But that his Argument had another ground, and that he
spoke of a people assembled in one Body of a Commonwealth, unto whom God had
given sufficient force, not only to resist, but also to suppress all kind of
open Idolatry; and such a people again he affirmed were bound to keep their
Land clean and unpolluted: that God required one thing of Abraham and his Seed,
when he and they were strangers in the Land of Egypt, and that another thing
was required of them when they were delivered from that bondage, and put into
the actual Possession of the Land of Canaan.

43. Finally, that the Application might come home to the point in hand, it was
resolved by this learned and judicious Casuist, that when they could hardly
find ten in any one part of Scotland, who rightly understood Gods Truth, it
had been foolishness to have craved the suppression of Idolatry either from the
Nobility or the common subject, because it had been nothing else but the
betraying of the silly Sheep for a prey to the Wolves. But now (says he) that
God has multiplied knowledge, and has given the victory unto Truth in the
hands of his Servants, if you should suffer the Land again to be defiled, you
and your Prince should drink the cup of Gods indignation; the Queen, for her
continuing obstinate in open Idolatry, in this great light of the Gospel; and
you, for permission of it, and countenancing her in the same. For my assertion
is (says he) that Kings have no privilege more then has the people to offend
Gods Majesty; and if so be they do, they are no more exempted from the
punishment of the Law, then is any other subject; yea, and that subjects may
not only lawfully oppose themselves unto their Kings, whenever they do any
thing that expressly oppugnes Gods Commandments, but also that they may execute
Judgment upon them according to Gods Laws; so that if the King be a Murderer,
Adulterer, or an Idolater, he should suffer* according to Gods Law, not as a
King, but as an Offender. Now that Knox did not speak all this as his private
judgment, but as it was the judgment of Calvin, and the rest of the Genevian
Doctors, whom he chiefly followed, appears by this passage in the story. It was
required that Knox should write to Calvin, and to the Learned men in other
Churches, to know their judgments in the Question; to which he answered, that
he was not only fully resolved in conscience, but had already heard their
judgments as well in that, as in all other things which he had affirmed in
that Kingdom; that he came not to that Realm without their resolution, and had
for his assurance the handwriting of many; and therefore if he should now move
the same questions again, he must either show his own ignorance, or
inconstancy, or at least forgetfulness.

44. Of the same Nature, and proceeding from the same Original, are those
dangerous passages so frequently dispersed in most parts of his History. By
which the Reader is informed, That Reformation of Religion does belong to more
then the Clergy and the King: That Noblemen ought to reform Religion, if the
King will not: That Reformation of Religion belongs to the Commonalty, who
concurring with the Nobility, may compel the Bishops to cease from their
Tyranny, and bridle the cruel Beasts (the Priests:) That they may lawfully
require of their King to ^ave true Preachers; and if he be negligent, they
justly may themselves provide them, maintain them, defend them against all that
do persecute them, and may detain the profits of the Church Livings from the
Popish Clergy: That God appointed the Nobility to bridle the inordinate
appetite of Princes, who in so doing cannot be accounted as resisters of
Authority; and that it is their duty to repress the rage and insolency of
Princes: That the Nobility and Commonalty ought to reform Religion; and in that
case may remove from honors, and may punish such as God has condemned, of
what estate, condition, or honor soever they be: That the punishment of such
crimes as touch the Majesty of God, does not appertain to Kings and chief
Rulers only, but also to the whole body of the people, and to every member of
the same, as occasion, vocation, or ability shall serve, to revenge the injury
done against God: That Princes for just causes may be deposed: That of Princes
be Tyrants against God and his Truth, their subjects are freed from their Oaths
of obedience: And finally, that it is neither birth right or propinquity of
blood which makes a King rule over a people that profess Jesus Christ; but that
it comes from some special and extraordinary dispensation of Almighty God.

45. Such is the plain Song, such the Descant of these Sons of Thunder; first
tuned by the Genevian Doctors, by them commended unto Knox, and by Knox
preached unto his Brethren the Kirk of Scotland. In which what countenance he
received from Goodman, and how far he was justified, if not succeeded by the
pen of Buchanan, we shall see hereafter. In the mean time the poor Queen must
needs be in a very sorry case, when not her people only must be poisoned with
this dangerous Doctrine, but that she must be baffled and affronted by each
saucy Presbyter, who could pretend unto a Ministry in the Church: Of which the
dealing of th^s man gives us proof sufficient, who did not only revile her
parson in the Pulpit, and traduce her Government, but openly pronounced her to
be an Idolatress, and therefore to be punished by her Subjects as the Law
required. Nothing more ordinary with him in his factious Sermons, then to call
her a Slave to Satan, and to tell the people that Gods vengeance hanged over
the Realm, by reason of her impiety: which what else was it, but to inflame the
hearts of the people, as well against the Queen, as all them that served her?
For in his public Prayers he commonly observed this Form, viz. O Lord, if it
be thy good pleasure, purge the Queens heart from the venom of Idolatry, and
deliver her from the bondage and thraldom of Satan, in the which she yet
remains for lack of true Doctrine, etc. that in so doing, she may avoid the
eternal damnation which is ordained for all obstinate and impenitent to thee,
and that this Realm may also escape that plague and vengeance which inevitably
follows Idolatry, maintained in this Kingdom against thy manifest Word, and the
Light thereof set forth unto them. Such in a word was the intemperancie of his
spirit, his hatred of her person, or contempt of her Government, that he
opposed and crossed her openly in all her courses, and for her sake, fell foul
upon all men of more moderate counsels.

46. During the interval between the death of her Father, and her own coming
back from France, there had been little shown of a Court in Scotland, as not
much before. But presently on her return, a greater bravery in Apparel was
taken up by the Lords and Ladies, and such as waited near her person, then in
former times; never more visibly, then when they waited on her in a pompous
manner, as she went to the Parliament of this year. This gives great scandal to
the Preachers, to none more then Knox. The Preachers boldly in their Pulpits
(that I say not malapertly) declared against the superfluity of their Clothes,
and against the rest of their Vanities; which they affirmed should provoke Gods
vengeance, not only against those foolish Women, but the whole Realm; and
especially against those that maintained them in that odious abusing all things
which might have better been bestowed. A course is taken principally by their
solicitations, that certain Articles were agreed on, and proposed in
Parliament, for regulating all excess in Apparel as a great enormity, the
stinking pride of Women, as Knox plainly calls it. Who being sent for to the
Court upon the like occasion, could not but pass a scorn upon such of the
Ladies whom he found more gorgeously attired then agreed with his liking, by
telling them what a pleasant life it was they lived, if either it would always
last, or that they might go to Heaven in all that gear. But sie on that knave
death (quoth he) that will come whether we will or not; and when he has laid
an arrest, then foul worms will be busy with this ^^esh, be it never so fair
and tender; and the silly soul I fear ^i^l be so feeble, that it can neither
carry with it gold, garnishing, ^urbishing, pearl, nor precious stones. So
Zealous was be for a Purity both in Church and State, as not to tolerate soft
Raiment, though in Princes Palaces. The Queen had graced the Parliament with
her presence three days together; in one of which she entertains them with a
Speech, to the great satisfaction of all her good Subjects. Knox calls it by
the name of a painted Oration, tells us in scorn that one might have heard
amongst her flatterers that it was Vox Dianae, the voice of a Goddess, (for it
could not be Vox Dei) and not of a woman; others (as he pursues the Jeer)
crying out, God save that sweet face; was there ever Orator spoke so properly
and so sweetly? etc. And this as much displeased the Preachers, as the pride of
the Ladies.

47. The Queen had gained the thirds of all Church-Rents by an Act of State,
for the more honorable support of her self and her Family, upon condition of
making some allowance out of it to defray the Ministers: How Knox approved of
this, has been shown before. We must now see how he had trained up Goodman (if
they were not both rather trained up by the same great Master) to pursue the
quarrel; and how far he was seconded by the rest of the Brethren. In a general
Assembly held this year, the business of the thirds was again resumed by some
Commissioners of the Kirk. To which no sat^sfactory answer being given by the
Queen and her Council, it was said by those of the Assembly, If the Queen will
not, we must; for both second and third parts are rigorously taken from us and
our tenants. Knox added, that if others would fellow his counsel, the Guard and
the Papists should complain as long as their Ministers. Goodman takes fire upon
this strain, and starts a doubt about the Title which the Queen had unto the
thirds, or the Papists to the other two parts of the Church-Rents. At which
when he was put in mind by Ledington that he was a stranger, and therefore was
to be no medler; he boldly answered, that though he was a stranger in the Civil
Policy of that Realm, yet stranger he was none in the Church of God; the care
whereof did appertain to him no less in Scotland, then if he were in the midst
of England, his own nat^ve Country. So little was there got by talking unto any
of these powerful Zealots. At whose exhorbitances when the Lord James Steward
(not long before made Earl of Murray) seemed to be offended, and otherwise had
appeared more favorable to the Queen then agreed with their liking; Knox, who
before adored him above all men living, discharged himself by Letter in a
churlish manner from any further intermedling in his affairs; in which he
commits him to his own wit (so the Letter words it) and to the conduct of those
men who would better please him; and in the end thereof upbraids him, that his
preferment never came by any complying with impiety, nor by the maintaining of
pestilent Papists.

48. But to proceed to greater matters: the Queen began her Summers Progress,
and left a Priest behind in Halyrood-house, to execute Divine-Offices in the
Chapel to the rest of her Family. Some of the Citizens of Edenborough were
observed to repair thither at the time of Mass; whereof the Preachers make
complaint, and stir the people in their Sermons to such a fury, that they flock
in great multitudes to the Palace, violently force open the Chappel-doors,
seize upon such as they found there, and commit them to Prison, the Priest
escaping with much difficulty by a privy Postern. The news of this disorder is
carried post to the Queen, who thereupon gives order to the Provost of
Edenborough to seize upon the persons of Andrew Armstrong, or Patrick Cra^ston,
(the Chief-Ringleaders of the tumult) that they might undergo the Law at a time
appointed, for forethought Felony, in making a violent invasion into the
Queens Palace, and for spoliation of the same. This puts the Brethren into a
heat, and Knox is ordered by the consent of the rest of the Ministers, to give
notice unto all the Church of the present danger, that they might meet together
as one man to prevent the mischief. In the close of which Letter he ^ets them
know what hopes he had, that neither flattery nor fear would make them so far
to decline from Christ Jesus, as that against their public Promise, and solemn
Bond, they would leave their dear Brethren in so just a cause. It was about the
beginning of August that the tumult happened, and the beginning of October that
the Letter was written. A Copy of it comes into the hands of the Lords of the
Council; by whom the writing of it was declared to be treason, to the great
rejoicing of the Queen, who hoped on this occasion to revenge her self upon him
for his former insolences. But it fell out quite contrary to her expectation.
Knox is commanded to appear before the Lords of the Council, and he comes
accordingly; but comes accompanied with such a train of godly Brethren, that
they did not only fill the open part of the Court, but thronged up stairs, and
pressed unto the doors of the Council. This makes the man so confident, as to
stand out stoutly against the Queen and her Council, affirming that the
convocating of the people in so just a Cause, was no offense against the Law;
and boldly telling them, that they who had inflamed the Queen against those
poor men, were the Sons of the Devil; and therefore that it was no marvail if
they obeyed the desires of their Father, who was a Murderer from the
beginning. Moved with which confidence, or rather terrified with the clamours
of the Rascal Rabble, even ready to break in upon them, the whole Nobility then
present, absolved him of all the crimes objected to him, not without some
praise to God for his modesty, and for his plain and sensible answers, as
himself reports it.

1564.
49. Worse fared it with the Queen, and those of her Religion in another
adventure, then it did in this. At the ministering of the Communion in
Edenborough on the first of April, the Brethren are advertised that the Papists
were busy at their Mass; some of which taking one of the Bailiffs with them,
laid hands upon the Priest, the Master of the House, and two or three of the
Assistants; all whom they carried to the Tole-booth or Common Hall: The Priest
they re-invest with his Massing-Garments; set him upon the Market-cross, unto
which they tie him, holding a Chalice in his hand, which is tied to it also,
and there exposed him for the space of an hour to be pelted by the boys with
rotten Eggs. The next day he is accused and convicted in a course of Law, by
which he might have suffered death, but that the Law had never been confirmed
by the King or Queen. So that instead of all other punishments which they had
no just power to inflict upon him, he was placed in the same manner on the
Market-cross, the Common-hang-man standing by, and there exposed to the same
insolences for the space of three or four hours, as the day before. Some
Tumult might have followed on it, but that the Provost with some Halberdiers
dispersed the multitude, and brought the poor Priest off with safety. Of this
the Queen complains, but without any Remedy: Instead of other satisfaction, an
Article is drawn up by the Commissioners of the next Assembly, to be presented
to the Parliament then sitting at Edenborough; in which it was desired, That
the Papis^ical and blasphemous Mass, with all the Papistical Idolatry, and
Papal Jurisdiction, be universally suppressed, and abolished throughout this
Realm, not only in the subjects, but the Queens own person, etc. of which more
hereafter. It was not long since nothing was more preached amongst them, then
the great tyranny of the Prelates, and the unmerciful dealing of such others as
were in Authority, in not permitting them to have the liberty of Conscience in
their own Religion, which now they denied unto their Queen.

50. But the affront which grieved her most, was the perverse, but most
ridiculous opposition which they made to her Marriage: she had been desired for
a Wife by Anthony of Bourbon King of Navar, Lewis Prince of Conde, Archduke
Charles, the Duke of Bavaria, and one of the younger Sons of the King of
Sweden. But Queen Elizabeth, who endeavored to keep her low, dissuaded her
from all Alliances of that high strain, persuaded her to Marry with some Noble
Person of England, for the better establishment of her Succession in the Crown
of this Realm; and not obscurely pointed to her the Earl of Leicester: Which
being made known to the Lady Margaret Countess of Lenox, Daughter of Margaret
Queen of Scots, and Grandchild to King Henry the Seventh, from whom both
Queens derived their Titles to this Crown; she wrought upon the Queen of Scots,
by some Court-Instruments, to accept her Eldest Son the Lord Henry Steward for
her Husband. A Gentleman he was above all exception, of comely personage, and
very plausible behavior, of English Birth and Education and much about the
same age with the Queen her self. And to this Match she was the more easily
inclined, because she had been told of the King her Father, that he resolved
(if he had dyed without any Issue of his own) to declare the Earl of Lenox for
his Heir Apparent, that so the Crown might be preserved in the name of the
Stewarts. But that which most prevailed upon her, was a fear she had lest the
young Lord, being the next Heir unto her self to the Crown of England, might
Marry into some Family of power and puissance in that Kingdom; by means whereof
he might prevent her of her hopes in the succession; to which his being born in
England, and her being an Alien and an Enemy, might give some advantage. Nor
did it want some place in her consideration, that the young Lord, and his
Parents also, were of the same Religion with her, which they had constantly
maintained, notwithstanding all temptations to the contrary in the Court of
England. To smooth the way to this great business, the Earl desires leave of
Queen Elizabeth to repair into Scotland, where he is graciously received, and
in ^ull Parliament restored unto his native Country, from whence he had been
banished two and twenty years. The young Lord follows not long after, and
finds such entertainment at the hands of that Queen, that report voiced him
for her Husband before he could assure himself of his own affections. This
proved no very pleasing news to those of the Congregation, who thought it more
expedient to their Affairs, that the Queen should not Marry at all; or at
least, not Marry any other Husband but such as should be recommended to her by
the Queen of England, on whom their safety did depend. In which regard they are
resolved to oppose this Match, though otherwise they were assured that it would
make the Queen grow less in reputation both at home and abroad, to Marry with
one of her own subjects, of what blood soever.

51. And now comes Knox to play his prize, who more desired that the Earl of
Leicester (as one of his own Faction) should espouse the Queen, then the Earl
desired it for himself. If she will Marry at all, let her make choice of one of
the true Religion, for other Husband she should never have, if he could help
it. And to this end he lays about him in a Sermon preached before the
Parliament, at which the Nobility and Estates were then assembled. And having
roved sufficiently, as his custom was, at last he tells them in plain terms
(desiring them to note the day, and take witness of it) That whensover the
Nobility of Scotland who profess the Lord Jesus, should consent that an Infidel
( and all Papists are Infidels, says he) should be head to their Sovereign;
they did, so far as in them lies, banish Christ Jesus from this Realm, yea, and
bring Gods judgments upon the Country, a plague upon themselves, and do small
comfort to her self. For which being questioned by the Queen in a private
conference, he did not only stand unto it, without the least qualifying or
retracting of those harsh expressions; but must entitle them to God, as if they
had been the immediate Inspirations of the holy Ghost: for in his Dialogue with
the Queen, he affirmed expressly, that out of the preaching place few had
occasion to be any way o^fended with him; but there (that is to say, in the
Church or Pulpit) he was not Master of himself, but must obey him that commands
him to speak plain, and flatter no flesh upon the face of the Earth. This
insolent carriage of the man put the Queen into passion; insomuch, that one of
her Pages (as Knox himself reports the story) could hardly find Handkerchiefs
enough to dry her eyes; with which the proud fellow showed himself no further
touched, then if he had seen the like fears from any one of his own Boys on a
just correction.

52. Most men of moderate spirits seemed much offended at the former passage,
when they heard it from him in the Pulpit, more when they heard of the
affliction it had given the Queen. But it prevailed so far on the generality of
the Congregation, that presently it became a matter of Dispute amongst them,
Whether the Queen might choose to her self an Husband, or whether it were more
fitting that the Estates of the Land should appoint one for her. Some sober men
affirmed in earnest, that the Queen was not to be barred that liberty which was
granted to the meanest Subject. But the Chief leading-men of the Congregation
had their own ends in it, for which they must pretend the safety of the
Commonwealth. By whom it was affirmed as plainly, that in the Heir unto a
Crown, the case was different, because, said they, such Heirs in assuming an
Husband to themselves, did withal appoint a King to be over the Nation: And
therefore that it was more fit, that the whole people should choose a Husband to
one Woman, then one Woman to elect a King to Rule over the whole people. Others
that had the same design, and were possibly of the same opinion, concerning
the imposing of a Husband on her by the States of the Realm, disguised their
purpose, by pretending another Reason to break off this Marriage: The Queen and
the young Nobleman were too near of Kindred to be conjoined in Marriage by the
Laws of the Church; her Father and his Mother being born of the same Venture, as
our Lawyers phrase it. But for this blow the Queen did easily provide a
Buckler, and dispatched one of her Ministers to the Court of Rome for a
Dispensation. The other was not so well warded, but that it fell heavy at the
last, and plunged her into all those miseries which ensued upon it.

53. But notwithstanding these obstructions, 1565^
the Match went forwards in the Court, chiefly solicited by one David Risio,
born in Piedmont; who coming into Scotland in the company of an Ambassador from
the Duke of Savoy, was there detained by the Queen, first in the place of a
Musician, afterward employed in writing Letters to her Friends in France. By
which he came to be acquainted with most of her secrets, and as her Secretary
for the French Tongue to have a great hand in the managing of all Foreign
transactions. This brought him into great envy with the Scots, proud in
themselves, and not easy to be kept in fair terms, when they had no cause unto
the contrary. But the preferring of this stranger was considered by them as a
wrong to their Nation, as if not able to afford a sufficient man to perform
that Office, to which the Educating of so many of them in the Court of France
had made them no less fit and able then this Mungrel Italian. To all this Risio
was no stranger, and therefore was to cast about how to save himself, and to
preserve that Power and Reputation which he had acquired. Which to effect, he
labored by all means to promote the Match, that the young Lord being obliged
unto him for so great a benefit, might stand the faster to him against all
Court-factions, whenever they should rise against him. And that it might
appear to be his work only, Ledington the chief Secretary is dispatched for
England, partly to gain the Queens consent unto the Marriage, and partly to
excuse the Earl of Lenox and his Son, for not returning to the Court as she had
commanded. In the mean time he carries on the business with all care and
diligence, to the end that the Match might be made up before his return. Which
haste he made for these two Reason: first, lest the dissenting of that Queen,
(whose influence he knew to be very great on the Kingdom of Scotland) might
either beat it off, or at least retard it; the second, that the young Lord
Darnley, for so they called him, might have the greater obligation to him for
effecting the business, then if it had been done by that Queens consent.

54. To make all sure (as sure at least as humane Wisdom could project it) a
Convention of the Estates is called in May, and the business of the Marriage is
propounded to them. To which some yielded absolutely without any condition,
others upon condition that Religion might be kept indempnified; only the Lord
Vehiltry, one who adhered to Knox in his greatest difficulties, maintained the
Negative, affirming openly, that he would never admit a King of the Popish
Religion. Encouraged by which general and free consent of the chief Nobility
then present, the Lord Darnly not long after is made Baron of Ardmonack,
created Earl of Ross and Duke of Rothesay, titles belonging to the eldest and
the second Sons of the Kings of Scotland. But on the other side, such of the
great Lords of the Congregation as were resolved to work their own ends out of
these present differences, did purposely absent themselves from that
Convention, that is to say, the Earls of Murray, Glencarne, Rothes, Arguile,
etc. together with Duke Hamilton, and his dependants, whom they had drawn into
the Faction: and they convened at Stirling also, though not until the Queen and
her retinue were departed from thence; and there it was resolved by all means
to oppose the Marriage, for the better avoiding of such dangers and
inconveniences which otherwise might ensue upon it. For whose encouragement,
the Queen of England furnished them with ten thousand pounds, that it might
serve them for advance-money for the listing of Soldiers, when an occasion
should be offered to embroyl that Kingdom. Nor was Knox wanting for his part to
advance the troubles, who by his popular declamations against the Match, had so
incensed the people of Edenborough, that they resolved to put themselves into a
posture of War, to elect Captains to command them, and to disarm all those who
were suspected to wish well unto it. But the Queen came upon them in so just a
time, that the chief Leaders of the Faction were compelled to desert the Town,
and leave unto her mercy both their Goods and Families; to which they were
restored not long after by her grace and clemency.

55. A general Assembly at the same time was held in Edenborough, who falsely
thinking that the Queen in that conjuncture could deny them nothing, presented
their desires unto her: In the first whereof it was demanded, That the
Papistical and blasphemous Mass, with all Popish Idolatry, and the Popes
jurisdictions, should be universally suppressed and abolished throughout the
whole Realm, not only amongst the Subjects, but in the Queens Majesty's own
Person and Family. In the next place it was desired, That the true Religion
formerly received should be professed by the Queen, as well as by the Subjects;
and people of all sorts bound to resort upon the Sundays, at least to the
Prayers and Preachings, as in the former times to Mass: That sure provision
should be made for sustentation of the Ministry, as well for the time present,
as for the time to come; and their Livings assigned them in the places where
they served, or at least in the parts next adjacent; and that they should not
be put to crave the same at the hands of any others: That all Benefices then
vacant, and such as had fallen void since March 1558, or should happen
thereafter to be void, should be disposed to persons qualified for the
Ministry, upon trial and admission by the Superintendent; with many other
demands of like weight and quality. To which the Queen returned this answer:
first, That she could not be persuaded that there was any impiety in the Mass:
That she had been always bred in the Religion of the Church of Rome, which she
esteemed to be agreeable to the Word of God, and therefore trusted that her
subjects would not force her to do any thing against her conscience: That
hitherto she never had, nor did intend hereafter to force any man's conscience,
but to leave every one to the free exercise of that Religion which to him
seemed best; which might sufficiently induce them to oblige her by the like
indulgence. She answered to the next: That she did not think it reasonable to
defraud her self of such a considerable part of the Royal Patrimony, as to put
the Patronages of Benefices out of her own power; the public necessities of
the Crown being such, that they required a great part of the Church-Rents to
defray the same: Which notwithstanding, she declared, that the necessities of
the Crown being first supplied, care should be taken for the sustentation of
the Ministers in some reasonable and fit proportion, to be assigned out of the
nearest and most commodious places to their several dwellings. For all the
rest, she was contented to refer her self to the following Parliament, to whose
determinations in the particulars desired, she would be conformable.

56. Not doubting but this answer might sufficiently comply with all
expectations, she proceeds to the Marriage, publicly solemnized in the midst
of July, by the Dean of Restalrig, whom I conceive to be the Dean of her
Majesty's Chapel, in which that service was performed; and the next day the
Bridegroom was solemnly proclaimed King by the sound of Trumpet; declared to be
associated with her in the public Government, and order given to have his name
used in all Coyns and Instruments. But neither the impossibility of untying
this knot, nor the gracious answer she had made to the Commissioners of the
late Assembly, could hinder the Confederate Lords from breaking out into
action. But first they published a Remonstrance (as the custom was) to abuse
the people; in which it was made known to all whom it might concern, That the
Kingdom was openly wronged, the liberties thereof oppressed, and a King imposed
upon the people without the consent of the Estates; which they pretend to be a
thing not practiced in the former time, contrary to the Laws and received
Customs of the Country: And thereupon desired all good Subjects to take the
matter into consideration, and to join with them in resisting those beginnings
of Tyranny. But few there were that would be taken with these Baits, or thought
themselves in any danger by the present Marriage; which gave the Queen no power
at home, and much less abroad. And that they might continue always in so good a
posture, the young King was persuaded to show himself at Knoxes Sermon; but
received such an entertainment from that fiery and seditious spirit, as he
little looked for. For Knox, according to his custom, neither regarding the
Kings presence, nor fearing what might follow on his alienating from the cause
of the Kirk, fell amongst other things to speak of the Government of wicked
Princes, who for the sins of the people were sent as Tyrants and Scourges to
plague them; but more particularly, that people were never more scourged by
God, then by advancing boys and Women to the Regal Throne. Which if it did
displease the King, and give offense to many Conscientious and Religious men,
can seem strange to none.

57. In the mean time the discontented Lords depart from Stirling more
discontented then they came, because the people came not in to aid them, as
they had expected. From Stirling they remove to Paisely, and from thence to
Hamilton, the Castle whereof they resolved to Fortify for their present
defense. But they were followed so close by the King and Queen, and so divided
in opinion amongst themselves, that it seemed best to them to be gone, and try
what Friends and Followers they could find in Edenborough: but they found that
place too hot for them also; the Captain of the Castle did so ply them with
continual shot, that it was held unsafe for them to abide there longer. From
thence therefore they betook themselves to the Town of Dumfreis, not far from
the City of Carlisle in England, into which they might easily escape,
whatsoever happened, as in time they did. For the King leaving his old Father,
the Earl of Lenox, to attend them there, marched with his Forces into Fife,
where the party of the Lords seemed most considerable; which Province they
reduced to their obedience: some of the great Lords of it had forsook their
dwellings, many were taken prisoners and put to Ransom, and some of the chief
Towns fined for their late disloyalty: Which done, they march to Edenborough,
and from thence followed to Dumfreis. On whose approach, the Lords, unable to
defend themselves against their Forces, put themselves into Carlisle, where
they are courteously received by the Earl of Bedford, who was then Lord-Warden
of the Marches; from thence Duke Hamilton, the Earls of Glencarne and Rothes,
the Lord Vchiltry, the Commendator of Kilvinning, and diverse others of good
note, removed not long after to New Castle, that they might have the easier
passage into France or Germany, if their occasions so required. The Earl of
Murray is dispatched to the Court of England; but there he found so little
comfort, at the least in show, as brought the Queen under a suspicion amongst
the Scots, either of deep dissimulation, or of great inconstancy. The news
whereof did so distract and divide the rest, that Duke Hamilton underhand made
his own peace with his injured Queen, and put himself into her power in the
December following. The falling off of which great person so amazed the rest,
that now they are resolved to follow all those desperate counsels, by which
they might preserve themselves and destroy their enemies, though to the ruin
of the King, the Queen, and their natural Country. But what they did in the
pursuance of those counsels, must be reserved for the subject of another Book.

The end of the fourth Book.
AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History Of the PRESBYTERIANS. LIB. V. Containing A
further discovery of their dangerous Doctrines; their oppositions to
Monarchical and Episcopal Government; their secret Practices and Conspiracies
to advance their Discipline; together with their frequent Treasons and
Rebellions in the pursuance of the same, from the year 1565, till the year 1585.
1. AMongst the many natural Children of King James the Fifth, none were more
eminent and considerable in the course of these times, then James Pryor of St.
Andrews, and John Pryor of ^oldingham; neither of which were men in Orders, or
trained up to Learning, or took any further charge upon them, then to receive
the profit of their several places, which they enjoyed as Commendators, or
Administrators, according to the ill custom of some Princes in Germany. John
the less active of the two, but Father of a Son who created more mischief to
King James the Sixth, then James the other Brother did to the present Queen:
For having took to Wi^e a Daughter of the House of Hepbourn, Sister and next
Heir of James Hepbourn Earl of Bothwel (of whom more anon) he was by her the
Father of Francis Stewart, who succeeded in that Earldom on the death of his
Uncle. But James the other Brother was a man of a more stirring spirit,
dextrous in the dispatch of his business, cunning in turning all things to his
own advantage; a notable dissembler of his love and hatred, and such a Master
in the art of insinuation, that he knew how to work all parties to espouse his
interest. His preferments lay altogether in Ecclesiastical Benefices, designed
unto him by his Father, or conferred upon him by his Sister, or the King her
Husband. But that all three conjured to the making of him, appears by the Kings
Letter on the seventeenth day of July, upon this occasion. At what time as the
Marriage was solemnized between Francis then Daulphin of France, and the Queen
of Scots; he went thither to attend those tryumphs, where he became a Suitor to
the Queen his Sister; that some further Character or Mark of Honor might be
set upon him then the name of Pryor. But the Queen having been advertised by
some other Friends, that he was of an aspiring mind, and enterprising nature,
and of a spirit too great for a private Fortune, thought it not good to make
him more considerable in the eye of the people then he was already; and so
dismissed him for the present.

2. The frustrating of these hopes so exceedingly vexed him (as certainly some
are as much disquieted with the loss of what they never had, as others with the
ruin of a present possession) that the next year he joined himself to those of
the Congregation, took Knox into his most immediate and particular care, and
went along with him hand in hand in defacing the Churches of St. Andrews,
Stirling, Lithgow, Edenborough, and indeed what not? And for so doing, he
received two sharp and chiding Letters from the King and Queen, upbraiding him
with former Benefits received from each, and threatening severe punishment, if
he returned not immediately to his due obedience. Which notwithstanding, he
continues in his former courses, applies himself unto the Queen and Council of
England, and lays the plot for driving the French Forces out of Scotland: Which
done; he caused the Parliament of 1560 to be held at Edenborough, procures some
Acts to pass for banishing the Popes Supremacy, repealed all former Statutes
which were made in maintenance of that Religion, and ratifies the Confession
of the Kirk of Scotland in such form and manner as it was afterward confirmed
in the first Parliament of King James the Sixth. Upon the death of Francis the
young French King, he goes over again. And after some condolements betwixt him
and the Queen, intimates both to her and the Princes of the House of Guise, how
ill the rugged and untractable nature of the Scots would sort with one, who had
been used to the compliances and affabilities of the Court of France; advises
that some principal person of the Realm of Scotland might be named for Regent;
and in a manner recommends himself to them as the fittest man. But the worst
was, that his Mother had been heard to brag amongst some of her Gossips, that
her Son was the lawful Issue of King James the Fifth; to whose desires she had
never yielded, but on promise of Marriage. This was enough to cross him in his
present aims, and not to trust him with a power by which he might be able to
effect his purposes, if he had any such aspirings. And so he was dismissed again,
without further honor then the carrying back of a Commission to some Lords in
Scotland, by which they were empowered to manage the affairs of that Kingdom
till the Queens return.

3. This second disappointment adds more Fuel to the former flame; and he
resolves to give the Queen as little comfort of that Crown, as if it were a
Crown of Thorns, as indeed it proved. For taking England in his way, he applies
himself to some of the Lords of the Council, to whom he represents the dangers
which must needs ensue to Queen Elizabeth, if Mary his own Queen were suffered
to return into her Country, and thereby lay all passages open to the powers of
France, where she had still a very strong and prevailing party. But when he
found that she had fortunately escaped the Ships of England, that the Subjects
from all parts had went away extremely satisfied with her gracious carriage, he
resolved to make one in the Hosanna, as afterward he was the Chief in the
Crucifige; he applies himself unto the Queens humor with all art and industry,
and really performed to her many signal services, in gratifying her with the
free exercise of her own Religion; in which, by reason of his great Authority
with the Congregation, he was best able to oblige both her self and her
servants. By this means he became so great in the eyes of the Court, that the
Queen seemed to be governed wholly by him: and that he might continue always in
so good a posture, she first conferred upon him the Earldom of Murray, and
after married him to a Daughter of Keith, Earl-Marshal of Scotland. Being thus
honored and allied, his next care was to remove all impediments which he found
in the way to his aspiring. The Ancient and Potent Family of the Gourdons he
suppressed and ruined, though after it reflourished in its ancient glory: But
his main business was to oppress the Hamiltons, as the next Heirs unto the
Crown in the common opinion; the Chief whereof (whom the French King had
created Duke of Chasteau-Herald, a Town in Poictou) he had so discountenanced,
that he was forced to leave the Court, and suffer his eldest Son the Earl of
Arrane to be kept in prison, under pretense of some distemper in his brain.
When any great Prince sought the Queen in Marriage, he used to tell her, that
the Scots would never brook the power of a stranger; and that whenever that
Crown had fallen into the hands of a Daughter, as it did to her, a Husband was
chosen for her by the Estates of the Kingdom, of their own Language, Laws and
Parentage. But when this would not serve his turn to break off the Marriage
with the young Lord Darnley, none seemed more forward then himself to promote
that Match which he perceived he could not hinder: Besides, he knew that the
Gentleman was very young, of no great insight in business, mainly addicted to
his pleasures, and utterly unexperienced in the affairs of that Kingdom; so
that he need not fear the weakening of his power by such a King, who desired not
to take the Government upon him. And in this point he agreed well enough with
David Risio, though on different ends. But when he found the Queen so
passionately affected to this second Husband; that all Graces and Court-favours
were to pass by him; that he had not the Queens ear so advantagiously as before
he had; and that she had revoked some Grants which were made to him and others,
during her minority, as against the Law; he thought it most expedient to the
furthering of his own concernments, to piece himself more nearly with the Earls
of Morton, Glencarne, Arguile and Rothes, the Lords Ruthen, Vchiltry, etc. whom
he knew to be zealously affected to the Reformation, and no way pleased with
the Queens Marriage to a person of the other Religion. By whom it was resolved,
that Morton and Ruthen should remain in the Court, as well to give as to
receive intelligence of all proceedings: 1565.
The others were to take up Arms, and to raise the people, under pretense of
the Queens Marriage to a man of the Popish Religion, not taking with her the
consent of the Queen of England. But being too weak to keep the Field, they
first put themselves into Carlisle, and afterward into New Castle, as before
was said; and being in this manner fled the Kingdom, they are all proclaimed
Traitors to the Queen; a peremptory day appointed to a public Trial; on which
if they appeared not at the Bar of Justice, they were to undergo the sentence
of a condemnation.

4. And now their Agents in the Court begin to bustle: the King was soon
perceived to be a mere outside-man, of no deep reach into Affairs, and easily
wrought on; which first induced the Queen to set the less value on him; nor was
it long before some of their Court-Females whispered into her ears, that she
was much neglected by him, that he spent more of his time in Hawking and
Hunting, and perhaps in more unfit divertisements (if Knox speak him rightly)
then he did in her company; and therefore that it would be requisite to lure
him in, before he was too much on the Wing, and beyond her call. On these
suggestions, she gave order to her Secretaries, and other Officers, to place
his name last in all public Acts, and in such Coyns as were new stamped to
leave it out. This happened as they would have wished: For hereupon Earl Morton
closes with the King, insinuates unto him how unfit it was that he should be
subject to his Wife; that it was the duty of women to obey, and of men to
govern; and therefore that he might do well to set the Crown on his own head,
and take that power into his hands which belonged unto him. When they perceived
that his ears lay open to the like temptations, they then began to buz into
them, the Risio was grown too powerful for him in the Court, that he out-vied
him in the bravery both of Clothes and Horses, and that this could proceed from
no other ground then the Queens affection, which was suspected by wise men to
be somewhat greater then might stand with honor. And now the day draws on
apace, on which Earl Murray and the rest were to make their appearance; and
therefore somewhat must be done to put the Court into such confusion, and the
City of Edenborough into such disorder, that they might all appear without fear
or danger of any legal prosecution to be made against him. The day designed for
their appearance, was the twelfth day of March; and on the day before, say
some, (or third day before, as others) the Conspirators go unto the King,
seemed to accuse him of delay, tell him that now or never was the time to
revenge his injuries, for that he should now find the fellow in the Queens
private Chamber, without any force to make resistance. So in they rush, find^
David sitting at the Queens Table, the Countess of Arguile only between them.
Ruthen commands him to arise, and to go with him, telling him that the place in
which he sat did no way beseem him. The poor fellow runs unto the Queen for
protection, and clasps his arms about her middle; which the King forcibly
unfastneth, and puts him to the power of his mortal enemies, by whom he was
dragged down the Stairs, and stabbed in so many places (fifty three, says
Knox) that his whole body seemed to be like a piece of Cut-work. Which
barbarous Murder Knox proclaims for an act of justice, calls it a just
punishment on that Pultron and vile Knave David, for abusing the Common wealth,
and his other villainies; and heavily complains, that the Chief Actors in the
same (which he extols for a just act, and most worthy of all praise, p. 96.)
were so unworthily left by the rest of their Brethren, and forced to suffer the
bitterness of exile and banishment.

5. The Queen was then grown great with Child, and being affrighted at the
suddenness of this execution, and the fear of some treasonable attempt against
her person, was in no small danger of miscarrying. The Court was full of
Tumult, and the noise thereof so alarmed the Town, that the people flocked
thither in great multitudes to know the matter; to whom the King signified out
of a Window, that the Queen was safe; which somewhat appeased them for the
present: But notwithstanding, both the Court and City were in such distraction,
that when the Earl of Murray and the rest of the Confederates tendered their
appearance, and offered themselves unto the trial of the Law, there was no
information made against them, nor any one sufficiently instructed for the
prosecution. Which being observed, they address themselves to the Parliament
House, and there take instruments to testify upon Record, that they were ready
to answer whatsoever could be charged upon them; but none there to prosecute.
And here the Scene begins to change: Morton and Ruthen, and the rest of their
accomplices, betake themselves to New Castle, as the safest Sanctuary; and
Murray staid behind to negotiate for them. And he applied himself so
dexterously in his negotiation, that first he endears himself to the Queen his
Sister, by causing her Guards to be again restored unto her, which had been
taken from her at the time of the murder. She on the other side, to show how
much she valued the affection of so dear a Brother, was easily entreated that
Morton, Lindesay, and the rest who remained at New Castle, should be permitted
to return; but so, that it should rather seem to be done upon the earnest
solicitations of the Earls of Huntley and Arguile, then at his request. The
King in the mean time finds his error, and earnestly supplicates unto her for
a reconcilement; assuring her, that he had never fallen on that desperate
action, but as he was forcibly thrust upon it by Morton and Murray. And that he
might regain his reputation in the sight of the people, he openly protested his
innocence at the Cross in Edenborough by sound of Trumpet, and publicly
averred, that his consent had gone no further with the Murderers, then for the
recalling of the banished Lords which were sled into England. The young Prince
was not so well studied in the School of mischief, as to have learned that
there is no safety in committing one act of wickedness, but by proceeding to
another; or at the least, by standing stoutly unto that which was first
committed, that so his confidence might in time be took for innocence. A
lesson which the rest of the Confederates had took out long since, and were now
upon the point to practice it upon himself.

6. For by this piece of ostentation and impertinencie, 1566.
the King gained nothing on the people, and lost himself exceedingly amongst
the Peers; for as none of the common sort did believe him to be the more
innocent of the wicked murder, because he washed his hands of it in the sight
of the multitude; so the great men which had the guiding of the Faction,
disdained him as a weak and impotent person, not to be trusted in affairs of
his own concernment: nor did he edify better with the Queen, then he did with
the Subjects; who was so far from suffering any hearty reconciliation to be
made between them, that she expressed more favor unto Murray then in former
times. Which so exasperated the neglected and forsaken Prince, that he resolved
on sending Murray after Risio; with which he makes the Queen acquainted, in
hopes she would approve of it as an excellent service; but she disswades him
from the fact, and tells Murray of it; knowing full well, that which soever of
the two miscarried in it, she should either loose an hated Friend, or a
dangerous Enemy. Murray communicates the Affair with Morton, and the rest of
his Friends. By whom it is agreed, that they should take into their Friendship
the Earl of Bothwel, a man of an audacious spirit, apt for any mischief; but
otherwise of approved valor, and of a known fidelity to the Queen in her
greatest dangers. He had before some quarrels with the Earl of Murray, of whose
designs he was not distrustful without cause; and therefore labored both by
force and practice, either to make him less or nothing. But Murray was too hard
for him at the weapon of Wit, and was so much too powerful for him, both in
Court and Consistory, that he was forced to quit the Kingdom, and retire to
France. Returning at such time as Murray and the rest of the Confederates were
compelled to take sanctuary at New Castle, he grew into great favor with the
Queen, whose discontents against the King he knew how to nourish; which made
his friendship the more acceptable, and his assistance the more useful in the
following Tragedy. Thus Herod and Pilate are made friends, and the poor King
must fall a peace offering for their Redintegration.

7. But first they would expect the issue of the Queens delivery, by the
success whereof, the principal conspirators were resolved to steer their
course. On the 19 day of July, she is delivered of a Son in the Castle of
Edenborough, to the general joy of all the Kingdom, and the particular comfort
of the chief Governors of Affairs for the Congregation. There was no more use
now of a King or Queen, when God had given them a young Prince to sit upon the
Throne of his Fathers; in whose minority they might put themselves into such a
posture, that he should never be able to act much against them when he came to
age. And now they deal with Bothwel more effectually then before they did,
encourage him to remove the King by some means or other, to separate himself
from his own Wife, (a Daughter of the House of Huntley) and Espouse the Queen.
Let him but act the first part, as most proper for him, and they would easily
find a way to bring on the rest. For the performance whereof, and to stand to
him in it against all the world, they bound themselves severally and jointly
under Hand and Seal. In which most wicked practice they had all these ends:
first, the dispatching of the King; next, the confounding of Bothwel, whom they
feared and hated; thirdly, the weakening of the Queen both in power and credit,
and consequently the drawing of all Affairs to their own disposing. Bothwel in
order to the plot makes use of Ledington to prompt the Queen to a Divorce,
which he conceived might easily be effected in the Court of Rome; and is
himself as diligent upon all occasions to work upon the Queens displeasures,
and make the breach wider betwixt her and her Husband. The greatness of which
breach was before so visible, that nothing was more commonly known, nor
generally complained of amongst the people: But never was it made so eminently
notorious in the eye of Strangers, as at the Christening of the young Prince in
December following. At which time she would neither suffer the Ambassadors of
France or England to give him a visit, nor permit him to show himself amongst
them at the Christening Banquet. From Stirling, where the Prince was
Christened, he departs for Glasco, to find some comfort from his Father. To
which place he was brought not without much difficulty: for falling sick upon
the way, it appeared plainly by some symptoms that he had been poisoned, the
terrible effects whereof he felt in all the parts of his body with unspeakable
torments: But strength of Nature, Youth and Physic did so work together, that
he began to be in a good way of recovery, to the great grief of those who had
laid the plot. Some other way must now be taken to effect the business, and
none more expedient then to persuade the Queen to see him, to fl^tter him with
some hopes of her former favor, and bring him back with her to Edenborough;
which was done accordingly. At Edenborough he was lodged at a private house, on
the outside of the Town, (an house unseemly for a King, as Knox confesses) and
therefore the fitter for their purpose: where, on the 9 of February at night,
the poor Prince was strangled, his dead body laid in an Orchard near adjoining,
with one of his Servants lying by it, whom they also murdered; and the house
most ridiculously blown up with powder, as if that blow could have been given
without mangling and breaking the two bodies in a thousand pieces.

8. The infamy of this horrid murder is generally cast upon the Queen, by the
arts of those whom it concerned to make her odious with all honest men; nor did
there want some strong presumptions which might induce them to believe that she
was of the counsel in the fact; and with the good Brethren of the Congregation,
every presumption was a proof, and every weak proof was thought sufficient to
convict her of it. But that which most confirmed them in their suspicions, was
her affection unto Bothwel, whom she first makes Duke of Orknay, and on the 15
of May is married to him in the Chapel of Halyrood-house, according to the
form observed by those of the Congregation. But against these presumptions
there were stronger evidences: Bothwel being compelled not long after to flee
into Denmark, did there most constantly profess, both living and dying, that
the Queen was innocent. Morton affirmed the same at his execution above twelve
years after, relating that when Bothwel dealt with him about the murder, and
that he showed himself unwilling to consent unto it without the Queens Warrant
and Allowance; Bothwel made answer, that they must not give themselves any hope
of that, but that the business must be done without her privity. But that which
seems to make most for her justification, was the confession of Hepbourne,
Daglish, and others of Bothwels servants, who were condemned for murdering the
young King; and being brought unto the Gallows, they protested before God and
his holy Angels, that Bothwel had never told them of any other Authors of so
lewd a counsel, but only the two Earls of Morton and Murray. In the mean time
the common infamy prevailed, and none is made more guilty of it then this
wretched Queen, who had been drawn to give consent to her marriage with
Bothwel, by the solicitation and advice of those very men, who afterward
condemned her for it. In order to whose ends, Buchanan publishes a most
pestilent and malicious Libel, 1567.
which he called, The defection, wherein he publicly traduced her for living
an adulterous life with David Risio, and afterward with Bothwel himself; that
to precipitate her unlawful marriage with him, she had contrived the death of
the King her husband, projected a Divorce between Bothwel and his former Wife,
contrary to the Laws both of God and Man. Which Libel being printed and
dispersed abroad, obtained so much credit with most sorts of people, that few
made question of the truth of the accusations. Most true it is, that Buchanan
is reported by King James himself to have confessed with great grief at the
time of his death, how falsely and injuriously he had dealt with her in that
scandalous Pamphlet: but this confession came too late, and was known to few,
and therefore proved too weak a remedy for the former mischief.

9. He published at the same time also that seditious Pamphlet, which he
entitled, De jure Regni apud Scotos. In which he labored to make proof, that
the Supreme power of the Scottish Nation was in the body of the people, no
otherwise in the King but by delegation; and therefore that it was in the
peoples power, not only to control and censure, but also to depose and condemn
their Kings, if they found them faulty. The man was learned for his time, but a
better Poet then Historian, and yet a better Historian then he was a
Statesman. For being of the Genevian Leven, he fitted all his State-maximes
unto Calvin's Principles, and may be thought in many points to out-go his
Master. Now in this Pamphlet we may find these Aphorisms laid down for
undoubted truths, which no true Scot must dare to question, unless he would be
thought to be^^ary his Country; that is to say, That the people is better then
the King, and of greater Authority: That the people have right to bestow the
Crown at their pleasure: That the making of the Laws does belong to the people,
and Kings are but Masters of the Rolls: That they have the same power over the
King, that the King has over any one man: That it were good that rewards were
appointed by the people for such as should kill Tyrants, as commonly there is
for those that have killed either Wolves or Bears, or have taken their Whelps:
That the people may arraign their Princes; that the Ministers may excommunicate
their King; and that whosoever is by Excommunication cast into Hell, is made
thereby unworthy to live on earth.

10. And that he might make sure work of it, he takes upon him to reply upon
all Objections, which sober and more knowing men had found out to the contrary.
For whereas it had been objected, That custom was against such dealing with
Princes: That Jeremiah commanded obedience to Nebuchadnezzar: That God placed
Tyrants sometimes for punishment of his people: That the Jews dealt not so with
any of their Princes; and that there was no example to be found in Scripture,
to show that subjects may so use their Governors, as is there pretended: To
all these he returns his particular answers; and in this sort he answers to
them, that is to say, That there is nothing more dangerous to be followed then
a common custom: That the example is but singular, and concludes nothing: That
as God placed Tyrants to punish the people, so he appoints private men to kill
them: That the Kings of the Jews were not elected by the people, and therefore
might not deal with them, as they might in Scotland, where Kings depend wholly
on the peoples Election: And finally, that there were sundry good and wholesome
Laws in diverse Countries, of which there is no example in holy Scripture. And
whereas others had objected, That by St. Paul's Doctrine we are bound to pray
for Kings and Princes: The Argument is evaded by this handsome shift, That we
are bound to pray for those whom we ought to punish. But these are only
velitations, certain preparatory skirmishes to the grand encounter; the main
battle follows. For finally, the principal objection is, That St. Paul has
commanded every soul to be subject to the higher Powers; and that St. Peter
has required us to submit our selves to every Ordinance of man, whether it be
unto the King as to the Supreme, or unto such as be in Authority by and under
him. And hereunto they frame their Answer in such a manner, as if they knew
Gods mind better then the Apostles did, or that of the Apostles better then
they did themselves.

11. The answer is, that the Apostles writ this in the Churches infancy, when
there were not many Christians, few of them rich and of ability to make
resistance: As if (said he) a man should write to such Christians as are under
the Turk, in substance poor, in courage feeble, in strength unarmed, in number
few, and generally subject unto to all kind of injuries; would he not write as
the Apostles did? who did respect the men they writ to, their words not being
to be extended to the body or people of the Common wealth. For imagine (says
he) that either of the Apostles were now alive, and lived where both the Kings
and people did profess Christianity, and that there were such Kings as would
have their wills to stand for laws, as cared neither for God nor Man; as
bestowed the Churches Revenues upon Iesters and Rascals, and such as gibed at
those who did profess the more sincere Religion; what would they write of such
to the Church? Surely except they would dissent from themselves, they would
say, That they accounted no such for Magistrates; they would forbid all men
from speaking unto them, and from keeping their company; they would leave them
to their subjects to be punished; nor would they blame them if they accounted
not such men for their Kings, with whom they could have no society by the Laws
of God. So excellent a proficient did this man show himself in the Schools of
Calvin, that he might worthily have challenged the place of Divinity-Reader in
Geneva it self.

12. To put these Principles into practice, a Bond is made at Stirling by some
of the chief Lords of the Congregation, pretended for the preservation of the
Infant-Prince; but aiming also at the punishment of Bothwel, and the rest of
the Murderers. The first that entered into this Combination, were the Earls of
Athol, Arguile, Morton, Mar and Glencarne, with the Lords Lindsay and Boyd;
to which were added not long after, the Lords Hume and Ruthen, (this Ruthen
being the Son of him who had acted in the Murder of David Risio) together with
the Lairds of Drumlanrig, Tulibardin, Seffourd and Grange, men of great power
and influence on their several Countries; besides many others of good note. The
Earl Murray having laid the plot, obtained the Queens leave to retire into
France till the times were quieter, committing to the Queen the Government of
his whole Estate; that so if his design miscarried, as it possibly might, he
might come off without the least hazard of estate or honor. Of this
conspiracy the Queen receives advertisement, and presently prepares for Arms,
under pretense of rectifying some abuses about the Borders. The Confederates
were not much behind; and having got together a considerable power, made an
attempt on Borthwick Castle, where the Queen and Bothwel then remained. But not
being strong enough to carry the place at the first attempt, Bothwel escaped
unto Dunbar, whom the Queen followed shortly after in man's apparel. Missing
their prey, the Confederates march toward Edenborough with their little army,
and make themselves Masters of the Town. But understanding that the Queens
Forces were upon their march, they betook themselves unto the field, gained the
advantage of the ground, and thereby gave her such a diffidence of her good
success, that having entertained them with a long parley, till Bothwel was gone
off in safety, she put her self into their hands without striking a blow.

13. With this great prey the Confederates returned to Edenborough in the
middle of June; and the next day order her to be sent as Prisoner to
L^chlevin-house, under the conduct of the Lords Ruthen and Lindsay, by whom she
was delivered in a very plain and sorry attire to the custody of Murray's
Mother, who domineered over the unfortunate Lady with contempt enough. The next
day after her commitment, the Earl of Glencarne passes to the Chapel in
Halyrood house, where he defaceth all the Vestments, breaks down the Altar, and
destroys the Images. For which though he was highly magnified by Knox, and the
rest of the Preachers; yet many of the chief Confederates were offended at it,
as being done without their consent, when a great storm was gathering toward
them, by the conjunction of some other of the principal Lords on the Queens
behalf. To reconcile this party to them, and prevent the Rupture, Knox with
some other of their Preachers are dispatched away with Letters of Credence, and
instructions for attoning the difference. But they effected nothing to the
benefit of them that sent them, and not much neither to their own, though they
had some concernments of self-interest besides the public, which they made
tender of to their considerations. A general Assembly at the same time was held
in Edenborough, with which upon the coming back of these Commissioners, it was
thought necessary to ingratiate themselves by all means imaginable. And
thereupon it was agreed, that the Acts of Parliament made in the year 1560, for
the suppressing of Popery, should be confirmed in the next Parliament then
following; that the assignation of the Shires for the Ministers maintenance,
should be duly put in execution, till the whole Patrimony of the Church might
be invested in them in due form of Law; which was conditioned to be done (if it
could not be done sooner) in that Parliament also. Some other points of huge
concernment to the Church were then also moved; but they were only promised,
without any performance. It was also then agreed between them, that all
Noblemen, Barons, and other Professors should employ their whole Forces,
Strength and Power, for the punishment of all and whatsoever persons that
should be tried and found guilty of that horrible Murder of late committed on
the King: And further, that all the Kings and Princes which should succeed in
following times to the Crown of that Realm, should be bound by Oath before
their Inauguration, to maintain the true Religion of Christ, professed then
presently in that Kingdom. Thus the Confederates and the Kirk are united
together; and hard it is to say, whether of the two were least execusable
before God and man. But they followed the light of their own principles, and
thought that an excuse sufficient, without fear of either.

14. The news of these proceedings alarms all Christendom, and presently
Ambassadors are dispatched from France and England to mediate with the
Confederates (they must not be called Rebels) for the Queens Delivery.
Throgmorton for the Queen of England presses hard upon it, and showed himself
exceeding earnest and industrious in pursuance of it. But Knox and
self-interest prevailed more amongst them, then all intercessions whatsoever,
there being nothing more insisted upon by that fiery spirit, then that she was
to be deprived of her Authority and Life together. And this he thundered from
the Pulpit with as great a confidence, as if he had received his Doctrine at
Mount Sinai from the hands of God, at the giving of the Law to Moses. Nor was
Throgmorton thought to be so Zealous on the other side, as he outwardly seemed.
For he well knew how much it might concern his Queen in her personal safety,
and the whole Realm of England in its peace and happiness, that the poor Queen
should be continued in the same (or a worse) condition, to which these wretched
men had brought her. And therefore it was much suspected by most knowing men,
that secretly he did more thrust on her deprivation with one hand, then he
seemed to hinder it with both. Wherewith encouraged, or otherwise being too far
gone to retire with safety, Lindsay and Ruthen are dispatched to
Lochlevin-house, to move her for a resignation of the Crown to her Infant-Son.
Which when she would by no means yield to, a Letter is sent to her from
Throgmorton to persuade her to it; assuring her, that whatsoever was done by
her under that constraint, would be void in Law. This first began to work her
to that resolution. But nothing more prevailed upon her, then the rough
carriage of the two Lords which first made the motion. By whom she was
threatened in plain terms, that if she did not forthwith yield unto the desires
of her people, they would question her for incontinent living, the murder of
the King, her tyranny, and the manifest violation of the Laws of the Land, in
some secret transactions with the French. Terrified wherewith, without so much
as reading what they offered to her, she sets her hand to three several
Instruments; In the first of which, she gave over the Kingdom to her young Son,
at that time little more then a twelve Month old; in the second, she
constituted Murray Viceroy during his minority; and in the third, in case that
Murray should refuse it, she substitutes Duke Hamilton, the Earls of Lenox,
Arguile, Athol, Morton, Glencarne and Mar; all but the two first being sworn
Servants unto Murray, and the two first made use of only to discharge the
matter.

15. Thus furnished and empowered, the Lords return in triumph to their fellows
at Edenborough, with the sound of a Trumpet; and presently it was resolved to
Crown the Infant-King with as much speed as might be, for fear of all such
alterations as might otherwise happen. And thereunto they spurred on with such
precipitation, that whereas they extorted those subscriptions from her on St.
Iame's day, being the 25 of July, the Coronation was dispatched on the 29. The
Sermon, for the greater grace of the matter, must be preached by Knox; but the
superstitious part and ceremony of it was left to be performed by the Bishop of
Orknay, another of the natural Sons of James the Fifth, assisted by two
Superintendents of the Congregation. And that all things might come as near as
might be to the Ancient Forms, the Earl of Morton and the Lord Humes took Oath
for the King, that he should maintain the Religion which was then received, and
minister Justice equally to all the Subjects. Of which particular the King made
afterward an especial use, in justifying the use of Godfathers and God
mothers at the Baptizing of Infants, when it was questioned in the Conference
at Hampton Court. Scarce fifteen days were past from the Coronation, when
Murray showed himself in Scotland, as if he had dropped down from Heaven for the
good of the Nation; but he had took England in his way, and made himself so
sure a party in that Court, that he was neither afraid to accept the Regencie
in such a dangerous point of time, nor to expostulate bitterly with his own
Queen for her former actions: not now the same man as before in the time of her
glories. For the first handselling of his Government, he calls a Parliament,
and therein ratifies the Acts of 1560 for suppressing Popery, as had been
promised to the last general Assembly; and then proceeds to the Arraignment of
Hepbourne, Hay and Daglish for the horrible murder of the King: by each of
which it was confessed at their execution, that Bothwel was present at the
murder, and that he had assured them at their first engaging that most of the
Noblemen in the Realm ( Murray and Morton amongst others) were consenting to
it.

16. And now or never must the Kirk begin to bear up bravely: In which if they
should fail, let Knox bear the blame for want of well-tutoring them in the
Catechism of their own Authority. They found themselves so necessary to this
new Establishment, that it could not well subsist without them; and they
resolved to make the proudest he that was, to feel the dint of their spirit. A
general Assembly was convened not long after the Parliament, by which the
Bishop of Orknay was convented and deposed from his Function, for joining the
Queen in Marriage to the Earl of Bothwel, though he proceeded by the Form of
their own devising. And by the same the Countess of Arguile was ordained (after
citation on their part, and appearance on hers) to give satisfaction to the
Kirk, for being present at the Baptism of the Infant-King, because performed
according to the Rites of the Church of Rome: the satisfaction to be made in
Stirling where she had offended, upon a Sunday after Sermon; the more
particular time and manner of it, to be prescribed by the Superintendent of
Lothian. And this was pretty handsome for the first beginning, according
whereunto it was thought fit by the Chief Leaders to run on till they came to
the end of the Race; of which in general King James has given us this
description in a Declaration of his published not long after the surprising of
his person by the Earl of Gowry 15^2, where we find it thus: The Bishops
having embraced the Gospel, it was at first agreed even by the Brethren, with
the consent of Regent, that the Bishops estate should be maintained and
authorized. This endured for sundry years; but then there was no remedy, the
Calling it self of Bishops was at least become Antichristian, and down they
must of necessity: whereupon they commanded the Bishops (by their own
Authority) to leave their Offices and Jurisdiction. They decreed in their
Assemblies, That Bishops should have no vote in Parliament; and that done, they
desired of the King that such Commissioners as they should send to the
Parliament and Council, might from thenceforth be authorized in the Bishops
places for the Estate. They also directed their Commissioners to the Kings
Majesty, commanding him and the Council, under pain of the Censures of the
Church (Excommunication they meant) to appoint no Bishops in time to come,
because they (the Brethren) had concluded that State to be unlawful. And that
it might appear to those of the suffering party, that they had not acted all
these things without better Authority then what they had given unto themselves;
they dispatched their Letters unto Beza, who had succeeded at Geneva in the
Chair of Calvin; from whence they were encouraged and persuaded to go on in
that course, and Ne unquam il^um p^^em admittant, ^uamvis u^^tatis reti^endae
specie blandiatur, Ep. 79.
never readmit that plague (he means thereby the Bishops) to have place in that
Church, although it might flatter them with a show of retaining unity.

17. But all this was not done at once, though laid here together, to show how
answerable their proceedings were to their first beginnings. To cool which
heats, and put some Water in their Wine, 1568.
the Queen by practicing on her Keepers escapes the Prison, and puts her self
into Hamilton Castle; to which not only the dependants of that powerful
Family, but many great Lords, and diverse others, did with great cheerfulness
repair unto her with their several followers. Earl Murray was at Stirling when
this news came to him; and it concerned him to bestir himself with all
celerity, before the Queens power was grown too great to be disputed. He
therefore calls together such of his Friends and their adherents as were near
unto him, and with them gives battle to the Queen, who in this little time had
got together a small Army of four thousand men. The honor of the day attends
the Regent, who with the loss of one man only bought an easy Victory; which
might have proved more bloody to the conquered Army, (for they lost but three
hundred in the fight) it he had not commanded back his Soldiers from the
execution. The Queen was placed upon a Hill to behold the battle. But when she
saw the issue of it, she posted with all speed to the Port of Kerbright, took
Ship for England, and landed most unfortunately (as it after proved) at
Wirckington in the County of Cumberland. From thence she dispatched her Letters
to Queen Elizabeth, full of Complaints, and passionate bewailings of her
wretched fortune; desires admittance to her presence, and that she might be
taken into her protection; sending withal a Ring which that Queen had given
her, to be an everlasting token of that love and amity which was to be
maintained between them. But she soon found how miserably she had deceived her
self in her Expectations. Murray was grown too strong for her in the Court of
England; and others which regarded little what became of him, were glad of her
misfortunes in relation to their own security; which could not better be
consulted, then by keeping a good Guard upon her, now they had her there. And
so instead of sending for her to the Court, the Queen gives order by Sir
Francis Knollis (whom she sent of purpose) to remove the distressed Lady to
Carlisle, as the safer place, until the equity of her cause might be fully
known. She has now took possession of the Realm which she had laid claim to,
but shall pay dearly for the purchase; the Crown whereof shall come at last to
her Posterity, though it did not fall upon her person.

18. Now that the equity of her cause might be understood, the Regent is
required by Letters from the Court of England to desist from any further
prosecution of the vanquished party, till that Queen were perfectly informed in
all particulars touching these Affairs. Which notwithstanding, he thought fit
to make use of his Fortune, summoned a Parliament, in which some few of each
sort, noble and ignoble, were proscribed for the present; by the terror
whereof many of the rest submitted, and they which would not were reduced by
force of Arms. Elizabeth not well pleased with these proceedings, requires that
some Commissioners might be sent from Scotland to render an account to her, or
to her Commissioners, of the severity and hard dealing which they had showed
unto their Queen. And hereunto he was necessitated to conform, as the case then
stood: The French being totally made against him, the Spaniards more displeased
then they, and no help (...) be had from any, but the English only. At York
Commissioners attend from each part in the end of September. From Queen
Elizabeth, Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Sussex, and Sir Ralph Sadlier
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. For the unfortunate Queen of Scots, John
Lesly Bishop of Ross, the Lords Levington, Boyd, etc. And for the Infant King,
besides the Regent himself, there appeared the Earl of Morton, the Lord
Lindsay, and certain others. After such protestations made on both sides as
seemed expedient for preserving the Authority of the several Crowns, an Oath is
took by the Commissioners to proceed in the business according to the Rules of
Justice and Equity. The Commissioners from the Infant-King present a
Declaration of their proceedings in the former troubles; to which an answer is
returned by those of the other side. Elizabeth desiring to be better satisfied
in some particulars, requires the Commissioners of both sides, some of them at
the least, to repair unto her; where after much sending and proving (as the
saying is) there was nothing done which might redound unto the benefit of the
Queen of Scots.

19. For whilst these matters were in agitation in the Court of England,
Letters of hers were intercepted, written by her to those which continued of
her party in the Realm of Scotland. In which Letters she complained, that the
Queen of England had not kept promise with her; but yet desired them to be of
good heart, because she was assured of aid by some other means, and hoped to be
with them in a short time. Which Letters being first sent to Murray, and by him
showed to Queen Elizabeth, prevailed so much for his advantage, that he was not
only dismissed with favor, but waited on by her command through every County
by the Sheriffs and Gentry, till he came to Berwick; from whence he passed
safely unto Edenborough, where he was welcomed with great joy by his Friends
and Followers. Nothing else memorable in this Treaty which concerns our
History, but that when Murray and the rest of the Scots Commissioners were
commanded by Queen Elizabeth to give a reason of their proceedings against that
Queen, they justified themselves by the Authority of Calvin: by which they did
endeavor to prove, (as my Author has it) That the Popular Magistrates are
appointed and made to moderate, and keep in order, the excess and unruliness of
Kings; and that it was lawful for them to put the Kings, that be evil and
wicked, into prison, and also to deprive them of their Kingdoms. Which
Doctrine, how it relished with Queen Elizabeth, may be judged by any that knows
with what a Sovereign power she disposed of all things in her own Dominions,
without fear of rendering an account to such Popular Magistrates, as Calvin's
Doctrine might encourage to require it of her. But Calvin found more Friends in
Scotland, then in all the world; there being no Kingdom, Principality, or other
Estate, which had herein followed Calvin's Doctrine, in the imprisoning,
deposing, and expelling their own natural Prince, till the Scots first led the
way unto it in this sad Example.

20. Between the last Parliament in Scotland, and the Regents journey into
England, a general Assembly of the Kirk was held at Edenborough In which they
entered into consideration of some disorders which had before been tolerated in
the said Assem^ly, and were thought fit to be redressed. For remedy whereof, it
was enacted, That none should be admitted to have voice in these Assemblies,
but Superintendents, Visitors of Churches, Commissioners of Shires and
Universities; together with such other Ministers, to be elected or approved by
the Superintendents, as were of knowledge and ability to dispute and reason of
such Matters as were there propounded. It was ordained also, That all Papists
which continued obstinate after lawful admonition, should be Excommunicated; as
also, that the committers of Murder, Incest, Adultery, and other such heinous
crimes, should not be admitted to make satisfaction by any particulur Church,
till they did first appear in the habit of penitents before the general
Assembly, and there receive their Order in it. It was also condescended to,
upon the humble Supplication of the Bishop of Orkney, that he should be
restored unto his place, from which they had deposed him, for his acting in the
Queens Marriage: Which favor they were pleased to extend unto him, upon this
Condition, That for removing of the scandal, he should in his first Sermon
acknowledge the fault which he had committed; and crave pardon of God, the
Kirk, and the State, whom he had offended. But their main business was to alter
the Book of Discipline, especially in that part of it which related to the
Superinterdents, whom though they countenanced for the present by the former
Sanction, till they had put themselves in a better posture; yet they resolve to
bring them by degrees to a lower station, and to lay them level with the rest.
In reference whereunto, the Regent is solicited by their Petition, that
certain Lords of secret Council might be appointed to confer with some of the
said Assembly, touching the P^lity and Jurisdiction of the Kirk, and to assign
some time and place to that effect, that it might be done before the next
Session of Parliament. To which Petition they received no answer, till the July
following: But there came no great matter of it, by reason of the Regents
death, which soon after happened.

21. For so it was, that after his return from England, he became more feared
by some, and obeyed by others, then he had been formerly; which made him stand
more highly upon terms of Honor and Advantage, when Queen Elizabeth had
propounded some Conditions to him in favor of the Queen of Scots, whose cause
appearing desperate in the eyes of most who wished well to her, they labored
to make their own peace, and procure his Friendship. Duke Hamilton, amongst the
rest, negotiated for a Reconcilement, and came to Edenborough to that purpose;
but unadvisedly interposing some delays in the business, because he would not
act apart from the rest of the Queens Adherents, he was sent Prisoner to the
Castle. This puts the whole Clan of the Hamiltons into such displeasures (being
otherwise no good friends to the Race of the Stewarts) that they resolved upon
his death; compassed not long after by James Hamilton, whose life he had spared
once when he had it in his power. At Lithgoe, on the 23 of January, he was shot
by this Hamilton into the belly; of which wound he dyed, the Murderer escaping
safely into France. His death much sorrowed for by all that were affected to
the Infant-King, of whom he had showed himself to be very tender; which might
have wiped a way the imputation of his former aspirings, if the Kings death
could have opened his way unto the Crown, before he had made sure of the
Hamiltons, who pretended to it. But none did more lament his death, then his
Friends of the Kirk; who in a General Assembly which they held soon after,
decreed, That the Murderer should be Excommunicated in all the chief Boroughs
of the Realm; and, That whosoever else should happen to be afterward convicted
of the Crime, should be proceeded against in the same sort also. And yet they
were not so intent upon the prosecution of the Murderers, as not to be careful
of themselves and their own Concernments. They had before addressed their
desires unto the Regent, that remedy might be provided against chopping and
changing of Benefices, diminution of Rentals, and setting of Tithes into long
Leases, to the defrauding of Ministers and their Successors; That they who
possessed pluralities of Benefices, should leave all but one; and, That the
Jurisdiction of the Kirk, might be made separate and distinct from that of the
Civil Courts. But now they take the benefit of the present distractions, to
discharge the thirds assigned unto them from all other Encumbrances then the
payment of Five thousand Marks yearly for the Kings support; which being
reduced to English money, would not amount unto the sum of Three hundred pound;
and seems to be no better, then the sticking up a feather (in the ancient
Byword) when the Goose was stolen.

22. As touching the distractions which emboldened them to this Adventure, they
did most miserably afflict the whole State of that Kingdom. The Queen of Scots
had granted a Commission to Duke Hamilton, the Earls of Huntley and Arguile, to
govern that Realm in her Name, and by her Authority; in which they were opposed
by those, who for their own security, more then any thing else, professed their
obedience to the King. Great spoils and Rapines hereupon ensued upon either
side; but the Kings party had the worst; as having neither hands enough to make
good their interest, nor any head to order and direct those few hands they had.
At last the Earl of Sussex, with some Soldiers, came toward the borders,
supplied them with such Forces as enabled them to drive the Lords of the Queens
Faction out of all the South; and thereby gave them some encouragement to
nominate the old Earl of Lenox for their Lord Lieutenant, till the Queens
pleasure in it might be further known. And in this Broyl the Kirk must needs
act somewhat also; For finding that their party was too weak to compel their
Opposites to obedience by the Mouth of the Sword, they are resolved to try what
they can do by the Sword of the Mouth: And to that end, they send their Agents
to the Duke of Chasteau-Harald, the Earls of Arguile, Eglington, Cassels, and
Cranford, the Lords Boyde and Ogilby, and others, Barons and Gentlemen of name
and quality; whom they require to return to the Kings obedience, and ordain
Certification to be made unto them, that if they did otherwise, the Spiritual
Sword of Excommunication should be drawn against them. By which, though they
effected nothing which advanced the cause, yet they showed their affections,
and openly declared thereby to which side they inclined, if they were left unto
themseves And for a further evidence of their inclinations, they were so
temperate at that time, or so obsequious to the Lords, whose cause they
favored, that they desisted from censuring a seditious Sermon, upon an
Intimation sent from the Lords of the Council, that the Sermon contained some
matter of Treason, and therefore that the Cognizance of it belonged unto
themselves and the Secular Judges.

23. The Confusions still increase amongst them; 1570.
the Queen of England seeming to intend nothing more, then to balance the one
side by the other, that betwixt both she might preserve her self in safety. But
in the end, she yields unto the importunity of those who appeared in favor of
the King, assures them of her aid and succors when their needs required, and
recommends the Earl of Lenox as the fittest man to take the Regency upon him.
The Breach now widens more then ever: The Lords commissionated by the Queen are
possessed of Edenborough, and having the Castle to their Friend, call a
Parliament thither; as the new Regent does the like at Stirling; and each
pretends to have pre-eminence above the other. The one, because it was
assembled in the Regal City; the other, because they had the Kings Person for
their countenance in it. Nothing more memorable in that at Edenborough, then
that the Queens extorted Resignation was declared null and void in Law; and
nothing so remarkable in the other, as that the Young King made a Speech unto
them (which had been put into his mouth) at their first setting down. In each
they forfeit the Estates of the opposite party; and by Authority of each,
destroy the Country in all places in an hostile manner. The Ministers had
their parts also in these common sufferings; compelled in all such places where
the Queen prevailed, to recommend her in their Prayers by her Name or Titles,
or otherwise to leave the Pulpit unto such as would. In all things else the
Kirk had the felicity to remain in quiet; care being taken by both parties for
the Preservation of Religion, though in all other things, 1571.
at an extreme difference amongst themselves. But the new Regent did not long
enjoy his Office, of which he reaped no fruit, but cares and sorrows. A sudden
Enterprise is made on Stirling by one of the Hamiltons, on the third of
September, at what time both the Parliament and Assembly were there convened:
And he succeeded so well in it, as to be brought privately into the Town, to
seize on all the Noblemen in their several Lodgings, and amongst others, to
possess themselves of the Regents person: But being forced to leave the place,
and quit their Prisoners, the Regent was unfortunately killed by one of
Hamiltons Soldiers, together with the Gentleman himself unto whom he had
yielded. The Earl of Mar is on the fifth of the same month proclaimed his
Successor: His Successor indeed, not only in his cares and sorrows, but in the
shortness of his Rule; for having in vain attempted Edenborough in the very
beginning of his Regency, he was able to effect as little in most places else,
more then the wasting of the Country, 1572.
as he did Edenborough.

24. The Subjects in the mean time were in ill condition, and the King worse:
They had already drawn their Swords against their Queen, first forced her to
resign the Crown, and afterward drove her out of the Kingdom. And now it is
high time to let the young King know what he was to trust to; to which end,
they command a piece of Silver of the value of Five shillings to be coined, and
made current in that Kingdom; on the one side whereof, was the Arms of
Scotland, with the Name and Title of the King, in the usual manner; on the
other side, was stamped an Armed Hand grasping a naked Sword, with this
Inscription; viz. Si been, pro me; si male, contra me: By which the people were
informed, that if the King should govern them no otherwise then he ought to do,
they should then use the Sword for his preservation; but if he governed them
amiss, and transgressed their Laws, they should then turn the point against
him. Which words being said to have been used by the Emperor Trajan, in his
delivering of the Sword unto one of his Courtiers, when he made him Captain of
his Guard, have since been used by some of our Presbyterian Zealots, for
justifying the Authority of inferior Officers, in censuring the actions, and
punishing the persons of the Supreme Magistrate. It was in the year 1552, that
this learned piece of Coin was minted; but whether before or after the death of
the Earl of Mar, I am not able to say: for he having but ill success in the
course of his Government, contracted such a grief of heart, that he departed
this life on the eighth of October, when he had held that Office a little more
then a year; followed about seven weeks after, by that great Incendiary John
Knox, who dyed at Edenborough on the 27 of November; leaving the State
imbroyled in those disorders, which by his fire and fury had been first
occasioned.

25. Morton succeeds the Earl of Mar in this broken Government, when the
affairs of the young King seemed to be at the worse; but he had so good fortune
in it, as by degrees to settle the whole Realm in some Form of peace: He
understood so well the estate of the Country, as to assure himself, that till
the Castle of Edenborough was brought under his power, he should never be able
to suppress that party, whose stubborn standing out (as it was interpreted) did
so offend the Queen of England, that she gave order unto Drury, 15^3.
then Marshal of Berwick, to pass with some considerable Forces into Scotland
for his present assistance. With these Auxiliaries he lays siege to the Castle,
battering it, and reduces it to such extremity, that they were compelled to
yield to mercy. Of which, though many of them tasted, yet Grange himself, who
first or last had held the place against all the four Regents, together with
one of his Brothers, and two Goldsmiths of Edenborough, were hanged at the
Market-Cross of that City. By which surrender of the Castle, the Queens Faction
was so broke in pieces, that it was never able to make head again; 1574.
all of them laboring to procure their own peace by some Composition. For now
the Regent being at leisure to enquire after the miscarriages of the years
preceding, he sends his Justices in Air into all parts of the Country, who
exercised their Commissions with sufficient Rigor; people of all sorts being
forced to compound, and redeem themselves, by paying such sums of money as by
these Justices were imposed. Some of the Merchants also were called in
question, under color of Transporting Coin; fined in great sums, or else
committed to the Castle of Blackness, till they gave satisfaction. By which
proceedings he incurred the censure of a covetous man, though he had other ends
in it then his own enriching. For by these rigorous exactions, he did not only
punish such as had been most active in the late distempers, but terrified them
from the like attempts against the present Government for the times ensuing. To
such Confusions and Disorders, such miserable Rapines* Spoils and Devastations,
such horrible Murders and Assassinates, was this poor Realm exposed for seven
years together, by following the Genevian Doctrines of Disobedience which Knox
had preached, and Buchanan in his Seditious Pamphlets had dispersed amongst
them. Not to say any thing that indeleable reproach and infamy, which the whole
Nation had incurred in the eye of Christendom, for their barbarous dealings
toward a Queen, who had so graciously indulged unto them the exercise of that
Religion which she found amongst them, without disturbance unto any.

26. Which matters being thus laid together, we must proceed to such affairs as
concern the Kirk, abstracted from the troubles and commotions in the Civil
State. In reference whereunto, we may please to know, that after diverse
Solicitations made by former Assemblies, for settling a Polity in the Church,
certain Commissioners were appointed to advise upon it. The Earl of Mar then
Regent, nominated for the Lords of the Council, the Earl of Morton Chancellor,
the Lord Ruthen Treasurer, the Titular Abbot of Dumferling principal Secretary
of Estate in the place of Ledington, Mackgil chief Register, Bullenden the then
Justice Clerk, and Colen Campbel of Glenarchy. The Assembly then sitting at
Leith, named for the Kirk, John Ereskin of Dun Superintendent of Angus, John
Winram, Superintendent of Fife, Andrew Hay Commissioner of Gladisdale, David
Lindesay Commissioner of the West, Robert Pont Commissioner of Orknay, and Mr.
John Craige one of the Ministers of Edenborough. The Scots were then under some
necessity of holding fair quarter with the English; and therefore to conform
(as near as conveniently they might) to the Government of it in the outward
Polity of the Church. Upon which reason, and the prevalency of the Court
Commissioners, those of the Kirk did condescend unto these Conclusions; and
condescended the more easily, because Knox was absent, detained by sickness
from attending any public business. Now these Conclusions were as follows;
1. That the Archbishopricks and Bishoprics presently void, or should happen
hereafter to be void, should be disposed to the most qualified of the Ministry:
2. That the Spiritual Jurisdictions should be exercised by the Bishops in their
several Diocesses: 3. That all Abbo^s, Pryors, and other inferior Prelates,
who should happen to be presented to Benefices, should be tried by the Bishop
and Superintendent of the bounds, concerning their qualification and aptness to
give voice for the Church in Parliament; and upon their Collation be admitted
to the Benefice, and not otherwise: 4. That the nomination of fit persons for
every Archbishopric and Bishopric should be made by the King or Regent, and
the Election by the Chapters of the Cathedrals. And because diverse persons were
possessed of places in some of the said Chapters, which did bear no Office in
the Church; It was ordered, That a particular nomination of Ministers in every
Diocese should be made, to supply their rooms until their Benefices in the said
Churches should fall void: 5. That all Benefices of Cure under Prelacies,
should be disposed to actual Ministers, and no others: 6. That the Ministers
should receive Ordination from the Bishop of the Diocese; and where no Bishop
was then placed, from the Superintendent of the bounds: 7. That the Bishops and
Superintendents at the Ordination of the Ministers, should exact of them an
Oath for acknowledging his Majesty's Authority, and for obedience to their
Ordinary in all things Lawful, according to a Form then condescended. Order was
also taken for disposing of Provestries, College charges, Chaplanaries, and
diverse other particulars most profitable for the Church; which were all
ordained to stand in force until the Kings minority, or till the States of the
Realm should determine otherwise. How happy had it been for the Isles of
Britain, if the Kirk had stood to these Conclusions, and not unravelled all the
Web to advance a Faction, as they after did?

1572.
27. For in the next general Assembly held in August at the Town of Perth, where
these conclusions were reported to the ^est of the Brethren, some of them took
offense at one thing, some at another: some took exception at the Title of
Archbishop and Dean; and others at the name of Archdeacon, Chancellor and
Chapter, not found in the Genevian Bibles, and otherwise Popish, and offensive
to the ears of good Christians. To satisfy whose queazie stomachs, some of the
Lay-Commissioners had prepared this Lenitive; that is to say, That by using of
these Titles, they meant not to allow of any Popish Superstition in the least
degree; and were content they should be changed to others which might seem less
scandalous. And thereupon it was proposed, that the name of Bishop should be
used for Archbishop, that the Chapter should be called the Bishops Assembly,
and the Dean the Moderator of it. But as for the Titles of Archdeacon,
Chancellor, Abbot, and Pryor, it was ordered that some should he appointed to
consider how far these Functions did extend, and give their opinion to the next
Assembly for the changing of them, with such others, as should be thought most
agreeable to the Word of God, and the Polity of the best Reformed Churches,
Which brings into my mind the fancy of some people in the Deserts of Afric,
who having been terribly wasted with Tigers, and not able otherwise to destroy
them, passed a Decree that none should thenceforth call them Tigers; and then
all was well. But notwithstanding all this care, and these qualifications, the
conclusions could not be admitted, but with this Protestation, that they
received those Articles for an interim only, till a more perfect Order might
be attained at the hands of the King, the Regent, or the States of the Realm.
And it was well that they admitted them so far: For presently upon the rising
of this Assembly, Mr. John Douglass, Provost of the new College in St.
Andrews, was preferred to the Archbishopric of that See; Mr. James Boyd to the
Archbishopric of Glasco; Mr. James Paton to the Bishopric of Dunkeld; and Mr.
Andrew Grahame to the Sea of Dumblane; the rest to be disposed of afterward as
occasion served.

28. But long it was not that they held in so good a Posture. 1573.
Morton succeeding in the Regencie to the Earl of Mar, entered into a
consideration of the injury which was done the King by the invading of his
Thirds, and giving only an allowance yearly of five thousand Marks. These he
brings back unto the Crown, upon assurance that the Pensions of the Ministers
should be better answered then in former times, and to be payable from
thenceforth by the Parish in which they served. But no sooner had he gained his
purpose, when to improve the Kings Revenue, and to increase the Thirds, he
appointed to one Minister two or three Churches, in which he was to preach by
turns; and where he did not preach, to appoint a Reader. Which Reader for the
most part was allowed but twenty or forty pounds yearly; each pound being
valued at no more then one shilling eight pence of our English money. And in
the payment of these Pensions, they found their condition made worse then
before it was: for, whereas, they could boldly go to the Superintendents, and
make their poor Estates known unto them, from whom they were sure to receive
some relief and comfort; they were now forced to dance attendance at the Court,
for getting warrants for the payment of the sums assigned, and supplicating for
such augmentations as were seldom granted. And when the Kirk desired to be
restored unto the Thirds, as was also promised in case the assignations were
not duly paid, it was at last told them in plain terms, That since the Surplus
of the Thirds belonged to the King, it was fitter the Regent and Council should
modifie the Stipends of Ministers, then that the Kirk should have the
appointment and designation of a Surplus. Nor did the Superintendents speed
much better, if not worse, when they addressed themselves to any of the
Court-Officers for the receiving the Pensions assigned unto them; which being
greater then the others, came more coldly in. And if they pressed at any time
with more importunity then was thought convenient, it was told them that the
Kirk had now no use of their services, in regard that Bishops were restored in
some places to their Jurisdictions.

29. And now the Discipline begins to alter, from a mixed to a plain
Pre^bytery. Before the confirming of Episcopacie by the late conclusions, the
Government of the Kirk had been by Superintendents, assisted by Commissioners
for the Countries, as they called them then. The Commissioners changed, or new
Elected at every general Assembly; the Superintendents settled for term of life.
To them it appertained to approve and admit the Ministers; they presided in all
Synods, and directed all Church Censures within their bounds; neither was any
Excommunication pronounced without their Warrant. To them it also was referred
to proportion the Stipends of all Ministers; to appoint the Collectors of the
Thirds, (as long as they were chosen by the general Assembly) to make payment
of them, after such form and manner as to them seemed best; and to dispose of
the Surplusage, if any were, toward the charges of the State. And to this Knox
consented with the greater readiness, because in an unsettled Church, the
Ministers were not thought of parts sufficient to be trusted with a power of
Jurisdiction; and partly because such men as were first designed for
Superintendents, were for the most part possessed of some fair Estate, whereby
they were not only able to support themselves, but to afford relief and
comfort to the poor Ministers. But when these men grew old or dyed, and that
the entertaining of the Reformed Religion in all parts of the Realm had given
encouragement to men of Parts and Learning to enter into the Ministry, they
then began more universally to put in practice those restrictions with which
the Superintendents had been fettered, and the power of the Ministers extended
by the Book of Discipline, according to the Rules whereof the Minister and
Elders of every Church, with the assistance of their Deacons, if occasion were,
were not alone enabled to exercise most part of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
over their several Congregations, but also to join themselves with the chief
Burgesses of the greater Towns for censuring and deposing their own
Superintendents. In which respect the Government may be said to be a mixed, not
a plain Presbytery, as before was noted; though in effect, Presbytery was the
more predominant, because the Superintendents by the Book of Discipline were to
be subject to the Censures of their own Presbyteries.

30. But these Presbyteries, and the whole power ascribed unto them by the Book
of Discipline, were in a way to have been crushed by the late conclusions, when
they flew out again upon occasion of the hard dealing of the Earl of Morton, in
putting them besides their Thirds. And then withal, because the putting of some
Ministers into Bishops Sees, had been used by him for a pretense to defraud the
Superintendents of their wonted means, the Bishops were inhibited by the
general Assembly which next followed, from exercising any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within the bounds which they had formerly assigned to their
Superintendents, without their consent and approbation. Which opportunity was
both espied and taken by Andrew Melvin, for making such an innovation in the
Form of Government, as came most near unto the Pattern of Geneva, where he had
studied for a time, and came back thence more skilful in Tongues and Languages
then any other part of Learning. And being hot and eager upon any business
which he took in hand, emulous of Knoxes greatness, and hoping to be Chronicled
for his equal in the Reformation; he entertained all such as resorted to him,
with the continual commendations of that Discipline which he found at Geneva,
where the Presbyteries carried all, without acknowledging any Bishop or
Superintendent in power above them. Having by this means much insinuated into
diverse Ministers, 1572.
he dealt with one John Drury, one of the Preachers of Edenborough, to propound
a question in the general Assembly which was then convened, touching the
lawfulness of the Episcopal Function, and the Authority of Chapters in their
Election. Which question being put according as he had directed, he first
commends the Speakers Zeal (as if he had been unacquainted with the motion) and
then proceeds to a long and well-framed discourse, touching the flourishing
Estate of the Church of Geneva, and the opinions of those great and eminent
men, Calvin then dead, and Theodore Beza then alive, in the point of
Church Government. After which premises, he fell upon this conclusion, That
none ought to bear any Office in the Church of Christ, whose titles were not
found in the holy Scripture: That though the name of Bishop did occur in
Scripture, yet was it not to be taken in that sense in which it was commonly
understood: That no Superiority was allowed by Christ amongst the Ministers of
the Church; all of them being of the same degree, and having the same power in
all Sacred Matters: That the corruptions crept into the Estate of Bishops were
so great and many, that if they should not be removed, Religion would not long
remain in Purity. And so referred the whole matter to their consideration.

31. The Game being thus started and pursued by so good a Huntsman, it was
thought fit by the Assembly, to commend the chase thereof to six chosen
Members, who were to make report of their diligence to the rest of the
Brethren. Of which, though Melvin took a care to be named for one, and made use
of all his wit and cunning to bring the rest of the Referrees to his own
opinion, yet he prevailed no further at that time, then under color of a
mannerly declining of the point in hand, to lay some further restrictions upon
the Bishops in the exercise of their Power and Jurisdictions, then had been
formerly imposed. The sum of their report was to this effect; Viz. That they
did not hold it expedient to answer the Questions propounded for the present;
but if any Bishop was chosen, that had not qualities required by the Word of
God, he should be tried by the General Assembly: That they judged the name of a
Bishop, to be common to all Ministers who had the charge of a particular flock;
and that by the Word of God, his chief function consisted in the Preaching of
the Word, the Ministration of the Sacraments, and the exercise of
Ecclesiastical Discipline with the consent of the Elders: That from amongst the
Ministry, some one might be chosen to oversee and visit such reasonable bounds
besides his own flock, as the General Assembly should appoint: That the
Minister so elected, might in those bounds appoint Preachers, with the advice
of the Ministers of that Province, and the consent of the flock which should be
admitted; and that he might suspend Ministers from the exercise of their
Office, upon reasonable causes, with the consent of the Ministers of the
bounds. This was the sum of the Report; and that thus much might be reported to
begin the game with, great care was took by Melvin and his Adherents, that
neither any of the Bishops nor Superintendents which were then present in the
Assembly (being eight in number) were either nominated to debate the points
proposed, nor called to be present at the Conference. But somewhat further must
be done, now their hand was in: And therefore, that the rest might see what
they were to trust to, if this world went on, they deposed James Patton Bishop
of Dunkelden from his place and dignity, without consulting the Lord-Regent, or
any of the secret Council in so great a business.

32. The next Assembly makes some alteration in propounding the question, and
gives it out with a particular reference to their own concernment, in this
manner following; that is to say, Whether the Bishops, as they were in
Scotland, had their Function warranted by the Word of God? But the determining
of this question was declined as formerly. Only it was conceived expedient for
a further preparative, both to approve the opinions of the Referrees in the
former Meeting, and to add this now unto the rest, That the Bishops should take
to themselves the service of some one Church within their Diocese, and nominate
the particular flock whereof they would accept the charge. News of which last
addition being brought to the Regent, he required by a special Message, either
to stand to the Conclusions before mentioned, which were made at Leith, or else
devise some other Form of Church Government which they would abide. And this
fell out as Melvin and his Tribe would have it: For after this, there was
nothing done in the Assemblies for two years together, but hammering, forming
and reforming a new Book of Discipline, to be a standing Rule for ever to the
Kirk of Scotland. But possible it is, that the design might have been brought
to perfection sooner, if the Regent had not thought himself affronted by them,
in the person of his Chaplain Mr. Patrick Adamson, whom he had recommended to
the Sea of S. Andrews. For the Election being purposely delayed by the Dean and
Chapter, till the sitting of the next Assembly; Adamson then present, was
interrogated whether he would submit himself unto the trial, and undertake that
Office upon such conditions as the Assembly should prescribe. To which he
answered, That he was commanded by the Regent not to accept thereof upon any
other terms, then such as had been formerly agreed upon between the
Commissioners of the Kirk and the Lords of the Council. On this refusal, they
inhibit the Chapter from proceeding in the said Election; though afterward,
for fear of the displeasure of so great a man, their command therein was
disobeyed, and the party chosen. Which so provoked those meek and
humble-spirited men, that at their next Meeting they discharged him from the
exercise of all Jurisdiction, till by some General Assembly he were lawfully
licensed. And this did so exasperate the Regent on the other side, that he
resolved to hinder them from making any further Innovation in the Churches
Polity as long as he continued in his place and power.

33. But the Regent having somewhat imprudently dismissed himself of the
Government, and put it into the hands of the King, in the beginning of March,
An. 1577, they then conceived they had as good an opportunity as could be
desired to advance their Discipline, which had been hammering ever since in the
Forge of their Fancies. And when it happened (as it was not long before it did)
they usher in the Design with this following Preamble; viz. The General
Assembly of the Kirk finding universal corruption of the whole Estates of the
body of this Realm the great coldness and slackness in Religion in the greatest
part of the Professors of the same, with the daily increase of all kind of
fearful sins and enormities; as, Incests, Adulteries, Murders ( committed in
Edenborough and Stirling) cursed Sacrilege, ungodly Sedition and Division
within the bowels of the Realm, with all manner of disordered and ungodly
living; which justly has provoked our God, although long-suffering and
patient, to stretch out his arm in his anger to correct and visit the iniquity
of the Land; and namely, by the present penury, famine and hunger, joined with
the Civil and Intestine Seditions: Whereunto doubtless greater judgments must
succeed, if these his corrections work on Reformation and amendment in men's
hearts: Seeing also the bloody exclusions of the cruel counsels of that Roman
Beast, tending to extermine and raze from the face of all Europe, the true
light of the blessed Word of Salvation: For these causes, and that God of his
mercy would bless the Kings Highness, and his Regiment, and make him to have a
happy and prosperous Government, as also to put in his Highness heart, and in
the hearts of his Noble Estates of Parliament, not only to make and establish
good politic Laws for the Weal and good Government of the Realm, but also to
set and establish such a Polity and Discipline in the Kirk, as is craved in the
Word of God, and is contained and penned already to be presented to his
Highness and Council; that in the one and in the other God may have his due
praise, and the age to come an example of upright and Godly dealing. Which Act
of the Assembly passed on the 24 of April 1578.

34. The Discipline must be of most excellent use, which could afford a present
remedy to so many mischiefs; and yet as excellent as it was, it could obtain no
Ratification at that time of the King or Parliament; which therefore they
resolve to put in practice by the strength of their party, without insisting
any further on the leave of either. In which respect, it will not be
unnecessary to take a brief view of such particulars in which they differ from
the Ancient Government of the Church of Christ, or the Government of the Church
of England then by Law established; or finally, from the former Book of
Discipline which themselves had justified. Now by this Book it is declared,
That none that bear Office in the Church of Christ, ought to have Dominion over
it, or be called Lords: That the Civil Magistrates are so far from having any
power to Preach, administer the Sacraments, or execute the Censures of the
Church, that they ought not to prescribe any Rule how it should be done: and
that as Ministers are subject to the judgment and punishment of Magistrates in
External things, if they offend; so ought the Magistrates submit themselves to
the Discipline of the Church, if they transgress in matter of Conscience and
Religion: That the Ministers of the Church ought to govern the same by mutual
consent of Brethren, and equality of power, according to their several
Functions: That there are only four ordinary Office bearers in the Church;
that is to say, The Pastor, Minister or Bishop; the Doctor, the Elder, and the
Deacon; and that no more ought to be received in the Word of God; and therefore
that all ambitious Titles invented in the Kingdom of Antichrist and his usurped
Hierarchy, which are not of these four sorts-together with the Offices
depending thereupon ( that is to say, Archbishops, Patriarchs, Chancellours,
Deans, Archdeacons, etc.) ought in one word to be rejected: That all which bear
Office in the Church, are to be elected by the Eldership, and consent of the
Congregation to whom the person presented is appointed, and no otherwise. That
the Ordination of the person so elected, is to be performed with Fasting,
Prayer, and the Imposition of the hands of the Eldership (Remember that
Imposition of hands was totally rejected in the former Book:) That all
Office-bearers in the Church should have their own particular flocks, amongst
whom they ought to exercise their charge, and keep their residence.

35. But more particularly it declares, That it is the Office of the Pastor,
Bishop or Minister, to preach the Word of God, and to administer the Sacraments
in that particular Congregation unto which he is called: and it belongs unto
them, after lawful proceeding of the Eldership, to pronounce the sentence of
binding and loosing; as also, to solemnize Marriage between persons contracted,
being by the said Eldership thereunto required: That it is the Office of the
Doctor, simply to open the mind of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, without
making any such application as the Minister uses; and that this Doctor being
an Elder, ought to assist the Pastor in the Government of the Church, by reason
that the Interpretation of the Word, which is the only Judge in Ecclesiastical
matters, is to him committed: That it is the Office of the Elder (that is to
say, The Lay-Elder, for so they mean) both privately and publicly, to watch
with all diligence over the flock committed to them, that no corruptions of
Religion or manners grow amongst them; as also to assist the Pastor or Minister
in examining those that come to the Lords Table, in visiting the sick, in
admonishing all men of their duties according to the Rule of the Word; and in
holding Assemblies with the Pastors and Doctors, for establishing good order in
the Church, the Acts whereof he is to put in execution: That it is the Office
of the Deacon to collect and distribute the goods of the Church, at the
appointment of the Elders, amongst which he is to have no voice in the common
Consistory; contrary to the Rules of the former Book: That all Ecclesiastical
Assemblies have a power lawfully to convene together for that effect: That it
is in the power of the Eldership to appoint Visitors for their Churches within
their bounds; and that this power belongs not to any single person, be he
Bishop or otherwise: That every three, four or more Parishes, may have an
Eldership to themselves; but so, that the Elders be chosen out of each in a fit
proportion: That it is the Office of these Elderships to enquire of naughty and
unruly Members, and to bring them into the way again, either by Admonition, and
threatening of Gods Judgments, or by Correction, even to the very Censure of
Excommunication; as also to admonish, censure, and (if the case require) to
depose their Pastor, if he be found guilty of any of those grievous crimes (
among which Dancing goes for one) which belongs to their cognizance: The Errors
committed by the Eldership, to be corrected by Provincial Assemblies, and those
in the Provincials by the General. The maintenance and assisting of which
Discipline, and the inflicting of Civil punishments upon such as do not obey
the same, without confounding one Jurisdiction with another, is made to be the
chief Office of Kings and Princes. And that this Discipline might be executed
without interruption, it was required that the Name and Office of Bishops, as
it then was, and had been formerly exercised in the Church of Scotland; as also
the Names and Offices of Commendators, Abbots, Priors, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, Chancellors, Archdeacons, etc. should from thenceforth be utterly
abolished, and of no effect. Which points, and all the rest therein contained,
being granted to them, all right of Patronages destroyed, that popular
Elections may proceed in all their Churches, and finally, the whole Patrimony
of the Church in Lands, Tithes or Houses, permitted to the distribution of the
Deacons in every Eldership, they then conceive that such a right Reformation
may be made as God requires.

36. This Book of Discipline being presented to the King in ^^rliament, and the
approving of the same deferred to a fur^her time; they took this not for a
delay, but a plain denial; and therefore it was agreed in the next general
Assembly (as before is said) to put the same in execution by their own
Authority, without expecting any further confirmation of it from the King or
Council. Which that they might effect without fear of disturbance, they first
discharge the Bishops and Superintendents from intermedling in Affairs which
concerned Religion, but only in their own particular Churches; that so their
Elderships (according to this new establishment) might grow up and flourish.
And then they took upon them, with their own adherents, to exercise all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, without respect to Prince or Prelate; they altered
the Laws according to their own appetite; they assembled the Kings Subjects,
and enjoined Ecclesiastical pains unto them; they made Decrees, and put the
same in execution; they prescribed Laws to the King and State; they appointed
Fasts throughout the whole Realm, especially when some of their Faction were to
move any great enterprise; they used very traytorous, seditious and
contumelious words in the Pulpits, Schools, and otherwise, to the disdain and
reproach of the King; and being called to answer the same, they utterly
disclaimed the Kings Authority, saying he was an incompetent Judge, and that
matters of the Pulpit ought to be exempted from the judgment and correction of
Princes. And finally, they did not only animate some of those that adhered
unto them, to seize upon the Kings person, and usurp his power; but justified
the same in one of their general Assemblies held at Edenborough for a lawful
Act; ordaining all those to be excommunicated which did not subscribe unto the
same. This we take up by wholesale now, but shall return it by retail in that
which follows.

37. And first they begin with Mr. James Boyd, Archbishop of Glasco, a man of a
mild and quiet nature, and therefore the more like to be conformable to their
commands; requiring him to submit himself to the Assembly, and to suffer the
corruptions of the Episcopal Order to be reformed in his person. To which proud
intimation of their will and pleasure, he returned this Answer, which, for the
modesty or piety thereof, deserves to be continued to perpetual memory. I
understand (says he) the name, Office and Reverence given to a Bishop to be
lawful, and allowed by the Scriptures of God; and being elected by the Church
and King to be Bishop of Glasco, I esteem my Office and Calling lawful, and
shall endeavor with all my power to perform the duties required, submitting my
self to the judgment of the Church, if I shall be tried to offend; so as
nothing be required of me, but the performance of those duties which the
Apostle prescribes. Finding him not so tractable as they had expected, they
Commissionate certain of their Members to require his subscription to the Act
made at Stirling, for reformation of the State Episcopal; by which it was
agreed, that every Bishop should take charge of some flock in particular. And
this they pressed upon him with such heat and violence, that they never left
prosecuting the poor man, till they had brought him to his Grave. By none more
violently pursued then by Andrew Melvin, whom he had brought to Glasco, and
made Principal of the College there, gave him a free access to his House and
Table, or otherwise very liberally provided for him. But Scots and
Presbyterians are not won by favors, nor obliged by Benefits. For Melvin so
disguised his nature, that when he was in private with him at his Table or
elsewhere, he would use him with all reverence imaginable, giving him the title
of his Lordship, with all the other honors which pertained unto him; but in
all particular Meetings, whatsoever they were, he would only call him Mr.
Boyd, and otherwise carried himself most despitefully toward him.

38. Their rough and peremptory dealing with this Reverend Prelate, discouraged
all the rest from coming any more to their Assemblies: Which happened as they
could have wished. For thereupon they agree amongst themselves upon certain
Articles, which every Bishop must subscribe, or else quit his place; that is to
say, 1. That they should be content to be Ministers and Pastors of a flock: 2.
That they should not usurp any criminal jurisdiction: 3. That they should not
vote in Parliament in the name of the Church, unless they had a Commission from
the general Assembly: 4. That they should not take up for maintaining their
ambition, the Rents which might maintain many Pastors, Schools and Poor, but
content themselves with a reasonable portion for discharge of their Offices: 5.
That they should not claim the title of Temporal Lords, nor usurp any Civil
Jurisdiction, whereby they might be drawn from their charge: 6. That they
should not Empire over Presbyteries, but be subject to the same: 7. That they
should not usurp the power of Presbyteries, nor take upon them to visit any
bounds that were not committed to them by the Church: 8. That if any more
corruptions should afterward be tried, the Bishop should agree to have them
reformed. These Articles were first tendered to Patrick Adamson, Archbishop of
St. Andrews, and Metropolitan of all Scotland; against whom they had a former
quarrel, not only because he was preferred, elected, and admitted to that
eminent Dignity without their consent, but had also exercised the Jurisdiction
which belonged unto it, in express and direct opposition unto their commands.
And first they quarrelled with him for giving Collation unto Benefices, and for
giving voice in Parliament, not being authorized thereunto by the Kirk. They
quarrelled with him afterward for drawing or advising the Acts of Parliament,
Anno 1584, which they conceived to be so prejudicial to the Rights of the Kirk;
and held the King so hard unto it, that he was forced to counsel the poor
Prelate to subscribe some Articles, by which he seemed in a manner to renounce
his Calling; of which more hereafter. They quarrelled with him again in the
year 1589, for marrying one of the Daughters of the late Duke of Lenox to the
Earl of Huntly without their consent; wherein the King was also fain to leave
him to their discretion. And finally, they so vexed and persecuted him from one
time to another, upon pretense of not conforming to their lawless pleasures,
that they reduced him in the end to extreme necessity, published a false and
scandalous Paper in his name, as he lay on his death bed, containing a
Recantation (as they called it) or rather a renouncing of his Episcopal
Function; together with his approbation of their Presbyteries: which Paper he
disowned at the the hearing of it. By which, and many such unworthy courses,
they brought his gray hairs (as they did some others of his Order) with shame
and sorrow to the Grave.

39. Mention was made before of an Act of Parliament made in the time of the
Interregnum, before the Queens coming back from France, for demolishing all
Religious Houses, and other Monuments of Superstition and Idolatry. Under which
name all the Cathedrals were interpreted to be contained, and by that means
involved in the general ruin; only the Church at Glasco did escape that
storm, and remained till this time undefaced in its former glory: But now
becomes a very great eyesore to Andrew Melvin, by whose practices and
solicitations it was agreed unto by some Zealous Magistrates, that it should
forthwith be demolished; that the materials of it should be used for the
building of some lesser Churches in that City for the ease of the people; and
that such Masons, Quarriers, and other Workmen, whose service was requisite
thereunto, should be in readiness for that purpose at the day appointed. The
Arguments which he used to persuade those Magistrates to this Act of Ruin,
were the resorting of some people to that Church for their private Devotions;
the huge vastness of the Fabric, which made it incommodious in respect of
hearing; and especially the removing of that old Idolatrous Monument, which
only was kept up in despite of the Zeal and Piety of their first Reformers. But
the business was not carried so closely, as not to come unto the knowledge of
the Crafts of the City, who, though they were all sufficiently Zealous in the
cause of Religion, were not so mad as to deprive their City of so great an
Ornament. And they agreed so well together, that when the Workmen were
beginning to assemble themselves to speed the business, they made a tumult,
took up Arms, and resolutely swore, that whosoever pulled down the first stone,
should be buried under it. The Workmen upon this are discharged by the
Magistrates, and the people complained of to the King for the insurrections.
The King upon the hearing of it, receives the actors in that business into his
protection, allows the opposition they had made, and lays command upon the
Ministers (who had appeared most eager in the prosecution) not to meddle any
more in that business, or any other of that nature; adding withal, that too
many Churches in that Kingdom were destroyed already, and that he would not
tolerate any more abuses of such ill example.

40. The King for matter of his Book had been committed to the institution of
George Buchanan, 1580.
a most fiery and seditious Calvinist; to moderate whose heats, was added Mr.
Peter Young, (father of the late Dean of Winchester) a more temperate and sober
man, whom he very much esteemed, and honored with Knighthood, and afterward
preferred to the Mastership of St. Cross in England. But he received his
Principles for ma^ter of State, from such of his Council as were most tender of
the pub^lick interest of their Native Country. By whom, but most especially by
the Earl of Morton, he was so well instructed, that he was able to distinguish
between the Zeal of some in promoting the Reformed Religion, and the madness or
sollies of some others, who practiced to introduce their innovations under that
pretense. Upon which grounds of State and Prudence, he gave order to the
general Assembly, sitting at this time, not to make any alteration in the
Polity of the Church, as then it stood, but to suffer things to continue in the
state they were till the following Parliament, to the end that the
determinations of the three Estates might not be any ways prejudged by their
conclusions. But they neglecting the command, look back upon the late
proceedings which were held at Stirling, where many of the most material points
in the Book of Discipline were demurred upon. And thereupon it was ordained,
that nothing should be altered in Form or Matter, which in that Book had been
concluded by themselves. With which the King was so displeased, that from that
time he gave less countenance to the Ministers then he had done formerly. And
to the end that they might see what need they had of their Princes favor, he
suffered diverse sentences to be past at the Council Table, for the suspending
of their Censures and Excommunications, when any matter of complaint was heard
against them. But they go forwards howsoever, confirmed and animated by a
Discourse of Theodore Beza which came out this year, entitled, De Triplici
Episcopatu. In which he takes notice of three sorts of Bishops; the Bishop of
Divine Institution, which he makes to be no other then the ordinary Minister of
a particular Congregation; the Bishop of humane Constitution, that is to say,
the President or Moderator in the Church Assemblies; and last of all, the
Devils Bishop, such as were then placed in a perpetual Authority over a Dioces^
or Province in most parts of Christendom; under which last capacity they beheld
their Bishops in the Kirk of Scotland. And in the next Assembly, held at Dundee
in July following, it was concluded, That the Office of a Bishop, as it was
then used and commonly taken in that Realm, had neither foundation, ground, nor
warrant in the holy Scriptures. And thereupon it was decreed, That all persons
either called unto that Office, or which should hereafter be called unto it,
should be required to renounce the same, as an Office unto which they are not
warranted by the Word of God. But because some more moderate men in the next
Assembly held at Glasgow, did raise a scruple touching that part of the Decree
in which it was affirmed, That the calling of Bishops was not warranted by the
Word of God, it was first declared by the Assembly, that they had no other
meaning in that Expression, then to condemn the estate of Bishops as they then
stood in Scotland. With which the said moderate men did not seem contented, but
desired that the conclusion of the matter might be respited to another time, by
reason of the inconvenience which might ensue. They are cried down by all the
rest with great heat and violence; insomuch, that it was proposed by one
Montgomery Minister of Stirling, that some Censure might be laid on those who
had spoken in defense of that corrupted estate Nay, such was the extreme hatred
to that Sacred Function in the said Assembly at Dundee, that they stayed not
here; They added to the former, a Decree more strange, inserting, That they
should desist and cease from Preaching, ministering the Sacraments, or using in
any sort of Office of a Pastor in the Church of Christ, till by some General
Assembly they were De Novo Authorized and admitted to it; no lower Censure then
that of Excommunication, if they did the contrary. As for the Patrimony of the
Church, which still remained in their hands, it was resolved that the next
General Assembly should dispose thereof.

49. There happened at this time an unexpected Revolution in the Court of
Scotland, which possibly might animate them to these high presumptions. It had
been the great Masterpiece of the Earl of Morton in the time of his Regency,
to fasten his dependence most specially on the Queen of England; without which
he saw it was impossible to preserve the Kings Person, and maintain his Power
against the practices and attempts of a prevalent Faction, which openly
appeared in favor of his Mothers pretensions. And in this course he much
desired to keep the King, when he had took the Government upon himself, as
before was said, prevailing with him, much against the mind of most of the
Lords, to send an Ambassador for that purpose. Which put such fears and
jealousies into the heads of the French, on whom the S^ots had formerly
depended upon all occasions, that they thought ^it to countermine the English
party in the Court, and so blow them up. No better Engine for this purpose then
the Lord Esme Stewart, Seignieur of Aubigny in France, and Brothers Son to
Matthew the late Earl of Lenox the Young Kings Grandfather. By him it was
conceived that they might not only work the King to the party of France, but
get some ground for re-establishing the old Religion, or at least to gain some
countenance for the Favorers and Professors of it. With these Instructions he
prepares to the Court of Scotland, makes himself known unto the King, and by
the affability of his conversation wins so much upon him, that no Honor or
Preferment was thought great enough for so dear a Kinsman. The Earldom of Lenox
being devolved upon the King by the death of his Grandfather, was first
conferred on Robert Bishop of Orknay, one of the Natural Sons of King James V.
Which he, to gratify the King, and oblige the Favorite, resigned again into
his hands; in recompense whereof, he is preferred unto the title of Earl of
March. As soon as he had made this Resignation of the Earldom of Lenox, the
King confers it presently on his Cousin Aubigny, who studied to appear more
serviceable to him every day then other. And that his service might appear the
more considerable, a report is cunningly spread abroad, that the Earl of Morton
had a purpose to convey the King into England; by means whereof the Scots would
forfeit all the Privileges which they held France. Morton sufficiently cleared
himself from any such practice. But howsoever, the suspicion prevailed so far,
that it was thought fit by those of the Adverse party to appoint a
Lord-Chamberlain, who was to have the care of His Majesty's Person; and that a
Guard of twenty four Noblemen should be assigned to the said Lord-Chamberlain
for that end and purpose. Which Trust and Honor was immediately conferred on
the Earl of Lenox, who had been sworn to the Council much about that time, and
within less then two years after was created Duke.

50. The sudden Preferments of this man, being well known to be a professed
Votary of the Church of Rome, 1581.
encouraged many Priests and Jesuits to repair into Scotland; who were
sufficiently practical in propagating the Opinions, and advancing the interest
of that Church. Which gave occasion to the Brethren to exclaim against him, and
many times to fall exceeding foul on the King himself. The King appears
sollicitous for their satisfaction; and deals so effectually with his Kinsman,
that he was willing to receive instruction from some of their Ministers, by
whom he is made a real Proselyte to the Religion then established; which he
declared, by making profession of his Faith in the great Church of Edenborough,
and his diligent frequenting the Church at their Prayers and Sermons. But it
happened very unfortunately for him, that some Dispensations sent from Rome were
intercepted, whereby the Catholics were permitted to promise, swear,
subscribe, and do what else should be required of them, if still they kept
their hearts, and secretly employed their counsels for the Church of Rome.
Against this blow the Gentleman could find no buckler, nor was there any ready
way either to take off the suspicions, or to still the clamors which by the
Presbyterian Brethren were raised against him. Their outcries much increased,
by the severities then showed to the Earl of Morton, whom they esteemed to be a
most assured Friend (as indeed he was) to their Religion, though indeed in all
points not corresponding with them to the book of Discipline. For so it was,
that to break off all hopes of fastening a dependence on the Realm of England,
Morton was publicly accused at the Council Table for being privy to the
Murder of His Majesty's Father, committed to the Castle of Edenborough on the
second of January, removed to Dunbritton on the twentieth: Where having
remained above four months, he was brought back to Edenborough in the end of
May, condemned upon the first of June, and the next day executed: His Capital
Accuser being admitted to sit Judge upon him.

51. This news exceedingly perplexed the Queen of England: she had sent Bows
and Randolph at several times to the King of Scots, who were to use their best
endeavors as well to lessen the Kings favor to the Earl of Lenox, as to
preserve the life of Morton. For the effecting of which last, a promise was
made by Randolph unto some of his Friends, both of men and money. But as
Walsingham sent word from France, she had not took the right course to effect
her purpose. She had of late been negligent in paying those persons which had
before confirmed the Scots to the English interest; which made them apt to tack
about, and to apply themselves to those who would bid most for them. And yet
the business at the present was not gone so far, but that they might have
easily been reduced unto her devotion, if we had now sent them ready money
instead of promises; for want whereof, that Noble Gentleman, so cordially
affected to Her Majesty's service, was miserably cast away. Which quick advice,
though it came over-late to preserve his life, came time enough to put the
Queen into a way for recovering Her Authority amongst the Scots; of which more
hereafter. Nor were the Ministers less troubled at it then the Queen of
England, imputing unto Lenox the contrivance of so sad a Tragedy. Somewhat
before this time he had been taxed in the Pulpit by Drury, one of the Brethren
of Edenborough, for his unsoundness in Religion, and all means used to make him
odious with the people. For which committed by the Council to the Castle of
Edenborough, he was, not long after, at the earnest entreaty of his
Fellow-Ministers, 1582.
and some promise on his own part for his good behavior, restored again unto
his charge. But after Mortons death (some other occasions coming in) he breaks
out again, and mightily exclaims against him; insomuch, that the King gave
order to the Provost of Edenborough to see him removed out of the Town. The
Magistrate advises him to leave the Town of his own accord: But he must first
demand the pleasure of the Kirk, convened at the same time in an Assembly.
Notwithstanding whose Mediation, he was forced to leave the Town a little
while, to which he was brought back in Triumph within few months after. A Fast
was also kept by order of the said Assembly: For the ground whereof they
alleged, amongst other things, not only the oppression of the Church in
general, but the danger wherein the Kings Person stood, by a company of wicked
men, who labored to corrupt him in Religion as well as manners.

52. But no man laid more hastily about him, or came better off then Walter
Belcanqual, another Preacher of that City. Who in a Sermon by him preached,
used some words to this purpose, That within this four years Popery had entered
into the Country and Court, and was maintained in the Kings Hall, by the
Tyranny of a great Champion, who was called Grace (which Adjunct they gave
ordinarily to their Dukes in Scotland;) but that if his Grace continued in
opposing himself to God and his Word, he should come to little Grace in the
end. The King at the first hearing of it, gives order to the General Assembly
to proceed therein. Which being signified to Belcanqual, he is said to have
given thanks to God for these two things; first, For that he was not accused
for any thing done against his Majesty and the Laws: But principally, because
he perceived the Church had obtained some Victory. And for the last he gave
this reason, That for some quarrel taken at a former Sermon, the Council had
took upon them to be Judges of a Ministers Doctrine; but now that he was
ordered to appear before the Assembly, 1573.
he would most joyfully submit his Doctrine to a public Trial. But those of
the Assembly sending word to the King, that they could not warrantably proceed
against him, without the business were prosecuted by some Accuser, and made
good by witnesses; the King was forced, for fear of drawing any of his Servants
into their displeasures, to let fall the cause. But Belcanqual would not so
give over: The Kings desisting from the prosecution would not serve his turn,
unless he were absolved also by the whole Assembly, who had been present at the
Sermon. This was conceived to be most reasonable and just; for having put it to
the vote, his Doctrine was declared to be ^ound and Orthodox, and that he had
delivered nothing which might give just offense unto any person. The King
begins to see by these particulars what he is to trust to. But they will
presently find out another expedient, as well for trial of their own power, as
his utmost patience.

52. A corrupt Contract had been made betwixt Montgomery before mentioned, and
the Duke of Lenox; by which it was agreed, That Montgomery should be advanced,
by the Dukes Intercession, to the Archbishopric of Glasgow; and that
Montgomery, in requital of so great a favor, should grant unto the Duke and
his Heirs for ever, the whole Estate and Rents of the said Archbishopric, upon
the yearly payments of One thousand pound Scotch, with some Horse, Corn and
Poultry. No sooner had the Kirk notice of this Transaction, but without taking
notice of so base a Contract, they censured him for taking on him the Episcopal
Function. The King resolves to justify him in the Acceptance, unless they
could be able to charge him with unfoundess of Doctrine, or corruption of
manners. Hereupon certain Articles are preferred against him; and, amongst
others, it was charged, that he had said, The Discipline was a thing
indifferent, and might stand the one way or the other; That to prove the
lawfulness of Bishops in the Church, he had used the Examples of Ambrose and
Augustine: That at another time, he called the Discipline, and the lawful
Calling of the Church, the triefls of Policy: That he said the Ministers were
captious, and men of curious brains: That he charged them with sedition, and
warned them not to meddle in the disposing of Crowns* and that if they did,
they should be reproved: That he accused them of Pasquils, Lying, Backbiting,
etc. And finally, he denied that any mention of Presbytery or Eldership was
made in any part of the New Testament. For which and other Errors of like
nature in point of Doctrine, though none of them sufficiently proved when it
came to trial, it was resolved by the Assembly, that he should stand to his
Ministry in the Church of Stirling, and meddle no further with the Bishopric,
under the pain of Excommunication. But not content with ordering him to give
off the Bishopric, they suspend him on another quarrel from the use of his
Ministry. To neither of which sentences when he would submit, as being
supported by the King on one side, and the Duke on the other, they cited him to
appear before the Synod of Lothian to hear the sentence of Excommunication
pronounced against him. This moved the King to interpose his Royal Authority,
to warn the Synod to appear before him at the Court at Stirling, and in the
mean time to desist from all further Process. Pont and some others make
appearance in the name of the rest; but withal make this protestation, That
though they had appeared to testify their obedience to his Majesty's warrant,
yet they did not acknowledge the King and Council to be competent Judges in
that matter; and therefore that nothing done at that time should either
prejudge the Liberties of the Church, or the Laws of the Realm. Which
Protestation notwithstanding, they were inhibited by the Council from using any
further proceedings against the man, and so departed for the present.

54. But the next general Assembly would not leave him so, but prosecute him
with more heat then ever formerly; and were upon the point of passing their
judgment on him, when they were required by a Letter missive from the King,
not to trouble him for any matter about the Bishopric, or any other cause
preceding, in regard the King resolved to have the business heard before
himself. But Melvin hereupon replied, That they did not meddle with any thing
belonging to the Civil Power; and that for matters Ecclesiastical, they had
Authority enough to proceed against him, as being a Member of their Body. The
Master of the Requests, who had brought the Letter, perceiving by these words,
that they meant to proceed in it, as they had begun, commanded a Messenger at
Arms, whom he had brought along with him, to charge them to desist upon pain of
Rebellion. This moves them as little as the Letter, and he is summoned
peremptorily to appear next morning, that he might receive his sentence. Next
morning he appears by his Procurator, and puts up an appeal from them to the
King and Council; the rather, in regard that one who was his principal Accuser
in the last Assembly, was now to sit amongst his Judges. But neither the Appeal
it self, nor the Equity of it, could so far prevail, as to hinder them from
passing presently to the Sentence; by which, upon the specification and recital
of his several crimes, he was ordained to be deprived, and cast out of the
Church. And now the courage of the man begins to fail him. He requires a
present Conference with some of the Brethren, submits himself to the Decrees of
the Assembly, and promises neither to meddle further with the Bishopric, nor
to exercise any Office in the Ministry, but as they should license him
thereunto. But this inconstancy he makes worse, by another as bad; for finding
the Kings countenance toward him to be very much changed, he resolves to hold
the Bishopric; makes a journey to Glasgow, and entering into the Church with a
great train of Gentlemen which had attended him from the Court, he puts by the
ordinary Preacher, and takes the Pulpit to himself. For this disturbance, the
Presbytery of the Town send out Process against him, but are prohibited from
proceeding by his Majesty's Warrant, presented by the Mayor of Glasgow. But
when it was replied by the Moderator, That they would proceed in the cause
notwithstanding this Warrant, and that some other words were multiplied upon
that occasion; the Provost pulled him out of his Chair, and committed him
Prisoner to the Talebooth. The next Assembly look on this action of the Provost
as a foul indignity, and prosecute the whole matter unto such extremity, that
notwithstanding the Kings intercession, and the advantage which he had against
some of their number; the Provost was decreed to be excommunicated; and the
Excommunication formerly decreed against Montgomery, was actually pronounced in
the open Church.

55. The Duke of Lenox finds himself so much concerned in the business, that
he could not but support the man, who for his sake had been exposed to all
these affronts; he entertains him at his Table, and hears him preach, without
regard unto the Censures under which he lay. This gives the general Assembly a
new displeasure. Their whole Authority seemed by these actions of the Duke to
be little valued; which rather then they would permit, they would proceed
against him in the self-same manner. But first it was thought fit to send some
of their Members, as well to intimate unto him that Montgomery was actually
excommunicated; as also to present the danger in which they stood by the Rules
of the Discipline, who did converse with excommunicated persons. The Duke being
no less moved then they, demanded in some choler, Whether the King or Kirk had
the Supreme Power; and therewith plainly told them, That he was commanded by
the King to entertain him, whose command he would not disobey for fear of their
Censures. Not satisfied with this defense, the Commissioners of the general
Assembly presented it unto the King amongst other grievances; to which it was
answered by the King, that the Excommunication was illegal, and was declared to
be so upon very good Reasons to the Lords of the Council; and therefore that no
manner of person was to be liable to censure upon that account. The King was at
this time at the Town of Perth, to which many of the Lords repaired, who had
declared themselves in former times for the Faction of England, and were now
put into good heart by supplies of money, (according unto Walsinghams counsel)
which had been secretly sent unto them from the Queen. Much animated, or
exasperated rather, by some Leading-men, who managed the Affairs of the late
Assemblies, and spared not to inculcate to them the apparent dangers in which
Religion stood by the open practices of the Duke of Lenox, and the Kings
crossing with them upon all occasions. To which the Sermons of the last Fast
did not add a little; which was purposely indicted, as before was said, in
regard of those oppressions which the Kirk was under; but more, because of the
great danger which the company of wicked persons might bring to the King, whom
they endeavored to corrupt both in Religion and Manners. All which inducements
coming together, produced a resolution of getting the King into their power,
forcing the Duke of Lenox to retire into France, and altering the whole
Government of the Kingdom as themselves best pleased.

56. But first, the Duke of Lenox must be sent out of the way. And to effect
this, they advised him to go to Edenborough, and to erect there the
Lord-Chamberlains Court, for the reviving of the ancient Jurisdiction which
belonged to his Office. He had not long been gone from Perth, when the King was
solemnly invited to the House of William Lord Ruthen (not long before made Earl
of Gowry) where he was liberally feasted: but being ready to depart, he was
stayed by the Eldest Son of the Lord Glammis, (the Master of Glammis, he is
called, in the Scottish Dialect) and he was stayed in such a manner, that he
perceived himself to be under a custody. The apprehensions whereof, when it
drew some tears from him, it moved no more compassion nor respect from the
froward Scots, but that it was fitter for boys to shed tears then bearded men.
This was the great work of the 23 day of August; to which concurred at the
first, to avoid suspi^ion, no more of the Nobility but the Earls of Mar and
Gowry, the Lords Boyd and Lindsay, and to the number of ten more of the better
sort; but afterward the act was owned over all the Nation, not only by the
whole Kirk-party, but even by those who were of contrary Faction to the Duke of
Lenox, who was chiefly aimed at. The Duke, upon the first advertisement of this
surprise, dispatched some men of Noble Quality to the King, to know in what
condition he was, whether free or Captive. The King returned word that he was a
Captive, and willed him to raise what force he could to redeem him thence. The
Lords on the other side declared, That they would not suffer him to be misled
by the Duke of Lenox, to the oppression of Himself, the Church, and the whole
Realm; and therefore the Duke might do well to retire into France, or otherwise
they would call him to a sad account for his former actions. And this being
done, they caused the King to issue out a Proclamation on the 28. In which it
was declared, That he remained in that place of his own free will: That the
Nobility then present had done nothing which they were not in duty obliged to
do: That he took their repairing to him for a service acceptable to himself,
and profitable to the Commonwealth: That therefore all manner of persons
whatsoever which had levied any Forces, under color of his present restraint,
should disband them within six hours, under pain of Treason. But more
particularly, they cause him to write a Letter to the Duke of Lenox (whom they
understood to be grown considerably strong for some present action) by which he
was commanded to depart the Kingdom, before the 20 of September then next
following. On the receipt whereof, he withdraws himself to the strong Castle of
Dunbritton, that there he might remain in safety whilst he staid in Scotland,
and from thence pass safely into France whenever he pleased.

57. The news of this Surprise is posted with all speed to England: And
presently the Queen sends her Ambassadors to the King; by whom he was
advertised to restore the Earl of Angus, who had lived an Exile in England
since the death of Morton, to his Grace and Favor; but most especially, that
in regard of the danger he was fallen into by the perverse counsels of the Duke
of Lenox, he would interpret favorably whatsoever had been done by the Lords
which were then about him. The King was able to discern, by the drift of this
Ambassie, that the Queen was privy to the practice; and that the Ambassadors
were sent thither rather to animate and encourage the Conspirators, then advise
with him. But not being willing at that time to displease either Her or them,
he absolutely consents to the restoring of the Earl of Angus; and to the rest
gave such a general answer, as gave some hope, that he was not so incensed by
this Surprise of his person, but that his displeasure might be mitigated on
their good behavior. And that the Queen of Scots also had the same
apprehensions concerning the encouragement which they had from the Queen of
England, appears by her Letter to that Queen, bearing date at Sheffield, on the
eighth of November. In which she intimates unto Her, That She was bound in
Religion, Duty and Justice; not to help forwards their Designs, who secretly
conspire His ruin and Hers, both in Scotland and England: And thereupon did
earnestly persuade her, by their near Alliance, to be careful of Her Sons
welfare, not to intermeddle* any further with the affairs of Scotland, without
her privity or the French Kings; and to hold them for no other then Traitors,
who dealt so with Him at their pleasures. But as Q. Elizabeth was not moved
with her complaints, to recede from the business; so the Conspirators were
resolved to pursue their advantage. They knew on what terms the King stood with
the people of Edenborough; or might have known it, if they did not, by their
Triumphant bringing back of Dury their excluded Minister, as soon as they heard
the first news of the Kings Restraint. In confidence whereof, they bring him
unto Halyrood-House on the Eighth of October; the rather, in regard they
understood, that the General Assembly of the Kirk was to be held in that Town
on the next day after; of whose good inclinations to them, they were nothing
doubtful, nor was there reason why they should.

58. For having made a Formal Declaration to them, concerning the necessity of
their repair unto the King, to the end they might take him out of the hands of
his Evil Counselors, they desired the said Assembly to deliver their opinion
in it. And they, good men, pretending to do all things in the fear of God, and
after mature deliberation (as the Act imports) first justify them in that
horrid Enterprise, to have done good and acceptable service to God, their
Sovereign, and their Native Country. And that being done, they gave order,
That all Ministers should publicly declare to their several flocks, as well
the danger into which they were brought, as the deliverance which was effected
for them by those Noble Persons; with whom they were exhorted to unite
themselves, for the further deliverance of the Kirk, and perfect Reformation of
the Commonwealth. Thus the Assembly leads the way, and the Convention of
Estates follows shortly after. By which it was declared, in favor of the said
Conspirators, That in their repairing to the King the Three and twentieth of
August last, and abiding with him since that time, and whatsoever they had done
in pursuance of it, they had done good, thankful and necessary service to the
King and Country; and therefore they are to be exonerated of all actions Civil
or Criminal that might be intended against them, or any of them in that
respect; inhibiting thereby all the Subjects to speak or utter any thing to the
contrary, under the pain to be esteemed Calumniators and Dispersers of false
Rumors, and to be punished for the same accordingly. The Duke perceives by
these proceedings, how that cold Country, even in the coldest time of the
year, would be too hot for him to continue any longer in it; and having wearied
himself with an expectation of some better fortune, is forced at last on the
latter end of December to put into Berwick, from whence he passes to the Court
of England, and from thence to France, never returning more unto his Natural,
but Ungrateful Country. The Duke had hardly left the Kingdom, when two
Ambassadors came from France to atone the differences, to mediate for the
Kings deliverance, and to solicit that the Queen (whose liberty had been
negotiated with the Queen of England) might b^ made Co-partner with Her Son in
the Public Government. which last was so displeasing to some zealous
Ministers, that they railed against them in their Pulpits, calling them
Ambassadors of that bloody Murderer the Duke of Guise; and foolishly
exclaiming, that the White-Cross which one of them wore upon his shoulders (as
being a Knight of the Order of the Holy Ghost) was a Badge of Antichrist. The
King gives order to the Provost and other Magistrates of the City of
Edenborough, that the Ambassadors should be feasted at their going away; and
care is taken in providing all things necessary for the Entertainment. But the
good Brethren of the Kirk, in further manifestation of their peevish Follies,
Indict a Fast upon that day, take up the people in their long-winded Exercises
from the morning till night, rail all the while on the Ambassadors; and with
much difficulty, are dissuaded from Excommunicating both the Magistrates, and
the Guests to boot.

59. The time of the Kings deliverance drew on apace, sooner then was expected
by any of those who had the custody of his person. 1583.
Being permitted to retire with his Guards to Falkland, that he might recreate
himself in Hunting, which he much affected, he obtained leave to bestow a visit
on his Uncle the Earl of March, who then lay in S. Andrews, not far off. And
after he had taken some refreshment with him, he procures leave to see the
Castle: Into which he was no sooner entered, but Col. Stewart the Captain of his
Guard (to whom alone he had communicated his design) makes fast the gates
against the rest; and from thence makes it known to all good Subjects, that
they should repair unto the King, who by Gods great mercy had escaped from the
hands of his Enemies. This news brings thither on the next morning the Earls of
Arguile, Marshal, Montross and Rothess; and they drew after them, by their
example, such a general concourse, that the King finds himself of sufficient
strength to return to Edenborough; and from thence, having showed himself to be
in his former liberty, he goes back to Perth. Where first by Proclamation, he
declares the late restraint of his Person to be a most treasonable act: but
then withal, to manifest his great affection to the peace of his Kingdom, he
gives a Free and General Pardon to all men whatsoever which had acted in it;
provided that they seek it of him, and carry themselves for the time coming
like obedient subjects. The Kings escape was made in the end of June; and in
December following, he calls a Convention of the Estates, in which the subject
of his Proclamation was approved and verified, the fact declared to be Crimen
laesae Majestatis, or Treason in the highest degree. For which, as some were
executed, and others fled; so diverse of the Ministers that had been dealers in
that matter, pretending they were persecuted, had retired into England. For
notwithstanding his Majesty's great clemency in pardoning the Conspirators on
such easy conditions, they preferred rather the pursuing of their wicked
purposes, then the enjoying of a peaceable and quiet life. For whether it were
that they presumed on supplies from England, of which they had received no
in^^obable hopes, as afterward was confessed by the Earl of Gowry; or that
they built upon the Kirk-Faction to come in to aid them, as the General
Assembly had required; they begin in all places to prepare for some new
Commotion; but being deceived in all their hopes and expectations, they were
confined to several Prisons, before the Convention of Estates; and after it,
upon a further discovery of their preparations and intentions, compelled to
quit the Kingdom, and betake themselves for their protection unto several
Nations. Only the Earl of Gowry staid behind the rest, and he paid well for
it. For being suspected to be hammering some new design, he was took Prisoner
at Dundee in the April following, 1584, thence brought to Edenborough, and
there condemned and executed, as he had deserved.

In the mean time the Kirk-men were as troublesome as the Lay-Conspirators.
Dury, so often mentioned, in a Sermon at Edenborough, had justified the fact at
Ruthen; for which being cited to appear before the Lords of the Council, he
stood in maintenance of that which he had delivered; but afterward submitting
himself unto the King on more sober thoughts, he was kept upon his good
^ehaviour, without further punishment. But Andrew Melvin was a man of another
metal; who being commanded to attend their Lordships for the like offense,
declined the judgment of the King and Council, as having no cognizance of the
cause. To make which good, he broached this Presbyterian Doctrine, That
whatsoever was spoken in the Pulpit, ought first to be tried by the
Presbytery; and that neither the King nor Council were to meddle with it,
though the same were treasonable, till the Presbytery had first taken notice
of it. But finding that the King and Council did resolve to proceed, and had
entered upon Examination of some Witnesses which were brought against him, he
told the King (whether with greater Confidence or Impudence is hard to say)
That he preached the Laws both of God and man. For which undutiful Expression,
he was commanded Prisoner to the Castle of Blackness. Instead whereof, he takes
Sanctuary in the Town of Berwick, where he remained till way was made for his
return; the Pulpits in the mean time sounding nothing, but that the Light of
the Country for Learning and Piety, was forced for safety of his life to
forsake the Kingdom. In which Exile he was followed within few months after by
Palvart Sub-Dean of Glasgow, Galloway and Carmichiel, two inferior Ministers;
who being warned to tender their appearance to the King and Council, and not
appearing at the time, were thereupon pronounced Rebels, and fled after the
other. Nor was the General Assembly held at Edenborough of a better temper then
these Preachers were, in which the Declaration made at the last Convention of
Estates, was stoutly crossed and encountered. The King, with the advice of his
Estates, had resolved the Fact of surprising His Majesty's person to be
treasonable. But the Brethren in the said Assembly did not only authorize and
avow the same, but also (esteeming their own judgment to be the Sovereign
judgment of the Realm) did ordain all them to be excommunicated that would
subscribe unto their opinion.

61. The King perceiving that there was no other way to deal with these men,
then to husband the present opportunity to his best advantage, resolved to
proceed against them in such a way, as might disable them from committing the
like insolences for the time to come. The chief Incendiaries had been forced
to quit the Kingdom, or otherwise deserted it of their own accords, the better
to escape the punishment which their crimes had merited. The great Lords, on
whose strength they had most presumed, were either under the like exile in the
neighboring Countries, or else so weakened and disanimated, that they durst not
stir. So that the King being clearly Master of the Field, his Counselors in
good heart, and generally the Lords and Commons in good terms of obedience, it
was thought fit to call a Parliament, and therein to enact such Laws, by which
the honor of Religion, the personal safety of the King, the peace and
happiness of the Kingdom, and the prosperity of the Church, might be made
secure. In which Parliament it was enacted amongst others things, (the better
to encounter the proceedings of the Kirk, and most Zealous Kirkmen) That none
of his Highness Subjects in time coming, should presume to take upon them by
word or writing, to justify the late treasonable attempt at Ruthen, or to keep
in register or store any Books approving the same in any sort. And in regard
the Kirk had so abused his Majesty's goodness, by which their Presbyterial
Sessions, the general Assemblies, and other meetings of the Kirk, were rather
connived at then allowed; an Act was made to regulate and restrain them for the
times ensuing: for by that Act it was ordained, That from thenceforth none
should presume or take upon them to Convocate, Convene, or assemble themselves
together for holding of Councils, Conventions, or Assemblies; to treat,
consult, or determine in any matters of Estate, Civil or Ecclesiastical,
(excepting the ordinary judgments) without the Kings special commandment.

62. In the next place, the Kings lawful Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, so
often before impugned, was approved and confirmed; and it was made treason for
any man to refuse to answer before the King, though it were concerning any
matter which was Ecclesiastical. The third Estate of Parliament (that is, the
Bishops) were restored to the ancient dignity; and it was made treason for any
man, after that time, to procure the innovation or diminution of the Power and
Authority of any of the three Estates. And for as much as through the wicked,
licentious, public and private Speeches, and untrue calumnies of diverse his
Highness subjects (I speak the very words of the Act) to the disdain, contempt,
and reproach of his Majesty, his Council and proceedings; stirring up his
Highness subjects thereby to misliking, sedition, unquietness; to cast off
their due o^edience to his Majesty: Therefore it is ordained, that none of his
subjects shall presume or take upon them privately or publicly, in Sermons,
Declamations, o^ familiar Conferences, to utter any false, scandalous, and
untrue Speeches, to the disdain, reproach, and contempt of his Majesty, his
Council, and proceedings; or to meddle in the Affairs of his Highness, under
pain of treason. And lastly, an Act was pa^s'd for calling in of Buchanans
History, that Masterpiece of Sedition, entitled, De jure Regni apud Sootos;
and that most infamous Libel, which he called, The Detection: by which last
Acts, his Majesty did not only take care for preventing the like scandalous
and seditious practices for the time to come, but satisfied himself by taking
some revenge upon them in the times foregoing.

63. The Ministers could not want intelligence of particulars before they were
passed into Acts. And now or never was the time to bestir themselves, when
their dear Helena was in such apparent danger to be ravished from them. And
first, it was thought necessary to send one of their number to the King, to
mediate either for the total dismissing of the Bills prepared, or the
suspending of them at the least for a longer time; not doubting, if they gained
the last, but that the first would easily follow of it self. On this Errand
they employ Mr. David Lindsay, Minister of the Church of Leith; a man more
moderate then the rest, and therefore more esteemed by the King then any other
of that body. And how far he might have prevailed, it is hard to say: But
Captain James Stewart (commonly called the Earl of Arran) who then governed the
Affairs of that Kingdom, having notice of it, caused him to be arrested, under
color of maintaining intelligence with the Fugitive Ministers in England;
imprisoned him for one night in Edenborough, and sends him the next day to the
Castle of Blackness, where he remained almost a year. Upon the news of his
commitment, Lawson and Belcanqual, two of the Ministers of Edenborough, forsake
their Church^s, and join themselves unto their Brethren in England; first
leaving a Manifest behind them, in which they published the Reasons of their
sudden departure. John Dury, so often before mentioned, had lately been
confined at Montross; so that no Preacher was now left in Edenborough, or the
Port adjoining, to intercede for themselves and the Kirk in that present
exigent. By means whereof the Acts were passed without interruption. But when
they were to be proclaimed, as the custom is, Mr. Robert Pont, Minister of St.
Cutberts, and one of the Senators of the College of Justice, (for the good
Ministers might act in Civil Matters, though the Bishops might not) took
Instruments in the hands of a public Notary, and openly protested against
those Acts, never agreed to by the Kirk; and therefore that neither the Kirk,
nor any of the Kirk-men, were obliged to be obedient to them. Which having
done, he fled also into England, to the rest of his Brethren; and being
proclaimed Rebel, lost his place in the Sessions.

64 The flying of so many Ministers, and the noise they made in England against
those Acts, increased a scandalous opinion which themselves had raised, of the
Kings being inclined to Popery: and it began to be so generally believed, that
the King found himself under a necessity of rectifying his reputation in the
eye of the world, by a public Manifest. In which he certified as well to his
good subjects, as to all others whatsoever whom it might concern, as well the
just occasion which had moved him to pass those Acts, as the great Equity and
Reason which appeared in them. And amongst these occasions, he reckons the
justifying of the Fact at Ruthen, by the public suffrage of the Kirk; Melvins
declining of the judgment of the King and Council; the Fast indicted at the
entertainment of the French Ambassadors; their frequent general Fasts,
proclaimed and kept in all parts of the Realm by their Authority, without his
privity and consent; the usurping of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction by a
certain number of Ministers, and unqualified Gentlemen, in the Presbyteries and
Assemblies; the alteration of the Laws, and making new ones at their pleasure,
which must bind the Subject; the drawing to themselves of all such Causes,
though properly belonging to the Courts of Justice, in which was any mixture of
scandal: On which account, they forced all those also to submit to the Churches
Censures, who had been accused in those Courts, for Murder, Theft, or any like
enormous crimes, though the party either were absolved by the Court it self, or
pardoned by the King after condemnation. But all this could not stop the
Mouths, and much less stay the Pens of that Waspish Sect; some flying out
against the King in their scurrilous Libels, bald Pamphlets, and defamatory
Rythmes; others with no less violence inveighing against him in their Pulpits,
but most especially in England, where they were out of the Kings reach, and
consequently might rail on without fear of punishment. By them it was given
out, to render the King odious both at home and abroad, That the King
endeavored to extinguish the light of the Gospel, and to that end had caused
those Acts to pass against it: That he had left nothing of the whole ancient
Form of Justice and Polity, in the Spiritual Estate, but a naked shadow: That
Popery was immediately to be established, if God and all good men came not in
to help them: That for opposing these impieties, they had been forced to flee
their Country, and sing the Lords Song in a strange Land; with many other
reproachful and calumnious passages of like odious nature.

65. But loosers may have leave to talk, as the saying is; and by this barking,
they declared sufficiently that they could not bite. I have now brought the
Presbyterians to their lowest fall; but we shall see them very shortly in their
resurrections. In the mean time it will be seasonable to pass into England,
that we may see how things were carried by their Brethren there, till we have
brought them also to this point of time, and then we shall unite them all
together in the course of their story.

The end of the fifth Book.
AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History Of the PRESBYTERIANS. LIB. VI. Containing
The beginning, progress and proceedings of the Puritan-Faction in the Realm of
England, in reference to their Innovations both in Doctrines and Forms of
Worship; their Opposition to the Church, and the Rules thereof; from the
beginning of the Reign of King Edward VI. 1548, to the Fifteenth year of Queen
Elizabeth, Anno 1572.
1. THE Reformation of the Church of England was put into so good a way by King
Henry the Eighth, that it was no hard matter to proceed upon his beginnings. He
had once declared himself so much in favor of the Church of Rome, by writing
against Martin Luther, that he was honored with the Title of Defensor Fidei (or
the Defender of the Faith) by Pope Leo X. Which Title he afterward united by
Act of Parliament to the Crown of this Realm, not many years before his death.
But a breach happening betwixt him and Pope Clement VII, concerning his desired
Divorce; he first prohibits all appeals and other occasions of resort to the Sea of Rome; procures himself to be acknowledged by the Prelates and Clergy in
their Convocation, for Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England; obtained
a promise of them in verbo Sacerdotii (which was then equal to an Oath) neither
to make, promulge nor execute any Ecclesiastical Constitutions, but as they
should be authorized thereunto by his Letters Patent; and then proceed^ unto
an Act for extinguishing the usurped Authority of the Bishop of Rome. But
knowing what a strong party the Pope had in England, by reason of that huge
multitudes of Monks and Friars which depended on him, he first dissolves all
Monasteries and Religious Houses which were not able to dispend Three hundred
Marks of yearly Rent; and after draws in all the rest upon Surrendries,
Resignations, or some other Practices. And having brought the work so far, he
caused the Bible to be published in the English Tongue; indulged the private
reading of it to all persons of quality, and to such others also as were of
known judgment and discretion; commanded the Epistles and Gospels, the Lords
Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandment, to be rehearsed openly to the
people on every Sunday and Holy Day in the English Tongue; and ordered the
Letany also to be read in English upon Wednesdays and Fridays. He had caused
moreover many rich Shrines and Images to be defaced, such as had most
notoriously been abused by Oblations, Pilgrimages, and other the like acts of
Idolatrous Worship; and was upon the point also to abolish the Mass it self,
concerning which he had some secret communication with the French Ambassador,
if Fox speak him rightly.

2. But what he did not live to do, and perhaps never would have done, had he
lived much longer, was brought to pass in the next Reign of King Edward VI. In
the beginning whereof, by the Authority of the Lord Protector, the diligence of
Archbishop Cranmer, and the endeavors of many other Learned and Religious men,
a Book of Homilies was set out to instruct the people; Injunctions published
for the removing of all Images formerly abused to Superstition, or false and
counterfeit in themselves. A Statute past in Parliament for receiving the
Sacrament in both kinds, and order given to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Some other Prelates, to draw a Form for the Administration of it accordingly,
to the honor of God, and the most Edification of all good people. The news
whereof no sooner came unto Geneva, but Calvin must put in for a share; and
forthwith writes his Letters to Archbishop Cranmer, in which he offers his
assistance to promote the service, if he thought it necessary. But neither
Cranmer, Kidley, nor any of the rest of the English Bishops, could see any such
necessity of it, but that they might be able to do well without him. They knew
the temper of the man, how busy and pragmatical he had been in all those
places in which he had been suffered to intermeddle; that in some points of
Christian Doctrine he differed from the general current of the Ancient Fathers;
and had devised such a way of Ecclesiastical Polity, as was destructive in it
self to the Sacred Hierarchy, and never had been heard of in all Antiquity. But
because they would give him no offense, it was resolved to carry on the work by
none but English hands, till they had perfected the composing of the Public
Liturgy, with all the Rites and Ceremonies in the same contained. And that
being done, it was conceived not to be improper, if they made use of certain
Learned men of the Protestant Churches for reading the Divinity-Lectures, and
moderating Disputations in both Universities; to the end that the younger
Students might be trained up in sound Orthodox Doctrine. On which account they
invited Martin Bucer and Peter Martyr, two men of eminent parts and Learning,
to come over to them; the one of which they disposed in Oxon, and the other at
Cambridge. This might have troubled Calvin more then his own repulse, but that
he thought himself sufficiently assured of Peter Martyr, who by reason of his
long living amongst the Switzers, and his nea^ Neighborhood to Geneva, might
possibly be governed by his Directions. But because Bucer had no such
dependence on him, and had withal been very much conversant in the Lutheran
Churches, keeping himself in all his Reformations in a moderate course; he
practices to gain him also, or at least to put him into such a way as might
come nearest to his own. Upon which grounds he posts away his Letters to him,
congratulates his invitation into England; but above all, advises him to have
a care that he endeavored not there, as in other places, either to be the
Author or Approver of such moderate counsels, by which the parties might be
brought to a Reconcilement.

3. For the satisfaction of these strangers, but the last especially, the
Liturgy is translated into Latin by Alexander Alesius, a right Learned Scot.
A Copy of whose Translation, or the sum thereof, being sent to Calvin,
administered no small matter of offense unto him; not so much because any thing
in it could be judged offen^ive, but because it so much differed from those of
his own conception. The people of England had received it as an heavenly
treasure sent down by Gods great mercy to them; all moderate men beyond the
Seas, applauded the felicity of the Church of England, in fashioning such an
excellent Form of Gods Public Worship; and by the Act of Parliament which
confirmed the same, it was declared to have been done by the special aid of the
Holy Ghost. But Calvin was resolved to think otherwise of it, declaring his
dislike thereof in a long Letter written to the Lord Protector: In which he
excepteth more particularly against Commemoration of the dead (which he
acknowledges notwithstanding to be very ancient;) as also against Chrism, or
Oil in Baptism, and the Form of Visiting the sick; and then advises, that as
well these, as all the rest of the Rites and Ceremonies, be cut off at once.
And that this grave advice might not prove unwelcome, he gives us such a Rule
or Reason, as afterward raised more trouble to the Church of England then his
bare advice. His Rule is this, That in carrying on the work of a Reformation,
there is not any thing to be exacted, which is not warranted and required by
the Word of God: That in such cases there is no Rule left for worldly wisdom*
for moderation and compliance; but all things to be ordered as they are
directed by his will revealed. What use his Followers made of their Masters
Rule, in crying down the Rites and Ceremonies of this Church (as Superstitiou^,
Antichristian, and what else they pleased) because not found expressly and
particularly in the Holy Scriptures, we shall see hereafter.

In the mean time, we must behold him in his Applications to the King and
Council, his tampering with Archbishop Canmer, his practicing on men of all
conditions to increase his party* For finding little benefit to redound unto
him by his Letter to the Lord Protector, he sets upon the King himself; and
tells him plainly, that there were many things amiss which required
Reformation. In his Letters unto the King and Council, as he writes to
Bullinger, he had excited them to proceed in the good work which they had
begun; that is to say, that they should so proceed as he had directed. With
Cranmer he is more particular, and tells him in plain terms, That in the
Liturgy of this Church, as then it stood, there remained a whole mass of
Popery, which did not only blemish, but destroy Gods Public Worship. But
fearing he might not edify with the godly King, assisted by so wise a Council,
and such Learned Prelates, he has his Emissaries in the Court, and amongst the
Clergy; his Agents in the City and Country, his Intelligencers (one Monsieur
Nicholas amongst the rest) in the University. All of them active and
industrious to advance his purposes; but none more mischievously practical then
John Alasco, a Polonian born, but a professed Calvian both in Doctrine and Forms
of Worship; who coming out of Poland with a mixed Congregation, under pretense
of being forced to fly their Country for professing the Reformed Religion,
were gratified with the Church of Augustine-Fryers in London for their public
use; and therein suffered to enjoy their own way, both in Worship and
Government, though in both exceeding different from the Rules of this Church.
In many Churches of this Realm the Altars were left standing as in former
times, and in the rest the holy Table was placed Altar-wi^e, at the East End of
the Quire. But by his party in the Court, he procures an Order from the Lords
of the Council, for causing the said Table to be removed, and to be placed in
the middle of the Church or Chancel, like a common Table. It was the usage of
this Church to give the holy Sacrament unto none but such as kneeled at the
participation, according to the pious order of the primitive times. But John
Alasco coming out of Poland, where the Arrians (who deny the Divinity of Christ
our Savior) had introduced the use of ^itting, brought that irreverend custom
into England with him. And not content with giving scandal to this Church by
the use thereof in his own Congreg^tion, he publishes a Pamphlet in defense of
that irreverend and sawey gesture, because most proper for a Supper. The
Liturgy had appointed several Offices for many of the Festivals observed in
the most regular times of Christianity: Some of the Clergy in the Convocation
must be set on work to question the conveniencie, if not the lawfulness of
those observations, considering that all days are alike, and therefore to be
equally regarded in a Church Reformed. And some there were which raised a
scruple touching the words which were prescribed to be used in the delivery of
the Bread and Wine to the Congregation.

5. Not to proceed to more particulars, let it suffice that these Emissaries
did so ply their work, by the continual soliciting of the King, the Council,
and the Convocation, that at the last the Book was brought to a review. The
product or result whereof was the second Liturgy, confirmed in Parliament Anno
5, 6 Edw. 6. By the tenor of which Act it may appear, first, that there was
nothing contained in the said Book, but what was agreeable to the Word of God,
and the Primitive Church, very comfortable to all good people desiring to live
in Christian conversation, and most profitable to the Estate of this Realm. And
secondly, That such doubts as had been raised in the use and exercise thereof,
proceeded rather from the curiosity of the Minister and Mistakers, then of any
other worthy cause. And thereupon we may conclude, that the first Liturgy was
discontinued, and the second superinduced upon it after this review, to give
satisfaction unto Calvin's Cavils, the curiosities of some, and the mistakes of
others of his Friends and Followers. But yet this would nor serve the turn;
they must have all things modelled by the Form of Geneva, or else no quiet to
be had: Which since they could not gain in England, in the Reign of King Edward
(who did not long outlive the settling of the second Liturgy) they are resolved
more eagerly to pursue the project in a Fo^reign Country, during their exile
and affliction in the Reign of Queen Mary. Such of the English as retired to
Embden, Strasburg, Basil, or any other of the Free and Imperial Cities,
observed no Form of Worship in their Public Meetings, but this second
Liturgy. In contrary whereof, such as approved not of that Liturgy when they
were in England, united themselves into a Church or Congregation in the City of
Frankfort, where they set up a mixed Form of their own devising, but such as
carried some resemblance to the Book of England. Whittingham was the first who
took upon himself the charge of this Congregation; which after he resigned to
Knox, as the fitter man to carry on the work intended, who having retired to
Geneva on the death of King Edward, and from thence published some tedious
Pamphlets against the Regiment of Women, and otherwise defamatory of the
Emperor and the Queen of England, was grown exceeding dear to Calvin and the
rest of that Consistory. By his endeavors, and forwardness of too many of the
Congregation, that little which was used of the English Liturgy was quite laid
aside, and all things brought more near the Order which be found at Geneva;
though so much differing from that also, as to entitle Knox for the Author of
it.

6. The noise of this great Innovation brings Gryndal and Chambers from the
Church of Strasburg to set matters right. By whom it was purposed, that the
substance of the English Book being still retained, there might be a
forbearance of some Ceremonies and Offices in it. But Knox and Whittingham were
as much bent against the substance of the Book, as against any of the
Circumstantials and Extrinsecals which belonged unto it. So that no good effect
following on this interposition, the Agents of the Church of Strasburg return
back to their brethren, who by their Letters of the 13 of December expostulate
in vain about it. To put an end to these Disputes, no better way could be
devised by Knox and Whittingham, then to require the countenance of Calvin,
which they thought would carry it. To him they send an Abstract of the Book of
England, that by his positive and determinate Sentence (which they presumed
would be in favor of his own) it might stand or fall. And he returns this
Answer to them, ^
That in the Book of England, as by them described, he had observed many
tolerable Fooleries; that though there was no manifest impiety, yet it wanted
much of that purity which was to be desired in it; and that it contained many
Relicts of the dregs of Popery: and finally, that though it was lawful to begin
with such beggarly Rudiments, yet it behooved the Learned, Godly and Grave
Ministers of Christ, to set forth something more refin^d from Filth and
Rustiness. Which Letter see at large in the first Book of this History, Number
17. This Answer so prevailed upon all his Followers, that they who sometimes
had approved, did now as much dislike the English Liturgy; and those who at
first had conceived a dislike thereof, did afterward grow into an open
detestation of it. In which condition of Affairs, Dr. Richard Cox, Dr. Horn,
and others of great Note and Quality, put themselves also into Frankfort, where
they found all things contrary to their expectation. Cox had been Almoner to
King Edward VI, Chancellor of the University of Oxon, Dean of Westminster, one
that had a chief hand in composing the English Liturgy; which made him very
impatient of such Innovations, amounting to no less then a total rejection of
it, as he found amongst them. By his Authority and appointment, the English
Litany is first read, and afterward the whole Book reduced into use and
practice. Against which when Knox began to rail in a public Sermon, (according
to his wonted custom) he is accused by Cox to the Senate of Frankfort for his
defamatory writings against the Emperor and the Queen of England. Upon the
news whereof, Knox forsakes the Town, retires himself unto his Sanctuary at
Geneva, and thither he is followed by a great part of his Congregation, who
made foul work in England at their coming home.

7. But this about the Liturgy, though it was the greatest, was not the only
quarrel which was raised by the Zuinglian or Calvinian Zealors. The Church
prescribed the use of Surplices in all Sacred Offices, and Coapes in the
officiating at the holy Altar. It prescribed also a distinct habit in the
Clergy from the rest of the people; Roche^s and Chimeres for the Bishops;
Gowns, Tippets, and Canonical Coats for the rest of the Clergy; the square Cap
for all. Their opposition in the use of the Surplice, much confirmed and
countenanced, as well by the writings, as the practice of Peter Martyr; who
kept a constant intercourse with Calvin at his being here. For in his Writings
he declared to a Friend of his, (who required his judgment in the case) that
such Vestments being in themselves indifferent, could make no man godly or
ungodly, either by forbearance or the use thereof; but that* he thought it more
expedient to the good of the Church, that they and all others of that kind
should be taken away, when the next convenient opportunity should present it
self. Which judgment as he grounds upon Calvin's Rule, that nothing should be
acted in a Reformation which is not warranted expressly by the Word of God; so
he adds this to it of his own, that where there is so much contending for these
outward matters, there is but little care of the true Religion. And he assures
us of himself (in point of practice) that though he were a Canon of
Christ-Church, and diligent enough in attending Divine Service as the others
did, yet he could never be persuaded to use that Vestment; which must needs
animate all the rest of the Genevians to forbear it also. The like was done by
John Alasco, in crying down the Regular habit of the Clergy before described.
In which prevailing little by his own authority, he writes to M. Bucer to
declare against it; and for the same was most severely reprehended by that
moderate and learned man, and all his cavils and objections very solidly
answered. Which being sent unto him in the way of a Letter, was afterward
printed and dispersed, for keeping down that opposite humor, which began then
to over-swell the Banks, and threatened to bear all before it. But that which
made the greatest noise, was the carriage of Mr. John Hooper, Lord Elect of
Gloucester, who having lived amongst the Switzers in the time of King Henry,
did rather choose to be denied his Consecration, then to receive it in that
habit which belonged to his Order. At first the Earl of Warwick (who after was
Duke of Northumberland) interceded for him, and afterward drew in the King to
make one in the business. But Cranmer, Ridley, and the rest of the Bishops who
were most concerned, craved leave not to obey His Majesty against his Laws;
and in the end prevailed so far, that Hooper for his contumacy was committed
Prisoner; and from the Prison writes his Letters to Martin Bucer and Peter
Martyr, for their opinion in the case. From the last of which, who had declared
himself no Friend to the English Ceremonies, he might presume of some
encouragement; the rather, in regard that Calvin had appeared on his behalf,
who must needs have a hand in this quarrel also. For understanding how things
went, he writes unto the Duke of Sommerset to atone the difference, not by
persuading Hooper to conform himself to the received Orders of the Church, but
to lend the man a helping hand, by which he might be able to hold out against
all Authority.

8. But Hooper being deserted by the Earl of Warwick, and not daring to rely
altogether upon Calvin's credit, which was unable to support him, submits at
last unto the pleasure of his Metropolitan, and the Rules of the Church. So
that in fine the business was thus compromised; that is to say, That he should
receive his Consecration attired in his Episcopal Robes: That he should be
dispensed withal from wearing them at ordinary times as his daily habits; but
that he should be bound to use them whenever he preached before the King in
his own Cathedral, or any other place of like public nature. According to
which Agreement, being appointed to preach before the King, he showed himself
apparelled in his Bishops Robes; viz. A long Scarlet Chimere reaching down to
the ground for his upper Garment (changed in Queen Elizabeth's time to one of
black Satin) and under that a white linen Rochet, with a Square Cap upon his
head. This Fox reproacheth by the name of a Popish Attire, and makes it to be a
great cause of shame and contumely to that godly man. But notwithstanding the
submission of this Reverend Prelate, too many of the inferior Clergy were not
found so tractable in their conformity to the Cap and Tippet, the Gown, and the
Canonical Coat; the wearing whereof was required of them, whenever they
appeared in public: Being decryed also by Alasco and the rest of the
Zuinglians or Galvinians, as a Superstitions and Popish Attire, altogether as
unfit for Ministers of the holy Gospel, as the Chimere and Rochet were for
those who claimed to be the Successors of the Lords Apostles. So Tyms replied
unto Bishop Gardener, when being asked whether a Coat, with stockins of diverse
colors, were a fit apparel for a Deacon: He sawcily made answer, that his
Vesture did not so much vary from a Deacons, as his Lordships did from that of
an Apostle. Which passage, as well concerning the debates about the Liturgy,
as about the Vestments, I have here abbreviated, leaving the Reader for his
further satisfaction to the History of the Reformation not long since
published, in which they are laid down at large in their times and places.

9. Nor did they work less trouble to the Church in those early days, by their
endeavoring to advance some Zuinglian Doctrines, by which the blame of all
men's sins was either charged upon Gods will, or his Divine Decree of
Predestination. These men are called in Bishop Hooper's Preface to the Ten
Commandments, by the name of Gospellers, for making their new Doctrines such a
necessary part of our Saviors Gospel, as if men could not possibly be saved
without it. These Doctrines they began to propagate in the Reign of King
Edward; but never were so busy at it, as when they lived at Geneva, or came
newly thence. For first, Knox publishes a book against an Adversary of Gods
Predestination; wherein it is declared, That whatsoever the Ethnicks and
ignorant did attribute to Fortune, by Christians is to be assigned to Gods
heavenly Providence: That we ought to judge nothing to come of Fortune, but
that all comes by the determinate counsel of God: And finally, that it would
be displeasing unto God, if we esteem any thing to proceed from any other; and
that we do not only behold him as the principal cause of all things, but also
the Author, appointing all things to one or the other by his only Counsel.
After, came out a book first written in French, and a^terwards by some of them
translated into English, which they called, A brief Declaration of the Table of
Predestination: In which is put down for a principal Aphorism, That in like
manner as God has appointed the end, it is necessary that he should appoint
the causes leading to the same end; but more particularly, That by virtue of
Gods will all things are done, yea, even those things which are evil and
execrable.

10. At the same time came out another of their books, pretended to be writ
Against a privy Papist, as the Title tells us; wherein is maintained more
agreeably to Calvin's Doctrine, That all evil springs of Gods Ordinance, and
that Gods Predestination was the cause of Adams fall, and of all wickedness.
And in a fourth book published by Robert Cowley, who afterward was Rector of
the Church of S. Giles near Cripplegate, entitled, The confutation of Thirteen
Articles; it is said expressly, That Adam being so perfect a creature that there
was in him no lust to sin, and yet so weak, that of himself he was not able to
resist the assault of the subtle Serpent; that therefore there can be no
remedy, but that the only cause of his fall must needs be the Predestination
of God. In which book it is also said, That the most wicked persons that have
been, were of God appointed to be wicked even as they were: That if God do
predestinate a man to do things rashly, and without any deliberation, he shall
not deliberate at all, but run headlong upon it be it good or evil: And in a
word, That we are compelled by Gods Predestination to do those things for which
we are damned. By which Defenders of the absolute Decree of Reprobation, as God
is made to be Author of sin, either in plain terms, or undeniable consequence;
so from the same men, and the Genevian Pamphlets by them dispersed, our English
Calvinists have borrowed all their Grounds and Principles on which they build
the absolute and irrespective Decree of Predestination, contrary to the
Doctrines publicly maintained and taught in the Church of England in the time
of King Edward, and afterward more clearly explicated under Queen Elizabeth.

1550.
11. Such was the posture of affairs at Queen Elizabeth's first coming to the
Crown of England, when to the points before disputed both at home and abroad,
was raised another of more weight and consequence then all the rest; and such,
as (if it could be gained) would bring on the other. Such as had lived in exile
amongst the Zwitzers, or followed Knox at his return unto Geneva, became
exceedingly enamored of Calvin's Platform; by which they found so much Authority
ascribed unto the Ministers in the several Churches, as might make them
absolute and independent, without being called to an account by King or Bishop.
This Discipline they purposed to promote at their coming home; and to that end,
leaving some few behind them to attend the finishing of the Bible with the
Genevian Notes upon it, which was then in the Press, the rest return a main for
England to pursue the Project. But Cox had done their errand before they came;
and she had heard so much from others of their carriage at Frankfort, and their
untractableness in point of Decency and comely Order in the Reign of her
brother, as might sufficiently forewarn her not to hearken to them. Besides,
she was not to be told with what reproaches Calvin had reviled her Sister, nor
how she had been persecuted by his followers in the time of her Reign; some of
them railing at her person in their scandalous Pamphlets; some practicing by
false, but dangerous allusions, to subvert her Government; and others openly
praying to God, That he would either turn her heart, or put an end to her days.
And of these men she was to give her self no hope, but that they would proceed
with her in the self-same manner, whenever any thing should be done (how
necessary and just soever) which might cross their humors. The consideration
whereof was of such prevalency with those of her Council, who were then
deliberating about the altering of Religion, that amongst other remedies which
were wisely thought of to prevent such dangers as probably might ensue upon it,
it was resolved to have an eye upon these men, who were so hot in the pursuit
of their flattering hopes, that out of a desire of Innovation (as my Author
tells me) they were busied at that very time in setting up a new Form of
Ecclesiastical Polity, and therefore were to be suppressed with all care and
diligence before they grew unto a head.

12. But they were men of harder metal then to be broken at the first blow
which was offered at them. Queen Mary's death being certified to those of
Geneva, they presently dispatched their Letters to their Brethren at Frankfort
and Arrow; to which Letters of theirs, an answer is returned from Frankfort on
the third, from Arrow on the 16 of January: And thereupon it is resolved to
prepare for England, before their party was so sunk, that it could not without
much difficulty be buoyed up again. Some of their party which remained all the
time in England, being impatient of delay, and choosing rather to anticipate
then expect Authority, had set themselves on work in defacing Images,
demolishing the Altars; and might have made foul work, if not stopped in time.
Others began as hastily to preach the Protestant Doctrine, in private Houses
first, and afterward as opportunity was offered, in the open Churches: Great
multitudes of people resorting to them without Rule or Order. To give a check
to whose forwardness, the Queen sets out her Proclamation in the end of
December; but which she gave command, That no Innovation should be made in the
State of Religion, and that all persons should conform themselves for the
present to the practices of Her Majesty's Chapel, till it was otherwise
appointed. Another Proclamation was also issued, by which all preaching was
prohibited, but by such only as were licensed by her Authority; which was not
like to countenance any men of such turbulent spirits. The news whereof much
hastened the return of those Zealous Brethren, who knew they might have better
fishing in a troubled water, then in a quiet and composed. Calvin makes use
also of the opportunity, directs his Letters to the Queen and Mr. Secretary
Cecil, in hope that nothing should be done but by his advice. The contrary
whereof gave matter of cold comfort both to him and them, when they were given
to understand, that the Liturgy had been revised and agreed upon: That it was
made more passable then before with the Roman Catholics; and that not any of
their number was permitted to act any thing in it, except Whitehead only, who
was but half theirs neither, and perhaps not that. All they could do in that
Conjuncture, was to find fault with the Translation of the Bible which was then
in use, in hope that their Genevian Edition of it might be entertained; and to
except against the paucity of fit men to serve the Church, and fill the vacant
places of it, on the like hopes that they themselves might be preferred to
supply the same.

13. And it is possible enough, 1559.
that either by the mediation of Calvin, or by the intercession of Peter Martyr
(who wrote unto the Queen at the same time also) the memory of their former
Errors might have been obliterated; if Knox had not pulled more back with one
hand, then Calvin, Martyr and the rest could advance with both. For in a Letter
of his to Sir William Cecil, dated April the 24, 1559, he first upbraids him
with consenting to the suppressing of Christ's true Evangel, to the erecting of
Idolatry, and to the shedding of the blood of Gods most dear children, during
the Reign of Mischievous Mary, that professed Enemy of God, as he plainly calls
her. Then he proceeds to justify his treasonable and seditious book against
the Regiment of Women. Of the truth whereof he positively affirms that he no
more doubts, then that he doubted that was the voice of God which pronounced
this sentence upon that Sex, That in dolor they should bear their children.
Next he declares in reference to the Person of Queen Elizabeth, That he could
willingly acknowledge her to be raised by God, for the manifestation of his
glory, although not Nature only, but Gods own Ordinance did oppugn such
Regiment. And thereupon he does infer, That if Queen Elizabeth would confess,
that the extraordinary Dispensations of Gods great mercy did make that lawful
in her, which both Nature and Gods Laws did deny in all women besides, none in
England should be more ready to maintain her lawful Authority then himself. But
on the other side he pronounces this Sentence on her, That if she built her
Title upon Custom, Laws and Ordinances of men, such foolish presumption would
grievously offend Gods Supreme Majesty, and that her ingratitude in that kind
should not long lack punishment. To the same purpose he writes also to the
Queen Herself, reproaching her withal, That for fear of her life she had
declined from God, bowed to Idolatry, and gone to Mass, during the persecution
of Gods Saints in the time of her Sister. In both his Letters he complains of
some ill offices which had been done him, by means whereof he was denied the
liberty of Preaching in England: And in both Letters he endeavored to excuse
his flock of late assembled in the most godly Reformed Church and City of
Geneva, from being guilty of any offense by his publishing of the book; the
blame whereof he wholly takes upon himself. But this was not the way to deal
with Queens and their Privy Counselors; and did effect so little in relation
to himself and his flock, that he caused a more watchful eye to be kept upon
them, then possibly might have been otherwise, had he scribled less.

14. Yet such was the necessity which the Church was under, that it was hardly
possible to supply all the vacant places in it, but by admitting some of the
Genevian Zealots to the Public Ministry. The Realm had been extremely visited
in the year foregoing with a dangerous and Contagious Sickness, which took away
almost half the Bishops, and occasioned such Mortality amongst the rest of the
Clergy, that a great part of the Parochial Churches were without Incumbents.
The rest of the Bishops, twelve Deans, as many Archdeacons, Fifteen Masters of
Colleges and Halls, Fifty Prebendaries of Cathedral Churches, and about Eighty
Beneficed-men were deprived at once, for refusing to sub^^^^ to the Queens
Supremacy. For the filling of which vacant places though as much care was taken
as could be imagined to stock the Church with moderate and conformable men, yet
many ^ast amongst the rest, who either had not hitherto discovered their
dis-affections, or were connived at in regard of their parts and learning.
Private opinions not regarded, nothing was more considered in them then their
zeal against Popery, and their abilities in Divine and Humane studies to make
good that zeal. On which account we find the Queens-Professor in Oxford to pass
amongst the Non-Conformists, though somewhat more moderate then the rest; and
Cartwright the Lady Margarets in Cambridge, to prove an unextinguished
firebrand to the Church of England; Wittingham the chief Ringleader of the
Frankfort-Schismaticks, preferred unto the Deanery of Durham, from thence
encouraging Knox and Goodman in setting up Presbytery and sedition in the Kirk
of Scotland. Sampson advanced unto the Deanery of Christ-Church, and not long
after turned out again for an incorrigible Nonconformist. Hardiman, one of the
first twelve Prebends of Westminster, deprived soon after, for throwing down
the Altar, and defacing the Vestments of the Church. And if so many of them
were advanced to places of note and eminence, there is no question to be made,
but that some numbers of them were admitted unto Countrey-Cures; by means
whereof, they had as great an opportunity as they could desire, not only to
dispute their Genevian Doctrines, but to prepare the people committed to them
for receiving of such Innovations both in Worship and Government, as were
resolved in time convenient to be put upon them.

15. For a preparative whereunto, 1560.
they brought along with them the Genevian Bible, with their Notes upon it,
together with David's Psalms in English meter; that by the one they might effect
an Innovation in the points of Doctrine, and by the other bring this Church
more near to the Rules of Geneva in some chief acts of Public Worship. For to
omit the incongruities of the Translation, which King James judged to be the
worst that he had ever seen in the English Tongue, the Notes upon the same in
many places savor of Sedition, and in some of Faction, destructive of the
Persons and Powers of Kings, and of all civil intercourse and humane society.
That Learned King has told us in the Conference at Hampton Court, that the
Notes on the Genevian Bible were partial, untrue, seditious, and savouring too
much of dangerous and traiterous conceits. For proof whereof he instanced in
the Note of Exodus 1. v. 19. where they allow of disobedience unto Kings and
Sovereign Princes: And secondly, in that on 2 Chronicles. 8.15, 16. where Asa is
taxed for not putting his Mother to death, but deposing her only from the
Regency which before she executed. Of which last note the Scottish Presbyterians
made especial use, not only in deposing Mary their lawful Queen, but
prosecuting her openly and underhand till they had took away her life. And to
this too he might have added that on Matthew. 2.12. where it is said, that
Promise ought not be kept where Gods honor and preaching of his truth is
hindered, or else it ought not to be broken. Which opens a wide gap to the
breach of all Oaths, Covenants, Contracts and Agreements, not only between man
and man, but between Kings and their Subjects. For what man can be safe, or
King secure; what Promise can oblige, or what Contract bind; or what Oath tie a
man to his Faith and duty, if on pretense of Gods honor, or the propagating of
his truth, he may lawfully break it? And yet this Doctrine passed so currantly
amongst the French, that it was positively affirmed by Eusebius Philadelphus,
whosoever he was, That Queen Elizabeth was no more bound to keep the League
which she had made and sworn with Charles IX, (because forsooth the preaching
of the Gospel might be hindered by it) then Herod was obliged to keep the Oath
which he had sworn to the Dancing-Harlot. Follow them to Rev. 9. and they will
tell us in their Notes upon that Chapter, that by the Locusts which came out of
the smoke, are meant false Teachers, Heretics, and worldly subtle Prelates,
with Monks, Friars, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Doctors,
Batchelors and Masters. To which though they subjoyn these words, viz. Which
forsake Christ to maintain false Doctrine; yet lays it a disgrace on all
Archbishops and Bishops, and on all such as take Academical degrees, by
bringing them under the name of Locusts, and joining them with Monks and
Friars, whom they beheld no otherwise then as Limbs of Antichrist. Which being
the design of their Annotations, agreeable to Calvin's Doctrine in reference to
Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, there is no doubt but that they come up
roundly to him in reference to Predestination, and the points appendant: for
which I shall refer the Reader to the Notes themselves; observing only in this
place, that they exclude Christ and all his sufferings from being any way
considerable in man's Election, which they found only on the absolute will and
pleasure of Almighty God, but are content to make him an inferior cause (and
only an inferior cause) of a man's salvation: For which consult them on Rom
9.15.

16. Now with this Bible, and these Notes, which proved so advantageous to them
in their main projectments, they also brought in David's Psalms in English
meter, of which they served themselves to some tune in the time succeeding.
Which device being first taken up by Clement Marot, and continued afterward by
Beza, as before is said, was followed here in England by Thomas Sternhold in
the Reign of King Edward, and afterward by John Hopkins and some others, who
had retired unto Geneva in the time of Queen Mary. Being there finished, and
printed at the end of their Bibles, they were first recommended to the use of
private Families; next brought into the Church for an entertainment before the
beginning of the Morning and Evening Service: And finally, published by
themselves, or at the end of the Psalter, with this Declaration, that they were
set forth and allowed to be sung in all Churches before and after Morning and
Evening Prayer, as also before and after Sermons. But first, no such allowance
can be found as is there pretended, nor could be found when this allowance was
disputed in the High Commission, by such as have been most industrious and
concerned in the search thereof. And then whereas it is pretended that the said
Psalms should be sung before and after Morning and Evening Prayer, as also
before and after Sermons (which shows they were not to be intermingled with the
Public Liturgy) in very little time they prevailed so far in most
Parish-Churches, as to thrust out the Te Deum, and the Benedicite, the
Benedictus, the Magnificat, and the Nunc Dimittis quite out of the Church. And
thirdly, by the practices and endeavors of the Puritan party (who had an eye
upon the usage of Geneva) they came to be esteemed the most Divine part of Gods
public service; the reading Psalms, together with the first and second
Lessons, being heard in many places with a covered head; but all men sitting
bare-headed when the Psalm is sung. And to that end, the Parish-Clerk must be
taught to call upon the people to sing it to the Praise and Glory God; no such
preparatory Exhortation being used at the naming of the Chapters or the daily
Psalms.

17. By these preparatives they hoped in time to bring in the whole body of
Calvinism, as well in reference to Government, and forms of Worship, as to
points of Doctrine. But then they were to stay their time, and not to show too
much at once of the main design, but rather to divert on some other counsels.
The Liturgy was so well fortified by the Law, and the Bishops so settled in
their jurisdictions, that it had been a madness to attempt on either, till they
should find themselves increased both in power and number, and that they had
some Friend in Court not only to excuse, but defend their actions. In which
respect, nothing seemed more expedient to them, then to revive the Quarrels of
King Edwards time about Caps and Tippets, and other Vestments of the Clergy
which had not the like Countenance from the Laws of the Land. In which as they
assured themselves of all help from the hands of Peter Martyr, so they
despaired not of obtaining the like from Calvin and Beza, whenever it should
be required. But as one Wave thrusts another forwards, so this dispute brings
in some others, in which the judgment of Peter Martyr was demanded also; that
is to say, concerning the Episcopal Habit, the Patrimony of the Church, the
manner of proceedings to be held against Papists, the Perambulation used in the
Rogation-Week; with many other points of the like condition. Which Quarrels
they pursued for five years together, till the settling of that business by the
Book of Advertisements, Anno 1565. They also had begun to raise their thoughts
unto higher matters then Caps and Tippets: In order whereunto, some of them
take upon them in their private Parishes, to ordain set Fasts; and others, to
neglect the observation of the Annual Festivals which were appointed by the
Church; some to remove the holy Table from the place of the Altar, and to
transpose it to the middle of the Quire or Chancel, that it might serve the
more conveniently for the posture of sitting; and others, by the help of some
silly Ordinaries, to impose Books of Foreign Doctrine on their several
Parishes; that by such Doctrine they might countenance their Actings in the
other particulars. All which, with many other innovations of the like
condition, were presently took notice of by the Bishops, and the rest of the
Queens Commissioners; and remedies provided for them in a book of Orders,
published in the year 1561; or the Advertisements before mentioned, about four
years after. Such as proceeded in their oppositions after these Advertisements,
had the name of Puritans; as men that did profess a greater Purity in the
Worship of God, a greater detestation of the Ceremonies and Corruptions of the
Church of Rome, then the rest of their brethren: under which name were
comprehended, not only those which hitherto had opposed the Churches
Vestments, but also such as afterward endeavored to destroy the Liturgy, and
subvert the Government.

18. In all this time they could obtain no countenance from the hands of this
State, though it was once endeavored for them by the Earl of Leicester (whom
they had gained to their Patron.) But it was only to make use of them as a
counterpoise to the Popish party, at such time as the Marriage was in agitation
between the Lord Henry Stewart and the Queen of Scots, if any thing should be
attempted by them to disturb the Kingdom; the fears whereof, as they were only
taken up upon politic ends, so the intended favors to the opposite Faction
vanished also wi^h them. But on the contrary, we find the State severe enough
against their proceedings, even to the deprivation of Dr. Thomas Sampson, Dean
of Christ-church. To which dignity he had been unhappily preferred in the first
year of the Queen; and being looked upon as head of this Faction, was worthily
deprived thereof by the Queens Commissioners. They found by this severity what
they were to trust to, if any thing were practiced by them against the Liturgy,
the Doctrine of the Church, or the public Government. It cannot be denied, but
Goodman, Gilbie, Whittingham, and the rest of the Genevian Conventicle, were
very much grieved, at their return, that they could not bear the like sway here
in their several Consistories, as did Calvin and Beza at Geneva; so that they
not only repined and grudged at the Reformation which was made in this Church,
because not fitted to their Fancies, and to Calvin's Platform; but have
labored to sow those Seeds of Heterodoxy and Disobedience, which afterward
brought forth those troubles and disorders which ensued upon it. But being too
wise to put their own Fingers in the fire, they presently fell upon a course
which was sure to speed, without producing any danger to themselves or their
party. They could not but remember those many advantages which John Alasco and
his Church of strangers afforded to the Zuinglian Gospellers, in the time of
King Edward; and they despaired not of the like, nor of greater neither, if a
French Church were settled upon Calvin's Principles in some part of London.

19. For the advancement of this project, Calvin directs his Letters unto
Bishop Grindal, newly preferred unto that See, that by his countenance or
connivance, such of the French Nation as for their Conscience had been forced
to flee into England, might be permitted the Free Exercise of their Religion:
whose leave being easily obtained, for the great reverence which he bares to
the name of Calvin, they made the like use of some Friends which they had in
the Court. By whose solicitation they procured the Church of St. Anthony, not
far from Merchant-taylors-Hall, then being of no present use for Religious
Offices, to be assigned unto the French, with liberty to erect the Genevian
Discipline, for ordering the Affairs of their Congregation, and to set up a
Form of Prayer which had no manner of conformity with the English Liturgy.
Which what else was it in effect, but a plain giving up of the Cause at the
first demand, which afterward was contended for with such opposition? what
else but a Foundation to that following Anarchy which was designed to be
obtruded on the Civil Government? For certainly, the tolerating of Presbytery
in a Church founded and established by the Rules of Episcopacie, could end in
nothing but the advancing of a Commonwealth in the midst of a Monarchy. Calvin
perceived this well enough, and thereupon gave Grindal thanks for his favor in
it, of whom they after served themselves upon all occasions; a Dutch-Church
being after settled on the same Foundation in the Augustine Friars, where John
Alasco held his Congregation in the Reign of King Edward. The inconveniences
whereof were not seen at the first; and when they were perceived, were not
easily remedied. For the obtaining of which ends, there was no man more like to
serve them with the Queen, then Sir Francis Knollis; who having Married a
Daughter of the Lord Carry of Hunsdon, the Queens Cosin-German, was made
Comptroller of the Household, continuing in good Credit and Authority with her
upon that account. And being also one of those who had retired from Frankfort
to Geneva in the time of the Schism, did there contract a great acquaintance
with Calvin, Beza, and the rest of the Consistorians, whose cause he managed at
the Court upon all occasions; though afterward he gave place to the Earl of
Leicester, as their Principal Agent.

20. But the Genevians will find work enough to employ them both; and having
gained their ends, will put on for more. The Isles of Guernsey and Iarsey, the
only remainder of the Crown of England in the Dukedom of Normandy, had
entertained the Reformation in the Reign of King Edward; by whose command the
public Liturgy had been turned into French, that it might serve them in those
Islands for their Edifications. But the Reformed Religion being suppressed in
the time of Queen Mary, revived again immediately after her decease, by the
diligence of such French Ministers as had resorted thither for protection in
the day of their troubles. In former times these Islands belonged unto the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Constance, who had in each of them a Subordinate
Officer, mixed of a Chancellor and Arch^ Deacon, for the dispatch of all such
business as concerned the Church: which Officers entitled by the name of
Deans, had a particular Revenue in Tithes and Corn allotted to them, besides
the Perquisites of their Courts, and the best Benefices in the Islands. But
these French Ministers desiring to have all things modelled by the Rules of
Calvin, endeavored by all the Friends they could to advance his Discipline; to
which they were encouraged by the brothers here, and the Governors there. The
Governors in each Island advanced the project, out of a covetous intent to
enrich themselves by the spoil of the Deanries; the brethren have hereupon a
hope to gain ground by little and little, for the erecting of the same in most
parts of England. And in pursuance of this plot, both Islands join in
confederacy to petition the Queen for an allowance of this Discipline, Anno
1563. In the year next following, the Signiour de St. Owen and Monsieur de
Soulemount were delegated to the Court to solicit in it; where they received
a gracious answer, and full of hopes returned to their several homes. In the
mean time, the Queen being strongly persuaded that this design would much
advance the Reformation in those Islands, was contented to give way unto it, in
the Towns of St. Peter's Port and St. Hillaries only, but no further. To which
purpose there were Letters decretory from the Council, directed to the Bailiff,
the Iurates, and others of each Island; subscribed by Bacon Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal; the Marquess of Northampton; the Earl of Leicester; the Lord
Clynton, afterward Earl of Lincoln; Rogers, Knollis and Cecil. The Tenor of
which Letter in relation to the Isle of Iarsey, was this that follows.

21. After our very hearty commendations unto you; where the Queens most
excellent Majesty understands, that the Isles of Guernsey and Jarsey have
anciently depended on the Diocese of Constance, and that there be certain
Churches in the same Diocese well reformed, agreeable throughout in the
Doctrine as is set forth in this Realm; knowing therewith, that they have a
Minister, which ever since his arrival in Jarsey has used the like Order of
Preaching and Administration, as in the said reformed Churches, or as it is
used in the French Church of London: her Majesty, for diverse respects and
considerations moving her Highness, is well pleased to admit the same Order of
Preaching and Administration to be continued at St. Hillaries, as has been
hitherto accustomed by the said Minister. Provided always, that the residue of
the Parishes in the said Isle, shall diligently put aside all superstitions
used in the said Diocese; and so continue there the Order of Service ordained
within this Realm, with the Injunctions necessary for that purpose. Wherein you
may not fail diligently to give your aids and assistance, as best may serve for
the advancement of Gods Glory. And so farewell. From Richmond the 7 of August,
Anno 1565.

22. Where note, that the same Letter, the names only of the places being
changed, and subscribed by the same men, was sent also unto those of Guernsey,
for the permission of the said Discipline in the Port of St. Peter's. In which,
though there be no express mention of allowing their Discipline, but only of
their Form of Prayer and Administration of Sacraments; yet they presumed so far
on the general words, as to put it presently in practice. In prosecution of
which Counsels, the Ministers and Elders of both Churches held their first
Synod in the Isle of Guernsey, on the 2 of September, Anno 1567, where they
concluded to advance it by degrees in all the rest of the Parishes, as
opportunity should serve, and the condition of Affairs permit: to the great
joy, no question, of their great Friends in England, who could not but
congratulate their own good Fortune in these fair beginnings.

23. At home they found not such success as they did abroad; 1566.
not a few of them being deprived of their Benefices, and other preferments in
the Church, for their inconformity, expressed in their refusing to officiate by
the public Liturgy, or not submitting to the directions of their Ordinaries in
some outward matters, as Caps and Surplices, and the like. The news of which
severity flies to France and Scotland; occasioning Beza in the one, and Knox
and his Comrades in the other, to interpose themselves in behalf of their
brethren. With what Authority Beza acted in it, we shall see anon. And we may
now take notice, that in Knoxes Letter, sent from the general Assembly of the
Kirk of Scotland, the Vestments in dispute are not only called Trifles and
Rags of Rome, but are discountenanced and decryed, for being such Garments as
Idolaters in time of greatest darkness, used in their Superstitious and
idolatrous service: and thereupon it is inferred, That if Surplice, Cap and
Tippet have been badges of Idolaters in the very act of their Idolatry, that
then the Preachers of Christian Liberty, and the Rebukers of Superstition, were
to have nothing to do with the dregs of that Romish beast. Which inference is
seconded by this Request, viz. That the Brethren in England which refused those
Romish Rags, might find of them (the Bishops) who use and urge them, such
favor, as their Head and Master commands each one of his Members to show to
another. And this they did expect to receive of their courtesy, not only
because they hoped that they, the said Bishops, would not offend God in
troubling their Brethren for such Vain trifles; but because they hoped that
they would not refuse the request of them, their Brethren and fellow-Ministers;
in whom, though there appeared no worldly Pomp, yet they assured themselves,
that they were esteemed the servants of God, and such as traveled to set forth
Gods Glory against the Antichrist of Rome, that conjured enemy of true
Religion, the Pope. The days, say they, are evil, iniquity abounds, charity
(alas) waxes cold; and therefore that it concerned them all to walk
diligently, because it was uncertain at what hour the Lord would come, to whom
they were to render an account of their Administration. After which Apostolical
Admonition, they commit them to the Mighty protection of the Lord Jesus Christ.
And so we conclude their Zealous Letter, dated December 27. 1566.

24. With more Authority writes Beza, as the greater Patriarch; and he writes
too concerning things of greater consequence then Caps and Surplices. For in a
Letter of his to Grindal, bearing date July, anno 1566, he makes a sad
complaint concerning certain Ministers, unblameable (as he says) both in life
and Doctrine, suspended from the Ministry by the Queens Authority, and the
good liking of the Bishops, for not subscribing to some new Rites and
Ceremonies imposed upon them. Amongst which Rites, he specifies the wearing of
such Vestments as were then worn by Baals Priests in the Church of Rome; the
Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the Communion, and such Rites, as had degenerated
(as he tell us) into most filthy Superstition. But he seems more offended, that
Women were suffered to baptize in extreme necessities: That power was granted
to the Queen for ordaining such other Rites and Ceremonies as should seem
convenient; but most especially, (which was indeed the point most grieved at)
that the Bishops were invested with a sole Authority for all matters of the
Church without consulting with the Pastors of particular flocks. He was too
well versed in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers, as not to know that all the
things which he complains of, were approved and practiced in the best and
happiest times of Christianity; as might be otherwise made apparent out of the
Writings of Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierome, Chrysostom; and indeed who not? But
Beza has a word for this. For first he blames the Ancient Fathers for borrowing
many of their Ceremonies from the Jews and Gentiles, though done by them out of
a good and honest purpose; that being all things to all men, they might gain
the more. And thereupon he gives this Rule, That all such Rites as had been
borrowed either from the Jew or Gentile without express Warrant from Christ or
the holy Apostles, as also all other significant Ceremonies, which had been
brought into the Church against right and reason, should be immediately
removed, or otherwise the Church could never be restored to her Native Beauty.
Which Rule of his, if once admitted, there must be presently an end of all
external Decency and Order in the Worship of God, and every man might be left
to serve him, both for time and place, and every particular circumstance in
that Sacred action, as to him seemed best. And what a horrible confusion must
needs grow thereby, not only in a whole National Church, but in every
particular Congregation, be it never so small, is no hard matter to conceive.

25. At the Reforming of this Church, not only the Queens Chapel, and all
Cathedrals, but many Parochial Churches also had preserved their Organs; to
which they used to sing the appointed Hymns; that is to say, the Te Deum, the
Benedictus, the Magnificat, the Nunc Dimittis, etc. performed in an Artificial
and Melodious manner, with the addition of Cornets, Sackbuts, and the like, on
the Solemn Festivals. For which as they had ground enough from the holy
Scripture, if the Practice and Authority of David be of any credit; so were
they warranted thereunto by the godly usage of the primitive times, after the
Church was once restored to her peace and freedom. Certain I am, that S.
Augustine imputes no small part of his Conversion to that heavenly Melody
which he heard very frequently in the Church of M^llaine, Ut si (...) ad can
(...) etc Confess. lib.
professing that it did not only draw tears from him, though against his will,
but raised his soul unto a sacred Meditation on spiritual matters. But Beza
having turned so many of the Psalms into meter, as had been left undone by
Marot, gave an example unto Sternhold and Hopkins to attempt the like. Whose
Version being left unfinished, but brought unto an end by some of our English
Exiles which remained at U^ per obl^c^^e (...)git ar^^u^. ad pletatis assert^^
Conf. lib.
Geneva; there was a purpose for imposing them upon the Church by little and
little, that they might come as close as might be in all points to their
Mother-City. At first, they sung them only in their private houses, and
afterward (as beforesaid) adventured to sing them also in the Church, as in
the way of entertainment, to take up the time till the beginning of the
Service, and afterward to sing them as a part of the Service it self. For so I
understand that passage in the Church Historian, in which he tells us, That Dr.
Gervis being then Warden of Merton College, had abolished certain Latin
superstitious Hymns which had been used on some of the Festivals, appointing
the Psalms in English to be sung in their place; and that as one Leech was
ready to begin the Psalm, another of the Fellows called Hall, snatched the book
out of his hands, and told him, That they could no more dance after his pipe.
But whatsoever Hall thought of them, Beza and his Disciples were persw^ded
otherwise. And that he might the better cry down that Melodious Harmony which
was retained in the Church of England, and so make way for the Genevian fashion
even in that point also; he tells us in the same Letter to Bishop Gryndal, That
the Artificial Music then retained in the Church of England, was fitter to be
used in Masks and Dancings, then Religious Offices; and rather served to please
the ear, then to move the affections. Which censure being passed upon it by so
great a Rabby, most wonderful it was how suddenly some men of good note and
quality, who otherwise deserved well enough of the Church of England, did bend
their wits and pens against it; and with what earnestness they labored to have
their own Tunes publicly introduced into all the Churches. Which that they
might the better do, they procured the Psalms in English meter to be bound in
the same Volume with the Public Liturgy, and sometimes with the Bible also;
setting them forth, as being allowed (so the Title tells us) to be sung in all
Churches before and after Morning and Evening Prayer, as also before and after
Sermons; but with what truth and honesty, we have heard before.

16. In fin^, he tells the Bishops how guilty they would seem to God and his
h^ly Angels, if they choose rather to deprive the Ministers of their Cures and
Benefices, then suffer them to go apparelled otherwise then to them seemed
good: And rather to deprive many hungry souls of their heavenly food, then give
them leave to receive it otherwise then upon their knees. And this being said,
he questions the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate, as contrary to the Word
of God, and the Ancient Canons, for ordaining any new Rites and Ceremonies in a
Church established; but much more the Authority ascribed to Bishops, in
ordering any thing which concerned the Church, without calling the Presbytery
to advise about it, and having their approbation in it. This was indeed the
point most aimed at. And to this point his followers take the courage to drive
on amain; the Copies of this Letter being presently dispersed for their greater
comfort, if not also printed. Some of the brethren, in their zeal to the name
of Calvin, preferred him once before S. Paul; and Beza out of question would
have took it ill, if he had been esteemed of less Authority then any of those
who claimed to be Successors to S. Peter. And therefore it were worth the while
to compare the Epistles of these men, with those of Pope Leo; and then to enter
seriously into consideration, whether of the two took more upon him; either
Pope Leo, where he might pretend to some command; or Beza, where he had no
authority to act at all. How much more moderate and discreet were the most
eminent men for Learning amongst the Zwitzers, may appear by the example of
Gualter and Bullinger, no way inferior unto the other, but in Pride and
Arrogance; who being desired by some of the English Zealots to give their
judgment in the point of the Churches Vestments, returned their approbation of
them; but sent it in a Letter directed to Horn, Sandys and Grindal, to let them
see, that they would not intermeddle in the affairs of this Church without
their privity and advice. Which whether it were done with greater Moderation or
Discretion, it is hard to say.

1567.
27. So good a Foundation being laid, the building could not choose but go on
apace. But first they must prepare the matter, and remove all doubts which
otherwise might interrupt them in the course of their building. And herein Beza
is consulted as the Master-Workman. To him they send their several scruples;
and he returns such answer to them, as did not only confirm them in their
present obstinacy, but fitted and prepared them for the following Schism. To
those before, they add the calling of the Ministers, and their ordaining by the
Bishops; neither the Presbytery being consulted, nor any particular place
appointed for their Ministration. Which he condemns as contrary to the Word of
God and the ancient Canons; but so, that he conceives it better to have such a
Ministry, then none at all; praying withal, that God would give this Church a
more lawful Ministry (the Church was much beholding to him for his zeal the
while) in his own good time. Concerning the Interrogatories proposed to Infants
in their Baptism, he declares it to be only a corruption of the ancient Form,
which was used in the baptizing persons of riper years. And thereupon desires
as heartily as before, That as the Church had laid aside the use of Oil, and
the old Rite of Exorcising, though retained at Rome; so they would also
abdicate those foolish and unnecessary Interrogations which are made to
Infan^^. And yet he could not choose but vaunt, that there was somewhat in one
of S. Augustines Epistles which might seem to favor it; and that such
question^ were proposed to Infants in the time of Origin, who lived above Two
hundred years before S. Augustine. In some Churches, and particularly in
Westminster-Abbey, they still retained the use of Wafers made of bread
unleavened; to which we can find nothing contrary in the Publik Rubricks. This
he acknowledges of it self for a thing indifferent; but so, that ordinary
leavened bread is preferred before it, as being more agreeable to the
Institution of our Lord and Savior. And yet he could not choose but grant, that
Christ administered the Sacrament in unleavened bread, no other being to be used
by the Law of Moses at the time of the Passover. He dislikes also the deciding
of Civil causes (by which he means those of Tithes, Marriages, and the
Last-Wills or Testaments of men deceased) in the Bishops Courts; but more, that
the Bishops Chancellors did take upon them to decree any Excommunication
without the approbation and consent of the Presbyters. Whose acts therein, he
Majestically pronounces to be void and null, not to oblige the Conscience of
any man in the sight of God; and otherwise, to be a foul and shameful
profanation of the Churches Censures.

28. To other of their Queries, Touching the Music in the Church; Kneeling at
the Communion; The Cross in Baptism, and the rest: He answers as he did before,
without remitting any thing of his former censure. Which Letter of his, bearing
date on the 24 of October, 1567. was superscribed, Ad quosdam Anglicanum
Ecclesiarum fratres, etc. To certain of the brethren of the Churches in
England, touching some points of Ecclesiastical Order and concernment which
were then under debate: by the receiving whereof, they found themselves so
fully satisfied and encouraged, that they fell into an open Schism in the year
next following. 1568.
At which time Benson, Button, Hallingham, Coleman, and others, taking upon
them to be of a more Ardent zeal then others in professing the true Reformed
Religion, resolved to allow of nothing in Gods Public Service (according to
the Rules laid down by Calvin and Beza) but what was found expressly in the holy
Scriptures. And whether out of a desire of Reformation (which pretense had
gilded many a rotten post) or for singularity sake and Innovation, they openly
questioned the received Discipline of the Church of England; yea, condemned the
same, together with the Public Liturgy, and the Calling of Bishops, as
savouring too much of the Religion of the Church of Rome. Against which they
frequently protested in their Pulpits; affirming, That it was an impious thing
to hold any correspondency with the Church; and laboring with all diligence to
bring the Church of England to a Conformity in all points with the Rules of
Geneva. These, although the Queen commanded to be laid by the heels, yet it is
incredible how upon a sudden their followers increased in all parts of the
Kingdom; distinguished from the rest by the name of Puritans, by reason of
their own perverseness* and most obstinate refusal to give ear to more sound
advice. Their numbers much increased on a double account; first, by the
negligence of some, and the connivance of other Bishops, who should have looked
more narrowly into their proceedings: And partly, by the secret favor of some
great men in the Court, who greedily gaped after the Remainder of the Churches
Patrimony.

29. It cannot be denied, but that this Faction received much encouragement
underhand, from some great persons near the Queen; from no man more then from
the Earl of Leicester, the Lord North, Knollis and Walsingham; who knew how
mightily some numbers of the Scots, both Lords and Gentlemen, had in short time
improved their fortune, by humoring the Knoxian Brethren in their Reformation;
and could not but expect the like in their own particulars, by a compliance
with those men, who aimed apparently at the ruin of the Bishops and Cathedral
Churches. But then it must be granted also, that they received no sma^l
encouragement from the negligence and remissness of some great Bishops, whom
Calvin and Beza ^ad cajoled to a plain connivance. Of Calvin's writing unto
Grindal for setting up a French Church in the middle of London, we have seen
before. And we have seen how Beza did address himself unto him, in behalf of
the Brethren who had suffered for their inconformity to established Orders. But
now he takes notice of the Schism, a manifest defection of some members from
the rest of the body; but yet he cannot choose but tamper with him to allow
their doings, or otherwise to mitigate the rigor of the Laws in force. For
having first besprinkled him with some commendation for his zeal to the Gospel,
and thanked him for his many favors to the new French Church, he begins
roundly, in plain terms, to work him to his own persuasions. He lays before him
first, how great an obstacle was made in the course of Religion, by those
petite differences; not only amongst weak and ignorant, but even Learned men.
And then advises that some speedy remedy be applied to so great a mischief, by
calling an Assembly of such Learned and Religious men as were least
contentious; of which he hoped to be the chief, if that work went forwards:
With this Proviso notwithstanding, That nothing should be ordered and
determined by them, with reference unto Ancient or Modern usages; but that all
Popish Rites and Ceremonies being first abolished, they should proceed to the
Establishment of such a Form of Ministration in the Church of England, as might
be grounded on some express Authorities of the Word of God. Which as he makes
to be a work agreeable unto Grindals piety; so Grindal after this (and this
bears date in July 1568) appeared more favorable every day then other to those
common Barretters, who used their whole endeavors to embroyl the Church.

30. Nor were these years less fatal to the Church of England, by the defection
of the Papists, who till this time had kept themselves in her Communion, and
did in general as punctually attend all Divine Offices in the same, as the
vulgar Protestants. And it is probable enough, that they might have held out
longer in their due obedience, if first, the scandal which was given by the
other Faction, and afterward the separation which ensued upon it, had not took
them off. The Liturgy of the Church had been exceedingly well fitted to their
approbation, by leaving out an offensive passage against the Pope; restoring
the old Form of words, accustomably used in the participation of the holy
Sacrament; the total expunging of a Rubric, which seemed to make a Question of
the Real presence; the Situation of the holy-Table in the place of the Altar;
the Reverend posture of kneeling at it, or before it, by all Communicants; the
retaining of so many of the ancient Festivals; and finally, by the Vestments
used by the Priest or Minister in the Ministration. And so long as all things
continued in so good a posture, they saw no caus^ of separating from the rest
of their Brethren in the acts of Worship. But when all decency and order was
turned out of the Church, by the heat and indiscretion of these new Reformers;
the holy-Table brought into the midst of the Church like a common-Table; the
Communicants in some places sitting at it with as little Reverence as at any
ordinary Table; the ancient Fasts and Feasts deserted, and Church-Vestments
thrown aside, as the remainders of the Superstition of the Church of Rome: they
then began visibly to decline from their first conformity. And yet they made no
general separation, nor defection neither, till the Genevian brethren had first
made the Schism, and rather chose to meet in Barns and Woods, yea, and common
Fields, then to associate with their brethren, as in former times. For, that
they did so, is affirmed by very good Authors, who much bemoaned the sad
condition of the Church, in having her bowels torn in pieces by those very
Children which she had cherished in her bosom. By one of which, who must needs
be of years and judgment at the time of this Schism, we are first told what
great contentions had been raised in the first ten years of her Majesty's
Reign, through the peevish frowardness, the outcries of such as came from
Geneva against the Vestments of the Church, and such like matters. And then he
adds, That being crossed in their desires touching those particulars, they
separated from the rest of their Congregations; and meeting together in Houses,
Woods, and common Fields, kept there their most unlawful and disorderly
Conventicles.

31. Now at such time as Button, Billingham, and the rest of the Puritan
Faction had first made the Schism, Harding and Sanders, and some others of the
Popish Fugitives, employed themselves as busily in persuading those of that
Religion to the like temptation: For being licensed by the Pope to exercise
Episcopal jurisdiction in the Realm of England, they take upon them to absolve
all such in the Court of Conscience, who should return to the Communion of the
Church of Rome; as also to dispense in Causes of irregularity, except it were
incurred by wilful murder; and finally, from the like irregularities incurred
by Heresy, if the party who desired the benefit of the Absolution, abstained
from Ministering at the holy Altar for three years together. By means whereof,
and the advantages before mentioned which were given them by the Puritan
Faction, they drew many to them from the Church, both Priests and People; their
numbers every day increasing, as the scandal did. And finding how the Sectaries
enlarged their numbers by erecting a French Church in London, and that they
were now upon the point of procuring another for the use and comfort of the
Dutch; they thought it no ill piece of Wisdom to attempt the like in some
convenient place near England, where they might train up their Disciples, and
fit them for employment upon all occasions. Upon which ground, a Seminary is
established for them at Doway in Flanders, Anno 1568; and another not long
after at Rhemes a City of Champaigne in the Realm of France. Such was the
benefit which redounded to the Church of England by the perverseness of the
Brethren of this first separation, that it occasioned the like Schism betwixt
her and the Papists, who till that time had kept themselves in her Communion,
as before was said. For that the Papists generally did frequent the Church in
these first ten years, is positively affirmed by Sir Edward Coke in his Speech
at the Arraignment of Garnet the Jesuit, and afterward at the Charge which was
given by him at the general Assizes held in Norwich. In both which he speaks on
his own certain knowledge, not on vulgar hearsay; affirming more particularly,
that ^e had many times seen Bedenfield, Cornwallis, and some other of the
Leading Romanists, at the Divine Service of the Church, who afterward were the
first that departed from it. The like averred by the most Learned Bishop
Andrews, in his Book called Tortura Torti, p. 130. and there asserted
undeniably against all opposition. And which may serve instead of all, we find
the like affirmed also by the Queen her self, in her Instructions given to
Walsingham, then being her Resident with the French King, Anno 1570. In which
Instructions, bearing date on the 11 of August, it is affirmed expressly of the
Heads of that party, and therefore we may judge the like of the Members also,
that they did ordinarily resort, from the beginning of her Reign, in all open
places, to the Churches, and to Divine Service in the Church, without any
contradiction, or show of misliking.

32. The parallel goes further yet. For as the Puritans were encouraged to this
separation by the Missals and Decretory Letters of Theodore Beza, 1569.
whom they beheld as the chief Patriarch of this Church: So were the Papists
animated to their defection by a Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth, whom they
acknowledged most undoubtedly for the Head of theirs. For the Pope being thrust
on by the importunity of the House of Guise, in favor of the Queen of Scots,
whose Title they preferred before that of Elizabeth; and by the Court of
France, in hatred to the Queen her self, for aiding the French Hugonots against
their King, was drawn at last to issue out this Bull against her, dated at Rome
Feb. 24. 1569. In which Bull he does not only Excommunicate her person,
deprive her of her Kingdoms, and absolve all her Subjects from their Oaths of
Allegiance; but commands all her Subjects, of what sort soever, not to obey her
Laws, Injunctions, Ordinances or Acts of State. The Defection of the Papists
had before been voluntary, but is now made necessary; the Popes command being
superadded to the scandal which had before been given them by the Puritan
Faction. For after this, the going or not going to Church was commonly reputed
by them for a sign distinctive, by which a Roman Catholic might be known from
an English Heretic. And this appears most plainly by the Preamble to the Act
of Parliament against bringing or executing of Bulls from Rome, 13 Eliz. 2.
Where it is reckoned amongst the effects of those Bulls and Writings, That
those who brought them, did by their lewd practices and subtle persuasions
work so farforth, that sundry people, and ignorant persons have been contented
to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and to have withdrawn and absented
themselves from all Divine Service, most godlily exercised in this Realm. By
which it seems, that till the roaring of those Bulls, those of the Popish party
did frequent the Church, though not so generally in the last five years (as our
Learned Andrews has observed) as they did the first, before they were
discouraged by the Innovations of the Puritan Faction.

33. But for their coming to our Churches for the first ten years, that is to
say, before the first beginning of the Puritan Schism, there is enough
acknowledged by some of their own. Parsons himself confesses, in his Pamphlet
which he calls by the name of Green-Coat, That for twelve years together the
Court and State was in great quiet, and no question made about Religion.
Brierly in his Apology speaks it more at large: by whom it is acknowledged,
That in the beginning of the Queens Reign, most part of the Catholics for many
years did go to the Heretical Churches and Service: That when the better and
truer opinion was taught them by Priests and Religious men from beyond the Seas
as more perfect and necessary, there wanted not many which opposed themselves
of the elder sort of Priests of Queen Mary's days: and finally, That this
division was not only favored by the Council, but nourished also for many
years by diverse troublesome people of their own, both in teaching and writing.
On which the Author of the Reply, whomsoever he was, has made this Descant,
viz. That for the Catholics going to Church, it was perchance rather to be
lamented then blamed, before it came to be a sign Distinctive, by which a
Catholic was known from one who was no Catholic. Thus as the Schisms began
together, so are they carried on by the self-same means, by Libelling against
the State: the Papists, in their Philopater; the Puritans, in Martin
Mar-Prelate, and the rest: by breeding up their novices beyond the Seas; the
Roman Catholics, at Rheims and Doway; the Presbyterians, at Geneva, Amsterdam
or Saumure: by raising sedition in the State, and plotting Treason against the
person of the Queen; the Papists, by Throgmorton, Parry, Tichbourn, Babington,
etc. the Puritans, by Thacker, Penry, Hacket, Coppinger, etc. And finally, by
the executions made upon either part; of which, in reference to the
Presbyterians, we shall speak hereafter. But as none of Plutarchs Parallels is
so exact, but that some difference may be noted, and is noted by him, betwixt
the persons and affairs of whom he writes; so was there a great difference in
one particular between the fortunes of the Papists and the contrary faction.
The Presbyterians were observed to have many powerful Friends at Court, in
which the Papists had scarce any but mortal Enemies. Spies and Intelligencers
were employed to attend the Papists, and observe all their words and actions;
so that they could not stir without a discovery: But all men's eyes were shut
upon the other party, so that they might do what they listed without
observation. Of which no reason can be given, but that the Queen being startled
at the Popes late Bull, and finding both her Person and Estate endangered,
under diverse pretenses, by many of the Romish party, both at home and abroad,
might either take no notice of the lesser mischief, or suffer that faction to
grow up to confront the other.

34. And now comes Cartwright on the Stage, on which he acted more then any of
the Puritan Faction, till their last going off again in the Reign of this
Queen. It was upon a discontent that he first left Cambridge; and in pursuance
of the same, that he left the Church. For being appointed one of the Opponents
at the Divinity-Act in Cambridge, Anno 1564, at such time as the Queen was
pleased to honor it with her Royal presence; he came not off so happily in her
esteem, but that Preston of Kings College for action, voice and elocution, was
preferred before him. This so afflicted the proud man, that in a sudden humor
he retires from the University, and sets up his studies in Geneva, where he
became as great with Beza, and the rest of that Consistory, as ever Knox had
been with Calvin at his being there. As soon as he had well acquainted himself
with the Form of their Discipline, and studied all such points as were to be
reduced to practice at his coming back, well stocked with Principles, and
furnished with Instructions, he prepares for England, and puts himself into his
College. Before, upon the apprehension of the said neglect, he had begun to
busy himself with some discourses against the Ecclesiastical Government then
by Law established; and seemed to entertain a great opinion of himself, both
for Learning and Holiness; and therewithal a great contemner of such others as
continued not with him. But at his coming from Geneva, he became more
practical, or pragmatical rather, condemning the Vocation of Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Officers; the Administration of
our holy Sacraments, and observations of our Rites and Ceremonies. And buzzing
these conceits into the Heads of diverse young Preachers and Scholars of the
University, he drew after him a great number of Disciples and Followers.
Amongst whom he prevailed so far by his secret practices, but much more by a
Sermon which he Preached one Sunday-morning in the Colledge-Chappel, that in
the afternoon all the Fellows and Scholars threw aside their Surplices (which
by the Statutes of the House they were bound to use) and went to the Divine
Service only in their Gowns and Caps. Dr. John Whitgift was at that time
Master of Trinity College, and the Queens Professor for Divinity; a man of
great temper and moderation, but one withal that knew well how to hold the
Reins, and not suffer them to be wrested out of his hand by an Headstrong
beast. Cartwright was Fellow of that College, emulous of the Masters Learning,
but far more envious at the Credit and Authority which he had acquired: for
which cause he procured himself to be chosen the Professor for the Lady
Margaret, that he might come as near to him as he could, both in place and
power. But not content with that which he had done in the College, he puts up
his Disciples into all the Pulpits in the University, where he and they inveigh
most bitterly against the Government of the Church, and the Governors of it;
the Ordination of Priests and Deacons, the Liturgy established, and the Rites
thereof. And though Whitgift Preached them down as occasion served with great
applause unto himself, but greater satisfaction to all moderate and sober men;
yet Cartwright and his Followers were now grown unto such a head, that they
became more violent by the opposition.

32. It happens commonly, as a Learned man has well observed, That those
fervent Reprehenders of things established by public Authority, are always
confident and bold spirited men; and such as will not easily be taken off from
their prosecutions by any fair and gentle usage. Which Whitgift found at last,
alter all his patience; insomuch, that having many times in vain endeavored,
by gentle Admonitions and fair persuasions, to gain the man unto himself, or so
to moderate and restrain him, as that he should no longer trouble both that
College and the whole University with his dangerous Doctrines; he was
necessitated in the end to expel him out of the House, and after to deprive him
also of the Margaret-Lecture. Which last he acted as Vice Chancellor upon this
account, that he had delivered diverse errors in his Lectures, which he had
neither recanted as he was required, nor so expounded as to free himself from
that imputation; and that withal he had exercised the Function of a Minister,
without being able to produce any Letters of Orders. Hereupon Cartwright and
his Followers began to mouth it, complaining that the man had been mightily
wronged, in being deprived of his preferments in the University, without being
called unto his answer; that Cartwright had made many offers of Disputation for
trial of the points in Question, but could never be heard; and therefore that
Whitgift supplied this by excess of power, which he was not able to make good
by defect of Arguments. To stop which clamor, Whitgift not only offered him
the opportunity of a Conference with him, but offered it in the presence of
sufficient witnesses; and put the man so hard unto it, that he not only
declined the Conference at the present, but confessed that Whitgift had made him
the like offers formerly, and that he had refused the same, as he now did also.
All which appears by a Certificate, subscribed by eight sufficient Witnesses,
and a public Notary, dated the 18 of March 1570. But this disgrace was
followed by a greater, much about that time: for finding himself in a necessity
to depart from Cambridge, he would have taken the degree of Doctor along with
him for his greater credit, but was denied by the major part of the Regent
Masters* and others which had votes therein; which so displeased both him and
all his adherents, that from this time the Degrees of Doctors, Batchellors and
Masters were esteemed unlawful, and those that took them reckoned for the Limbs
of Antichrist, as appears by the Genevian Notes on the Revel^tion. But for
this, and all the other wrongs which he had suffered (as was said) in the
University, he will revenge himself upon the Church in convenient time; and in
convenient time we shall hear more of it.

36. In the mean season, we must make a step to Banst^ed in Surrey, where we
shall find a knot of more Zealous Calvinists, then in other places; so Zealous
and conceited of their own dear Sanctity, that they separated themselves from
the rest of their brethren, under the name of the Anointed. The Bond of Peace
was broken by the rest before, and these men meant not to retain the unity of
spirit with them, as they had done formerly. Their Leader was one Wright; their
Opinions these, viz. That no man is to be accused of sin, but he that did
reject the truths by them professed. That the whole New Testament contained
nothing but predictions of things to come; and therefore that Christ (whom they
grant to have appeared in the flesh before) shall come before the Day of
Judgment, and actually perform those things which are there related: That he
whose sins are once pardoned, cannot sin again: And that no credit was to be
afforded to men of Learning, but all things to be taught by the Spirit only.
Of these men Sanders tells us in his Book De visibile Monarchia, Fol. 707, and
places them in this present year 1570. But what became of them, I find not
there, or in any others. And therefore I conceive, that either they were soon
worn out for want of Company, or lost themselves amongst the Anabaptists,
Familists, or some other. And this I look upon as one of the first Factions
amongst the Puritans themselves, after they had begun their separation from the
Church of England: Which separation, so begun as before is said, was closed
again about this time by the hands of those who first had labored in the
breach.

37. For so it was, that either out of love to their own profit, or the public
peace, some of them had consulted Beza touching this particular; that is to
say, Whether he thought it more expedient for the good of the Church, That the
Ministers should choose rather to forsake their Flocks, then to conform unto
such Orders as were then prescribed. Whereunto he returns this Answer: That
many things both may and ought to be obeyed, which are not warrantably
commanded: That though the Garments in dispute were not imposed upon the Church
by any warrant from the Word of God; yet having nothing of impiety in them, he
conceived that it were fitter for the Ministers to conform themselves, then
either voluntarily to forsake their Churches, or be deprived for their refusal:
That in like manner the people were to be advised to frequent the Churches, and
hear their Pastors so apparelled as the Church required, rather then utterly to
forsake that spiritual food, by which their souls were to be nourished to
eternal life: But so, that first the Ministers do discharge their Consciences,
by making a modest protestation against those Vestments, as well before the
Queens Majesty, as their several Bishops; and so apply themselves to suffer
what they could not remedy. This might have stopped the breach at the first
beginning, if either the English Puritans had not been too hot upon it, to be
cooled so suddenly, or that he had not made his own good counsel ineffectual in
the close of all: In which he tells them in plain terms, That if they could no
otherwise preserve their standing in the Church, then either by subscribing to
the lawfulness of the Orders, Rites and Ceremonies which were then required, or
by giving any countenance to them by a faulty silence; they should then finally
give way to that open violence which they were not able to resist; that is to
say, (for so I understand his meaning) that they should rather leave their
Churches, then submit themselves to such conditions. But this direction being
given toward the end of October, Anno 1567, seems to be qualified in his
Epistle to the Brethren of the Foreign Churches which were then in England,
bearing date June the fifth in the year next following; in which he thus
resolves the case proposed unto him: That for avoiding all destructive ruptures
in the body of Christ, by dividing the members thereof from one another, it was
not lawful for any man, of what Rank soever, to separate himself, upon any
occasion, from the Church of Christ, in which the Doctrine is preserved whereby
the people are instructed in the ways of God, and the right use of the
Sacraments ordained by Christ is maintained inviolable.

38. This might, I say, have stopped the breach in the first beginning, had not
the English Puritans been resolved to try some conclusions before they hearkened
to the Premises. But finding that their party was not strong enough to bear
them out, or rich enough to maintain them on their private purses, they thought
it not amiss to follow the directions of their great Dictator. And hereunto the
breaking out of those in Surrey gave some further color, by which, they say,
that nothing but confusion must needs fall upon them; and that so many
Factions, Subdivisions, and Schismatical Ruptures, as would inevitably ensue on
the first separation, must in fine crumble them to nothing. And on these
grounds it was determined to unite themselves to the main body of the Church,
to reap the profit of the same; and for their safer standing in it, to take as
well their Orders as their Institution from the hands of the Bishops. But so,
that they would neither wear the Surplice oftener then mere necessity compelled
them, or read more of the Common Prayers then what they thought might save them
harmless if they should be questioned; and in the mean time by degrees to bring
in that Discipline, which could not be advanced at once, in all parts of the
Kingdom. Which half Conformity they were brought to on the former grounds; and
partly by an Act of Parliament which came out this year, 13 Eliz. cap. 12. for
the reforming of disorders amongst the Ministers of the Church. And they were
brought unto no more then a half-Conformity, by reason of some clashing which
appeared unto them, between the Canons of the Convocation, and that Act of
Parliament; as also in regard of some interposings which are now made in their
behalf, by one of a greater Title, though of no more power, then Calvin,
Martyr, Beza, or the rest of the Advocates.

39. The danger threatened to the Queen, by the late sentence of Excommunication
which was past against her, occasioned her to call the Lords and Commons to
assemble in Parliament, the Bishops and Clergy to convene in their Convocation.
These last accordingly met together in the Church of St. Paul, on the 5 of
April 1571. At which time Dr. Whitgift, Master of Trinity-Colledge in
Gambridge, preached the Latin Sermon. In which he insisted most especially,
upon the Institution and Authority of Synodical Meetings, on the necessary use
of Ecclesiastical Vestments, and other Ornaments of the Church; the opposition
made against all Orders formerly Established, as well by Puritans as Papists;
touching in fine on many other particularities, in rectifying whereof the care
and diligence of the Synod was by him required. And as it proved, his counsel
was not given in vain. For the first thing which followed the Conforming of the
Prolocutor, was a command given by the Archbishop, That all such of the lower
House of Convocation, who not had formerly subscribed unto the Articles of
Religion agreed upon Anno 1562, should subscribe them now; or on their absolute
refusal, or procrastinations, be expelled the House. Which wrought so well,
that the said Book of Articles being publicly read, was universally approved,
and personally subscribed by every Member of both Houses, as appears clearly by
the Ratification at the end of those Articles. In prosecution of which
necessary and prudent course, it was further ordered, That the Book of Articles
so approved, should be put into Print, by the appointment of the Right Reverend
Dr. John Jewel then Bishop of Sarum; and that every Bishop should take a
competent number of them, to be dispersed in their Visitations, or Diocesan
Synods, and to be read four times in every year in all the Parishes of their
several and respective Diocesses. Which questionless might have settled a more
perfect Conformity in all parts of the Kingdom, some C^nons of the Convocation
running much that way, if the Parliament had spoke as clearly in it as the
Convocation; or if some sinister practice had not been excogitated to pervert
those Articles, in making them to come out imperfect, and consequently deprived
of life and vigor, which otherwise they would have carried.

40. The Earl of Leicester at that time was of great Authority, and had
apparently made himself the head of the Puritan faction. They also had the Earl
of Huntingdon, the Lord North, and others in the House of Peers; Sir Francis
Knollis, Walsingham, and many more in the House of Commons. To which (if Zanchy
be to be believed, as perhaps he may be) some of the Bishops may be added; who
were not willing to tie the Puritans too close to that Subscription by the Act
of Parliament, which was required of them by the Acts and Canons of the
Convocation. It had been ordered by the Bishops in their Convocation, That all
the Clergy then assembled, should subscribe the Articles. And it was ordered by
the unanimous consent of the Bishops and Clergy, That none should be admitted
from thenceforth unto Holy-Orders, till he had first subscribed the same; and
solemnly obliged himself to defend the things therein contained, as consonant
in all points to the Word of God, Can. 1571. Cap. de Episcop. But by the first
Branch of the Act of Parliament, Subscription seemed to be no otherwise
required, then to such Articles alone as contained the Confession of the tr^e
Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the holy Sacraments. Whereby all Articles
relating to the Book of Homilie^, the Form of Consecrating Archbishops and
Bishops, the Churches power for the imposing of new Rites and Ceremonies, and
retaining those already made, seemed to be purposely omitted, as not within the
compass of the said Subscription. And although no such Restriction do occur in
the following Branches, by which Subscription is required indefinitely unto all
the Articles; yet did the first Branch seem to have such influence upon all the
rest, that it was made to serve the turn of the Puritan Faction, whenever
they were called upon to subscribe to the Episcopal Government, the Public
Liturgy of the Church, or the Queens Supremacy. But nothing did more visibly
discover the designs of the Faction, and the great power their Patrons had in
the Public Government, then the omitting the first Clause in the Twentieth
Article: In which it was declared, That the Church h^d power to Decree Rites
and Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith. Which Clause, though
extant in the Registers o^ the Convocation as a part of that Article, and
printed as a part thereof both in Latin and English, Anno 1562, was totally
left out in this new Impression; and was accordingly left out in all the
Harmonies of Confessions, or other Collections of the same, which were either
printed at Geneva, or any other place where Calvinism was of most predominancy.
And so it stood with us in England till the death of Leicester. After which, in
the year 1593, the Articles were reprinted, and that Clause resumed, according
as it stands in the Public Registers. By which Clause it was after published
in the third year of K. James, and in the tenth year of the said King, Anno
1512, and in all following Impressions from that time to this. Once cunningly
omitted in a Latin Impression with came out at Oxon, An. 1536. but the forgery
was soon discovered, and the Book called in; the Printer checked, and ordered
to reprint the same with the Clause prefixed. Which makes it the more strange,
and almost incredible, that the Puritans should either plainly charge it as an
Innovation on the late Archbishop; or that any other sober or indifferent man
should make a question, whether the Addition of that Clause were made by the
Prelates, or the Substraction of it by the Puritans, for their several purposes.

41. There also past a Book of Canons in this Convocation, by which it was
required, That all such as were admitted unto Holy-Orders, should subscribe the
Book of Articles, as before was said: That the G^ay Amice, still retained (as
it seems) by some of the old Priests of Queen Mary's time, should be from
thenceforth laid aside, and no longer used: That the Deans and Residentiaries
of Cathedral Churches should admit no other Form of saying or singing Divine
Service of the Church, or administering the holy Sacraments, then that which was
prescribed in the Public Liturgy: That if any Preacher in the same, should
openly maintain any point of Doctrine contrary to any thing contained in the
Book of Articles, or the Book of Common Prayer, the Bishop should be advertised
of it by the Dean and Prebendaries, to the end he might proceed therein as to
him seemed best: That no man be admitted to preach, in what Church soever, till
he be licensed by the Queen, or the Archbishop of the Province, or the Bishop
of the Diocese in which he serves: And that no Preacher beng so licensed,
should preach or teach any thing for Doctrinal, to b^ believed by the people,
but what was consonant to the Word of God in Holy Scripture; or by the Ancient
Fathers or Orthodox Bishops of the Church had been gathered from it: That no
Parson, Vicar or Curate should from thenceforth read the Common Prayers in any
Chapel, Oratory, or Private House, unl^ss he were licensed by the Bishop under
hand and se^^: And that none of the persons aforesaid should (...) his
Ministry, or carry himself in his apparel or kind of life like ^o one of the
Laity: That the said Parsons, Vicars and Curates, should yearly certify to
their several Ordinaries, the names and Sirnames of all persons of fourteen
years of age and upwards, who had not received the Communion, or did refuse to
be instructed in the Public Catechi^m; or that they should not suffer any such
persons to be Godfather or God-Mother to any child, or to contract any
Marriage, either between themselves, or with any other. It was also ordered in
those Canons, That every Bishop should cause the Holy Bible in the largest
Volume to be set up in some conven^ent place of his Hall or Parlour; that as
well those of his own Family, as all such strangers as resorted to him, might
have recourse to it if they pleased: And that all Bishops, Deans and
Archdeacon: should cause the Book called, The Acts and Monuments, to be
disposed of in like sort, for the use aforesaid. The first of which Injunctions
seems to have been made for keeping up the Reputation of the English Bibles
publicly Autho^ized for the use of this Church. The credit and Authority of
which Translation, was much decryed by those of the Genevian Faction, to
advance their own. By the other there was nothing aimed at, but to gain credit
to the Book, which served so seasonably to create an odium, in all sorts of
people, against the Tyrannies and Superstitions of the Pope of Rome, whose
plots and practices did so apparently intend the ruin of the Queen and
Kingdom. No purpose either in the Bishops or Clergy to justify all or any of
the passages in the same contained, which have been since made use of by the
Disciplinarians, either to countenance some strange Doctrine, or decry some
Ceremony; to which he showed himself a Friend or Enemy, as the case might vary.

42. Fortified with these Canons and Synodical Acts, the Prelates show
themselves more earnest in requiring Subscription, more zealous in pressing for
Conformity then before they did; but found a stiffer opposition in the Puritan
Faction, then could be rationally expected. For whether it were, that they
relied upon their Friends in Court, or that some Lawyers had informed them that
by the Statute no Subscription was to be required of them, but only unto points
of Doctrine; certain it is, that they were now more insolent and intractable
then they had been formerly. For now, the bett^r to disguise their Projects to
wound the Discipline, the quarrels about Surplices and other Vestments (which
seemed to have been banished a while) are revived again; complaints made of
their sufferings in it to the Foreign Churches; and the report is spread
abroad (to gain the greater credit to their own perverseness) that many of the
Bishops did as much abominate those Popish Vestments as any of the brethren
did. For so writes Zanchy a Divine of Heidelburg, in his Letters unto Queen
Elizabeth of September the second; and writes so by direction from the Prince
Elector (whom they had engaged in the cause) out of an hope to take her off
from giving any further countenance to the Bishops in that point of Conformity.
To the same purpose he writes also to Bishop Jewel on the 11 of September.
Where he informs (as he had been informed himself) That many of the
Ecclesiastical Order would rather choose to quit their station in the Church,
and resign their Offices, then yield to the wearing of those Vestments which
had been formerly defiled by such gross Superstition. He also signifies what he
had writ unto the Queen, of whose relenting he could give himself no great
assurance; and that he had also been advised to write to some of the Clergy,
to the end that they might be persuaded to a present Conformity, rather then
deprive the Church of their future Ministry. The prosecution of which work he
commends to Jewel, that by the interposing of his Authority, they might be
brought to yield to the points proposed, and thereby be continued in the
exercise of their Vocation. Which last clause could not choose but be exceeding
acceptable to that Reverend Prelate; who had showed himself so earnest for
Conformity, in a Sermon preached by him at the Cross, that he incurred some
censure for it amongst the brethren. Which put him to this Protestation before
his death, That his last Sermon at S. Paul's Cross, and Conference about the
Ceremonies and state of the Church, was not to please any man living, nor to
grieve his brethren of a contrary opinion; but only to this end, that neither
party might prejudice the other. But he was able to act nothing in pursuance of
Zanchy's motion, by reason of his death within few days after, if not some days
before he received that Letter. For on the 22 of the same Month, it pleased
God to take him to himself; and thereby to deprive the Church of the greatest
Ornament which she could boast of in that age.

The end of the sixth Book.
AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History Of the PRESBYTERIANS. LIB. VII. Containing A
Relation of their secret and open Practices; the Schism and Faction by them
raised for advancing the Genevian Discipline in the Church of England, from the
year 1572, to the year 1584.
1. THe English Puritans had hitherto maintained their Quarrel by the Authority
of Calvin, the sawciness of Knox, the bold activities of Beza, and the more
moderate interposings of some Foreign Divines, whose name was great in all the
Churches of the Reformation. But now they are resolved to try it out by their
proper valor; to fling away their Bulrushes, and lay by their Crutches, or at
the best to make no other use of Outlandish Forces, then as Auxiliaries and
Reserves, if the worst should happen. And hitherto they had appeared only
against Caps and Surplices, or questioned some Rites and Ceremonies in the
public Liturgy which might be thought to have been borrowed from the Church
of Rome: But now they are resolved to venture on the Episcopal Government, and
to endeavor the erecting of the Presbyterian, as time and opportunity should
make way unto it. Amongst which undertakers, none more eminent, because none
more violent then Cartwright, formerly remembered: Snape of Northampton, a great
stickler for the holy Discipline; and Field a Lecturer in London, as
ridiculously zealous to advance Presbytery, as the most forward in the pack.
But Cartwright was the man upon whose Parts and Learning they did most depend,
and one who both by private Letters, and some Printed Pamphlets, had gained
more credit to the side then all the rest. And yet it was amongst his own only
that he gained such credit: For when his Papers had been shown unto Bishop
Jewel, and that the Judgment of that Reverend and Learned Prelate was demanded
of them, he is said to have returned this answer, That the Arguments therein
contained were too slight to build up, and too weak to pull down. And so it
proved in the event, when Cartwrights whole discourses against the Forms of
Government and Public Worship, here by Law established, came to be seriously
debated.

2. For having been long great with Child of some new design, the Babe comes
forth in the beginning of the Parliament which was held in the year 1572,
entitled by the name of an Admonition; in which, complaint was made of their
many grievances, together with a Declaration of the only way to redress the
same; which they conceived to be no other then the settling of the Genevian
Platform in all parts of the Kingdom. But the Parliament was so little pleased
with the Title, and so much displeased with the matter of the Admonition, that
the Authors and Preferrers of it were imprisoned by them. But this imprisonment
could lay no Fetters on their spirits, which grew the more exasperated, because
so restrained. For toward the end of the Parliament, out comes the second
Admonition, far more importunate then the first; and it comes out with such a
flash of Lightning, and such claps of Thunder, as if Heaven and Earth were
presently to have met together. In the first, he had amassed together all those
several Arguments which either his reading could afford, or his wit suggest, or
any of that party could excogitate for him against the Government of Bishops,
the whole body of the English Liturgy, and almost all the particular Offices
in the same contained. And in the second, he not only justified whatsoever had
been found in the first, but challenged the Parliament for not giving it a more
gracious welcome: For there he tells them in plain terms, That the State did
not show it self upright, allege the Parliament what it will: That all honest
men should find lack of equity, and all good Consciences condemn that Court:
That it should be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment, then
for such a Parliament: That there is no other thing to be looked for then some
speedy vengeance to light upon the whole Land, let the Politic M^chiavils of
England provide as well as they can, though God do his worst: And finally, that
if they of that Assembly would not follow the advice of the first Admonition,
they would infallibly be their own carvers in it; the Church being bound to
keep Gods Orde^ and nothing to be called Gods Order but their present Platform.

3. About this time, Clark, Travers, Gardener, Barber, Cheston; and lastly,
Crook and Egerton, joined themselves to the Brotherhood. Amongst whom, the
handling of such points as concerned the Discipline became very frequent, many
motions being made, and some conclusions settled in pursuance of it; but more
particularly, it was resolved upon the question, That for as much as diverse
Books had been written, and sundry Petitions exhibited to her Majesty, the
Parliament, and their Lordships, to little purpose, every man should therefore
labor by all means possible to bring the Reformation into the Church. It was
also then and there resolved, That for the better bringing in of the said holy
Discipline, they should not only, as well publicly as privately teach it, but
by little and little, as well as possibly they might, draw the same into
practice. According to which Resolution, a Presbytery was erected on the 20 of
November, at a small Village in Surrey, called Wandsworth, where Field had the
Incumbencie, or cure of Souls; a place conveniently situate for the
London-Brethren, as standing near the bank of the Thames, but four miles from
the City, and more retired and out of sight then any of their own Churches
about the Town. This first Establishment they indorsed by the name of the
Orders of Wandsworth. In which the Elders names are agreed on, the manner of
the Election declared, the approvers of them mentioned, their Offices agreed on
also, and described. And though the Queen might have no notice of this first
Establishment, yet she knew very well both by their Preachings and Writings,
that they had defamed the Church of England, that many of them refused to be
present at that Form of Worship which had the countenance of the Laws, and had
set up a new Form of their own devising: Which moved the Queen to look upon
them as men of an unquiet and seditious spirit, greedy of change, intent on the
destruction of all things which they found established, and ready once again to
break out into open Schism. For the preventing whereof, she gave command, That
the severity of the Laws for keeping up the Uniformity of Gods Public Worship,
should be forthwith put in execution: And that all such scandalous Books and
Pamphlets (the first and second Admonition amongst the rest) should either be
immediately delivered to some Bishop in their several Diocesses, or to some one
or other of the Lords of the Council, upon pain of imprisonment.

4. This Proclamation much amazed the Disciplinarians, who were not only more
sollicitous in searching into the true Cause and Originial of it, then ready to
execute their vengeance upon all such Counselors as they suspected for the
Authors. Sir Christopher Hatton was at that time in especial favor,
Vice-chamberlain, Captain of the Guard, and aftewards Lord-Chancellor also; in
the whole course of his preferments, of a known aversness to the Earl of
Leicester, and consequently no friend to the Puritan Faction. This obstacle
must be removed one way or other, according to that Principle of the ancient
Donatists, for murdering any man of what Rank soever which opposed their
Practices. This Office Burchet undertakes; and undertakes the Office upon this
Opinion, that it was lawful to assassinate any man who opposed the Gospel. But
being blind with too much light, he mistook the man; and meeting in the Street
with Hawkins, one of the greatest Sea-Captains of the times he lived in, he
stabbed him desperately with a Poniard, conceiving that it had been Hatton
their professed Enemy. For which committed to the Tower, he was there examined,
found to hold many dangerous and erroneous Tenants; and thereupon sent Prisoner
to the Lollards-Tower. From thence being called into the Consistory of St.
Paul's, before the Bishop of London and diverse others, and by them examined, he
still persisted in his errors, till the sentence of death was ready on the 4 of
November to be pronounced against him as an Heretic. Through the persuasions
of some men, who took great pains with him, he made a show as if he had
renounced and abjured those Opinions for erroneous and damnable, which formerly
he had embraced with so strong a passion. From thence returned unto the Tower
by the Lords of the Council, he took an opportunity when one of his Keepers was
withdrawn, to murder the other; intending the like also to his Fellow, if he
had not happily escaped it. For which Fact he was arraigned and condemned at
Westminster on the morrow after; and the next day he was hanged up in the very
place where he wounded Hawkins, his Right hand being first cut off, and nailed
to the Gibbet: a piece of Justice not more safe then seasonable; the horridness
of the Fact, and the complexion of the times, being well considered.

5. The Regular Clergy slept not in so great a tempest as was then hanging over
their heads; but spent themselves in censuring and confuting Cartwrights
Pamphlets, which gave the first Animation to those bold attempts. What censure
Bishop Jewel past upon Cartwrights Papers, has been shown before; and he will
give you his opinion of the Author also, of whom it is reported that he gave
this Character, viz. Stultitia nata est in cord pueri, sed virga Disciplinae
fugabit eam: That is to say, That folly had been bred in the heart of the young
man, and nothing but a Rod of correction would remove it from him. But Jewel
had only seen some scattered Papers intended for materials in the following
Pamphlet, which Whitaker both saw and censured when it was complete. For
writing of it unto Whitgift, he reports him thus: Quem Cartwrightus nuper
emisit libellum, etc. I have read over (says he) a great part of the Book
which Cartwright has lately set forth. Let me never live, if I ever saw any
thing more loose, and almost more childish. As for words indeed, he has store
of them, trim and fresh enough; but as for matter, none at all. Besides which,
he not only holds some peevish opinions derogatory to the Queens Authority in
causes Ecclesiastical; but had revolted also in that point to the Popish party,
from whom he would be thought to fly with such deadly hatred. He adds in fine,
That he complied not with the Papists in that point alone, but borrowed from
them most of his other weapons, wherewith he did assault the Church: And in a
word ( as Jerome did affirm of Ambrose) Verbis ludit, and in sententiis
dormitat, and plane ind^gnu est qui a quopiam d^cto refutetur.
that he was in words, but a Trifl^r; and for his matter, but a Dreamer; and
altogether unworthy to be refuted by a man of Learning. But these were only
some preparatory drops, to the following Tempest which fell upon him from the
pen of the Learned Whitgift; who punctually dissected the whole Admonition, and
solidly discoursed upon the Errors and Infirmities of it. Which Book of his,
entitled; An Answer to the Admonition, followed so close upon the heels of the
other, that it was published in the same year with it, 1572. To which Answer,
Cartwright sets out a Reply in the year next following; and Whitgift presently
rejoyns in his Defense of the Answer, An. 1574. against which Cartwright never
stirred, but left him Master of the field, possessed of all the signs of an
absolute Victory. And not long after, on the apprehension of his foil therein,
he withdraws to Guernsey first, and to Antwerp afterward; erecting the
Presbytery in those Foreign Nations, which he could not compass in his own.

7. For though the Brotherhood had attempted to advance their Discipline, and
set up their Presbytery in the Church of Wandsworth; yet partly by the terror
of the Proclamation, and partly by the seasonable execution of Burchet, they
were restrained from practicing any further at the present on the Church of
England. But what they durst not do directly, and in open sight, they found a
way to act obliquely, and under the disguise of setting up another Church of
strangers in the midst of London. Many of the Low Country men, both Merchants,
Gentlemen and others, had fled their Country at the coming in of the Duke of
Alva, settled their dwellings in the Ports and Sea-Towns of England which lay
nearest to them, and in good numbers took up their abode in London. Nor did
they only bring Families with them, but their Factories also: Their several
Trades and Manufactures; as the making of all sorts of Stuffs, rich Tapistries,
and other Hangings of less worth; and by their diligence therein, not only
kept many poor English Families in continual work, but taught the English the
same Arts which they brought hither with them. Such welcome Guests must needs
have some Encouragement to remain here always. And what Encouragement could be
greater and more welcome to them, then to enjoy the liberty of their own
Religion, according to such Government and Forms of Worship as they had
exercised at home? King Edward had indulged the like privileges to John
Alasco, and Queen Elizabeth to the French; neither of which were so
considerable as the Flemish Inmates. A suit is therefore made by their Friends
in Court, for granting them the Church of Augustine-Fryers, where John Alasco
formerly held his Dutch Congregation; and granting it with all such Privileges
and Immuniti^s as the Dutch enjoyed. And that they might proceed in setting up
their Presbyteries and new Forms of Worship, they obtain not only a Connivance
or Toleration, but a plain Approbation of their actings in it. For in the
Letters which confirmed this new Church unto them, it is expressly signified by
the Lords of the Council, That they knew well, that from the first beginning of
the Christian Faith, different Rites and Ceremonies had been used in some parts
thereof, which were not practiced in the other: That whilst some Christians
worshipped God upon their knees, others erect upon their feet, and some again
grovelling on the ground; there was amongst them all but one and the same
Religion, as long as the whole action tended to the honor of God, and that
there was no Superstition and Impiety in it: That they contemned not the Rites
which these Dutch brought with them, nor purposed to compel them to the
practice of those which were used in England; but that they did approve and
allow their Ceremonies, as sitted and accommodated to the nature of the
Country from whence they came. Which privileges they enlarged b^ their Letter
of the 29 of June, in the year next following, An. 1574; extending them to all
such of the Belgic Provinces as re^orted hither, and joined themselves unto
that Church, th^ugh otherwise dispersed in several parts and Sea-Towns for
their own conveniences; which gave the first beginning to the n^w Dutch
Churches in Canterbury, Sandwich, Yarmouth, Norwich, and some other places in
the North; to the great animation or the Presbyters, and the discomfort of all
such who were of judgment to foresee the sad consequents of it.

8. With like felicity they drove on their designs in Iersey and Guernsey; in
the two principal Towns whereof, the Discipline had been permitted by an Order
of the Lords of the Council, as before was said. But not content with that
allowance which the Lords had given them by His Majesty's great grace and
favor; their Preachers, being for the most part natural Frenchmen, had
introduced it by degrees into all the Villages; furthered therein by the
Sacrilegious Avarice of the several Governors, out of a hope to have the spoil
of the poor Deanries, to ingross all the Tithes unto themselves, and then put
off the Ministers with some sorry stipends, as in fine they did. But first
those Islands were to be dissevered by some Act of State, from being (...)
longer Members of the Diocese, or subject to the Juri^^iction of the Bishops of
Constance. And that being easily obtained, it was thought fit that Snape and
Cartwright, the great Supporters of the cause in England, should be sent unto
them to put their Churches in a posture, and settle the Discipline amongst them
in such form and manner as it was practiced in Geneva, and amongst the French.
Which fell out happily for Cartwright, as his case stood; who being worsted in
the last Encounter betwixt him and Whitgift, had now a handsome opportunity to
go off with credit; not as if worsted in the fight, but rather called away to
another trial. Upon th^s Invitation they set sail for the Islands, and take the
charge thereof upon them; the one of them being made the titular Pastor of the
Castle of Mount-Orgueil, in the Isle of Iersey; and the other of Castle-Cornet,
in the Rode of Guernsey. Thus qualified, they convene the Churches of each
Island, communicate unto them a rude Draught of the Holy Discipline; which
afterward was polished, and accommodated to the use of those Islands: but not
agreed upon and exercised until the year next following; as appears by the
Title of it, which is this, viz. The Ecclesiastical Discipline observed and
practiced by the Churches of Jersey and Guernsey, after the Reformation of the
same by the Ministers, Elders and Deacons of the Isles of Guernsey, Jersey,
Sark and Alderney; confirmed by the Authority, and in the presence of the
Governors of the same Isles, in a Synod holden in Guernsey the 28 of June 1576;
and afterward revived by the said Ministers and Elders, and confirmed by the
said Governors in a Synod holden in Jersey the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 17 days
of October, 1577.

9. With worse success, but less diligence, did Travers labor in the cause;
who being one of the same spirit, published a book in maintenance of the Holy
Discipline; which he caused to be printed at Geneva, and was thus entitled;
viz. Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae, and Anglicanae Ecclesiae ab illa aberrationis,
plena, e verbo Dei, and Dilucida Explicatio: that is to say, A full and perfect
Explication of Ecclesiastical Discipline, according to the Word ^f God; and of
the Church of Englands departing from it. In which book he advanced the
Discipline to so great a height, as made it necessary for all Christian Kings
and Princes (...) Disciplinae omnes R^g^^ and Princip^s fasces su^s submitte^^
necesse est. etc. Travers. de Discipl^^
to submit unto it, and lay down their Crowns and Scepters at the Churches
feet, even to the very licking up of the dust thereof, if occasion were But
Travers sojourned in Geneva when he wrote this book, and was to frame it to the
palate of Beza, and the rest of that Confistory; who had by this time made the
Discipline as essen^ial to the true being of a Church* as either the Preaching
of the Word, or the Administration of the holy Sacraments. Beza had so declared
it in a Letter to Knox, An. 1572. In which he reckons it as a great and signal
blessing from Almighty God, that they had introduced in Scotland, not only the
true Worship of God, but the Discipline also, which was the best Preservative
of the truth of Doctrine. Which therefore he desires him so to keep together,
as to be sure, that if the one be lost (that is, laid aside) the other is not
like to continue long. And Cartwright leading in the same path also, heightened
it above all which had gone before, or that followed after him. Some of the
Brethren have extolled it to the very Skies, as being the only Bond of Peace;
the Bane of Heresy; the Punisher of Sin, and maintainer of Righteousness: A
Discipline full of all goodness, for the peace and honor of Gods people,
ordained for the joy and happiness of all the Nations. But Cartwright sets them
such a leap, as they durst not reach at, not only telling us in his last Book
against Learned Whitgift, That the want of the Elderships is the cause of all
evil, and that it is not to be hoped that any Commonwealth can flourish without
it; but also, that it is no small part of the Gospel, yea, the substance of it.

9. And if it proved to be a part of our Saviors Gospel, what could the
brethren do less then pretend some Miracles for Confirmation of the same? and
to what Miracles could they pretend with more show of Sanctity, and
manifestation of the Spirit, then to the casting out of Devils? Cambden inform
us in this year, that the credulity of some London-Ministers had been abused by
a young Wench, who was pretended at that time to be possessed of the Devil. But
I rather think that the London-Ministers were confederate with this Wench, then
abused by her; considering the subsequent practice in that kind of casting out
Devils by the Puritan Preachers, to gain the greater credit to their Cause: for
in this very year they practiced the casting of a Devil out of one Mildred, the
base Daughter of Alice Norrington of Westwell in Kent. Which for all the godly
pretenses made by Roger Newman, and John Brainford, two of the Ministers of
that County, who were parties to it; was at the last confessed to be but a
false imposture. Dr. Harsnet, (who afterward dyed Archbishop of York) informs
us also in his Book against Darrel, that there were at this time two Wenches in
London, that is to say, Agnes Bridges, and Rachel Pinder, who publicly were
given out to be so possessed; and it is possible that one of them may be she
whom Cambden speaks of. Under which head may be also ranged the dispossessing
of one Margaret Gooper at Ditchet in the County of Sommerset, about ten years
after, 1584. But all inferior to the Pranks which were played by Darrel, with
whom none of the Puritan Exorcists is to hold comparison; of which we are to
speak hereafter in its proper place. The Papists have been frequently and
justly blamed for their impostures in this thing, and no terms are thought vile
enough to express their falsehoods. But they were only pious frauds in the
Presbyterians, because conducing to such godly and religious ends, in the
advancing of the Scepter and Throne of Christ, by the holy Discipline. And it
is strange that none of all their Zealots have endeavored to defend them in
it, as well as Cartwright labors to excuse their unlawful meetings from the
name of Conventicles; that being, as he tells us, too light a word to express
the Gravity and Piety of those Assemblies, in which Sacraments are Administered,
and the Gospel Preached. If so, all other Sectaries whatsoever may excuse
themselves from the holding of Conventicles, or being obnoxious to any penal
Laws and Sanctions upon that account, because they hold their Factious and
Schismatical Meetings for the self-same ends. And then the Queen must be
condemned for executing some severity on a Knot of An^baptists, whom she found
holding the like lawless Meetings in the year next following.

10. For so it was, 1575.
that many of those Foreigners which resorted hither from the Belgic
Provinces, and were incorporated into a distinct Society or Congregation,
differing both in Government and Forms of Worship from the Church of England,
did by degrees withdraw themselves from her Communion, and held their
Conventicles a part from the rest of that body. Of these, some openly declared
themselves for the Sect of the Anabaptists; others would needs be Members of
the Family of Henry Nicholas, (who had been once a Member of the Dutch Church
under John ^lasco) called commonly the Family of Love. Of which we have spoken
in the History of the Belgic troubles, ( Lib. 3. Numb. 46.) And not content to
entertain those new Opinions and devices amongst themselves, they must draw in
the English also to participate with them; who having deviated from the paths
of the Church, were like enough to fall into any other, and to pursue those
crooked ways, in which the cunning Heretics of those times did, and had gone
before them. But such a diligent eye was had upon all their practices, that
they were crossed in the beginning. For upon Easter Day, about nine in the
Morning, was disclosed a Conventicle of these Anabaptists, Dutchmen, at an
House without the Bars of Aldgate; whereof twenty seven were taken and sent to
prison, and four of them bearing Fagots at St. Paul's Cross, recanted in form
following, viz. Whereas I, N N, being seduced by the spirit of Error, and by
false Teachers his Ministers, have fallen into many damnable and detestable
Heresies, viz. 1. That Christ took not flesh of the substance of the Blessed
Virgin Mary: 2. That Infants horn of faithful Parents, ought to be Rebaptized:
3. That no Christian man ought to be a Magistrate, or bear the Sword or Office
of Authority: 4. And that it is not lawful for a Christian man to take an Oath.
Now by the Grace of God, and through Conference with good and Learned Ministers
of Christ his Church; I do understand and acknowledge the same to be most
damnable and detestable Heresies; and do ask God here before his Church mercy
for my said former Errors, and do forsake them, recant, and renounce them, and
abjure them from the very bottom of my heart. And further I confess, that the
whole Doctrine and Religion established in this Realm of England, as also that
which is received and practiced in the Dutch Church here in this City, is
sound, true, and acording to the Word of God; whereunto in all things I submit
my self, and will most gladly be a Member of the said* Dutch Church; from
henceforth utterly abandoning and forsaking all and every Anabaptistical Error.

11. This gave a stop to many of them at their first setting out. But some
there were, who neither would be terrified with the fear of punishment, or
edified by the Retractation which those four had made; continued in their
former courses with great pertinacity; insomuch, that on the 21 of May, being
Whitson-Eve, no fewer then eleven of that Sect, all Dutch, (that is to say, one
man and ten Women) were condemned in the Consistory at St. Paul's, to be burned
in Smithfield. And though great pains was taken to reclaim them from those
wicked Errors; yet such was their obstinacy and perverseness, that one Woman
only was converted. The r^st had so much mercy showed them, as to be banished
the Realm without further punishment; which gave the greater resolution to the
rest of their company to be more practical then before in promoting their
Heresies. Which put the State upon a just necessity of proceeding more severely
against some of them, then by Bonds and banishments: Two of the same Nation and
Opinions being burnt in Smithfield on the second of July, where they dyed with
very great horror, expressed by many roarings and cryings, but without any sign
or show of true Repentance. Before the executing of which sentence, John Fox
the English Martyrologist addressed his Letters to the Queen, in which he
supplicated for the lives of those wretched men, and offered many pious and
prudential reasons for the reversing of that sentence; or at the least, for
staying it from execution. By which he so prevailed upon her, that she
consented to a gracious sparing of their lives, i^ on a months Reprieve, and
Conference in the mean time with Learned men, they could be gained unto a
retractation of their damnable Heresies. But that expedient being tried, and
found ineffectual, the forfeiture of their lives was taken, and the sentence
executed. Nor had the Dutch Church of Norwich any better Fortune, or could
pretend to be more free from harboring some Fanatical spirits, then the Dutch
Congregation in the Augustine Friars. From some of which it may be probably
supposed, that Matthew Hamant, a poor Plowwright of Featherset, within three
Miles of Norwich, took his first impressions, which afterward appeared in more
horrid blasphemies then any English ever had been acquainted with in the times
preceding. For being suspected to hold many dangerous and unsound Opinions, he
was convented before the Bishop of that City; at what time it was charged upon
him, that he had publicly maintained these Heresies following; that is to say,
That the new Testament or Gospel was but mere foolishness, and a story of men,
or rather a mere Fable: That he was restored to Grace of the free Mercy of God,
without the means of Christ his Blood and Passion: That Christ is not God, or
the Savior of the World, but a sinful man, a mere man, and an abominable Idol;
and that all they that worship him, are abominable Idolaters: That Christ did
not rise again from death to life by the power of his Godhead, neither that he
ascended into Heaven: That the Holy Ghost is not God, and that there is no such
thing as an Holy Ghost: That Baptism is not necessary in the Church of God, nor
the use of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. For which he was
condemned for an Heretic in the Bishops Consistory, on the Fourteenth of
April; and being thereupon delivered to the Sheriff of the City, he was burnt
in the Castle-Ditch on the Twentieth of May 1579. As a preparative to which
punishment, his ears had been cut off on the Thirteenth of that Month, for
base and slanderous words against the Queen and Council.

12. About the same time that the Anabaptists were first brought to Censure,
there spawned another Fry of Heretics, who had its first Original amongst the
Dutch, and from thence came for England with the rest of their brethren. These
called themselves the Family of Love, as before is said; and were so well
conceited of their own great holiness, that they thought none to be Elected to
Eternal life, but such as were admitted into their Society. The particulars of
their Opinions, and the strange manner of Expressions, have been insisted on
before. Let it suffice, that by their seeming Sanctity, and other the like
deceitful arts of Dissimulation, they had drawn some of the English to them;
who having broke the bond of peace, could not long keep themselves to the
Spirit of Unity. Some of them being detected, and convented for it, were
condemned to do Penance at S. Paul's Cross; and there to make a Retractation of
their former Errors. According to which Sentence, five of them are brought
thither on the 12 of June; who there confessed themselves utterly to detest, as
well the Author of that Sect, H. N. as all his damnable Heresies. Which gentle
punishment, did rather serve to multiply then decrease the Sect; which by the
diligence of the Heretics, and the remisness of the new Archbishop, came to
such an height, that course was taken at the last for their apprehension, and
for the severe punishing of those which were so apprehended. For the Queen
seriously considering how much she was concerned, both in honor and safety, to
preserve Religion from the danger threatened by such desperate Heretics,
published her Proclamation on the ninth of October, An. 1580, for bringing
their persons unto Justice, and causing their pestilent Pamphlets to be openly
burnt. And to that end, she gave a strict Command to all Temporal Judges, and
other Ministers of Justice, to be assistant to the Bishops and their under
Officers, in the severe punishing of those Sects and Sectaries, by which the
happiness of the Church was so much endangered. By which severities, and a
Formal Abjuration prescribed unto them by the Lords of the Council, these Sects
were seasonably suppressed, or had the reason to conceal themselves amongst
such of the Brethren as did continue in their Separation from the Church of
England.

13. In the mean time, there happened a great alteration in the state of the
Church, by the death of one, and the preferment of another of the greatest
Prelates. Archbishop Parker left this life on the 17 of May, Anno 1575. To whom
succeeded Dr. Edmond Grindal, Translated from the Sea of York unto that of
Canterbury, on the 15 of February. The first a Prelate of great parts, and no
less Eminent for his zeal in the Churches cause; which prompted him to keep as
hard a hand on all Sects and Sectaries, and more particularly on those of the
Genevian Platform, as the temper of the times could bear. But Grindal was a man
of another spirit, without much difficulty wrought upon by such as applied
themselves to him. And having maintained a correspondence when he lived in
Exile with Calvin, Beza, and some others (...) ^he Consistory; he either could
not shake off their acquaint^^^e at his coming home, or was as willing to
continue it as they c^uld desire. Being advanced unto the Bishopric of London,
he condescends to Calvin's motion, touching the settling of a French Church in
that City on Genevian Principles; and received thanks from him for the same.
And unto whom but him must Beza make his Applications, when any of the brethren
were suspended, deprived or sequestered, for not conforming to the Vestments
then by Law required? Being Translated unto York, which was upon the 22 of May
1370, he entertains a new Intelligence with Zanchy a Divine of Heidelburg,
somewhat more moderate then the other; but no good Friend neither to the Church
of England, as appears by his interposings in behalf of the brethren, when they
were under any Censure for their inconformity. To this man Grindal renders an
account of his Preferment both to York and Canterbury: To him he sends
Advertisement how things went in Scotland, at his Advancement to the first; and
of the present state of affairs in England, when he came to the other. The like
Intelligence he maintained with Bullinger, Gualter, and some of the chief
Divines amongst the Switzers; taking great pride in being courted by the
Leading-men of those several Churches, though they had all their ends upon him,
for the advancing of Presbytery and Inconformity in the Church of England.

1579.
14. Upon these grounds, the Presbyterians gave themselves good hopes of the new
Archbishop; and they soon found how pl^ant he was like to prove to their
expectation. He entered on this great Charge in the Month of February 1575; at
which time the Prelates and Clergy were assembled in a Convocation; by whom a
Book of Articles was agreed upon for the better Reiglement of the Church. In
the end whereof, this Article was superadded by their procurement; viz. That
the Bishops should take order, that it be published and declared in every
Parish Church within their Diocesses, before the first day of May then next
following, That Marriages might be solemnized at all times in the year; so that
the Banes on their several Sundays or Holidays, in the Service-time, were
openly asked in the Church, and no impediment objected; and so that also the
said Marriages be publicly solemnized in the face of the Church, at the
aforesaid time of Morning-Prayer. But when the Book was offered to the Queens
peiusal, she disliked this Article, and would by no means suffer it to be
printed amongst the rest; 1577.
as appears by a Marginal Note in the Public Reg^ster of that Convocation.
Which though it might sufficiently have discouraged them from the like
Innovations, yet the next year they ventured on a business of a higher nature,
which was the falsifying and corrupting of the Common Prayer Book. In which,
being then published by Richard Judge the Queens Majesty's Printer, and
published Cum Privilegio Regiae Majestatis, as the Title intimates; the whole
Order of Private Baptism, and Confirmation of Children was quite omitted. In
the first of which it had been declared, That Children being born in Original
sin, were by the Laver of Regeneration in Baptism ascribed unto the number of
Gods Children, and made the Heirs of Life Eternal; and in the other, That by
the Imposition of hands and Prayer, they receive strength against sin, the
world and the Devil. Which grand omissions were designed to no other purpose,
but by degrees to bring the Church of England into some Conformity to the
desired Orders of Geneva. This I find noted in the Preface of a book writ by
William Reynolds, a virulent Papist I confess, but one that may be credited in
a matter of Fact, which might so easily have been refuted by the Book it self,
if he had any way belyed it.

15. Nothing being done for punishing of this great abuse, they enter upon
another Project: Which seemed to tend only to the increase of Piety in the
Professors of the Gospel; but was intended really for the furtherance of the
Holy Discipline. The design was, that all the Ministers within such a Circuit,
should meet upon a day appointed to exercise their gifts, and expound the
Scriptures; one being chosen at each meeting for the Moderator, to govern and
direct the Action; the manner whereof was (...) that follows: The Ministers
of some certain Precinct did meet (...) some week days in some principal Town;
of which Meeting some ancient grave Minister was President, and an Auditory
admitte^ of Gentlemen, and other persons of Leisure. There every Minister
successively (the youngest still beginning) did handle one and the same piece
of Scripture, spending severally some quarter of an hour and better; but in the
whole, some two hours. And the Exercise being begun and concluded with prayer,
the President giving them another Theme for the next Meeting (which was every
Fortnight) the said Assembly was dissolved. The Exercise they called by the
name of Prophesying; grounded upon those words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.13.
viz. For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all be
comforted. But finding that the Text was not able to bear it out, they added
thereunto such pious and prudential Reasons, as the best wits amongst them
could devise for the present. And though this Project was extremely magnified
and doted on with no less passion by some Countrey-Gentlemen, who were enamored
of the beauty and appearance of it; yet was it found upon a diligent enquiry,
that there was something else intended then their Edification. For it was easy
to be proved, that under color of those Meetings for Religious Exercises, the
Brethren met together and consu^ted of the common business, and furiously
declaimed against Church and State.

1579.
16. These Meetings Grindal first connived at when he sat at York, under
pretense of training up a preaching Ministry for the Northern parts. But
afterward he was so much possessed with the fancy of it, that he drew many of
the Bishops in the Province of Canterbury to allow them also. By means whereof,
they came to be so frequent in most parts of the Kingdom, that they began to
look with a face of danger, both on Prince and Prelate. For having once settled
themselves in these new Conventions with some show of Authority, the
Leading-Members exercised the Jurisdiction over all the rest, intrenching
thereby on the power of their several Ordinaries. And they incroached so far at
last on the Queens Prerogative, as to appoint days for solemn Fasts, under
pretense of Sanctifying those Religious Exercises to the good of the Nation, as
afterward in their Classical and Synodical Meetings, which took growth from
hence. Three years these Prophesyings had continued in the Province of
Canterbury, before the Queen took notice of them. But then they were presented
to her with so ill a complexion, that she began to startle at the first sight
of them. And having seriously weighed all inconveniences which might thence
ensue, she sends for Grindal to come to her; reproves him for permitting such
an Innovation to be obtruded on the Church, and gave him charge to see it
suddenly suppressed. She complained also, that the Pulpit was grown too common,
invaded by unlicensed Preachers, and such as preached sedition amongst the
people; requiring him to take some order, that the Homilies might be read more
frequently, and such Sermons preached more sparingly then of late they had
been. (...) this was hard meat, not so easily chewed; therefore not like to be
digested by so weak a stomach. Instead of acting any thing in order to the
Queens Commands, he writes unto her a most tedious and voluminous Letter: In
which he first presents her with a sad remembrance of the Discourse which past
between them, and the great sorrow which he had conceived on the sense thereof.
Which said, he falls into a commendation of Sermonizing; of the great benefit
thereby redounding unto all her Subjects; the manifold advantages which such
preachings had, above the Homilies; of wh^^ necessary use those Prophesyings
were, toward the training up of Preachers. In fine, he also lets her know, that
by the example of S. Ambrose, and his proceedings toward Theodosius and
Valentinian, two most mighty Emperors, he could not satisfy his conscience in
the discharge of the great trust committed to him, if he should not admonish
her upon this occasion, not to do any thing which might draw down Gods
displeasure upon her and the Nation, by stopping the Free Exercise of Gods true
Religion, and his promoting of his Gospel.

17. These Premises being laid together, he comes at last to this conclusion,
as to assure her in plain terms, but with all humility, That he could not with
a safe Conscience, and without the offense of the Majesty of God, give his
assent to the suppressing of the said Exercises, much less send out any
Injunction for the utter and universal subversion of the same: that he might
say with the Apostle, That he had no power to destroy, but only to edify;
that he could do nothing against the Truth, but for it: And therefore finally,
that if it were her Majesty's pleasure, for this or any other cause to remove
him out of his place, he would with all humility yield thereunto, and render
again unto her Majesty that which he had received from her. For to what
purpose, as he said, should he endeavor to retain a Bishopric, or to gain the
world, with the loss and hazard of his Soul? considering that he which does
offend against his Conscience, does but digg out his own way to Hell. In which
respect he humbly desires her to bear with him, if he rather choose to offend
her earthly Majesty, then the Heavenly Majesty of Almighty God. But not content
with such an absolute refusal, and setting her at such a distance from Almighty
God, he takes upon him to advise her to discharge her self of the concernments
of the Church, or not to manage it at the least with so high a hand as she had
done hitherto. Fitter it was, as he conceived it, That all Ecclesiastical
matters which concerned Religion, the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church,
should be referred unto the Bishops, and the Divines of this Realm, according
to the example of all Christian Emperors, and the godly Princes of all ages,
in the times before her. And this he further pressed upon her, by her own
Example, in not deciding any questions about the Laws of the Realm, in her
Court or Palace; but sending them to be determined by her Judges in the Courts
of Westminster; and therefore by the self-same Reason, when any question did
arise about the Discipline and Doctrine of the Church within her Dominions, the
ordinary way must be to refer the same to the Decision of the Bishops, and
other chief Ministers of the Church in Synodicall Meetings, and not to
determine of them in the Court by the Lords of her Council.

18. But notwithstanding his refusal to conform to her will and pleasure on the
one side, 1580.
and this harsh Counsel on the other, which must needs be unwelcome to a Prince
that loved and understood her own Authority so well as his Mistress did, he
might have kept his Bishopric, with her Majesty's favor, which he appeared so
willing to resign unto her. He might, I say, have kept them both, having so
many great Friends about the Queen, who app^oved his doings, if a breach had
not happened about this time betwixt him and Leicester, the mighty Patron and
Protector of the Puritan Faction, occasioned by his denying at the Earls
request to alienate his goodly House and Manor of Lambeth, that it might serve
for a retiring place to that mighty favorite. And hereunto he did contribute
further, as was said by others, for refusing to grant a Dispensation to marry
one which was too near of kindred to him, clearly within the Compass of those
degrees which seemed to him to be prohibited by the Word of God. This Leicester
thought he might command, and was exceedingly vexed not to find obedience, in
one who had been raised by him, and depended on him. Upon which ground, all
passages which before were shut against his Enemies, were now left free and
open for them; and the Queens ears are open to their informations, as the
passages were unto her person. By them she comes to understand, what a neglect
there was of the public Liturgy in most parts of the Kingdom, what ruin and
decay of Churches, what innovations made already, and what more projected; by
which she would be eased in time of all cares of Government, and find the same
to be transferred to the Puritan Consistories: She was told also of the general
disuse of all weekly Fasts, and those which annually were required by the Laws
of the Realm; and that instead thereof, the Brethren had took upon them,
according to the Arrian Doctrine, to appoint solemn and occasional Fasts in
several places, as at Leicester, Coventry, etc. in defiance of the Laws, and
her own Prerogative. Touching which last, she gave another hot Alarm to
Archbishop Grindal, who in a long Letter did excuse the matter, as not being
done by his allowance or consent; though it could not be denied but that it had
been done by his connivance, which came all to one: so that the Accusation
being strong, his Defenses weak, and no Friend left about the Queen who durst
mediate for him (for who durst favor him on whom Leicester frowned?) the
Archi-Episcopal Jurisdiction was sequestered from him, conferred upon four
Suffragans of the Province of Canterbury, and he himself confined to one of his
Country-houses, till the Queens ^^rther pleasure should be signified to him.
Which Sequestration must needs happen before the beginning of the Convocation
which was held this year; the Pesidency whereof was then devolved on the Bishop
of London, by reason of Grindals incapacity to perform that Service.

19. For on the sixteenth day of January, it pleased the Queen to call a
Parliament to be held at Westminster, in which some things occurred of great
importance, in order to the Presbyterian History which we have in hand. The
Puritans following the Arrians in that particular, as in many others, had
openly decryed all set and determinate Fasts; but then ascribed more merit unto
those of their own appointing, then any Papists do to those of the Popes
Ordaining. They had also much took off the edge of the people from the
Common Prayer Book, but ^^st especially from the Litany (none of the meanest
Pieces in it) which ^ill that time was read accustomably in the House of
Commons, before the Members settled upon any business. But in the beginning of
this Parliament, it was moved by one Paul Wentworth in the House of Commons,
that there might be a Sermon every Morning before they sat, and that they
would nominate some day for a solemn Fast. How the first motion sped, I have
nowhere found; but may conclude by the event, that it came to nothing, because
I never heard that any thing was done in puisance of it till the late Long
Parliament, where the like Toy was taken up for having Sermons every Morning in
the Abbey-Church. But that about the Fast being made when more then half the
Members were not present at it, was carried in the Affirmative by fifteen
voices. And thereupon it was ordered, as the Journal t^ll^^h us, That as many
of the House as conveniently could, should on the Sund^y fortnight following
assemble and meet together in the Temple-Church, there to have Preaching, and
to join together in Prayer with Humiliation and Fasting for the assistance of
Gods Spirit in all their consultations during this Parliament, and for the
preservation of the Queens Majesty and her Realms. And though they were so
cautious in the choice of their Preachers, to refer the naming of them to the
Lords of the Council, which were then Members of the House, in hope to gain
them also to avow the action; yet neither could this satisfy the Queen, or
affect their Lordships. For some of them having made the Queen acquainted with
their purpose in it, she sends a Message to them by Sir Christopher Hatton, who
was then Vice-Chamberlain; by which he lets them know, That her Majesty did
much admire at so great a rashness in that House, as to put in execution such
an Innovation, without her privity and pleasure first made known unto them.
Which Message being so delivered, he moved the House to make humble submission
to her Majesty, acknowledging the said offense and contempt, craving the
remission of the same, with a full purpose to forbear the committing of the
like hereafter. Which motion being hearkened to (as there was good reason) Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain is desired to present their submission to the Queen, and
obtain her pardon; which he accordingly performed.

20. This practice gave the Queen so fair a Prospect into the counsels of the
Faction, that she perceived it was high time to look about her, and to provide
for the preserving of her power and Prerogative-Royal, but more for the
security of her Realm and Person. To which end she procured a Statute to be
made in that very Parliament, by which it was Enacted, That if any person or
persons, forty days after the end of that Session, should advis^dly devise, or
write, or print, or set forth any manner of Book, Rhyme, Ballad, Letter or
Writing, containing any false, seditious, or slanderous matter, to the
Defamation of the Queens Majesty, or to the encouraging, stirring or moving of
any Insurrection or Rebellion within this Realm, or any of the Dominions to the
same belonging: Or if any person after the time aforesaid, as well within the
Queens Dominions, as in any other place without the same, should procure such
Book, Rhyme, Ballad, etc. to be written, printed, published or set forth, etc.
(the said offense not being within the compass of Treason by virtue of any
former Statute) that then the said Offenders, upon sufficient proof thereof by
two lawful witnesses, should suffer death and loss of goods, as in case of
Felony. And that the Queen may be as safe from the Machinations of the Papists,
as she was secured by this Act from the plots of the Puritans, a Law was past,
To make it Treason for any Priest or Jesuit to seduce any of the Queens
Subjects to the Romish Religion; and for the Subjects to be reconciled to the
Church of Rome. This Act, entitled, An Act for retaining the Queens Subjects
in their due obedience; the other, For the punishing seditious words against
the Queen, 23 Eliz. cap. 1, 2. Which Statutes were contrived of purpose to
restrain the Insolency of both Factions; and by which, many of them were
adjudged to death in times ensuing: Some of them, as in case of Treason; and
others, as the Authors or the Publishers of Seditious Pamphlets. But the last
Statute being made with Limitation to the life of the Queen, it expired with
her. And had it been revived (as it never was) by either of the two last Kings,
it might possibly have prevented those dreadful mischiefs which their posterity
for so long a time have been involved in.

21. Together with this Parliament, was held a Convocation, as the Custom is.
In the beginning whereof, an Instrument was produced under the Seal of
Archbishop Grindal, for substituting Dr. John Elmore then Bishop of London (a
Prelate of great parts and spirit, but of a contrary humor to the said
Archbishop) to preside therein; which in the incapacity of the other, he might
have challenged as of right belonging to him. Nothing else memorable in this
Convocation, but the admitting of Dr. William Day then Dean of Windsor, to be
Prolocutor of the Clergy; the passing of a Bill for the grant of Subsidies;
and a motion made unto the Prelates, in the name of the Clergy, for putting
the late Book of Articles in execution. Nothing else done within those walls,
though much was agitated and resolved on by those of Grindals party in their
private Meetings. Some of the hotter heads amongst them had proposed in
public, That the Clergy should decline all business, even the grant of
Subsidies, till the Archbishop were restored to his place and suffrage. But
this could find no entertainment amongst wiser men. Others advised, That a
Petition should be drawn in the name of both Houses, by which Her Majesty
might be moved to that restitution. And though I find nothing to this purpose
in the Public Registers (which may sufficiently evince, that it never passed
as an Act of the Convocation) yet I find that such a Petition was agreed upon
and drawn into form by Dr. Tobie Matthews then Dean of Christ-Church, and by
some Friends presented to Her Majesty's sight. Matthews was master of an
elegant and fluent style, and most pathetically had bemoaned those sad
misfortunes which had befallen that Prelate, and the Church in ^im, by
suffering under the displeasure of a gracious Sovereign. The mitigation whereof
was the rather hoped for, in regard he had offended more out of the tenderness
of his Conscience, then from the obstinacy of his will. But no such answer
being given unto this Petition, as by his Friends might be expected, Grindal
continued under his Suspension till the time of his death. Once it was moved,
to have a Co-adjutor imposed upon him, who should not only exercise the
Jurisdiction, but receive all the Rents and profits which belonged to his
Bishopric. And so far they proceeded in it, that Dr. John Whitgift (who had
been preferred to the Sea of Worcester, 1576.) was nominated for the man, as
one sufficiently furnished with abilities to discharge the trust. But he most
worthily declined it, and would not suffer the poor man to be stripped of his
clothes, though for the apparelling of his own body with the greater honor,
till death had laid him in the bed of Eternal rest.

22. But the troubles of this year were not ended thus. For neither those good
Laws before remembered, nor the Executions done upon them, could prevail so far,
as to preserve the Church from falling into those distractions, which both the
Papists and the Presbyterians had projected in it. The Jesuits had hitherto
been content to be lookers on, and suffered the Seminary Priests to try their
Fortunes in the reduction of this Kingdom to the Sea of Rome. But finding how
little had been done by them in twenty years; so little, that it came almost to
less then nothing; they are resolved to take the honor to themselves. To which
end, Heywood, Parsons and Campian first set foot in England, and both by secret
practices and printed Pamphlets, endeavored to withdraw the Subjects from
their due obedience. Nothing more ordinary in their mouths, or upon their pens,
then that the Crown belonged of right to the Queen of Scots: That Elizabeth was
to be deprived: That if the Pope commanded one thing, and the Queen another,
the Popes commands were to be obeyed, and not the Queens: And in a word, That
all the Subjects were absolved from their Allegiance, and might declare as much
when they found it necessary. Which that it might be done with the greater
safety, Pope Gregory the XIII is desired to make an Explication of the former
Bull. By which it should be signified to the English Catholics, that the said
former Bull of Pope Pius V should remain obligatory unto none but the Heretics
only; but that the Romish Catholics should not be bound by it, as the case
then stood, till they should find themselves in a fit capacity to put the same
in execution without fear of danger. And presently upon their first entrance, a
Book is published by one Howlet, containing many reasons for deterring the
Papists from joining in any Act of Worship with the English Protestants; the
going, or not going to Church, being from henceforth made a sign distinctive,
as they commonly phrased it. In this year also Beza published his Schismatical
Pamphlet, entitled, De triplici Episcopatu; of which see Lib. 1. numb. 47.
Lib. 5. numb. 40. first written at the request of Knox and other of the
Presbyterians of the Kirk of Scotland, that they might have the better color
to destroy Episcopacy; translated afterward into English for the self-same
reason, by Field of Wandsworth. Against this Book, Dr. John Bridges Dean of
Sarum writ a large Discourse, entitled, A Defense of the Government
established in the Church of England; not published till the year 1587, when
the Authority thereof was most highly stood on. The like done afterward by Dr.
Hadrian Savavia: of which we shall speak more in its proper place.

23. And now the waters are so troubled, that Cartwright might presume of
gainful fishing at his coming home. Who having settled the Presbytery in Iersey
and Guernsey, first sends back Snape to his old Lecture at Northampton, there
to pursue such Orders and Directions as they had agreed on; and afterward put
himself into the Factory of Antwerp, and was soon chosen for their Preacher.
The news whereof brings Travers to him; who receives Ordination (if I may so
call it) by the Presbytery of that City, and thereupon is made his Partner in
that charge. It was no hard matter for them to persuade the Merchants to admit
that Discipline, which in their turns might make them capable of voting in the
Public Consistory: And they endeavored it the rather, that by their help they
might effect the like in the City of London, whenever they should find the
times to be ready for them. The like they did also in the English Church at
Middleborough the chief Town in Zealand, in which many English Merchants had
their constant residence: To which two places they drew over many of the
English Nation, to receive admission to the Ministry in a different Form from
that which was allowed in the Church of England. Some of which following the
example of Cartwright himself, renounced the Orders which they had from the
hands of the Bishops, and took a new Vocation from these Presbyters; as,
Fennor, Arton, etc. and others there admitted to the rank of Ministers, which
never were ordained in England; as Heart, Guisin, etc. not to say any thing of
such as were elected to be Elders or Deacons in those Foreign Consistories,
that they might serve the Churches in the same capacity at their coming home.
And now at last they are for England, where Travers puts himself into the
service of the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, by whose Recommendation he is chosen
Lecturer of the Temple Church; which gave him opportunity for managing all
affairs which concerned the Discipline with the London-Ministers. Cartwright
applies himself to the Earl of Leicester, by whom he is sent down to Warwick,
and afterward made Master of an Hospital of his Foundation. In the chief
Church of which Town, he was pleased to preach, as often as he could dispense
with his other business. At his admission to which place, he faithfully
promised, if he might be but tolerated to Preach, not to impugn the Laws,
Orders, Policy, Government, nor Governors in this Church of England; but to
persuade and procure, so much as he could, both publicly and privately, the
estimation and peace of this Church.

24. But scarce was he settled in the place, when he made it manifest by all his
actions, how little care he took of his words and promises: for so it was, when
any Minister, either in private Conferences, or by way of Letters, required his
advice in any thing which concerned the Church, he plainly showed his mislike
of the Ecclesiastical Government then by Law Established, and excepted against
diverse parts of the Public Liturgy; according to the Tenor of the two
Admonitions, by him formerly published. By means whereof, he prevailed with
many, who had before observed the Orders of the Common Prayer Book, now plainly
to neglect the same; and to oppose themselves against the Government of
Bishops, as far as they might do it safely, in relation to the present times.
And that he might not press those points to others, which he durst not practice
in himself, he many times inveighed against them in his Prayers and Sermons:
The like he also did against many p^ssages in the Public Liturgy, as namely,
The use of the Surplice; the Interrogatories to Godfathers in the name of
Infants; the Cross in Baptism; the Ring in Marriage; the Thanksgiving after
Childbirth; Burials by Ministers; the kneeling at Communions; some points of
the Litany; certain Collects and Prayers; the reading of Portions of Scripture
for the Epistle and Gospel; and the manner of singing in Cathedral Churches.
And for example unto others, he procured his Wife not to give thanks for her
Delivery from the peril of Childbirth, after such Form, and in such place and
manner as the Church required. Which as it drew on many other women to the like
contempt, so might he have prevailed upon many more, if he had not once
discoursed upon matters of Childbirth with such in discretion, that some of the
good Wives of Warwick were almost at the point to stone him as he walked the
streets. But that he might not seem to pull down more with one hand, then he
would be thought sufficiently able to build up with both; he highly magnified
in some of his Sermons the Government of the Church by Elderships in each
Congregation, and by more Public Conferences in Classical and Synodical
Meetings; which he commended for the only lawful Church Government, as being
of Divine Institution, and ordained by Christ. A Form whereof he had drawn up
in a little Book: Which having past the approbation of some private Friends,
was afterward recommended to the use of the rest of the brethren, assembled
together by his means for such ends and purposes, by whom it was allowed of as
most fit to be put in practice. For being a new nothing, and of Cartwrights
doing, it could not but find many besides Women and Children to admire the
Workmanship.

1582.
25. This was the sum of Cartwrights Actings in order to the Innovations, both
in Government, and Forms of Worship, which heretofore he had projected. Not
that all this was done at once, or in the first year only after his return;
but by degr^^s, as opportunity was offered to him. Yet so far he prevailed in
the first year only, that a meeting of sixty Ministers out of the Counties of
Essex, Cambridge and Norfolk, was held at a Village called Cork^il, where
Knewstubs (who was one of their number) had the cure of Souls. Which Meeting
was held May 8. Anno 158^* there to co^fer about some passages in the Common
prayer book, what might be tolerated in the same, and what ^e^used; as namely,
Apparel, Matter, Form* Holy Days, Fastings, Injunctions, etc. The like Meeting
held at the Commencement in Cambridge then next ensuing. And what they did
resolve in both, may be gathered partly from a passage in the Preface to a Book
published in the year next following by William Reynods before mentioned. In
which he tells us, That it had been appointed by the first Book of Common
prayer, That the Minister in the time of his Ministration should use such
Ornaments in the church, as were in use by Authority of Parliament in the
second year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth. And then, says he, I appeal
to the knowledge of every man, how well that Act of Parliament is observed
throughout the Realm; in how many Cathedrals or Parish^Churches those Ornaments
are reserved* Whether every private Minister, by his own Authority, in the time
of his Ministration, disdain not such Ornaments, using only such Apparel as is
most vulgar and profane; to omit other particular differences, of Facts, of
Holy Days, crossing in Baptism, the visitation of the Sick, etc. In which their
alterations are well known, says he, by their daily practice, and by the
differences betwixt some Common prayer books which were last Printed ( as
namely that of Richard Jugg before remembered) from those which were first
published by Supreme Authority. In all which deviations from the Rule of the
Church, the Brethren walked on more securely, because the State was wholly
exercised at this time in executing the severity of the late Statute on such
Priests and Jesuits as labored to pervert the Subjects and destroy the Queen,
thereby to re-advance the Pope to his former Tyranny. In which respect it was
conceived to be a good Rule in the School of Policy, to grant a little more
liberty to the Puritan Faction; though possibly it were done on no other score,
then that of their notorious enmity to the Popish party.

26. About this time it also was, that by the practices of Cartwright and his
adherents, their Followers began to be distinguished by their names and titles,
from the rest of the people. First, in relation to their Titles. Thus those of
his Faction must be called the Godly, the Elect, the Righteous; all others
being looked upon as carnal Gospellers, the Profane, the Wicked. And next, in
reference to their names. Their Children must not be Baptized by the names of
their Ancestors, as Richard, Robert, and the like; but by some name occurring
in the holy Scriptures, but more particularly in the Old Testament, because
merely Hebrew, and not profaned with any mixture of the Greek or Roman:
concerning which there goes a story, that an Inhabitant of Northampton, called
Hodgkingson, having a Child to be Baptized, repaired to Snape, before
mentioned, to do it for him; and he consented to the motion, but with promise
that he should give it some name allowed in Scripture. The holy action being so
far forwards, that they were come to the naming of the Infant, they named it
Richard, which was the name of his Grandfather by the Mothers side. Upon this a
stop was made, nor would he be persuaded to Baptize the Child, unless, the
name of it were altered. Which when the Godfather refused to do, the Child
was carried back unchristened. It was agreed by him and Cartwright, in the Book
of Discipline which they imposed upon the Islands, That the Minister in
Baptizing Children should not admit of any such names as had been used in the
time of Paganism, the names of Idols, and the like. Which Rule though
calculated like a common Almanac, for the Meridian of those Islands only, was
afterward to be observed on the like occasions, in all the Churches of Great
Britain. Such was their humor at that time: but they fell shortly after on
another Fancy. For taking it for granted, because they thought so, that the
English Tongue might be as proper and significan^ as the holy Hebrew; they gave
such names unto their Children, as many of them when they came to age were
ashamed to own. Out of which Forge came their Accepted, Ashes, Consolation,
Dust, Deliverance, Discipline, Earth, Freegift, Fight-the good fight-of-faith,
From above, Ioy-again, Kill-sin, More-fruit, More-tryal, Praise^God,
Reformation, Tribunal, The-Lord-is-neer, Thankful, with many others of like
nature, which only served to make the Sacrament of Baptism as contemptible, as
they had made themselves ridiculous by these new inventions.

27. Some stop they had in their proceedings, which might have terrified them
at the present from adventuring further, but that they were resolved to break
through all difficulties, and try the patience of the State to the very utmost.
The Queen had entertained a treaty of Marriage, Anno 1581, with Francis Duke of
Anjow, the youngest Son of Henry the Second, and the only surviving brother of
Henry the Third, then Reigning in France. For the negotiating whereof, Monsieur
Simier, a most complete Courtier, was sent Ambassador from that King. By whom
the business was solicited with such dexterity, that the Match was generally
conceived to be fully made. The Puritans hereupon begin to clamor, as if this
Ma^ch did aim at nothing but the reduction of Popery, and the destruction of
Religion here by Law established. But fearing more the total ruin of their
hopes and projects, then any other danger which could happen by it. The Queen
took care to tie the Duke to such conditions, that he could hardly be permitted
to hear Mass in his private Closet; and had caused Camp^an to be executed at
his being here, to let him see how little favor was to be expected by him for
the Catholic party. Yet all this would not satisfy the zealous Brethren, who
were resolved to free themselves from their own fears, by what means soever.
First therefore it was so contrived, that as Simere passed between Greenwich
and London, before the coming of the Duke, a shot was made at him from a ship,
with which one of the Watermen was killed, but the Ambassador therewith more
amazed then hurt. The Gunner afterward was pardoned, by the great power the
Earl of Leicester had in Court; it being pretended, that the Piece was
discharged upon mere accident, and not upon malice or design. After this,
follows a seditious Pamphlet, writ by one Stubs of Lincolns Inn, who had
married one of the Sisters of Thomas Cartwright; and therefore may be thought
to have done nothing in it without his privity. This Book he called, The Gaping
Gulf; in which England was to have been swallowed, the wealth thereof consumed,
and the Gospel irrecoverably drowned; writ with great bitterness of spirit and
reproachful language, to the disgrace of the French Nation, the dishonor of the
Dukes own person; and not without some vile reflections on the Queen herself,
as if she had a purpose to betray her Kingdom to the power of Strangers.

28. For publishing this book, no such excuse could be pretended, as was
insisted on in defense of the former shot; nor could the Queen do less in
Justice to her self and her Government, as the case then stood, then to call
the Authors and the Publishers of it to a strict account. To which end the said
Stubs, together with Hugh Singleton and William Page, were on the 13 day of
October arraigned at Westminster, for Writing, Printing and dispersing that
Seditious Pamphlet; and were all then and there condemned to lose their right
hands for the said offense. Which Sentence was executed on the third of
November upon Stubs and Page, as the chief offenders; but Singleton was
pardoned as an Accessory, and none of the Principals in the Crime. Which
execution gave great grief to the Disciplinarians; because they saw by that
Experiment, that there was no dallying with the Queen, when either the honor of
her Government, or the peace of her Dominions seemed to be concerned. And they
were most afflicted at it in regard of Cartwright, whose inability to preserve
so near a Friend from the severity and shame of so great a punishment, was
looked on as a strong presumption that he could be as little able to save
himself, whenever it was thought expedient upon reason of State to proceed
against him. But now they are engaged in the same bottom with him, they were
resolved to steer their course by no other Compass, then that which this grand
Pilot had provided for them. Not terrified from so doing, by the open Schism
which was the next year made by one Robert Brown, once a Disciple of their own,
and one who built his Schism upon Cartwrights Principles; nor by the hanging of
those men who had dispersed his Factious and Schismatical Pamphlets. For the
better clearing of which matter, we must fetch the story of this Brown a little
higher, and carry it a little lower then this present year.

29. This Robert Brown was born at Tol^thorp in the County of Rutland; the
Grandchild of Francis Brown Esquire, privileged in the 18 year of King Henry
VIII, to wear his Cap in the presence of the King himself, or any other Lords
Spiritual or Temporal in the Land; and not to put it off at any time, but only
for his own ease and pleasure. He was bred sometimes in Corpus Christi College
(commonly called Bennet College) in the University of Cambridge. Where, though
he was not known to take any degree, yet he would many times venture into the
Pulpit. It was observed, that in his preaching he was very vehement; which
Cartwrights Followers imputed only to his zeal, as being one of their own
number. But other men suspected him to have worse ends in it. Amongst many,
whom rather curiosity then Devotion had brought to hear him, Dr. John Still
(though possibly not then a Doctor) happened to be one. Who being afterward
Master of Trinity-Colledge, and finally Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, was used
to say, That he discerned something extraordinary in him at the very first,
which he presaged would prove a disturbance to the Church, if it were not
seasonably prevented. Being well verst and conversant in Cartwrights Books, and
other the like Pamphlets of that time, he became more and more estranged from
the Church of England: Whose Gove^^ment he found to be de^amed for
Antichristian; her Sacraments affirmed to be defiled with Superstition; her
Liturgy reproached for Popish, and in some part Heathenish; and finally, her
Ordination to be made no better then those of Baals Priests amongst the Jews.
Not able to abide longer in a Church so impure and filthy, he puts himself over
into Zealand, and joins with Cartwrights new Church in the City of
Middleborough. But finding there some few remainders of the old impiety, he
resolves to constitute a new Church of his own Projectment, which should have
nothing in it but what was most pure and holy. The Draught whereof, he
comprehended in a Book which he printed at Middleborough, An. 1582, entitled,
A Treatise of Reformation: and having sent as many of them into England as
might serve his turn, he followed after in pursuit of his new Plantation.

30. The Dutch had then a Church at Norwich, 1583.
as before was said, more numerous then any other Church or Congregation within
the Precincts of that City. Many of which enclining of themselves to the
Anabaptists, were apt enough to entertain any new Opinions which held
Conformity with that Sect. Amongst them he begins, and first begins with such
amongst them as were most likely to be ruled and governed by him; he being of
an imperious nature, and much offended with the least dissent or contradiction,
when he had uttered any Paradox in his discourses. Having gotten into some
Authority amongst the Dutch, whose Language he had learned when he lived in
Middleborough, and grown into a great opinion for his Zeal and Sanctity, he
began to practice with the English; using therein the service and assistance of
one Richard Harrison, a Country School master, whose ignorance made him apt
enough to be seduced by so weak a Prophet. Of each Nation he began to gather
Churches to himself, of the last especicially; inculcating nothing more to his
simple Auditors, then that the Church of England had so much of Rome, that
there was no place left for Christ, or his holy Gospel. But more particularly
he inveighed against the Government of the Bishops, the Ordination of
Ministers, the Offices, Rites and Ceremonies of the public Liturgy, according
as it had been taught out of Cartwrights Books; descending first to this
Position, That the Church of England was no true and lawful Church. And
afterward to this conclusion, That all true Christians were obliged to come
out of Babylon, to separate themselves from those impure and mixed Assemblies,
in which there was so little of Christ's Institution; and finally, that they
should join themselves to him and to his Disciples, amongst whom there was
nothing to be found which savoured not directly of the Spirit of God; nothing
of those impurities and prophanations of the Church of England. Hereupon
followed a defection from the Church it self; not as before amongst the
Presbyterians, from some Offices in it. Browns Followers (which from him took
the name of Brownists) refusing obstinately to join with any Congregation, with
the rest of the people, for hearing the Word preached, the Sacraments
administered, and any public act of Religious Worship. This was the first
gathering of Churches which I find in England; and for the justifying hereof,
he caused his Books to be dispersed in most parts of the Realm. Which tending
as apparently to Sedition, brought both the Dispersers of them within the
compass of the Statute 23 Eliz. cap. 2. Of which we are informed by Stow, that
Elias Thasker was hanged at Bury on the fourth of June; and John Copping, on
the sixth of the same Month, for spreading certain Books, seditiously penned by
Robert Brown against the Book of Common Prayer established by the Laws of this
Realm; as many of their Books as could be found, being burnt before them.

31. As for the Writer of the Books, and the first Author of the Schism, he was
more favorably dealt with then these wretched instruments, and many other of
his Followers in the times succeeding. Being convented before Dr. Edmond Freak,
then Bishop of Norwich, and others of the Queens Commissioners in conjunction
with him; he was by them upon his refractory carriage committed to the custody
of the Sheriff of Norwich. But being a near kinsman by his Mother to the Lord
Treasurer Burleigh, he was at his request released from his imprisonment, and
sent to London, where some course was taken to reclaim him, if it might, be
possible, totally, or in part at least, as God pleased to bless it. Whitgift by
this time had attained to the Sea of Canterbury; a man of excellent patience
and dexterity in dealing with such men as were so affected. By whose fair
usage, powerful Reasons, and exemplary piety, he was prevailed upon so far, as
to be brought unto a tolerable compliance with the Church of England. In which
good humor he was favorably dismissed by the Archbishop, and by the
Lord-Treasurer Burleigh, to the care of his Father; to the end that being under
his eye, and dealt with in a kind and temperate manner, he might in time be
well recovered, and finally withdrawn from all the Relics of his fond
opinions. Which Letters of his bear date on the 8 of October 1585. But long he
had not staid in his Fathers house, when he returned unto his vomit, and
proving utterly incorrigible, was dismissed again; the good old Gentleman being
resolved upon this point, that he would not own him for a Son, who would not
own the Church of England for his Mother. But at the last, though not till he
had passed through two and thirty prisons, as he used to brag, by the
persuasions of some Friends, and his own necessities (the more powerful Orators
of the two) he was prevailed with to accept of a place called A Church in
Northamptonshire, beneficed with cure of Souls; to which he was presented by
Thomas Lord Burleigh, after Earl of Exon, and thereunto admitted by the Bishop
of Peterborough, upon his promise not to make any more disturbances in the
proceedings of the Church: A Benefice of good value, which might tempt him to
it, the rather, in regard that he was excused as well from preaching, as from
performing any other part of the public Ministry; which Offices he discharged
by an honest Curate, and allowed him such a competent maintenance for it, as
gave content unto the Bishop, who had named the man. And on this Benefice he
lived to a very great age, not dying till the year 1630; and then dying in
Northampton Gaol, not on the old account of his inconformity, but for breach of
the Peace. A most unhappy man to the Church of England, in being the Author of
a Schism which he could not close; and most unfortunate to many of his Friends
and Followers, who suffered death for standing unto those conclusions, from
which he had withdrawn himself diverse years before.

32. But it is time that we go back again to Cartwright, upon whose principles
and positions he first raised this Schism. Which falling out so soon upon the
Execution which was done on Stubs, could not but put a great rebuke upon his
spirit; and might perhaps have tended more to his discouragement, had not his
sorrows been allayed and sweetened by a Cordial which was sent from Beza,
sufficient to revive a half-dying brother. Concerning which there is no more to
be premised, but that Geneva had of late been much wasted by a grievous
pestilence, and was somewhat distressed at this time by the Duke of Savoy.
Their peace not to be otherwise procured, but by paying a good sum of money,
and money not to be obtained but by help of their Friends. On this account he
writes to Travers, being then Domestic Chaplain to the Lord Treasurer
Burleigh; but so, that Cartwright was to be acquainted with the Tenor of it;
that by the good which the one might do upon the Queen by the means of his
Patron, and the great influence which the other had on all his party, the
contribution might amount to the higher pitch. But as for so much of the said
Letter as concerns our business, it is this that follows; viz. If as often,
dear Brother, as I have remembered thee and our Cartwright, so often I should
have written unto thee, you had been long since overwhelmed with my Letters; no
one day passing, wherein I do not only think of you and your matters; which
not only our ancient Friendship, but the greatness of those affairs wherein
you take pains, seems to require at my hands. But in regard that you were
fallen into such times, wherein my silence might be safer far then my writing,
I have, though most unwillingly, been hitherto silent. Since which time,
understanding that by Gods Grace the heats of some men are abated, I could not
suffer this my Friend to come unto you without particular Letters from me, that
I may testify my self to be the same unto you as I have been formerly; as
also, that at his return I may be certified of the true state of your affairs.
After which Preamble, he acquaints him with the true cause of his writing, the
great extremities to which that City was reduced, and the vast debts in which
they were plunged; whereby their necessities were grown so grievous, that
except they were relieved from other parts, they could not be able to support
them: And then he adds, I beseech thee, my dear Brother, not only to go on in
health with thy daily prayers; but that if you have any power to prevail with
some persons, show us by what honest means you can, how much you love us in the
Lord. Finally, having certified him of other Letters which he had writ to
certain Noblemen, and to all the Bishops, for their assistance in that case;
not without some complaints of a dis-respect which he had found to some of his
late Addresses, he concludes it thus; viz. Farewell my dear Brother; the Lord
Jesus every day more and more bless thee, and all that earnestly desire his
glory.

33. This Letter dated in the beginning of October, 1582. came very seasonably
both to comfort Cartwright, who could not but be much afflicted with his late
misfortunes, and encouraged him to proceed in pursuit of that business in which
they had took such pains. This was enough to make them hasten in the work, who
wanted no such Spurs to set them forwards. Till this time they had no
particular Form, either of Discipline or Worship, which generally was allowed
of for the use of their Churches; But every man gathered some directions out of
Cartwrights books, as seemed most proper for that purpose. But Cartwright
having now drawn up his form of Discipline, mentioned before amongst the rest
of his practices, 1580, that book of his was looked on as the only Rule, by
which they were to regulate their Churches in all public duties. But in regard
of the great scandal given by Brown, the execution done at Bury upon Thacker
and Copping, and the severity of the Laws in that behalf; it was thought fit to
look before them, and so to carry on the business as to make no rupture in the
Church, and to create no eminent danger to themselves. In reference to which
ends, they held a General Assembly, wherein they agreed upon some order for
putting the said Discipline in execution, but with as little violation of the
peace of the Church as they could possibly devise: And therefore that they
might proceed with the greater safety, it was advised and resolved on, 1. That
such as are called unto the Ministry of any Church, should be first approved
by the Classis, or some greater Assembly, and then commended to the Bishop by
their special Letters, to receive their Ordination at his hands. 2. That those
Ceremonies in the Book of Common Prayer which seemed to have been used in the
times of Popery, were totally to be omitted, if it might be done without being
deprived of their Ministry; or otherwise the matter to be left to the
consideration of the Classis, or other greater Assembly, that by the judgment
thereof it might be determined what was most fitting to be done. 3. That if
Subscription to the Articles of Religion and the Book of Common Prayer should
be urged again, that they might be then subscribed unto, according to the
Statute of 13 Eliz. that is to say, to such of them only as contain the sum of
Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments. But 4. That for many
weighty causes, neither the rest of the said Articles, nor the Book of
Common Prayer were to be subscribed; no, though a man should be deprived of his
Ministry upon such refusal.

34. A Consultation was held also in the said Assembly, That without changing
of the names, or any sensible alteration in the state of the Church, the
Churchwardens and Collectors of every Parish might serve in the place of
Elders and Deacons; and to that end, that notice might be given of their
election, about the space of 15 days before the times appointed for it by the
Law of the Land: To the intent that the Church might join in prayer to God to
be so directed, as to make choice of fit men to supply those Ministeries. It
was advised also, That before the ordinary times of the said Elections, the
Ordinance of Christ should be publicly intimated to the Congregation,
concerning the appointment of Watchmen and Overseers in the Church; it being
their duty to foresee that no offense or scandal arise in the Church; and that
if any such offense or scandal should happen, it might be seasonably remedied
and abolished by them: as also that the names of the parties chosen be
published on the next Lords Day; their duties toward the Church, and the
Churches duty toward them, being then declared; and then the said Officers to
be admitted to their several Ministeries, with the general Prayers of the whole
Church. Orders were also made for a division of the Churches into Classical and
Synodical Meetings, according to the tenor of the Book of Discipline; for
keeping a Registry of the Acts of the Classis and Synods; for dealing with
Patrons to present fit men, when any Church fell void belonging to their
Presentations; for making Collections at the General Assemblies (which were
then held for the most part at the Act in Oxon, or the Commencement in
^ambridge) toward the relief of the poor, but most especially of those who had
been deprived of their Benefices for their not subscribing; as also of such
Ministers of the Kirk of Scotland, as for their factiousness and disobedience
had been forced to abandon that Kingdom: and finally, for nominating some
set-time at the end of each Provincial Synod, in which the said Provincial
Synod was to sit again; as also for the sending of fit men to the General
Synods, which were to be held either in times of Parliament, or at such other
times as seemed most convenient.

35. By these disguisings it was thought that they might breed up their
Presbytery under the Wing of Episcopacie, till they should find it strong
enough to subsist of it self, and bid defiance to that power which had given it
shelter. It was resolved also, that instead of Prophesying, which now began to
be suppressed in every place, Lectures should be set up in some chief Towns in
every County: to which the Ministers and Lay-brethren might resort securely,
and thereby prosecute their design with the like indemnity. But no disguise
could fit them in their alterations of the Forms of Worship; of which nothing
was to be retained by Cartwrights Rules, but that which held conformity with
the Church of Geneva. According to the Rules whereof, the Minister had no more
to do on the days of Worship, but to Preach his Sermon, with a long Prayer
before it, and another after it, of his own devising; the people being
entertained both before and after with a Psalm in Meter, according to such Tune
or Tunes as the Clerk should bid. For having distributed the whole Worship of
God into these three parts; that is to say, Prayers, Praises, and Prophesyings;
the singing of the Psalms (which they conceived to be the only way of giving
praise) became, in fine, as necessary as the Prayers or Preachings. Their other
aberrations from the public Liturgy in Sacraments and Sacramentals, may best
be found in Cartwrights practice, as before laid down; it being not to be
supposed that he would practice one thing and prescribe another, or that his
own practice might not be a sufficent Canon, to direct all the Churches of this
Platform. But these alterations being so gross, that no Cloak could cover them;
another expedient was devised somewhat more chargeable then the other, but of
greater safety. For neither daring to reject the public Liturgy, and being
resolved not to conform themselves unto it; they fell upon a course of hiring
some Lay-brother, (as Snape did a Lame Soldier of Barwick) or possibly* some
ignorant Curate, to read the Prayers to such as had a mind to hear them;
neither themselves, nor their Disciples coming into the Church, till the
singing of the Psalm before the Sermon. Concerning which, one of the brethren
writes to Field, Ego singulis sabbatis cum pres^ripta ^iturgias Form^la nihil
habens commercii, in Coetu Concion^m habeo, etc. Dat. April. 14.
That having nothing to do with the prescribed form of Common Prayer, he
preached every Lords day in his Congregation; and that ^e did so by the counsel
of the Reverend Brethren; by whom (such was Gods goodness to him) he had been
lately called to be one of the Classis, which once a week was held in some
place or other.

36. In this condition stood the Affairs, when the Reverend Whitgift came to
the Sea of Canterbury. A man that had appeared so stoutly in the Churches
quarrels, that there could be no fear of his Grind^llizing, by winking at the
plots and practices of the Puritan Faction. So highly valued by the Queen, that
when she first preferred him to the Sea of Worcester, Anno 1576, she gave him
the disposing of all the Prebendaries of that Church, to the end he might be
served with the ablest and most Learned men. Nor was he less esteemed for his
civil prudence; which moved Sir Henry Sidney* to select him before all others
to be his Vice President in Wales, at such time as he was to go Lord-Deputy for
the Realm of Ireland. Upon this man the Queen had always kept her eye since
Grindal fell into disfavour, and willingly would have made him his Co-adjutor,
if he could have been persuaded to accept the offer. Which moderation altered
nothing of the Queens mind toward him, who was so constant in her choice and
designations of fit men to serve her, that upon Grindals death, which happened
on the 6 of July 1583, she preferred Whitgift to the place. To which he was
actually translated before Michaelmas following, that he might have the benefit
of the half-years-rent. Which as it was another Argument of the Queens good
affection to him (who otherwise was sufficiently intent on her personal profit)
so for a further demonstration of it, she caused one hundred pounds to be
abated in his Tenths and first Fruits, which had been overcharged on his
Predecessor. And, which was more then both together, she suffered him to
Commence a Suit against Sir James Crofts, Comptroller of her Household,
Governor of the Town of Barwick, and a privy Councellor, for the recovery of
some Lands, to the quantity of one thousand Acres, which had been first
alienated to the Queen, and by the Queen was given to Crofts on a
Court-petition. Which suit, as he had courage enough to take in hand, so had he
the felicity of an happy Issue, in the recovering of those Lands from such
Potent Competitors, without loosing any part of her Majesty's favor. But these
things are not pertinent to my present business, unless it be to show upon what
ground he stood, and that he was resolved to abate of nothing which concerned
the honor of the Church, who was so vigilant and intent (without fear of envy
or displeasure) on the profit of it.

37. The Queen was set upon a point of holding her Prerogative-Royal at the
very height; and therefore would not yield to any thing in Civil matters, which
seemed to tend to any sensible diminution of it. And in like sort she was
resolved touching her Supremacy, which she considered as the fairest Jewel in
the Regal Diadem; and consequently, could as little hearken to such
Propositions as had been made in favor of the Puritan Faction by their great
Agents in the Court, though she had many times been solicited in it. To ease
herself of which Solicitations for the time to come, she acquaints Whitgift at
his first coming to the place, that she determined to discharge herself from
the trouble of all Church-concernments, and leave them wholly to his care: That
he should want no countenance and encouragement for carrying on the great trust
committed to him: That she was sensible enough into what disorder and confusion
the affairs of the Church were brought, by the connivance of some Bishops, the
obstinancy of some Ministers, and the power of some great Lords both in Court
and Country; but that notwithstanding all these difficulties, he must resolve,
not only to assert the Episcopal Power, but also to restore that Uniformity in
Gods Public Worship, which by the weakness of his Predecessor was so much
endangered. Thus authorized and countenanced, he begins his Government. And for
the first Essay thereof, he sends abroad three Articles to be subscribed by all
the Clergy of his Province. The Tenor of which Articles, because they
afterward created so much trouble to him, I shall here subjoyn. First
therefore, he required the Clergy to subscribe to this, That the Queen had
Supreme Authority over all persons born within her Dominions, of what condition
soever they were; and that no other Prince, Prelate or Potentate, either had,
or ought to have any jurisdiction Civil or Ecclesiastical within her Realms and
Dominions. 2. That the Book of Common Prayer, and the Ordination of Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, contained nothing contrary to the Word of God, but might
lawfully be used; and that they would use that and no other. 3. That he allowed
the Articles of Religion, agreed in the Synod holden at London, in the year of
our Lord 1562, and published by the Queens Authority; and did believe them to
be consonant to the Word of God.

38. It is not easy to imagine what clamours were raised amongst the Brethren
upon this occasion; how they moved Heaven and Earth, the Court and Country, and
all the Friends they had of the Clergy or Laity, to come to their assistance
in this time of their trial. By means whereof, they raised so strong an
opposition against his proceedings, that no man of less courage then Whitgift,
and none but Whitgift so well backed and countenanced by a gracious Mistress,
could have withstood the violence and fury of it. But by the Queens constancy
on the one side, who gave Semper Eadem for her Motto, to show that she was
always one; and by his most invincible patience on the other side, whose Motto
being Vincit qui patitur, declared what hopes he had, that by a discreet
patience he might get the Victory; he had the happiness to see the Church
reduced to her former luster, by the removing of all obstacles which lay before
him. The first of which was laid by some of his own Diocese, who being required
by him to subscribe for an Example to others, not only refused so to do, but
being thereupon suspended for their contumacy in due Form of Law, they
petitioned to the Lords of the Council for relief against him: the like
Petition was presented to them, by some Ministers of the Diocese of Norwich,
against Dr. Edmond Freak their Bishop; to whom the planting of so many Dutch
Churches in the principal City, and other of the chief Towns of his Diocese,
had given trouble enough. To the Petition of the Kentish Ministers, which
concerned himself, he was required to answer at the Council Table, on the
Sunday following. Instead whereof, he lays before them in the Letter, That the
Petitioners, for the most part, were ignorant and raw young men, few of them
licensed Preachers, and generally disaffected to the present Government: That
he had spent the best part of two or three days in laboring to reduce them to
a better understanding of the points in question; but not being able to
prevail, he had no otherwise proceeded then the Law required: That it was not
for him to sit in that place, if every Curate in his Diocese might be permitted
so to use him; nor possible for him to perform the Duty which the Queen
expected at his hands, if he might not proceed to the execution of that power
by her Majesty committed to him, without interruption: That he could not be
persuaded, that their Lordships had any purpose to make him a party, or to
require him to come before them to defend those actions, wherein he supposed
that he had no other Judge but the Queen her self; and therefore in regard that
he was called by God to that place and function, wherein he was to be their
Pastor, he was the rather moved to desire their assistance in matters
pertaining to his Office, for the quietness of the Church, the credit of
Religion, and the maintenance of the Laws in defense thereof, without
expecting any such attendance on them as they had required, for fear of giving
more advantage to those wayward persons, then he conceived they did intend. And
thereunto he added this protestation, That the three Articles whereunto they
were moved to subscribe, were such, as he was ready by Learning to defend, in
manner and form as there set down, against all opponents, either in England or
elsewhere.

39. In reference to the paper of the Suffolk Ministers, he returns this
answer: It seems something strange to me, that the Ministers of Suffolk
finding themselves agrieved with the doings of their Diocesans should leave the
ordinary course of proceeding by the Law, (which is to appeal unto me) and
extraordinarily trouble your Lordships in a matter not so incident (as I think)
to that honorable Board, seeing it has pleased her Majesty her own self in
express words to commit these causes Ecclesiastical to me, as to one who is to
make answer unto God and her Majesty in this behalf; my Office also and place
requiring the same. In answer unto their complaint; touching their ordinary
proceedings with them, I have herewith sent your Lordships a Copy of a Letter
lately received from his Lordship, wherein I think that part of their Bill to
be fully answered. Touching the rest, I know not what to judge of it; but in
some points it talks (as I think) modestly and charitably. They say, they are
no Jesuits sent from Rome to reconcile, etc. True it is, neither are they
charged to be so; but notwithstanding, they are contentious in the Church of
England, and by their contentions minister occasion of offense to those which
are seduced by Jesuits; and give the Sacraments against the form of public
Prayer used in this Church, and by Law established, and thereby increase the
number of them, and confirm them in their wilfulness. They also make a Schism
in the Church, and draw many other of her Majesty's Subjects to a misliking of
her Laws and Government in Causes Ecclesiastical. So far are they from
persuading them to obedience; or at the least, if they persuade them to it in
the one part of her Authority, it is in Causes Civil; they dissuade them from
it as much in the other, that i^, in Causes Ecclesiastical: so that indeed they
pluck down with the one hand, that which they seem to build with the other.

40. More of which Letter might be added, were not this sufficient, as well to
show how perfectly he understood both his place and power, as with what courage
and discretion he proceeded in the maintenance of it. Which being observed by
some great men about the Court, who had engaged themselves in the Puritan
quarrels, but were not willing to incur the Queens displeasure by their
opposition; it was thought best to stand a while behind the Curtain, and set
Beal upon him, of whose impetuosity and edge against him they were well
assured. This Beal was in himself a most eager Puritan, trained up by
Walsingham to draw dry-foot after Priests and Jesuits; his extreme hatred to
those men, being looked on as the only good quality which he could pretend to.
But being over-blinded by zeal and passion, he was never able to distinguish
rightly between truth and falsehood; between true Sanctity, and the counterfeit
appearance of it. This made him first conceive, that whatsoever was not
Puritan, must needs be Popish; and that the Bishops were to be esteemed no
otherwise then the sons of Antichrist, because they were not looked upon as
Fathers by the holy Brotherhood. And so far was he hurried on by these
dis-affections, that though he was preferred to be one of the Clerks of the
Council, yet he preferred the interest of the Faction before that of the Queen.
Insomuch that he was noted to jeer and gibe at all such Sermons as did most
commend Her Majesty's Government, and move the Auditory to obedience; not
sparing to accuse the Preachers upon such occasions to have broached false
Doctrine, and falsely to allege the Scriptures in defense thereof. This man had
either writ or countenanced a sharp Discourse against Subscription, inscribed
to the Archbishop, and presented to him; and thereupon caused speeches to be
cast abroad, that the three Articles to which Subscription was required, should
shortly be revoked by an Act of the Council: which much increased the obstinacy
of the self-willed Brethren. But after, fearing lest the Queen might have a
sight of the Papers, he resolved to get them out of his hands; and thereupon
went over to Lambeth, where he behaved himself in such a rude and violent
manner, as forced the Archbishop to give an acconnt thereof by Letter to the
Lord Treasurer Burleigh, who hitherto had stood fair toward him, in these
following words:

41. I have born (says he) with Mr. Beals intemperate speeches, unseemly for
him to use, though not in respect of my self, yet in respect of Her Majesty
whom he serves, and of the Laws established, whereunto he ought to show some
duty. Yesterday he came to my house, as it seems to demand the Book he
delivered unto me. I told him, That the book was written unto me, and therefore
no reason why he should require it again, especially seeing I was assured that
he had a Copy thereof; otherwise I would cause it to be written out for him:
Whereupon he fell into very great passions with me (which I think was the end
of his coming) for proceeding in the execution of the Articles, etc. and told
me in effect, that I would be the overthrow of this Church, and a cause of
tumult; with many other bitter and hard speeches, which I heard patiently, and
wished him to consider with what spirit he was moved to say so: For I said, it
could not be by the Spirit of God, which works in men Patience, Humility and
Love; and your words declare (said I) that you are very Arrogant, Proud,
Impatient and Uncharitable. Moreover, the Spirit of God, etc. And all this
while (says he) I talked with him in the upper end of my Gallery: My Lord of
Winchester and diverse strangers being in the other part thereof. But Mr. Beal
beginning to extend his voice that all might hear, I began to break off. Then
he being more and more kindled, very impatiently uttered very proud and
contemptuous speeches in the justifying of his book, and condemning the Orders
established, to the offense of all the bearers. Whereupon, being very desirous
to be rid of him, I made small answer; but told him that his speeches were
intolerable, that he forgot himself, and that I would complain of him to Her
Majesty: whereof he seemed to make small account, and so he departed in great
heat. Which said, he lets his Lordship know, That though he was never more
abused by any man in his life, then since his coming to that place he had been
by Beal, and that upon no other ground but for doing his duty, yet that he was
not willing to do him any ill office with the Queen about it, or otherwise to
proceed any further in it then his Lordship should think most convenient.

42. Finding by these Experiments how little good was to be done upon him
either way, it was resolved to make some trial on the opposite party, in hope
to bring them by degrees unto some atonement. The Lord Burleigh shall first
break the ice; who upon some complaint made against the Liturgy by some of the
brethren, required them to compose another, such as they thought might
generally be accepted by them. The first Classis thereupon devised a new one,
agreeable in most things to the Form of Geneva. But this Draught being offered
to the consideration of a second Classis (for so the wise Statesman had of
purpose contrived the plot) there were no fewer then six hundred Exceptions
made against it, and consequently so many alterations to be made therein,
before it was to be admitted. The third Classis quarrelled at those
Alterations, and resolved therefore on a new Model, which should have nothing
of the other: And against this, the fourth was able to pretend as many
Objections as had been made against the first. So that no likelihood appearing
of any other Form of Worship, either better or worse, to be agreed upon between
them, he dismissed their Agents for the present; with this assurance, that
whenever they could agree upon any Liturgy which might be universally
received amongst them, they should find him very ready to serve them in the
settling of it. Just so Pacuvius dealt with the people of Capua, when they
resolved to put all their Senators to death. For when he had advised them not
to execute that sentence upon any one Senator, till they were agreed upon
another to supply the place, there followed such a division amongst them in the
choice of the new, and so many Exceptions against every man which was offered
to them, that at the last it was resolved to let the old Senate stand in force,
till they could better their condition in the change of the persons. Walsingham
tries his fortune next, in hope to bring them to allow or the English Liturgy,
on the removal of such things as seemed most offensive. And thereupon he
offered, in the Queens name, that the three Ceremonies at which they seemed
most to boggle; that is to say, Kneeling at the Communion; The Surplice; and,
The Cross in Baptism, should be expunged out of the Book of Common Prayer, if
that would content them. But thereunto it was replied in the words of Moses, Ne
ungulam esse relinquendum; That they would not leave so much as a hoof behind.
Meaning thereby, that they would have a total abolition of the Book, without
retaining any part of Office in it in their next new-nothing. Which peremptory
answer did much alienate his affection from them; as afterward he affirmed to
Knewstubs, and Knewstubs to Dr. John Burges of Colshil; from whose pen I have
it.

43. The Brethren on the other side finding how little they had gotten by their
application to the Lords of the Council, began to steer another course, by
practicing upon the temper of the following Parliaments, into which they had
procured many of their chief Friends to be retained for Knights or Burgesses,
as they could prevail. By whose means (notwithstanding that the Queen had
charged them not to deal in any thing which was of concernment to the Church)
they procured a Bill to pass in the House of Commons 1585, for making trial of
the sufficiency of such as were to be ordained or admitted Ministers by twelve
Laymen; whose approbation and allowance they were first to pass, before they
were to receive Institution into any Benefice. Another Bill was also past, for
making Marriage lawful at all times of the year; which had been formerly
attempted by the Convocation, and tendered to the Queen amongst other Articles
there agreed upon, but was by her disrellished and rejected, as before was
said. They were in hand also with a third, concerning Ecclesiastical Courts,
and the Episcopal Visitations; pretending only a redress of some Exorbitances
in excessive Fees, but aiming plainly at the overthrow of the Jurisdiction. Of
which particulars, Whitgift gives notice to the Queen; and the Queen so far
signified her dislike of all those proceedings, that all those Projects dyed in
the House of Commons, without ever coming into Acts. The like attempts were
made in some following Sessions; in which some Members showed themselves so
troublesome to sober men, so alienated from the present Government, and so
dis-respective toward the Queen, that she was fain to lay some of them by the
heels, and deprive others of their places, before she could reduce them to a
better temper. Of which we shall speak more hereafter, in the course of this
History.

The end of the seventh Book.
AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History OF THE PRESBYTERIANS LIB. VIII. Containing
The Seditious Practices and Positions of the English Puritans, their Libels,
Railing, and Reviling, in order to the setting up of the Holy Discipline, from
the year 1584, to the year 1589. The undutiful Carriage of the French, and the
horrible Insolences of the Scotch Presbyters, from the year 1585, to the year
1592.
HAving thus prosecuted the Affairs of the Presbyterians in England, 1584.
to the same point of time where before we left the Scots, the French, and
those of the same Party in the Belgic Provinces: we shall hereafter treat of
them as they come before us with reference to the Practices and Proceedings of
their English Brethren. And first, beginning with the Scots, it is to be
remembered, that we left them at a very low ebb; the Earl of Goury put to death,
many of the Nobility exiled into Foreign Countries, and the chief Zealots of
the Faction amongst the Ministers, putting themselves into a voluntary
Banishment, because they could not have their wills on the King and Council.
England, as nearest hand, was the common Sanctuary, to which some Lords, and
almost all the Refractory Ministers had retired themselves. Much countenanced
by Mr. Secretary Walsingham, who had set them on work; and therefore was
obliged to gratify them in some fit proportion. To such of the Nobility as had
fled into England, he assigned the Isle of Lindisfarm, (commonly called the
Holy Island) not far from Berwick; with order to the Lord Hundsdon, who was
then Governor of that Town, to give them the possession of it. But Hundsdon,
though he had less Zeal, had so much knowledge of his Duty, as to disobey him;
considering the great consequence of the place, and that there was no
impossibility in it, but that the Scots might make use of it to the common
prejudice, if they should prove Enemies to this Crown, as perhaps they might. A
matter, which the Secretary would not have passed over in so light a manner,
but that an Ambassador was sent at the same time from the King of Scots, by
whom it was desired that the Fugitives of that Nation, whatsoever they were,
might either be remitted home, or else commanded not to live so near the
Borders, where they had opportunity, more than stood with the good of that
Kingdom, to pervert the Subjects. Which Reasonable Desire being yielded unto,
the Lords and Great men of that Nation were ordered to retire to Norwich, and
many of the Ministers, permitted to prepare for London, Oxon, Cambridg, and
some other places; where some of them procured more mischief to the Church of
England, than all of them could have done to their own Country, had they staid
at Berwick.

2. At London they are suffered, by some zealous Brethren, to possess their
Pulpits, in which they rail, without comptroll, against their King, the Council
of that Kingdom, and their natural Queen; as if by the practices of the one,
and the connivence of the other, the Reformed Religion was in danger to be
rooted out. Some Overtures had been made at that time by the Queen of Scots, by
which it was desired that she might be restored unto the Liberty of her person,
associating with the young King in the Government of the Realm of Scotland; and
be suffered to have the Mass said in her private Closet, for her self and her
Servants. The news whereof being brought to London, filled all the Pulpits
which the Scots were suffered to invade, with terrible Complaints and
Exclamations; none of them sparing to affirm, That her Liberty was inconsistent
with Queen Elizabeth's Safety: That both Kingdoms were undone, if she were
admitted to the joynt-Government of the Realm of Scotland; and, That the
Reformed Religion must needs breathe its last, if the Popish were permitted
within the Walls of the Court. Which points they pressed with so much vehemence
and heat, that many were thereby inflamed to join themselves in the Association
against that Queen, which soon after followed. Against their King they railed
so bitterly, and with such reproach, (one Davinson more than any other) that
upon complaint made by the Scottish* Ambassador, the Bishop of London was
commanded to silence all the Scots about the City; and the like Order given to
the rest of the Bishops, by whom they were inhibited from preaching in all
other places. But the less noise they made in the Church, the more closely and
dangerously they practiced on particular persons, in whom they endeavored to
beget an ill opinion of the present Government, and to engage them for
advancing that of the Presbyterian in the place thereof. But this they had
followed more successfully at the Act in Oxon, where they are liberally
entertained by Genebrand and the rest of the Brethren; amongst which, Wilcox,
Hen, and Ackton, were of greatest note. And at this time a question was
propounded to them concerning the proceeding of the Minister in his duty,
without the assistance or tarrying for the Magistrate. How they resolved this
question, may be easily guessed, partly by that which they had done themselves
when they were in Scotland; and partly by the Actings of their English
Brethren, in pursuance of it.

3. For presently after, Gelibrand deals with diverse Students in their several
Colleges, to put their hands unto a paper, which seemed to contain somewhat in
it of such dangerous nature, that some did absolutely refuse, and others
required further time of deliberation: of which Gelibrand thus writes to Field,
on the 12 th of Ian. then next following: I have already (says he) entered into
the matters whereof you write, and dealt with three or four several Colleges,
concerning those amongst whom they live. I find that men are very dangerous in
this point, generally favoring Reformation; but when it comes to the
particular point, some have not yet considered of the things for which others
in the Church are so much troubled: others are afraid to testify any thing
with their hands, lest it breed danger before the time: and many favor the
Cause of the Reformation, but they are not Ministers, but young Students; of
whom there is good hope, if they be not cut off by violent dealing before the
time. As I hear by you, so I mean to go forward where there is any hope, and to
learn the number, and certify you thereof, etc. But that these secret
practices might not be suspected, they openly attend the Parliament of this
year, as at other times, in hope of gaining some advantage against the Bishops,
and the received Orders of the Church: For in the Parliament of this year,
which began on the Twenty third of November, they petitioned, amongst other
things, That a Restraint might be laid upon the Bishops, for granting of
Faculties, conferring of Orders, as also in the executing of Ecclesiastical
Censure, the Oath Ex Officio, permitting Non-residence, and the like. But the
Queen would not hearken to it, partly because of the dislike she had of all
Innovations, which commonly tend unto the worse; but chiefly, in regard that
all such Applications as they made to the Parliament, were by her looked on as
derogatory to her own Supremacy. So that instead of gaining any of those points
at the hands of the Parliament, they gained nothing but displeasure from the
Queen, who is affirmed by Stow to have made a Speech at the end of their
Session, and therein to have told the Bishops, That if they did not look more
carefully to the discharge of their Duties, she must take order to deprive
them. Sharp words! and such as might necessitate the Bishops to look well about
them.

4. It happened also, that some of the great Lords at Court whom they most
relied on, began to cool in their affections to the Cause, and had informed the
Queen of the weakness of it, upon this occasion. The Earl of Leicester,
Walsingham, and some others of great place and power, being continually pressed
unto it by some Leadingmen, prevailed so far on the Archbishop of Canterbury,
as to admit them (in their hearing) to a private Conference: To which the
Archbishop condescends; and having desired the Archbishop of York, and the
Bishop of Winchester, to associate with him, that he might not seem to act
alone in that weighty business; he was pleased to hear such Reasons as they
could alledg for refusing to conform themselves to the Orders of the Church
established. At which time though the said most Reverend Prelate sufficiently
cleared all their Doubts, and satisfied all Exceptions which they had to make;
yet at the earnest request of the said great persons, he gave way unto a second
Conference to be held at Lambeth; at which such men were to be present, whose
Arguments and Objections were conceived unanswerable, because they had not yet
been heard. But when the points had been canvased on both sides for four hours
together, the said great persons openly professed before all the Company, That
they did not believe the Archbishops Reasons to have been so strong, and those
of the other side so weak and trivial, as they now perceived them. And having
thanked the Lord Archbishop for his pains and patience, they did not only
promise him to inform the Queen in the truth of the business; but endeavored
to persuade the opposite Party to a present Conformity. But long they did not
stay in so good a humor; of which more hereafter.

5. With better fortune sped the Lords of the Scottish Nation, in the advance
of their Affairs: Who being admitted to the Queens presence by the means of
Walsingham, received such countenance and support, as put them into a condition
of returning homewards and gaining that by force and practice, which they found
impossible to be compassed any other way. All matters in that Kingdom were then
chiefly governed by the Earl of Arran, formerly better known by the name of
Captain Jones, who being of the House of the Stuarts, and fastening his
dependence on the Duke of Lenox, at his first coming out of France, had on his
instigation undertaken the impeaching of the Earl of Morton: after which,
growing great in favor with the King himself, he began to ingross all Offices
and Places of Trust, to draw unto himself the managery of all Affairs, and
finally to assume the Title of Earl of Arran, at such time as the Chiefs of the
Hamiltons were exiled and forfeited. Grown great and powerful by these means,
and having added the Office of Lord Chancellor to the rest of his Honors, he
grew into a general hatred will all sorts of people: And being known to have no
very good affections to the Queen of England, she was the more willing to
contribute toward his destruction. Thus animated and prepared, they make
toward the Borders, and raising the Country as they went, marched on to
Sterling where the King then lay. And showing themselves before the Town with
Ten thousand men, they publish a Proclamation in their own terms, touching the
Reasons which induced them to put themselves into Arms. Amongst which it was
none of the least, That Acts and Proclamations had, not long before, been
published against the Ministers of the Kirk, inhibiting their Presbyteries,
Assemblies, and other Exercises, Privileges, and Immunities, by reason whereof
the most Learned and Honest of that number were compelled for safety of their
Lives and Consciences, to abandon their Country. To the end therefore that all
the aff^icted Kirk might be comforted, and all the said Acts fully made in
prejudice of the same, might be cancelled, and for ever abolished, they
commanded all the King's Subjects to come in to aid them.

6. The King perceiving by this Proclamation what he was to trust to, first
thinks of fortifying the Town: but finding that to be untenable, he betakes
himself unto the Castle, as his surest strength. The Conquerors having gained
the Town on the first of October, possessed themselves also of the Bulwarks about
the Castle; which they inviron on all sides, so that it was not possible for
any to escape their hands: In which extremity the King makes three Requests
unto them, viz. That his Life, Honor, and Estate, might be preserved. That the
Lives of certain of his Friends might not be touched. And that all things might
be transacted in a peaceable manner. They, on the other side, demand three
things for their security and satisfaction, viz. 1. That the King would allow
of their intention, and subscribe their Proclamation, until further Order were
established by the Estates, etc. and that he would deliver into their hands all
the Strongholds in the Land. 2. That such as had disquieted the Commonwealth,
might be delivered to them, and abide their due trial by Law. And, 3. That the
old Guard might be removed, and another placed, which was to be at their
disposal. To which Demands the King consents at last, as he could not
otherwise; though in their Second they had purposely run across to the Second
of his, wherein he had desired that the Lives of such as were about him, might
not be endangered. Upon the yielding of which points, which in effect was all
that he had to give unto them, he puts himself into their hands, has a new
Guard imposed upon him, and is conducted by them wheresoever they please. And
now the Ministers return in triumph to their Widowed Churches, where they had
the Pulpits at command, but nothing else agreeable to their expectation. For
the Lords having served their own turns, took no care of theirs; insomuch that
in a Parliament held in Lithgoe, immediately after they had got the King into
their power, they caused an Act to pass for ratifying the appointment betwixt
them and the King; by which they provided well enough for their own Indemnity.
But then withal, they suffered it to be Enacted, That none should either
publicly declare, or privately speak or write in reproach of his Majesty's
Person, Estate, or Government. Which came so cross upon the stomachs of the
Ministers, whom nothing else could satisfy but the repealing of all former
Statutes which were made to their prejudice, that they fell foul upon the King
in a scandalous manner: insomuch that one Gibson affirmed openly in a Sermon at
Edenborough, That heretofore the Earl of Arran was suspected to have been the
Persecutor, but now they found it was the King; against whom he denounced the
Curse that fell on Jeroboam, That he should dye Childless, and be the last of
his Race. For which, being called to an account before the Lords of the
Council, he stood upon his justification without altering, and was by them sent
Prisoner to the Castle of Blackross.

7. Of the same temper were the rest; who notwithstanding the late Acts of
Parliament inhibiting all Assembly and Classical Conventions, without leave
from the King, held a new Synod at St. Andrews, in the April following,
consisting (for the most part) of Barons and Lay-Gentlemen, Masters of
Colleges, and ignorant Schoolmasters. Which Synod (if it may be called so)
was purposely indicted by Andrew Melvin, for censuring the Archbishop of that
City, whom they suspected and gave out to be the chief Contriver of the Acts of
Parliament made in 1584, so prejudicial to the Kirk; and to have penned the
Declaration in defense thereof. And hereunto he found the rest so ready to
conform themselves, that they were upon the point of passing the Sentence of
Excommunication against him, before he was cited to appear; most of them crying
out aloud, It was the Cause of God; and, That there needed no citation, where
the iniquity was so manifest. But being cited, at the last, he appears before
them, puts up his Protestation concerning the unlawfulness of that Convention,
and his disowning any Jurisdiction which they challenged over him; and so
demanded of them, What they had to say? His Accusation was, That he had devised
the Acts of Parliament in -- 84, to the subversion of the Kirk, and the
Liberties of it. To which he answered, That he only had approved, and not
devised the said Acts; which having past the approbation of the Three Estates,
were of a nature too Supreme for such Assemblies; and thereupon appealed unto
the King, the Council, and the following Parliament. But notwithstanding this*
Appeal, the Sentence of Excommunication is decreed against him, drawn into
Writing, and subscribed. Which when neither the Moderator, being a mere Layick,
nor any of the Ministers themselves, had confidence enough to pronounce and
publish; one Hunter, a Pedagogue in the House of Andrew Melvin, (professing
that he had the Warrant of the Spirit for it) took the charge upon him, and
with sufficient audacity pronounced the Sentence.

8. The informality and perverseness of these proceedings, much displeased the
King; but more he feared what would be done in the next Assembly, appointed to
be held at Edenborough, and then near at hand* Melvin intended in the same, not
only to make good whatsoever had been done at the former Meeting, but to
dispute the nature and validity of all Appeals which should be made against
them on the like occasions. To break which blow, the King could find no other
way, but to persuade the Archbishop to subscribe to these three points, viz.
That he never publicly professed or intended to claim any Superiority, or to
be judge over any other Pastors and Ministers, or yet a vowed the same to have
any warrant in Gods Word: That he never challenged any Jurisdiction over the
late Synod at St. Andrews; and must have erred, by his contempt of the said
Meeting, if he had so done. And thirdly, That he would behave himself better
for the time to come; desiring pardon for the oversight of his former Actions;
promising to be such a Bishop from thenceforth, as was described by St. Paul:
And finally, submitting both himself and Doctrine, to the Judgment of the said
Assembly, without appealing from the same in the times to come. To such
unworthy Conditions was the poor man brought, only to gain the King some peace,
and to reserve that little Power which was left unto Him; though the King lost
more by this Transaction, than possibly He could have done by his standing out.
For, notwithstanding the Submissions on the part of the Bishop, the Assembly
would descend no lower than to declare, That they would hold the said Sentence
for not pronounced, and thereby leave the Bishop in the same estate in which
they found him; and not this neither, but upon some hopes and assurance given
them, that the King would favorably concur with them in the building of the
House of God. Which Agreement did so little satisfy the adverse party, that
they justified their former process, and peremptorily confirmed the Sentence
which had been pronounced. Which, when it could not be obtained from the
greater part of the Assembly, who were not willing to lose the glory of so
great a Victory; Hunter stands up, by the advice of Andrew Melvin, and
publicly protested against it; declaring further, That notwithstanding any
thing which had been done to the contrary, the Bishop should be still reputed
for an Excommunicated person, and one delivered unto Satan. It was moved in
this Assembly also, That some Censure should be laid upon the Ministers, who
had subscribed the Acts of Parliament made in -- 84. But their number proved so
great, that a Schism was feared; and they were wise enough to keep all
together, that they might be the better able upon all occasions to oppose the
King. Somewhat was also done concerning the Establishment of their
Presbyteries, and the defining of their Power: of which the King would take no
notice, reserving his disgust of so many Insolences, till he should find
himself in a condition to do them Reason.

9. In these Exorbitances, they are followed by the English Puritans, who had
been bad enough before, but henceforth showed themselves to have more of the
Scot in them, than in former times. For presently upon the news of the good
success which their Scottish Brethren had at Sterling, a scandalous Libel, in
the nature of a Dialogue, is published, and dispersed in most parts of England:
in which the state of this Church is pretended to be laid open in a Conference
between Diotrephes, (representing the person of a Bishop) Tertullus, (a Papist,
brought in to plead for the Orders of our Church) Demetrius, an Usurer,
(signifying such as live by unlawful Trades) Pandocheus, an Innkeeper, (a
receiver of all, and a soother of every man for his Gain) and Paul, (a Preacher
of the Word of God) sustaining the place and person of the Consistorians). In
the contrivance of which piece, Paul falls directly on the Bishop, whom he used
most proudly, spightfully, and slanderously. He condemns both the Calling of
Bishops as Antichristian, and censureth their proceedings as Wicked, Popish,
Unlawful, and Cruel. The Bishop is supposed to have been sent out of England
into Scotland, for suppressing the Presbyteries there, and is made upon his
return homewards, to be the Reporter of the Scottish Affairs; and withal, to
signify his great fear lest he, and the rest of the Bishops in England, should
be served shortly as the Bishops had lately been in Scotland, viz. at
Edenborough, St. Andrews, etc. Tertullus, the Papist, is made the Bishop's only
Counselor in the whole course of the Government of the Church; by whose Advice
the Bishops are made to bear with the Popish Recusants, and that so many ways
are sought to suppress the Puritans: And he, together with Pandocheus the Host,
and Demetrius the Usurer, relate unto the Bishop such Occurrences as had
happened in England during his stay amongst the Scots. At which, when the
Bishop seemed to wonder, and much more marvelled that the Bishops had not yet
suppressed the Puritans some way or other; Pandocheus is made to tell him, That
one of their Preachers had affirmed in the Pulpit, That there were One hundred
thousand of them in England; and that their Number in all places did increase
continually.

10. By this last brag about their Numbers, and somewhat which escaped from the
mouth of Paul, touching his hopes of seeing the Consistorian Discipline,
erected shortly, it may be gathered, That they had a purpose to proceed in
their Innovations, out of a hope to terrify the State to a compliance, by the
strength of their Party. But if that failed, they would then do as Penry had
advised and threatened; that is to say, they would present themselves with a
Petition to the Houses of Parliament, to the delivering whereof, One hundred
thousand Hands should be drawn together. In the mean time, it was thought fit
to dissemble their purposes, and to make trial of such other means as appeared
less dangerous. To which end they present with one Hand a Petition to the
Convocation, in which it was desired, That they might be freed from all
Subscriptions; and with the other, publish a seditious Pamphlet, entitled, A
Complaint of the Commons for a Learned Ministry. But, for the putting of their
Counsels in execution, they were for the present at a stand. The Book of
Discipline, upon a just examination, was not found so perfect, but that it
needed a review; and the review thereof is referred to Traverse. By whom being
finished, after a tedious expectation, it was commended to the Brethren, and by
them approved. But the worst was, it was not so well liked of in the Houses of
Parliament, as to pass for current; which so incensed those meek-spirited men,
that they fell presently to threatening and reviling all who opposed them in it.
They had prepared their way to the Parliament then sitting, Anno 1586, by
telling them, That if the Reformation they desired, were not granted, they
should betray God, his Truth, and the whole Kingdom, that they should declare
themselves to be an Assembly, wherein the Lords Cause could not be heard,
wherein the felicity of miserable men could not be respected; wherein Truth,
Religion, and Piety, could bear no sway; an Assembly that willingly called for
the Judgments of God upon the whole Realm; and finally, that not a man of their
seed should prosper, be a Parliament Man, or bear rule in England any more.

11. This necessary preparation being thus premised, they tender to the
Parliament, A Book of the form of Common Prayer by them desired, containing
also, in effect, the whole pretended Discipline, so revised by Traverse; and
their Petition in behalf thereof, was in these words following, viz. May it
therefore please your Majesty, etc. that the Book hereunto annexed, etc.
Entitled, A Book of the Form of Common Prayers, and Administration of
Sacraments, etc. and every thing therein contained, etc. may be from henceforth
put in use, and practiced through all your Majesty's Dominions, etc. But this
so little edified with the Queen, or that Grave Assembly, that in the drawing
up of a General Pardon to be passed in Parliament, there was an Exception of
all those that committed any offense against the Act for the Uniformity of
Common Prayers, or that were Publishers of Seditious Books, or Disturbers of
Divine Service. And to say the truth, the Queen had little reason to approve of
that Form of Discipline in which there was so little consideration of the
Supreme Magistrate in having either vote or place in any of their Synodical
Meetings, unless he be chosen for an Elder, or indicting their Assemblies,
either Provincial or National, or what else soever; or insomuch as nominating
the particular time or place, when, and where to hold them; or finally, in
requiring his assent to any of their Constitutions. All which, they challenge
to themselves with far greater arrogance than ever was exercised by the Pope,
or any Bishop or inferior Minister under his Command, during the times of
greatest Darkness. But the Brethren not considering what just Reason the Queen
had to reject their Bill, and yet fearing to fall foul upon her, in regard of
the danger; they let fly at the Parliament in this manner; that is to say,
That they should be in danger of the terrible Mass of God's Wrath, both in this
life, and that to come; and that for their not abrogating the Episcopal
Government, they might well hope for the Favor and Entertainment of Moses,
that is, the Curse of the Law: the Favor and loving-Countenance of Jesus
Christ, they should never see.

12. It may seem strange that Queen ELIZABETH should carry such a hard hand on
her English Puritans, as well by severe Laws, and terrible Executions, as by
excluding them from the benefit of a General Pardon; and yet protect and
countenance the Presbyterians in all places else. But that great Monster in
Nature, called Reason of State, is brought to plead in her defense; by which
she had been drawn to aid the French Hugonots against their King; to supply the
Rebel- Scots with Men, Money, Arms and Ammunition, upon all occasions; and
hitherto support those of the Belgic Provinces, against the Spaniard. Now she
receives these last into her protection, being reduced at that time unto great
Extremities, partly by reason of the death of the Prince of Orange; and partly
in regard of the great Successes of the Prince of Parma. In which extremity
they offered her the Sovereignty of Holland, Zealand, and West-Friesland; to
which they frame for her an unhandsom Title, grounded on her descent from
Philippa, Wife of Edward the third, Sister of William the third, Earl of
Heynalt, Holland, etc. But she not harkning to that offer about the
Sovereignty, as a thing too invidious, and of dangerous consequence; cheerfully
yielded to receive them into her protection, to raise an Army presently toward
their defense, consisting of Five thousand Foot, and One thousand Horse, with
Money, Ammunition, Arms, and all other necessaries; and finally, to put the
same Arms so appointed, under the Command of some Person of Honor, who was to
take the charge and trust of so great a Business. The Confederates, on the
other side, being very prodigal of that which was none of their own, delivered
into her hands the Keys of the Country, that is to say, the Towns of Brill and
Flushing, with the Fort of Ramekins. And more then so, as soon as the Earl of
Leicester came amongst them, in the Head of this Army, which most ambitiously
he affected for some other Ends; they put into his hands the absolute
Government of these Provinces, gave him the Title of His Excellency, and
generally submitted to him with more outward cheerfulness than ever they had
done to the King of Spain. It is not to be thought, but that the Presbyterian
Discipline went on succesfully in those Provinces, under this new Governor; who
having countenanced them in England against the Laws, might very well afford
them all his best assistances, when Law and Liberty seemed to speak in favor
of it. But being there was nothing done by them, which was more than ordinary;
as little more than ordinary could be done amongst them, after they had
betrayed their Country to the Power of Strangers; We shall leave him to pursue
their Wars, and return for England, where we shall find the Queen of Scots
upon the point of acting the last part of her Tragedy.

13. Concerning which, it may not be unfit to recapitulate so much of Her story
as may conduct us fairly to the knowledge of her present condition. Immediately
on the death of Queen MARY, she had taken on her self the Title and Arms of
England; which though she did pretend to have been done by the command of her
Husband, and promised to disclaim them both in the Treaty of Edenborough; yet
neither were the Arms obliterated in her Plate and Hangings, after the death of
that Husband; nor would she ever ratify and confirm that Treaty, as had been
conditioned. On this first grudg, Queen ELIZABETH furni^heth the Scots both
with Men and Arms, to expel the French; affords them such a measure both of
Money and Countenance, as made them able to take the Field against their Queen,
to take her Prisoner, to depose her; and finally, to compel her to forsake the
Kingdom. In which Extremity, she lands in Cumberland, and casts her self upon
the favor of Queen ELIZABETH; by whom she was first confined to Carlisle, and
afterward committed to the custody of the Earl of Shrewsbury. Upon the death
of FRANCIS the Second, her first Husband, the King of Spain designed her for a
Wife to his Eldest Son. But the Ambition of the young Prince spurred him on so
fast, that he brake his Neck in the Career. The Duke of Norfolk was too great
for a private Subject; of a Revenue not inferior to the Crown of Scotland:
insomuch that the Queen was counseled, when she came first to the Throne,
either to take him for her Husband, or to cut him off. He is now drawn into the
Snare, by being tempted to a hope of Marriage with the Captive-Queen; which
Leicester and the rest, who had moved it to him, turned to his destruction. Don
John of Austria, Governor of the Netherlands for the King of Spain, had the
like design, that by her Title he might raise himself to the Crown of England.
To which end he recalled the Spanish Soldiers out of Italy, to whose dismission
he had yielded when he first came to that Government; and thereby gave Q.
ELIZABETH a sufficient color to aid the Provinces against him. But his
aspirings cost him deer; for he fell soon after. The Guisards and the Pope had
another project, which was, To place her first on the Throne of England, and
then to find an Husband of sufficient Power to maintain her in it. For the
effecting of which Project, the Pope commissionated his Priests and Jesuits;
and the Guisards employed their Emissaries of the English Nation, by Poison,
Pistol, open War, or secret practices, to destroy the one, that so they might
advance the other to the Regal Diadem.

14. With all these Practices and Designs, it was conceived that the Imprisoned
Queen could not be ignorant; and many strong presumptions were discovered to
convict her of it: Upon which grounds, the Earl of Leicester drew the form of
an Association, by which he bound himself, and as many others as should enter
into it, To make enquiry against all such persons as should attempt to invade
the Kingdom, or raise Rebellion, or should attempt any evil against the Queen's
Person, to do her any manner of hurt, from, or by whomsoever that laid any
claim to the Crown of England. And that, that Person by whom, or for whom they
shall attempt any such thing, shall be altogether incapable of the Crown, shall
be deprived of all manner of Right thereto, and persecuted to the death by all
the Queen's Loyal Subjects, in case they shall be found guilty of any such
Invasion, Rebellion, or Treason, and should be so publicly declared. Which
Band or Association, was confirmed in the Parliament of this year, ending the
29 th of March, Ann. 1585, exceedingly extolled for an Act of Piety, by those
very men who seemed to abominate nothing more, than the like Combination made
not long before between the Pope, the Spaniard, and the House of Guise, called
the Holy League; which League was made for maintenance of the Religion then
established in the Realm of France, and the excluding of the King of Navarre,
the Prince of Conde, and the rest of the House of Bourbon, from their
succession to the Crown, as long as they continued Enemies to that Religion.
The Brethren in this case not unlike the Lamiae, who are reported to have been
stone-blind when they were at home, but more than Eagle-sighted when they went
abroad. Put that they might not trust to their own strength only, Queen
ELIZABETH ties the French King to her, by investing him with the Robes and
Order of St. George, called the Garter: She draws the King of Scots to unite
himself unto her in a League Offensive and Defensive against all the World; and
under color of some danger to Religion by that Holy League; she brings all the
Protestant Princes of Germany to confederate with her.

15. And now the Queen of Scots is brought to a public Trial, accelerated by a
new Conspiracy of Babington, Tichborn, and the rest; in which nothing was
designed without her privity. And it is very strange to see how generally all
sorts of people did contribute toward her destruction; the English Protestants,
upon an honest apprehension of the Dangers to which the Person of their Queen
was subject by so many Conspiracies: the Puritans, for fear lest she should
bring in Popery again, if she came to the Crown: the Scots, upon the like
conceit of over-throwing their Presbyteries, and ruinating the whole Machina of
their Devices, if ever she should live to be Queen of England. The Earl of
Leicester and his Faction in the Court, had their Ends apart; which was, To
bring the Imperial Crown of this Realm, by some means or other, into the Family
of the Dudley's. His Father had before designed it, by marrying his Son
Guilford with the Lady Jane, descended from the younger Sister of K. HENRY the
Eighth. And he projects to set it on the Head of the Earl of Huntington, who
had married his Sister, and looked upon himself as the direct Heir of George
Duke of Clarence. And that they might not want a Party of sufficient strength
to advance their Interest, they make themselves the Heads of the Puritan
Faction; the Earl of Leicester in the Court, and the Earl of Huntingdon in the
Country. For him, he obtains of the Queen the command of the North, under
the Title of Lord President of the Council iu York, to keep out the Scots: and
for himself, the Conduct of the English Armies which served in the
Low Countries, to make sure of all. He takes a course also to remove the
Imprisoned Queen from the Earl of Shrewsbury, and commits her to the custody of
Paulet, and Drury, two notorious Puritans, though neither of them were so base
as to serve his turn, when he practiced on them to assassinate her in a private
way. I take no pleasure in recounting the particulars of that Horrid Act, by
which a Sovereign Queen, lawfully Crowned and Anointed, was brought to be
arraigned before the Subjects of her nearest Kinswoman, or how she was
convicted by them; what Artifices were devised to bring her to the fatal Block;
or what dissimulations practiced to palliate and excuse that Murder.

16. All I shall note particularly in this woeful story, is the behavior of the
Scots, (I mean the Presbyters) who being required by the King to recommend her
unto God in their public Prayers, refused most unchristianly so to do, except
only David Lindesay at Leith, and the King's own Chaplains. And yet the Form of
Prayer prescribed, was no more than this, That it might please God to
illuminate her with the Light of his Truth, and save her from the apparent
danger wherein she was cast. On which default, the King appointed solemn
Prayers to be made for her in Edenborough, on the third of February; and
nominates the Archbishop of St. Andrews to perform that Office. Which being
understood by the Ministers, they stirred up one John Cooper, a bold young man,
and not admitted into Orders, of their own conferring to invade the Pulpit,
before the Bishop had an opportunity to take the place: Which being noted by
the King, he commanded him to come down, and leave the Pulpit to the Bishops,
as had been appointed; or otherwise, to perform the Service which the Day
required. To which the saucy Fellow answered, That he would do therein
according as the Spirit of God should direct him in it. And then perceiving
that the Captain of the Guard was coming to remove him thence, he told the King
with the same impudence as before, That this day should be a witness against
him in the Great Day of the Lord: And then denouncing a Woe to the Inhabitants
of Edenborough, he went down; and the Bishop of St. Andrews entering the Pulpit,
did the Duty required. For which intolerable Affront, Cooper was presently
commanded to appear before the Lords of the Council, and he took with him
Watson and Belcanqual, two of the Preachers of Edenborough, for his two
Supporters: Where they behaved themselves with so little reverence, that the
two Ministers were discharged from preaching in Edenborough, and Cooper was
sent Prisoner to the Castle of Blackness. But so unable was the King to bear up
against them, that having a great desire that Montgomery, Archbishop of
Glasgow, might be absolved from the Censures under which he lay, he could no
otherwise obtain it, than by releasing this Cooper, together with Gibson
beforementioned, from their present Imprisonment: which, though it were
yielded to by the King, upon condition that Gibson should make some
acknowledgment of his Offense in the face of the Church; yet, after many
triflings, and much tergiversation, he took his flight into England, where he
became a useful Instrument in the Holy Cause.

17. For so it was, that notwithstanding the Promise made to Archbishop
Whitgift, by Leicester, Walsingham, and the rest, as before is said, they gave
such encouragements underhand to the Presbyterians, that they resolved to
proceed toward the putting of the Discipline in execution, though they received
small countenance in it from the Queen and Parliament. Nor were those great
Persons altogether so unmindful of them, as not to entertain their Clamours,
and promote their Petitions at the Council Table, crossing and thwarting the
Archbishop whenever any Cause which concerned the Brethren, had been brought
before them. Which drew from him several Letters to the Lords of the Council,
each syllable whereof, (for the great Piety and Modesty which appears in them)
deserves to have been written in Letters of Gold. Now the sum of these Letters,
as they are laid together by Sir George Paul, is as follows.

18. God knows, (says he) how desirous I have been from time to time, to have
my doings approved by my ancient and honorable Friends: for which cause, since
my coming to this place, I have done nothing of importance against these
Sectaries, without good Advice. I have risen up early, and sat up late, to
yield Reasons, and make Answer to their Contentions, and their Seditious
Objections. And shall I now say, I have lost my labor? Or, shall my just
dealing with disobedient and irregular persons, cause my former professed and
ancient Friends to hinder my just proceedings, and make them speak of my
doings, yea, and of my self, what they list? Solomon says, An old Friend is
better than a new: I trust those that love me indeed, will not so lightly cast
off their old Friends, for any of these newfangled and factious Sectaries,
whose fruits are to make division, and to separate old and assured Friends. In
my own private Affairs, I know I shall stand in need of Friends; but in these
public Actions, I see no cause why I should seek any, seeing they to whom the
care of the Commonwealth is committed, ought of duty therein to join with me.
And if my honorable Friends shall forsake me (especially in so good a Cause)
and not put their helping-hand to the redress of these Enormities, (being
indeed a matter of State, and not of the least moment) I shall think my coming
unto this Place to have been for my punishment; and my hap very hard, that when
I think to deserve best; and, in a manner, consume my self to satisfy that
which God, Her Majesty, and the Church, requires of me, I should be evilly
rewarded. Sed meliora spero. It is objected, by some, that my desire of
Uniformity, by way of Subscription, is for the better maintenance of my Book.
They are mine Enemies that say so; but I trust my Friends have a better opinion
of me. Why should I seek for any confirmation of my Book, after twelve years
approbation? Or what shall I get thereby, more than already I have? Yet, if
Subscription may confirm it, it is confirmed long ago, by the Subscription of
almost all the Clergy of England, before my time. Mine Enemies likewise, and
the slanderous Tongues of this uncharitable Sect, report that I am revolted,
b^come a Papist, and I know not what. But it proceeds from th^^r Leudness,
and not from any desert of mine.

19. I am further burdened with Wilfulness: I hope my Friends are better
persuaded of me, to whose Consciences I appeal. It is strange that a man of my
place, dealing by so good a warrant as I do, should be so encountered; and, for
not yielding, counted Wilful. But I must be content, Vincit qui patitur. There
is a difference betwixt Wilfulness and Constancy. I have taken upon me, by the
Place which I hold under Her Majesty, the defense of the Religion and the Rites
of the Church of England, to appease the Schisms and Sects therein, to reduce
all the Ministers thereof to Uniformity, and to due Obedience, and not to waver
with every wind; which also, my Place, my Person, the Laws, Her Majesty, and
the goodness of the Cause, do require of me; and wherein the Lords of Her
Highness Privy Council, (all things considered) ought in duty to assist and
countenance me. But, How is it possible that I should perform what I have
undertaken, after so long Liberty and lack of Discipline, if a few persons so
meanly qualified, (as most of these Factious Sectaries are) should be
countenanced against the whole state of the Clergy, of greatest account both
for Learning, Years, Stayedness, Wisdom, Religion, and Honesty; and open
Breakers and Impugners of the Law, young in Years, proud in Conceit,
contentious in Disposition, should be maintained against their Governors,
seeking to reduce them to Order and Obedience? Haec sunt initia Haereticorum,
and ortus, atque conatus Schismaticorum male cogitantium, ut sibi placeant, ut
praepositum superbo tumore contemnant: sic de Ecclesi^ receditur, sic altar
profanum foris collocatur, sic contra Pacem Christi and Ordinationem, atque
Veritatem Dei Rebellatur. The first Fruits of Heretics, and the first Births
and Endeavors of Schismatics, are, To admire themselves, and in their
swelling-pride to contemn any that are set over them. Thus do men fall from the
Church of God; thus is a Foreign Unhallowed Altar erected; and thus is
Christ's Peace, and God's Ordination and Unity, rebelled against.

20. For my own part, I neither have done, nor do any thing in these matters,
which I do not think my self in Conscience and Duty bound to do, and which Her
Majesty has not with earnest Charge committed unto me, and which I am not well
able to justify to be most requisite for this Church and State; whereof, next
to Her Majesty, (though most unworthy, if not most unhappy) the chief Care is
committed to me; which I will not (by the Grace of God) neglect, whatsoever
come upon me there-for. Neither may I endure their notorious Contempts, unless
I will become Aesop's Block; and undo all that which hitherto has been done.
It is certain, that if way be given unto them, upon their unjust Surmises and
Clamours; it will be the cause of that confusion which hereafter the State will
be sorry for. I neither care for the honor of this Place I hold, (which is
onus unto me) nor the largeness of the Revenue, neither any Worldly thing (I
thank God) in respect of doing my duty, neither do I fear the displeasure of
man, nor the evil Tongue of the uncharitable, who call me Tyrant, Pope, Knave,
and lay to my charge things that I never did or thought. Scio enim hoc esse
opus Diaboli, ut servos Dei mendaciis laceret, and opinionibus falsis gloriosum
nomen infamet; ut, qui Conscientiae suae luce clarescunt, alienis Rumoribus
sordidentur: For I know, that this is the work of that Accuser the Devil, that
he may tear in pieces the Servants of God with Lies, that he may dishonor
their glorious Name, with false surmises, that they who through the clearness
of their own Consciences are shining bright, may have the filth of other men's
slanders cast upon them. So was Cyprian himself used, and other godly Bishops,
to whom I am not comparable. But that which most of all grieveth me, and is to
be wondered at and lamented, is, That some of those who give countenance to
these men, and cry out for a Learned Ministry, should watch their opportunity,
and be Instruments and Means to place most unlearned men in the chiefest Places
and Livings of the Ministry, thereby to make the state of the Bishops and
Clergy contemptible, and, I fear, salable. This Hypocrisy and Dissembling with
God and Man, (in pretending one thing, and doing another) goes to my heart,
and makes me think, that God's Judgments are not far off. The day will come,
when all men's hearts shall be opened. In the mean time, I will depend upon Him
who never fails those that put their trust in Him.

21. It may be gathered from this Abstract, what a hard Game that Reverend
Prelate had to play, when such great Masters in the Art, held the Cards against
him: For at that time the Earls of Huntington and Leicester, Walsingham
Secretary of Estate, and Knolls Comptroller of the Household (a professed
Genevian), were his open Adversaries; Burleigh, a Neutral at the best; and none
but Hatton (then Vicechamberlain, and afterward Lord Chancellor) firmly for
him. And him he gained but lately neither; but gained him at the last by the
means of Dr. Richard Bancroft, his Domestic Chaplain, of whom we shall have
cause to speak more hereafter. By his procurement he was called to the
Council Table, at such time as the Earl of Leicester was in Holland; which put
him into a capacity of going more confidently on (without checks or crosses, as
before) in the Church's Cause. A thing which Leicester very much stomacked at
his coming back; but knowing it was the Queen's pleasure, he disguised his
trouble, and appeared fair to him in the public, though otherwise he continued
his former Favors to the Puritan Faction. Sure of whose countenance, upon the
perfecting and publishing of the Book of Discipline, they resolved to put the
same in practice in most parts of the Realm, as they did accordingly. But it
was no where better welcome, than it was in London, the Wealth and Pride of
which City, was never wanting to cherish and support those men which most
apparently opposed themselves to the present Authority, or practiced the
introducing of Innovations, both in Church and State. The several Churches, or
Conventicles rather, which they had in that City, they reduced into one great
and general Classis, of which Cartwright, Egerton, or Traverse, were for the
most part Moderators; and whatsoever was there ordered, was esteemed for
current: from thence the Brethren of other places did fetch their light; and as
doubts did arise, thither they were sent to be resolved; the Classical and
Synodical Decrees of other places, not being Authentical indeed, till they were
ratified in this, which they held the Supreme Consistory and chief Tribunal of
the Nation. But in the Country, none appeared more forward than they did in
Northamptonshire, which they divide into three Classes; that is to say, the
Classis of Northampton, Daventry, and Kettring: and the device forthwith is
taken up in most parts of England, but especially in Warwickshire, Suffolk,
Norfolk, Essex etc. In these Classes, they determined in points of Doctrine,
interpreted hard places of Scripture, delivered their Resolution in such Cases
of Conscience as were brought before them, decided Doubts and Difficulties
touching Contracts of Marriage. And whatsoever was concluded by such as were
present (but still with reference to the better judgment of the
London-Brethren) became forthwith bindi^g to the rest; none being admitted into
any of the aforesaid Classes, before he has promised under his hand, That he
would submit himself, and be obedient unto all such Orders and Decrees as are
set down by the Classis to be observed. At these Classes they enquired into the
Life and Doctrine of all that had subscribed unto them; censuring some,
deposing others, as they saw occasion; in nothing more severe, than in
censuring those who had formerly used the Cross in Baptism, or otherwise had
been con^ormable to the Rules of the Church. And unto every Classis there
belonged a Register, who took the Heads of all that passed, and saw them
carefully entered in a Book for that purpose, that they might remain upon Record.

22. It may seem strange, that in a constituted Church, backed by Authority of
Law, and countenanced by the Favor of the Supreme Magistrate; a distinct
Government or Discipline should be put in practice in contempt of both: but
more, that they should deal in such weighty matters as were destructive of the
Government by Law established. Some Questions had before been started at a
Meeting in Cambridg, the final decision whereof, was thought fit to be referred
to the Classis of Warwick, where Cartwright governed as the perpetual
Moderator: And they accordingly assembling on the tenth day of the fourth
Month, (for so they phrased it) did then and there determine in this manner
follow: That private Baptism is unlawful: That it is not lawful to read
Homilies in the Church: and that the sign of the Cross is not to be used in
Baptism: That the Faithful ought not to communicate with unlearned Ministers,
although they may be present at their Service, in case they come of purpose to
hear a Sermon (the reading of the Service being looked on as a Lay-man's
Office): That the Calling of Bishops, etc. is unlawful: That, as they deal in
Causes Ecclesiastical, there is no duty belonging to them, nor any publicly to
be given them? That it is not lawful to be ordained by them into the Ministry,
or to denounce either Suspensions or Excommunications sent by their Authority:
that it is not lawful for any man to rest in the Bishop's deprivation of him
from his Charge, except upon consultation it seem good unto his Flock and the
Neighbouring-Ministers; but that he continue in the same, until he be compelled
to the contrary by Civil Force. That it is not lawful to appear in a Bishop's
Court, but with a Protestation of their unlawfulness. That Bishops are not to
be acknowledged either for Doctors, Elders, or Deacons, as having no ordinary
Calling in the Church of Christ. That touching the restoration of the
Ecclesiastical Discipline, it ought to be taught to the people ( data
occasion) as occasion should serve; and that as yet the people are not to be
solicited publicly to practice the Discipline, till they be better instructed
in the knowledge of it. And finally, That men of better understanding are to be
allured privately to the present allowing the Discipline, and the practice of
it, as far as they shall be well able with the Peace of the Church.

23. But here we are to understand, That this last Caution was subjoined in the
close of all; not that they had a care of the Church's Peace, but that they
were not of sufficient strength to disturb the same, without drawing ruin on
themselves; which some of the more hotheaded Brethren were resolved to
hazard: of which they had some loss this year, by the Imprisonment of Barrow,
Greenwood, Billet, Boudler, and Studley; who building on their Principles, and
following the Example of Robert Brown, before remembered, had brake out into
open Schism, when their more cunning Brethren kept themselves within the Pale
of the Church. But these we only touch at now, leaving the further prosecution
of them to a fitter place: Suffice it, that their present sufferings did so
little moderate the heats of some fiery spirits, that they resolved to venture
all for the Holy Discipline, as appears by Pain's Letter unto Field: Our zeal
to Gods Glory (says he), our love to his Church, and the due planting of the
same in this For-headed Age, should be so warm and stirring in us, as not to
care what adventure we give, or what censures we abide, etc. For otherwise, the
Diabolical boldness of the Jesuits and Seminaries, will cover our faces with
shame, etc. And then he adds, It is verily more than time to register the Names
of the fittest and hottest Brethren round about our several dwellings, whereby
to put the godly Counsel of Specanus in execution, (Note, that Specanus was one
of the first Presbyterian Ministers in the Belgic Churches) that is to say, Si
quis objiciat, etc. If any man object, That the setting up the lawful practice
of the Discipline in the Church, be hindered by the Civil Magistrate; let the
Magistrate be freely and modestly admonished of his duty in it; and if he
esteem to be accounted either a Godly or Christian Magistrate, without doubt he
will admit wholesome Counsels: but if he do not, yet let him be more exactly
instructed, that he may serve God in fear, and lend his Authority in defense of
God's Church and his Glory. Marry if by this way there happen no good success,
then let the Ministers of the Church execute their Office according to the
appointment of Christ: for they must rather obey God than men. In which last
point, (says Pain) we have dolefully failed, which now or never stands us in
hand to prosecute with all celerity, without lingering or staying so long for
Parliaments. But this Counsel of Pain being thought too rash, in regard they
could not find a sufficient number of Brethren to make good the Action, it was
thought fit to add the Caution abovementioned. The Hundred thousand Hands
which they so much bragged of, were not yet in readiness; and therefore it was
wisely ordered, That as yet the whole multitude were not to be allured
publicly to the practice of it, until men were better instructed in the
knowledge of so rare a Mystery: Till when, it could not be safe for them to
advance their Discipline in the way of force.

24. Now to prepare the people for the entertainment of so great a Change, it
was found necessary in the first place to return an Answer to some Books which
had been written in defense of Episcopal Government: and, in the next, to make
the Bishops seem as odious and contemptible in the eyes of their Profelytes, as
Wit and Malice could devise. Dr. John Bridges, Dean of Sarum, and afterward
Bishop of Oxford, published a Book in the year 1587, ent^tuled, A Defense of
the Government of the Church of England; intended chiefly against Beza; but so,
that it might serve to satisfy all Doubts and Cavils which had been made
against that Government by the English Puritans. To which an Answer is returned
by some zealous Brethren, under the Name of A Defense of the godly Ministers,
against the Slanders of Dr. Bridges. Bridges replies; and his Reply produces a
Rejoinder, An. 1588, bearing this Inscription, viz. A Defense of the
Ecclesiastical Discipline, against the Reply of Mr. Bridges. Dr. Some, Master
of Peter-House in Cambridg, to check the sawciness of Penrie, a most fiery
Puritan, published a Discourse at the same time, to detect his Follies: and
presently comes out a Libel, entitled, Mr. Some laid open in his Colors. The
Brethren had been smart enough with Dr. Bridges, and might be thought to have
been malepert enough with Dr. Some, if they had not carried themselves with far
more irreverence toward the Archbishop and the rest of the Sacred Hierarchy:
For now, in prosecution of the other part of their Design, which was, To make
the Bishops odious and contemptible in the eyes of their Proselytes; four of
the most seditious of all the Pack, (that is to say, Penrie, Throgmorton, Vdal,
and Fenner) lay their heads together. From which conjunction there proceeded
such a swarm of pestiferous Libels, that the like mischief (neither in nature,
nor in number) did never exercise the Patience of a Christian State. The
Authors of them, masked under the borrowed Name of Martin Mar-Prelate; which
Title they had taken on themselves, not without good cause, as may appear unto
any which have looked into these particulars; that is to say, The Epistle to
the Confocation-House: The Epitome: The Demonstration of Discipline: The
Supplication: Diotrephes: Martins Minerals: Have you any work for a Cooper:
Penry 's Epistles sent from Scotland: Theses Martinianae, or Martin Junior: The
Protestation of Martin: Martin Senior: More Work for the Cooper: A DIALOGVE,
setting forth the Tyrannical dealing of the Bishops against God's Children.
Read over Dr. Bridges, etc. with many others of like strain, of which it is
hard to say, whether their Malice or Uncharitableness had the most
predominancy. In all which doings, Cartwright was either of the Council in the
first Design, or without doubt a great approver of them upon the post-fact; and
thereupon he is affirmed to have used these words, That since the Bishops lives
would not amend by grave Books and Advertisements, it was fit they should be so
dealt with to their further shame.

25. For printing these pestiferous Libels, they chiefly made use of Walgrave's
Press, which he removed from place to place, for his greater safety; that is to
say, at Moulsey, near Kingston upon Thames; thence to Fausly in
Northamptonshire, so to Norton; afterward to Coventry, and so to Welstome in
Warwickshire; and from thence, finally, to the Town of Manchester, where both
the Workmen and the Press were seized on by the Earl of Darby, as they were
Printing the bold Pamphlet, called More Work for Cooper. For the dispersing of
these Libels, they made use of one Newman, a Cobbler, a Fellow fit for such a
business; and it had been great pity if they had employed any other Instrument.
But for their countenance and support, (especially as to the bearing of their
Charges) they had the Purse of Knightly of Fausley, (at whose House some of
them were Printed) being a Gentleman of good Note, but of greater Zeal, whom
Snape, and other Leading-men of that County, had inveigled to them. But he and
all the rest might have paid deer for it, if he whom they most wronged, had
not stood their Friend: For, being called into the Starr-Chamber, and there
deeply Censured, they were upon submission, at the humble and most earnest suit
of the Archbishop, released from their Imprisonment, and their Fines remitted.
And it is worth the observation, That the Puritans were then most busy, as
well in setting up their Discipline, as in publishing these Railing and
Seditious Pamphlets, when the Spaniards were hovering on the Seas with their
terrible Navy. At what time they conceived, and that not improbably, that the
Queen and Council would be otherwise busied, than to take notice of their
Practices, or suppress their doings; or rather, that they durst not call them
into question for their Words or Actions, for fear of alienating the Affections
of so strong a Party as they had raised unto themselves. The serious
apprehension of which mischievous Counsels, prevailed so far on Leicester and
Walsingham, that they did absolutely renounce any further intercession for
them; professing, That they had been horribly abused with their Hypocrisy;
which possibly might happen better for themselves, than it did for the Church;
the Earl of Leicester going to his own Place, before the end of this Year; and
Walsingham being gathered to his Fathers within Two years after.

26. I am ashamed to rake in these ^ilthy Puddles, though it be necessary that
the bottom of the Cinque be opened, that notice may be taken of that stinch and
putrefaction which proceeded from them. In which respect I hope the Reader will
excuse me, if I let him know, that they could find no other Title for the
Archbishop of Canterbury, than Beelzebub of Canterbury, Pope of Lambeth, the
Canterbury-Caiaphas, ^sau, A Monstrous Antichristian Pope, A most ^loody
Opposer of God's Saints, A very Antichristian Beast, A most vile and cursed
Tyrant. They tell us further of this humble and meek-spirited man, That no
Bishop ever had such an aspiring and ambitious mind as he; no, not Cardinal
Wolsey: None so proud as he; no, not Stephen Gardener of Winchester: None so
tyrannical as he; no, not Bonner the Butcher of London. In general, he tells us
both of Him, and the rest of the Bishops, That they are Unlawful, Unnatural,
False, and Bastardly Governors of the Church, the Ordinances of the Devil,
Petty Popes, Petty Antichrists, Incarnate Devils, Bishops of the Devil,
Cogging, Cozening Knaves, and will lie like Dogs. That they are Proud, Popish,
Presumptuous, Profane, Paltry, Pestilent, Pernicious Prelates and Usurpers;
Enemies of God, and the most pestilent Enemies of the State; and, That the
worst Puritan in England, is an Honester man than the best Lord Bishop in
Christendom. Nor do they speak any better of the Inferior Clergy, than they do
of the Bishops; of whom they tell us in like manner, That they are Popish
Priests, or Monks, or Friars, or Ale-haunters, or Boys and Lads, or Drunkards
and Dolts; That they will wear a Fool's Hood for a Living-sake: That they are
Hogs, Dogs, Wolves, Foxes, Simoniaks, Usurpers, Proctors of Antichrist's
Inventions, Popish Chap-men, halting Neutrals, greedy Dogs to fill their
Paunches, a multitude of desperate and forlorn Atheists, a Cursed,
Uncircumcised, Murdering Geration, a Crew or Hoop of Bloody Soul-murtherers,
and Sacrilegious Church-Robbers, and Followers of Antichrist.

27. Behold the Bishops and Clergy in their Convocation, and we shall see them
termed by one of the Captains of this Crew, Right puissant, poisoned,
persecuting, and terrible Priests, Clergy Masters of the Confocation-House,
the Holy-League of Subscription, the Crew of monstrous and ungodly Wretches,
that mingle Heaven and Earth together: Horned Monsters of the
Conspiration-House: An Antichristian Swinish Rabble, Enemies of the Gospel,
most covetous wretched Popish priests, and the Convocation-House of Devils, and
Beelzebub of Canterbury the chief of these Devils. The like Reproaches they
bestow on the Common Prayer, of which they say, That it is full of Corruption;
and that many of the Contents thereof, are against the Word of God; the
Sacraments wickedly mangled and profaned therein, the Lord's Supper not eaten,
but made a Pageant or Stage Play; and that the Form of public Baptism, is full
of Childish Superstitious Toys. So that we are not to admire, if the Brownists
please themselves in their separation from a Church so polluted and unreformed,
from men so wicked and profane, from such a Cinque of Satan, such a Den of
Devils. But much less can we wonder that the Papists should make use of these
horrible Slanders, not only to confirm, but increase their Party, By showing
them, from the Pens of their greatest Adversaries, what ugly Monsters had the
Government of the Church of England; from what Impieties they were preserved,
by not joining with them. One, I am sure, that is, Parsons in his Book of Three
Conversions, reports these Calumnies and Slanders for undoubted Truths; That
Martin Mar-Prelate is affirmed by Sir Edwine Sandys, to pass in those times for
unquestioned Credit in the Court of Rome; his Authority much insisted on to
disgrace this Church; and finally, that Appellant Episcopum Cantiariensem,
Pseudo-Episcopum, principem Demoniorum, Caiapham, Esaum, Monstrosum,
Antichristianum Papam, and Beam; alios autem Episcopos Angliae, degeneres,
perniciosos usurpatores, deteriores Monachis, Latronos, Lupos Episcopos
Diaboli, etc. Mason. lib. 3. cap. 16.
Kellison, one of later date, does build as much upon the Credit of these
Libels, to defame the Clergy, as if they had been dictated by the same
Infallible Spirit which the Pope pretends to. Such excellent Advantages did
these Saints give unto the Devil, that all the Locusts in the Revelation which
came out of the Pit, never created so much scandal to the Primitive times.

28. To still these Clamours, or at the least to stop the mouths of these
Railing Rabshecha's, that so the abused people on all sides might be
undeceived; as good a course was took by Whitgift and the rest of the Prelates,
as Human Wisdom could devise. For first, A grave Discourse is published in the
year next following, entitled, An Admonition to the People of England, in
answer to the slanderous Untruths of Martin the Libeller: But neither this nor
any other grave Refutal, would ever put them unto silence, till they were
undertaken by Tom Nash, a man of a Sarcastical and jeering Wit; who by some
Pamphlets written in the like loose way, which he called, Pasquill, and
Marsorius, The Counter-Scuffle, Pappe with a Hatchet, and the like; stopped
their mouths for ever, none of them daring to deal further in that Commodity,
when they saw what Coin they should be paid in by so frank a Customer. Mention
was made before of a sorry Pamphlet, entitled, The Complaint of the Commons
for a Preaching-Ministry; which Penry seconded by another called by the Name
of, A Supplication for Preaching in Wales: In both which it was intimated to
all sorts of people, That the Gospel had no free passage amongst us: That there
was no care taken for Preaching the Word of God for the instruction of the
people; for want whereof they still remained in darkness and the shadow of
death. For the decrying of which scandalous and lewd suggestions, Order was
given unto the Bishops to take the Names and Number of the Preachers in their
several Diocesses, and to present a true and perfect Catalogue of them, in the
Convocation, which was then at hand. By which Returns it will appear, That at
this time when so much noise was made for want of Preaching, there were within
the Realm of England, and the Dominion of Wales, no fewer than Seven thousand
four hundred sixty three Preachers and Catechisers; which last may be accounted
the best sort of Preachers for the instruction of the people. Of which great
Number there were found to be no fewer than One hundred forty five Doctors in
Divinity, Three hundred forty eight Batchellors of Divinity, Thirty one Doctors
of both Laws, Twenty one Batchelors of the same; Eighteen hundred Masters in
Arts, Nine hundred forty six Batchelors of Arts, and Two thousand seven hundred
forty six Catechisers. So that neither the number of bare Reading-Ministers was
so great, nor the want of Preaching so deplorable, in most parts of the
Kingdom, as those Pamphlets made it; the Authors whereof ought rather to have
magnified the Name of God for sending such a large Increase of Laborers in his
Heavenly Husbandry, as could not any where be paralleled in so short a time;
there passing no more than Thirty years between the first beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, and the rendering of this Account to the Convocation.

29. And that the Parliament might receive the same satisfaction, a most
excellent and judicious Sermon was Preached at St. Paul's Cross, on Sunday the
ninth of February, being the first Sunday after their Assembling, by Dr.
Richard Bancroft, being then Chaplain to the Lord Chancellor Hatton, preferred
within some few years after to the Sea of London, and from thence to
Canterbury. In the performance of which Service, he selected for the Theme or
Subject of his Discourse, 1 John 4.1. viz. Dearly beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God: for many false prophets are
gone out into the world. In canvasing which Text, he did so excellently set
forth the false Teachers of those times in their proper colors, their Railing
against Bishops, their Ambition, their Self-love, their Covetousness, and all
such Motives as had spurred them on to disturb this Church, as satisfied the
greatest part of that huge Congregation, touching the Practices and Hypocrisies
of these holy Brethren. He also showed on what a weak Foundation they had built
their Discipline, of which no tract or footsteps could be found in the Church
of Christ from the Apostles days to Calvin; and with what Infamy the Aerian
Heretics were reproached in the Primitive times, for laboring to introduce
that Parity which these men designed. He further laid before them the great
danger which must needs ensue, if private men should take upon them to deny or
dispute such matters as had been settled in the Church by so good Authority:
Against which troublesome Humor many Provisions had been made by the Canons of
Councils, and the Edicts of Godly and Religious Emperors. To which he added,
the necessity of requiring Subscription, in a Church well constituted, by all
the Ministers of the same; which he justified by the example of Geneva, and the
Churches of Germauy, to be the best way to try the spirits whether they be of
God or not, as his Text required. Next, he insisted on the excellency of the
Common Prayer Book, applauded by the Divines of Foreign Churches; approved by
Bucer, Fox, Alesius, the Parliaments and Convocations of this Kingdom; and
after, justified by Archbishop Cranmer against the Papists; by Bishop Ridley
against Knox; and by diverse others: showing withal, the many gross Absurdities
found in extemporary Prayers, to the great dishonor of God, and the shame of
Religion. Hence he proceeds to justify the Superiority of Bishops, and the
Supremacy of the Queen, together with the dangerous Practices and Designs of
the Disciplinarians, exemplified by their Proceedings in Scotland, and their
Positions in England, of which more anon. All which particulars, with many more
upon the by, he proved with such evidence of demonstration, such great variety
of Learning, and strength of Arguments, that none of all that Party could be
found to take Arms against them, in defense either of their lewd Doctrine, or
more scandalous Uses. And this being done, he closed up all with a grave and
serious Application, in reference to the prevalency and malignity of the
present Humors: which wrought so much upon his Auditors of both Houses of
Parliament, that in the passing of a general Pardon at the end of the Sessions,
there was Exception of Seditious Books, Disturbances of Divine Service, and
Offenses against the Act of Uniformity in the Worship of God.

30. And yet it is not altogether improbable, but that this Exception was made
rather at the Queen's Command, or by some Caveat interposed by the House of
Peers, than by the sole Advice, or any voluntary Motion of the House of
Commons; in which the Puritans at that time had a very strong Party. By whose
Endeavor, a smart Petition is presented to the Lords, in the Name of the
Commons, for rectifying of many things which they conceived to be amiss in the
state of the Church. The whole Petition did consist of Sixteen particulars, of
which the first Six did relate to a Preaching-Ministry; the want of which, was
much complained of in a Supplication which had been lately Printed and
presented to them; but such a Supplication, as had more in it of a Factious and
Seditious Libel, than of a Dutiful Remonstrance. In the other Ten it was
desired, 1. That no Oath or Subscription might be tendered to any at their
entrance into the Ministry, but such as was prescribed by the Statutes of the
Realm, and the Oath against corrupt Entering. 2. That they may not be troubled
for omission of some Rites or Offices prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer.
3. That such as had been suspended or deprived for no other offense, but only
for not subscribing, might be restored. 4. That they may not be called and
urged to answer before the Officials and Commissaries, but before the Bishops
themselves. 5. That they might not be called into the High Commission, or Moot
of the Diocese where they lived, except for some notable Offense. 6. That it
might be permitted to them, in every Arch-Deaconry, to have some common
Exercises and Conferences amongst themselves, to be limited and prescribed by
the Ordinaries. 7. That the high Censure of Excommunication may not be
denounced or executed for small matters: 8. Nor by Chancellors Commissioners or
Officials, but by the Bishops themselves, with the assistance of grave persons.
9. That Non-residency may be quite removed out of the Church. Or, 10. That at
least, according to the Queen's Injunctions ( Art. 44.), no Non-resident,
having already a License or Faculty, may enjoy it, unless he depute an able
Curate, that may weekly Preach and Catechize, as was required by Her Majesty in
the said Injunctions. Against the violence of this Torrent, Archbishop
Whitgift interposed both his Power and Reason; affirming with a sober
confidence in the H. of Peers, not only that England flourished more at that
time with able Ministers, than ever it had done before; but that it had more
able men of eminent Abilities in all parts of Learning, than the rest of
Christendom besides. But, finding that the Lord Gray, and others of that House,
had been made of the Party, he drew the rest of the Bishops to join with him in
an humble Address to Her Sacred Majesty; in which they represented to Her the
true estate of the Business, together with those many Inconveniences which must
needs arise to the State present and to come, to the Two Universities, to all
Cathedral Churches, and the Queen Her Self, if the Commons might have had their
will, though in no other Point than in that of Pluralities. All which they
pressed with such a Dutiful and Religious Gravity, that the Queen put an end to
that Dispute, not only for the present, but all Parliaments following.

31. Somewhat there must be in it, which might make them so afraid of that
Subscription which was required at their hands to the Queen's Supremacy, as
well as to the Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, to the Liturgy, and to
the Articles of Religion by Law established: and therefore it will not be amiss
(as we have done already in all places else) to touch upon the Principles and
Positions of our English Puritans, that we may see what Harmony and Consent
there is betwixt them and their dear Brethren of the Discipline in other
Nations: For if we look into the Pamphlets which came out this Year, we shall
find these Doctrines taught for more Sacred Truths, viz. That if Princes do
hinder them that seek for this Discipline, they are Tyrants both to the Church
and Ministers; and being so, may be deposed by their Subjects. That no Civil
Magistrate has pre-eminence by ordinary Authority, either to determine of
Church-Causes, or to make Ecclesiastical Orders and Ceremonies. That no Civil
Magistrate has such Authority, as that without his consent it should not be
lawful for Ecclesiastical persons to make and publish Church-Orders. That they
which are no Elders of the Church, have nothing to do with the Government of
it. That if their Reformation be not hastened forward by the Magistrate, the
Subjects ought not any longer to tarry for it, but must do it themselves. That
there were many thousands which desired the Discipline: And, That great
Troubles would ensue if it were denied them. That their Presbyteries must
prevail: And, That if it be brought about by such ways and means as would make
the Bishops hearts to ache, let them blame themselves. For explication of which
last passage, Martin Mar-Prelate in his first Book, threatens only fists; but
in the second, he advises the Parliament then assembled, to put down Lord
Bishops, and bring in the Reformation which they looked for, whether Her
Majesty would or not.

32. But these perhaps were only the Evaporations of some idle Heads, the
Freaks of Discontent and Passion, when they were crossed in their Desires: Let
us see therefore what is taught by Thomas Cartwright, the very Calvin of the
English; as highly magnified by Martin, and the rest of that Faction, as the
other was amongst the French. Dr. Harding in his Answer to Bishop Jewel,
assures us, That the Office of a King is the same in all places, not only
amongst Christians, but amongst the Heathen. Upon which Premises he concludes,
That a Christian Prince has no more to do in deciding of Church Matters, or in
making Ceremonies and Orders for the same, than has a Heathen. Cartwright
affirms himself to be of the same opinion; professing seriously his dislike of
all such Writers as put a difference between the Rights of a Profane and a
Christian Magistrate. Specanus, a stiff Presbyterian in the Belgic Provinces,
makes a distinction between potestas Facti, and potestas Iuris; and then infers
upon the same, That the Authority of determining what is fit to be done,
belongs of right unto the Ministers of the Church, though the execution of the
Fact in Civil Causes, does properly appertain to the Supreme Magistrate. And
more than this, the greatest Clerks amongst themselves would not give the
Queen. If she assume unto Her self the exercise of Her farther Power, in
ordering Matters of the Church according to the lawful Authority which is
inherent in the Crown, She shall presently be compared unto all the wicked
Kings, and others, of whom we read in the Scriptures; that took upon them,
unlawfully to intrude themselves into the Priest's Office; as unto Saul, for
his offering of Sacrifice; unto Osias for burning Incense upon the Altar; unto
Gideon, for making of an Ephod: and finally, to Nadab and Abihu, for offering
with strange fire unto the Lord.

33. According to these Orthodox and sound Resolves, they hold a Synod in St.
John's College in Cambridg, taking the opportunity of Sturbridg-Fayr, to cloak
their meeting for that purpose. At which Synod ( Cartwright and Perkins being
present amongst the rest) the whole Book-Discipline, reviewed by Traverse, and
formally approved of by the Brethren in their several Classes, received a more
Authentic approbation: insomuch, that first it was decreed amongst them, That
all which would might subscribe unto it, without any necessity imposed upon
them so to do. But not long after, it was made a matter necessary, so
necessary, as it seems that no man could be chosen to any Ecclesiastical Office
amongst them, nor to be of any of their Assemblies, either Classical,
Provincial, or National, till he had first subscribed to the Book of
Discipline. Another Synod was held at Ipswich, not long after, and the Results
of both confirmed in a Provincial and National Synod held in London, which gave
the Book of Discipline a more sure establishment than an Act of State. It is
reported, that the night before the great Battle in the Fields of Thessaly,
betwixt Caesar and Pompey, the Pompeyan Party was so confident of their good
success, that they cast Dice amongst themselves for all the great Offices and
Magistracies of the City of Rome, even to the Office of the Chief-Priest-hood,
which then Caesar held. And the like vanity or infatuation had possessed these
men, in the opinion which they had of their Strength and Numbers: Insomuch that
they entered into this consideration, how Archbishops, Bishops, Chancellors,
Deans, Cannons, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Registers, Apparitors, etc. (all
which, by their pretended Reformation, must have been thrust out of their
Livings) should be provided for, that the Commonwealth might not be thereby
pestered with Beggars. And this they did upon the confidence of some unlawful
Assistance to effect their purposes, if neither the Queen, nor the Lords of the
Council, nor the Inferior Magistrates in their several Counties (all which they
now solicited with more heat than ever) should cooperate with them. For about
this time it was, that Cartwright in his Prayer before his Sermon, was noted to
have used these words, viz. Because they (meaning the Bishops) which ought to
be Pillars in the Church, combine themselves against Christ and his Truth;
therefore, O Lord, give us Grace and Power, all, as one man, to set our selves
against them. Which words he used frequently to repeat, and to repeat with such
an earnestness of spirit, as might sufficiently declare that he had a purpose
to raise Sedition in the State, for the imposing of that Discipline on the
Church of England, which was not likely to be countenanced by any lawful
Authority; which put the Queen to a necessity of calling him, and all the rest
of them, to a better account; to which they shall be brought in the years next
following.

33. In the mean time we must pass over into France, where we find HENRY the
Third, the last King of the House of Valoise, most miserably deprived of his
Life and Kingdom; driven out of Paris first by the Guisian Faction; and
afterward assassinated by Jacques Clement, a Dominican Friar, as he lay at St.
Cloud, attending the reduction of that stubborn City. Upon whose death the
Crown descended lineally on HENRY of Bourbon, King of Navarre, and Duke of
Vendosme, as the next Heir-male: For the excluding of which Prince, and the
rest of that House, the Holy League was first contrived, as before is said.
There was at that time in the late King's Army, a very strong Party of French
Catholics, who had preferred their Loyalty to their Natural Prince, before the
private Interest and Designs of the House of Guise; and now generally declare
in favor of the true Successor. By their Assistance, and the concurring-Forces
of the Hugonot-Faction, it had been no hard matter for him to have Mastered the
Duke of Maine, who then had the Command of the Guisian Leagues. But in the last
he found himself deceived of his expectation. The Hugonots, which formerly had
served with so much cheerfulness under his Command their King, would not now
serve him in his just and lawful Wars against his Enemies: Or, if they did, it
shall be done upon Conditions so intolerable, that he might better have pawned
his Crown to a Foreign Prince, than on such terms to buy the favor of his
Subjects. They looked upon him as reduced to a great necessity; most of the
Provinces, and almost all the Principal Cities, having before engaged against
HENRY the Third, and many others falling off when they heard of his death. So
that they thought the new King was not able to subsist without them; and they
resolved to work their own Ends out of that Necessity. Instead of leading of
their Armies, and running cheerfully and courageously toward his defense, who
had so often defended them, they sent Commissioners or Delegates to negotiate
with him, that they may know to what Conditions he would yield for their future
advantage, before they acted any thing in order to his preservation: and their
Conditions were so high, so void of all Respects of Loyalty, and even common
Honesty, that he conceived it safer for him, and far more honorable in it
self, to cast himself upon the Favor of the Queen of England, than condescend
to their unreasonable and unjust demands. So that, in fine, the Hugonots, to a
very great number, forsook him most disloyally in the open Field, drew off
their Forces, and retired to their several dwellings, enforcing him to the
necessity of imploring succors from the professed Enemies of his Crown and
Nation. Nor did he find the Queen unwilling to supply him both with Men and
Money on his first desires. For which She had better reason now, than when She
aided him and the rest of the French Hugonots, in their former Quarrels. And
this She did with such a cheerful openness both of Heart and Hand, as did not
only make him able to keep the Field, but to gain ground on the untraceable and
insulting Rebels. Which when the Hugonots observed, and saw that he was like
enough to do well without them, they then came freely to his aid, and were
content to take such terms as he pleased to give them.

1587.
34. And now again we are for Scotland, where we shall find the King's Affairs
grown from bad to worse. We left him in a great vexation, for not being able to
prevail in any thing in behalf of Montgomery, unless he relinquished his
pursuit against Gibson and Cooper. For so it was, that he must do and suffer
more than he had done hitherto, before he could give himself any hopes of
living peaceably amongst them. A Parliament is therefore summoned to be held at
Edenborough, in the end of July: In which he was contented to pass some Acts
for ratifying all Laws made in his Minority, in favor of the Kirk of Scotland,
for trying and censuring the Adversaries of true Religion; as also, for the
punishing of such as did menace or invade the Ministers. But that which gave
them most content, was an Act of Parliament for Annexing of all the
Temporalties of Bishoprics, Abbeys, and other Religious Houses, which had not
otherwise been disposed of to the Crown of that Realm; which they promoted
under color of improving the Royal Patrimony, that the King might have Means
to bear forth the Honor of his Estate, and not trouble his Subjects with
Taxations; but in plain truth, to overthrow the Calling and Estate of Bishops,
which they presumed that no man of Quality would accept, when the Lands were
aliened. And this the King was the more willing to consent to, in regard that
he had been persuaded by some about him, That the Episcopal Houses being
reserved out of that Grant, together with the Tithes of the Churches formerly
annexed to their Benefices, would be sufficient to maintain their Dignity in
some fit proportion. But the King soon found himself abused: For the rest of
the Temporalties which formerly had been disposed of amongst the Laity, being
settled and confirmed upon them in the present Parliament, there remained so
little to the Crown by this Annexation, as left him nothing behind, but the
envy of so high a Sacriledg* the gain and benefit whereof was enjoyed by
others. And of that little which remained unto him by the Annexation, he
received very small contentment, most of it being squandered away by some
begging Courtiers till he had left himself unable to reward or gratify a
deserving Minister. But this he did not find till it was too late; though the
disease was past all remedy, had he found it sooner. But what he could not do
himself when he lived in Scotland, he first commended to the doing of his Son
Prince Henry, in his Book called Basilicon Doron; and after lived to see it
remedied, in part, when he reigned in England.

35. There happened also a Dispute in the present Parliament, betwixt the
Ministers of the Kirk, and such of the Gentry as formerly had possessed
themselves of Abbeys and Priories, and thereby challenged to themselves a place
in Parliament: Concerning which we are to know, that most of the Monasteries
and Religious Houses, had been founded upon Tithes and Impropriations, though
not without some good proportion of Demesnes, which were laid unto them. But
when the Scots were set upon the humor of Reformation, and set upon it in a
way which showed them rather to proceed upon private Ends, than the public
Interest of Religion; the principal men amongst them seized on all which they
could lay hands on, and after kept it to themselves by no better Title than
that of the first Usurpation only, and no more than so. Some of the Bishops and
Abbots also, seeing how things were like to go, and that the Church's Patrimony
was not like to hold in the same Successions which had conveyed it unto them,
dismembered the best Tithes and Manors from them, or otherwise resigned the
whole to the hands of such as appeared most able to protect them. And so it
stood, till Murrey was made Regent of the Realm in the King's first Infancy;
who did not only wink at those Usurpations, (the questioning whereof would most
infallibly have estranged the Occupants from adhering to him) but suffered many
of the Layards and Gentlemen to invade the Tithes, which had not formerly been
appropriated to Religious Houses, and to annex them to the rest of their own
Estates. By means whereof, some of them were possessed of six, ten, twelve, or
twenty Tythings, united into one Estate, as they lay most convenient for them.
The Ministers being put off with beggarly stipends, amounting in few places to
ten pounds per annum of good English money. These, with the rest, they called
the Lords of new erection; and they did Lord it over the poor people with pride
and tyranny enough; For, neither would they suffer the Occupant or Land-holder
to carry away his nine parts of the Fruits, till they had taken off their
Tenth; and sometimes out of spite, or self-will, or any other pestant humor,
would suffer their tenth part to lie at waste in the open Field, that the poor
Labourer of the Earth might suffer the more damage by it. But that which did
most grieve the Ministers in the present exigent, was, That such Lairds and
Gentlemen as had robbed the Church, and plumed their own Nests with the
Feathers of it, should sit and vote in Parliament as Spiritual Persons, and
they themselves be quite excluded from those public Councils. A great heat
hereupon was struck in the present Session, by Pont and Lindsey, commissionated
by the Kirk for that employment; who openly propounded, in the Name of the
Kirk, That the said pretended Prelates might be removed at the present, and
disabled for the time to come, to sit in Parliament, as having no Authority
from the Church, and most of them no Function or Calling in it. Bruce,
Commendator of Kinlosse, was chosen for the mouth of the rest; and he appeared
so strongly in it, that the Petition of the Ministers was referred to the Lords
of the Articles, and by them rejected; though afterward they had their Ends in
it, by a following Parliament.

36. Being made secure from any further fear of Bishops, by reason of the Poor
Submission which was made by Montgomery, and the annexing of Archbishops Lands
to the Royal Patrimony; the Ministers became more insolent and imperious than
they had been formerly; and in that jolly humor they so vexed and terrified
him, that he could find no other way in point of King-craft, to preserve
himself against their insolences and attempts, but by giving some encouragement
to the Popish party. The exercise whereof brought out many Priests and Jesuits;
some of them more particularly to negotiate in behalf of the King of Spain, who
was then a setting forward his great Armada. But the King well knowing of what
consequence that employment was, and how destructive of his Interest to the
Crown of England, commanded them by public Proclamation to avoid the Kingdom.
But withal gave them day till the last of January, that they might not complain
of being taken unprovided: Which small Indulgence so offended the unquiet
brethren, that they called a number of Noblemen, Barons, and Commissioners of
Burgly (without so much as asking the King's leave in it) to meet at
Edenborough on the sixth of February, to whom they represented the Churches
dangers, and thereupon agreed to go all together in a full body to the Court,
to attend the King; to the end that by the terror of so great a company, they
might work him to their own desires. But the King hearing of their purpose,
refused to give access to so great a multitude; but signified withal that he
was ready to give audience unto some few of them which should be chosen by the
rest. But this affront the King was forced to put up also, to pass by the
unlawfulness of that Convention, to acknowledge their grievances to be just, and
to promise a redress thereof in convenient time. Which drew him into Action
against Maxwel and some others of the Popish Lords and for the same received
the public thanks of the next Assembly, that being no ordinary favor in them;
and was so far gratified withal, as to be suffered to take Mr. Patrick
Galloway from his Charge in Perth, to be one of the Preachers at the Court. Of
which particular I had perhaps took little notice, but that we are to hear more
of him on some other occasion.

37. The next fine pranck they played, relates to the Crowning of Queen Ann,
with whom the King landed out of Denmark at the Port of Leith, on the 20 th. of
May 1590. and designed her Coronation on the morrow after. None of the Bishops
being at hand, the King was willing to embrace the opportunity to oblige the
Kirk, by making choice of one of their own Brethren, to perform that Ceremony;
to which he nominated Mr. Robert Bruce, a Preacher at Edenborough, and one of
the most moderate men in a whole Assembly. But when the fitness of it came to
be examined by the rest of the Brethren, it was resolved to pretermit the
Unction (or Anointing of Her) as a Jewish Ceremony, abolished by Christ,
restored into Christian Kingdoms by the Pope's Authority, and therefore not to
be continued in a Church Reformed. The Doubt first started by one John
Davinson, who had then no Charge in the Church, though followed by a Company of
ignorant and seditious people, whom Andrew Melvin set on work to begin the
Quarrel, and then stood up in his defense to make it good. Much pains was taken
to convince them by the Word of God, That the Unction, or Anointing of Kings,
was no Jewish Ceremony: but Melvin's Will was neither to be ruled by Reason,
nor subdued by Argument; and he had there so strong a Party, that it passed in
the Negative. Insomuch that Bruce durst not proceed in the Solemnity, for fear
of the Censures of the Kirk. The King had notice of it, and returns this word,
That if the Coronation might not be performed by Bruce, with the wonted
Ceremonies, he would stay till the coming of the Bishops, of whose readiness to
conform therein, he could make no question. Rather than so, said Andrew Melvin,
let the Unction pass: better it was that a Minister should perform that
honorable Office, in what Form soever, than that the Bishops should be brought
again unto the Court upon that occasion. But yet, unwilling to profane himself
by consenting to it, he left them to agree about it, as to them seemed best;
and he being gone, it was concluded by the major part of the Voices, That the
Anointing should be used. According whereunto, the Queen was Crowned and
Anointed on the Sunday following, with the wonted Ceremonies, but certainly
with no great State; there being so short an interval betwixt Her Landing, and
the appointed day of Her Coronation.

38. It was not long before, 1591
that they had a quarrel with the Lords of the Session, touching the
Jurisdiction of their several Courts; but now the Assembly would be held for
the chief Tribunal. One Graham was conceived to have suborned a public Notary
to forge an Instrument, which the Notary confessed on Examination, to have been
brought to him ready drawn, by one of the said Graham's Brethren. Graham
enraged thereat, enters an Action against Sympson, the Minister of Sterling, as
one who had induced the man, by some sinister Practices, to make that
Confession. The Action being entered, and the Process formed, Sympson complains
to the Assembly, and they give Order unto Graham to appear before them, to
answer upon the scandal raised on one of their Brethren. Graham appears, and
tells them, That he would make good his Accusation before competent Judges,
which he conceived not them to be. And they replied, That he must either stand
to their judgment in it, or else be censured for the slander. The Lords of the
Session hereupon interpose themselves, desiring the Assembly not to meddle in a
Cause which was then dependent in their Court in due form of Law. But the
Assembly made this Answer, That Sympson was a Member of theirs: That they might
proceed in the purgation of one of their own number, without intrenching on the
Jurisdiction of the Civil Courts; and therefore, that their Lordships should
not take it ill, if they proceeded in the Trial. But let the Lords of the
Session, or the Party interested in the Cause, say what they pleased, the
Assembly vote themselves to be Judges in it, and were resolved to proceed to a
Sentence against him as a false Accuser. In fine, the business went so high on
the part of the Kirk, that the Lords of the Session were compelled to think of
no other Victory than by making a drawn Battle of it; which by the Mediation of
some Friends was at last effected.

39. The Kirk is now advancing to the highest pitch of her Scotch Happiness, in
having her whole Discipline, that is to say, their National and Provincial
Assemblies, together with their Presbyteries and Parochial Sessions; confirmed
by the Authority of an Act of Parliament. In order whereunto, they had ordained
in the Assembly held at Edenborough, on the 4th of August, Anno 1590. That all
such as then bore Office in the Kirk, or from thenceforth should bear any
Office in it, should actually subscribe to the Book of Discipline. Which Act
being so material to our present History, deserves to be exemplified verbatim,
as it stands in the Registers, and is this that follows, viz. Aug. 4. 1590.
40. Forasmuch that it is certain, That the Word of God cannot be kept in the
own sincerity, without the Holy Discipline be had in observance: It is
therefore by the common consent of the whole Brethren and Commissioners
present, concluded, That whosoever has born Office in the Ministry of the Kirk
within this Realm, or that presently bears, or shall hereafter bear Office
therein, shall be charged by every particular Presbytery, where their residence
is, to subscribe the Heads of the Discipline of the Kirk of their Realm, at
length set down and allowed by Act of the whole Assembly, in the Book of
Polity, which is registrate in the Assembly-Books, and namely the Heads
controverted by Enemies of the Discipline of the Reformed Kirk of this Realm,
betwixt this and the next Synodal Assemblies of the Provinces, under the pain
of Excommunication to be executed against the Non-subscribers: and the
Presbyteries which shall be found remiss and negligent herein, to receive
public rebuke of the whole Assembly. And to the effect the said Discipline may
be known as it ought to be, to the whole Brethren; it is ordained, That the
Moderator of each Presbytery shall receive from the Clerk of the Assembly, a
Copy of the said Book, under his Subscription, upon the Expenses of the
Presbytery, betwixt this and the first day of September next to come, under the
pain of being openly accused in the face of the whole Assembly.

41. This Preparation being made, they present their whole desires to the King,
in the following Parliament, convened at Edenborough, in the Month of June,
1592. In which it was proposed, 1. That the Acts of Parliament made in the year
1584, against the Discipline of the Kirk, and the Liberty thereof, should be
abrogated and annulled; and a Ratification of the Discipline granted, whereof
they were then in practice. 2. That the Act of Annexation should be repealed,
and restitution made of the Church's Patrimony. 3. That the Abbots, Priors, and
other Prelates, bearing the Titles of Kirk-men, and giving Voices for the Kirk
without Power and Commission from the same, should not be permitted in time
coming, to give Voice in Parliament, or convene in the Name of the Kirk. And,
4. That a solid Order might be taken for purging the Realm of Idolatry and
Blood, wherewith it was miserably polluted. On the second and third of these
Desires, the King took longer time of deliberation, as being points of great
concernment to Himself and others, touching the main of their Estates. But He
resolved to give them satisfaction in the first and last. It was answered
therefore to the first part of the last Article, That saying of Mass, receiving
of Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and Trafficking Papists, against the King's
Majesty and Religion presently professed, should be a just cause to infer the
pain of Treason: with this Proviso notwithstanding, That if the Jesuits and
Seminary Priests did satisfy the Prince and the Church, the foresaid Penalty
should not be laid on the Receivers. And to the second part thereof, concerning
Blood, it was answered, That the same should be remitted to the Courts of
Justice. In like manner it was answered to the first branch of their first
Proposal, That the said Statutes should be no ways prejudicial, nor derogatory
to the Privileges that God had given to the spiritual Office-bearer in the
Church, concerning Heads of Religion, matters of Heresy, Excommunication,
Collation, or Deprivation of Ministers, or any such Ecclesiastical Censures,
grounded and having warrant of the Word of God. But to the second branch
thereof, he gave his Plenary assent, according to the tenor of the Act here
following; which in regard it contains the sum of all their Projects for
lifetime then past, and the ground of all their Insolences for the times
ensuing; it shall not grieve me to subjoyn, nor be troublesome to the Reader to
pass it over, if he have not patience enough to go through with it. Now the
tenor of the said Act is as follows.

At the Parliament holden at Edenborough, June 5. in the Year of God, 1592.
42. Our Sovereign Lord, and Estates of this present Parliament, following the
Laudable and Good Example of their Predecessors, has ratified and approved,
and by the tenor of this present Act ratifies and approves all Liberties,
Privileges, Immunities, and Freedoms, whatsoever, given and granted by His
Highness, his Regents in His Name, or any of His Predecessors, to the True and
Holy Kirk, presently established within this Realm, and declared in the first
Act of His Highness Parliament, the 20 th day of October. 1579. And all and
whatsoever Acts of Parliaments and Statutes made of before by His Highness and
His Regents, anent the Liberty and Freedom of the said Kirk; and specially the
first Act of Parliament holden at Edenborough, the 24 th of October, in the
year of God 1581, with the whole particular Acts there mentioned; which shall
be as sufficient as if the same were here mentioned: and all other Acts of
Parliament made since, in favor of the true Kirk, and such like; ratifies and
approves the general Assemblies appointed by the said Kirk; and declares, That
it shall be lawful to the Kirk and Ministers every year, at least, or oftener,
pro re nata, as occasion and necessity shall require, to hold and keep general
Assemblies, providing, that the King's Majesty, or His Commissioners with Him,
to be appointed by His Highness, be present at ilk general Assembly, before the
dissolving thereof, to nominate and appoint time and place, when and where the
next general Assembly shall be holden. And in case neither His Majesty nor His
Commissioners be present for the time, in that Town where the next general
Assembly is holden; then, and in that case, it shall be lesum to the said
general Assembly, by themselves to nominate and appoint time and place where
the next general Assembly of the Kirk shall be kept and holden, as they have
been used to do in times bypast. And also, ratifies and approves the
Provincial and Synodal Assemblies, to be holden by the said Kirk and Ministers
twice ilk year, as they have been, or presently are in use to do, within every
Province of this Realm. And ratifies and approves these Presbyteries, and
particular Sessions appointed by the said Kirk, with the whole Discipline and
Jurisdiction of the same, agreed upon by His Majesty, in conference had by His
Highness, with certain of the Ministers convened to that effect: of the which
Articles, the tenor follows.

1. Matters to be entreated in Provincial Assemblies.
43. Their Assemblies are constitute for weighty matters, necessary to be
entreated by mutual consent and assistance of Brethren within the Province, as
need requires. This Assembly has Power to handle, order, and redress, all
things omitted or done amiss in the particular Assemblies. It has Power to
depose the Office-bearers of the Province, for good and just causes deserving
deprivation. And generally, these Assemblies have the whole Power of the
particular Elderships, whereof they are collected.

2. Matters to be entreated in the Presbyteries.
The Power of the Presbyteries, is, To use diligent labors in the bounds
committed to their charge, that the Kirks be kept in good order: To enquire
diligently of naughty and ungodly persons, and to travel to bring them into the
way again, by Admonition, or Threatening of God's Judgments, or by Correction.
It appertains to the Eldership to take heed that the Word of God be purely
preached within their bounds, the Sacraments rightly ministered, the Discipline
entertained, and Ecclesiastical Goods uncorruptly distributed. It belongs to
this kind of Assemblies, To cause the Ordinances made by the Assemblies
Provincial, National, and general, to be kept and put in execution: To make
Constitutions which concern (...) in the Kirk, for decent Order in the
particular Kirk where they govern; providing, that they alter no Rules made by
the Provincial and General Assemblies: and that the Provincial Assemblies
aforesaid, be privy to the Rules that they shall make, and to abolish
Constitutions tending to the hurt of the same. It has power to excommunicate
the obstinate, formal process being had, and due interval of times observed.
Anent particular Kirks, if they be lawfully ruled by sufficient Ministers, and
Session, they have Power and Jurisdiction in their own Congregation, in matters
Ecclesiastical: and decrees and declares the Assemblies, Presbyteries, and
Sessions-Jurisdiction, and Discipline aforesaid, to be in all times coming most
just, good, and godly, in it self; notwithstanding whatsoever Statutes, Acts,
Canons, Civil and Municipal Laws made to the contrary: to which, and every one
of them, these Presents shall make express derogation.

44. And because there are diverse Acts of Parliament made in favor of the
Papistical Church, tending to the prejudice of the Liberty of the true Kirk of
God, presently professed within this Realm, Jurisdiction and Discipline
thereof, which stand yet in the Books of the Acts of Parliament not abrogated
nor annulled: Therefore His Highness and Estates foresaid, has abrogated,
casted, and annulled, and by the tenor hereof, abrogates, casts, and annuls
all Acts of Parliament made by any of His Highness Predecessors for maintenance
of Superstition and Idolatry; with all, and whatsoever Acts, Laws, and
Statutes, made at any time before the day and date hereof, against the Liberty
of the true Kirk, Jurisdiction and Discipiline thereof, as the same is used and
exercised within this Realm. And in special, that Act of Parliament holden at
Sterling, the 4 th of November, 1543, commanding obedience to be given to
Eugenius the Pope for the time: the Act made by K. James the 3d, in His
Parliament holden at Edenborough, the 24 th of February, in the year of God
1480. And all other Acts whereby the Pope's Authority is established. The Act
of the said King James in his Parliament holden at Edenborough, the 20 th of
November, 1469, anent the Saturday, and other Vigils, to be Holy Day from
Even-song to Even-song. Item, That part of the Act made by the Queen-Regent,
holden at Edenborough the first day of February 1551, giving specially License
for holding of of Pasch, and Zuil.

45. And further, the King's Majesty and Estates aforesaid, declare, That the
129 th Act of Parliament holden at Edenborough, the 22 d of May, in the year of
God 1584, shall no ways be prejudicial, or derogate any thing from the
Privilege that God has given the Spiritual Office-bearers in the Kirk,
concerning Heads of Religion, Matters of Heresy, Excommunication, Collation,
or Deprivation of Ministers, or any such like Ecclesiastical Censures,
specially grounded, and having warrant of the Word of God. Item, Our Sovereign
Lord and Estates of Parliament foresaid, abrogates, casts, and annihilates the
Acts of the same Parliament holden at Edenborough the same year, 1584; granting
Commission to Bishops and other Judges, constitute in Ecclesiastical Causes, to
receive His Highness Presentation to Benefices, to give Collation thereupon,
and to put Order to all Causes Ecclesiastical, which His Majesty and Estates
foresaid, declares to be expired in the self, and to be null in time coming, of
none avail, force or effect. And therefore ordains all Presentations to
Benefices to be direct to the particular Presbyteries in all time coming, with
full Power to give Collation thereupon, and to put Order to all Matters and
Causes Ecclesiastical within their bounds, according to the Discipline of the
Kirk: Providing the foresaid Presbyters be bound and astricted to receive and
admit whatsoever qualified Minister presented by His Majesty or Laick Patrons.

46. Such was the Act by which the Presbyterian Discipline was settled in the
Kirk of Scotland. They had given Him trouble enough before, when they had no
authority of Law to confirm their actions. But now He must expect much more;
and they will see His expectation satisfied to the very full. So that it may be
much admired that He yielded to it, the rather in regard the Reasons of it are
not certainly known, nor very easy to be guessed at. Whether it were, that he
were not well enough informed touching the low condition which the English
Puritans were at this time brought to, or that He stood so much in fear of the
Earl of Bothwell, (whose treacherous practices threatened Him with continual
danger) that He was under a necessity of conforming to them for His own
preservation; or that He thought it His best way to let them have their own
Wills, and pursue their own Counsels, till they had wearied both themselves and
the rest of the Subjects, by the misgovernment of that Power which He had given
them; or whether it were all, or none of these, it is hard to say. Nor is it
less to be admired, that the Nobility of Scotland, who had found the weight of
that heavy yoke in the times foregoing, should take it so easily on their
necks, and not join rather with the King to cast it off. But they had gotten
most of the Church Lands into their possession, and thought it a greater piece
of wisdom to let the Presbytery overtop them in their several Consistories,
than that the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, or any other who pretended unto
their Estates, should be restored again to their Power and Places, and thereby
brought to a capacity of contending with them for their own. In which respect
they yielded also to another Act against the everting of Church Lands and
Tenths into Temporal Lordships: for, To what purpose should they strive for
such empty Titles, as added little to their profit, and not much to their
pleasures? There also passed some other Acts which seemed much to favor both
the Kirk and the Kirk-men; as namely, For the ratification of a former Act,
1587, in favor of the Ministers, their Rents and Stipends; for enabling
Lay-Patrons to dispose of their Prebendaries and Chaplinaries unto Students;
and that no Benefices with Cure pay any Thirds. There passed another Act also
which concerned the Glebes and Manses in Cathedral Churches, preserved of
purpose by the King (though they thought not of it) that when he found it
necessary to restore Episcopacy, the Bishops might find Houses, and other fit
Accommodations, near their own Cathedrals.

47. Thus have the Presbyterians gained two Acts of great importance; The one
for settling their Presbyteries in all parts of the Kingdom: The other for
repressing all thoughts of restoring Episcopacy, by passing over the
Church Lands to the use of the Crown. And to make as sure of it as they could,
(because a threefold Cord is not easily broken) they had before called upon
the King to reinforce the Band, or National Covenant, which had been made for
their adhaesion to the true Religion, and renouncing Popery. For so it was,
that some suspicions had been raised by the Presbyterians, That the King was
miserably seduced, and inclined to Popery; and that the Earl of Lenox had been
sent from France for no other purpose, but to work Him to it. And thereupon the
King gave order unto Mr. I. Craige, being then a Preacher in the Court, to form
a short Confession of Faith; wherein not only all the Corruptions of the Church
of Rome in point of Doctrine, but even those also which related unto Discipline
and Forms of Worship, were to be solemnly abjured. Which Confession, for
example to others, the King Himself, with all His Court and Council, did
publicly both subscribe and swear, Anno 1580. And the next year He required
the like Oath and Subscription from all His Subjects, for the securing of those
Fears and Jealousies which the Kirk had of Him. But in regard this general
Confession was not found sufficient to hinder the increase of Popery, for want
of some strict Combination amongst the Subjects which professed the Reformed
Religion; it was desired, that a Solemn League or Band might be authorized, by
which they should be bound to stand to one another in defense thereof; that is
to say, both of their Covenant and Religion, against all Opponents. The Guisian
Papists had projected the like League in France, to suppress the Gospel; and
why should they in Scotland be less zealous for the true Religion, than the
Guisian Papists for the false? Upon which ground the King was easily entreated
to consent unto it: and first subscribed the Band Himself, with all His Family,
An. 1589; which the next year he caused to be subscribed by all sorts of
people, as the General Assembly had desired.

48. Now in this Covenant and Confession, they did not only bind themselves to
renounce the Pope, together with all the Superstitions and Corruptions of the
Church of Rome; but in particular, to continue in obedience to the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland; and to defend the same according to their
vocation and power, all the days of their lives. And though it cannot be
conceived, that under those general words of Doctrine and Discipline, there
could be any purpose to abjure the Episcopal Government, which was in being
when that Confession was first framed, and for many years after: yet being now
received and subscribed unto, and their Presbyteries established by Act of
Parliament, it was interpreted by the Covenanters of succeeding times, Anno
1638, to contain in it an express renouncing of Episcopacy, as also of such
Rites and Ceremonies as had been introduced amongst them by the Synod of Perth,
Anno 1618. The sad Effects whereof, the King foresaw not at the present; but He
took order to redress them in the time to come: For now the Temporal Estates of
Bishops being alienated and annexed to the Crown by Act of Parliament, Anno
1587. Episcopacy tacitly abjured by Covenant, and that Covenant strengthened by
a Band or Association, Anno 1590. And finally, their Presbyteries settled by
like Act of Parliament in this present year Anno 1592. it was not to be thought
that ever Bishops or Episcopacy could revive again, though it otherwise
happened. It cannot be denied, but that K. JAMES did much despise this
Covenant, (commonly called the Negative Confession) when He came into England:
for, taking occasion to speak of it in the Conference of Hampton Court, he lets
us know, That Mr. Craige (the Compiler of it) with his renouncings and
abhorrings, his detestations and abrenounciations, did so amaze the simple
people, that few of them being able to remember all the said particulars, some
took occasion thereby to fall back to Popery, and others to remain in their
former ignorance. To which he added this short note, That if he had been bound
to that Form of Craige 's, the Confession of his Faith must have been in his
Table Book, and not in his Head. But what a mean opinion soever K. JAMES had of
it, the Puritans or Presbyterians of both Kingdoms, made it serve their turns
for raising a most dangerous Rebellion against his Son, and altering the whole
Frame of Government both in Church and State, which they new-molded at their
pleasure: and sure I am, that at the first entering into this Band, the
Presbyterians there grew so high and insolent, that the King could get no
Reason of them in his just demands. The King had found by late experience, how
much they had encroached upon his Royal Prerogative, defamed the present
Government, and reviled his Person. And thereupon, as he had gratified them in
confirming their Discipline, so he required them not long after to subscribe
these Articles; that is to say, That the Preacher should yield due obedience
unto the King's Majesty. That they should not pretend any privilege in their
Allegiance. That they should not meddle in matters of State. That they should
not publicly revile His Majesty. That they should not draw the people from
their due obedience to the King. That, when they are accused for their Factious
Speeches, or for refusing to do any thing, they should not alledg the
inspiration of the Spirit, nor feed themselves with color of Conscience, but
confess their faults like Men, and crave pardon like Subjects. But they were
well enough, they thanked him; and were resolved to hold their own Power, let
Him look to His.

AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History OF THE PRESBYTERIANS LIB. IX. Containing
Their Disloyalty, Treasons, and Seditions, in France, the Country of
East-Friesland, and the Isles of Britain; but more particularly, in England.
Together with the severe Laws made against them, and the several Executions in
pursuance of them, from the year 15^9 to the year 1595.
THus have we brought the Presbyterians to their highest pitch in the Kirk of
Scotland, when they were almost at their lowest fall in the Church of England:
these being at the very point of their Crucifixion, when the others were
chanting their Hosanna's for their good success. The English Brethren had lost
their principal Support, by the death of Leicester, though he was thought to
have cooled much in his affections toward their Affairs. But what they lost in
him, they studied to repair by the Earl of Essex, whose Father's Widow he had
married, trained him up for the most part under Puritan Tutors, and married him
at the last to Walsingham's Daughter. Upon these hopes they made their
applications to him, and were cheerfully welcomed; the Gentleman b^ing young,
ambitious, and exceeding popular, and therefore apt enough to advance their
Interest, and by theirs his own. And he appeared the rather for them at the
first, to cry quits with Whitgift; who, when he might have been elected
Chancellor of the University of Oxon, on the death of Leicester, chose rather
to commend his dear Friend, the Lord Chancellor Hatton, to the place, than to
assume it on himself; and after Hatton's death, to nominate the Lord Buckburst
to them, who was also chosen. The young Earl had an eye upon that great Office,
that he might be as powerful amongst men of the Gown, as he was amongst
Gentlemen of the Sword; and took it for an high affront, that the Archbishop
should presume to commend any other to that Honor, which he designed unto
himself. But the Queen easily took him off, and made him so far Friends with
Whitgift, as not to make any open profession of displeasure toward him, by
which the opposite Faction might be animated to their former Insolences, which
notwithstanding the Archbishop kept a vigilant eye upon all his actions, as
one that was not to be told of his private practices, the secret intelligence
which he had with the Heads of that Party, and saw that most of his Allies and
Kindred were engaged that way. For, though upon the reconciliation which was
made between them, the Earl had offered him to run a course in Clergy-Causes,
according to his directions and advice; yet what he did therein, proceeded
rather from a fear of the Queen's displeasure, than from any love to Whitgift,
or the Church it self; as afterward appeared most evidently in the course of
his actions.

2. But that which gave the Brethren their greatest blow, was, the death of
Walsingham, who dyed on the sixth of April, 1590. The Queen had lately been more
sensible of those manifold dangers which both the Principles and Practices of
the Disciplinarians did most apparently threaten to her whole Estate; more now
than ever, by the coming out of a Pamphlet, called, The humble Motion: In which
it was affirmed, That thousands did sigh for the Discipline, ten thousands had
sought it; and, that the most worthy men of every Shire had consented to it:
That the Eldership was at hand: That the people were inflamed with a zeal to
have it; and, that it was hard, dangerous, and impossible, to stand against it.
Incensed thereat, and fearing the sad consequences of such pestilent Pamphlets.
She resolved upon some speedy course to prevent the mischief: and therefore
gave the greater countenance to the Archbishops, Bishops, and their
subordinate Officers, for proceeding with them. On which encouragement, the
seeming-neutrality of the Earl of Essex, and the sickness of Walsingham, Snape,
and some others of their principal Leaders, were called before the
High Commission at Lambeth, in the first beginning of Easter-Term: which,
though it seemed both strange and unwelcome to them, yet there was no remedy.
Appear they did, because they must; but were resolved, that their appearance
should conduce as little as might be to their disadvantage. For, being required
to take their Oaths, according to the use of the Court, to answer punctually to
all such Interrogatories as were to be propounded to them; the Oath is
absolutely refused, unless the Interrogatories might be showed unto them.
First, therefore, they were made acquainted with the substance of them, but
that would not serve. They were assured in the next place, That they should be
required to answer no further unto any of them, than they were bound to do by
the Laws of the Land. But that served as little. In fine, it was resolved, That
the Interrogatories should be showed unto them, (here contrary to the practice
of all Courts in Criminal Causes) which served least of all: For now Snape
finding what was like to be charged upon them, gave notice of the same to the
rest of the Brethren, and did not only refuse the Oath, as before he did; but
put the rest upon a course of premeditation, both whether it were fit to answer
upon Oath, or not; and then, what Answer they would make, if they were put to
it. But so it happened, that his Letters, being intercepted, were produced
against him; upon which he was clapped up in Prison, and a great terror thereby
struck into all the Brethren, who now began to apprehend the dangers they were
fallen into by their former Insolences.

3. It may be gathered by those Letters, that no small diligence had been used
by such as had employed themselves in it, to search into the bottom of their
deepest Counsels, and most secret Purposes; and that so perfect a discovery had
been made thereof, as might warrant the High Commissioners to proceed severely,
without the least fear of being foiled in their undertakings. For Snape
confesses in those Letters, That they had the knowledge not only of Generals,
but of Specials, and Particulars also; that is to say, touching the places
where they met, Oxford, London, Cambridg, etc. the times of their accustomed
Meetings, as, Sturbridg-Faire, Acts, Terms, etc. the persons which assembled at
them, as, Cartwright, Perkins, Travers, Chark, etc. and finally, the very
matters which they dealt in, and agreed upon. Much troubled the good man seemed
to be, in guessing at that false Brother who had made the discovery: but, that
they were discovered, he is sure enough; for he affirms, that their Actings
neither were, or could be any longer concealed; and therefore, that the Lord
called upon them to be resolute in the present case. And thereupon it was
propounded, Whether it were better and more safe, that one man (with the
consent of the rest) should boldly, freely, and wisely confess, and lay open,
etc or, that some weak or wicked man should without consent, and in evil sort,
acknowledge, etc. He tells them, That the matter aimed at by High Commissioners,
was, To bring them within danger of Law for holding Conventicles: That in
Causes of Murder, and the like, it was commonly asked, Whether the Party fled
upon it; and therefore, that they should do well to consider of it, in
reference to the present case, and so advising, That T. C. should be sent to
with all speed, he concludes his Letter.

4. This Letter coming up so close to the former discoveries, brings Cartwright
into play in September following. But first, a consultation must be had amongst
them, at the House of one Gardener, Whether, and if at all, how far it might be
fit for him to reveal all or any of the matters which had passed in conference
or disputation in any of their former Assemblies. And, as it seems, it was
determined in the Negative, (according to the Doctrine of the old
Priscilianists) that he should not do it. For, when the Oath was offered to
him, he refused to take it. The High-Commission-Court was at that time held in
the Bishop of London's Consistory, in the Church of St. Paul. At which were
present, amongst others, the Lord Bishop of London, the two Chief Justices,
Sergeant Puckering, afterward Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Mr. Justice
Gaudie, and Popham, then Attorney General, but afterward Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas. All which did severally and distinctly assure him upon their
Credits, That by the Laws of the Realm he was bound to take the Oath required,
for making a true answer unto the Interrogatories which were to be propounded
to him. To which he made no other Answer, but that he could find no such thing
in the Law of God; and so continuing in his obstinacy, was committed also. But
the Commissioners having spent some time in preparing the matter, and thinking
the cognizance thereof more fitter for the Star Chamber, referred both the
Persons and the Cause to the care of that Court. In which an Information was
preferred against them by the Queen's Attorney, for setting forth and putting
in practice (without warrant and authority) a new form of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, together with the Presbyterial Discipline not
allowed by Law. Upon the news whereof, the Brethren enter into consultation, as
well about some course to be presently taken for relief of the Prisoners, as
for the putting of their Discipline into further practice: What the result was,
may be gathered from a Letter of Wiggingtons, (one of the hottest heads amongst
them) in which he thus writes to Porter of Lancaster, viz. Mr. Cartwright is in
the Fleet for refusing the Oath (as I hear); and Mr. Knewstubs is sent for, and
sundry worthy Ministers are disquieted, who have been spared long: So that we
look for some bickering ere long, and then a Battle, which cannot long endure.

5. But before any thing could be done upon either side, in order to the
proceedings of the Co^rt, or the release of the Prisoners, there brake out such
a dangerous Treason, as took up all the thoughts of the Lords of the Council,
and the Brethren too. The Brethren had so fixed their Fancies on the Holy
Discipline, and entertained such strange devices to promote the same, beyond
the warrant of God's Word, and the Rule of Law; that at the last God gave them
up to strong delusions, and suffered them to be transported by their own ill
spirits, to most dangerous downfalls. One Coppinger, a Gentleman of a very good
Family, had been so wrought upon by some of the chief Factors to the
Presbyterians, that he became a great admirer of their Zeal and Piety: and
being acquainted with one Arthington* a Lay- Genevian, but very zealous in the
Cause, he advises with him of some means for the good of the Prisoners. But
upon long deliberation, they could think of no course at all, unless it would
please God by some extraordinary Calling to stir up some zealous Brethren to
effect their desires: and if God pleased to take that way, why might not one or
both of them be chosen, as fit Instruments in so great a service? than whom,
they knew of none more able, and of few more zealous. On these Preparatories
they betake themselves to Prayer and Fasting, hold a strict Fast together on
the 15 th of December, and then began to ^ind themselves extraordinarily
exercised, as appears by their Letters writ to Lancaster, in whose House they
held it. Immediately upon this Fact, Coppinger takes a journey into Kent, and
fancies (by the way) that he was admitted to a familiar Conference with God
himself, that he received from Him many strange Directions, to be followed by
him whenever God should please to use his service for the good of His Church;
and more particularly, that he was showed a way to bring the Queen to
repentance, and to cause all the Nobles to do the like out of hand; or else to
prove them to be Traitors to Almighty God. Another Fast is held by him and
Arthington at his coming back, in which he finds himself more strongly stirred
to a matter of some great importance, than he was before: of which he gives
notice unto Gibson in Scotland, by his Letter of the last of December; and
afterward to Wiggington abovementioned; by them to be communicated to the rest
of the Brethren. Another Fast follows upon this, at which Wiggington and some
others did vouchsafe their presence, who had before confirmed them in the fancy
of some such extraordinary Calling as he seemed to drive at. With the intention
of this last, Cartwright and other of the Prisoners were made acquainted
beforehand, to the intent that by the benefit of their secret prayers, the
Action might be crowned with an End more glorious. And the same night,
Coppinger finds himself in Heaven, exceedingly astonished at the Majesty of
Almighty God, but very much comforted by the Vision; and every day more and
more encouraged to some great Work; which he communicates at several times, and
by several Letters, to Cartwright, Travers, Clark, etc. amongst the Preachers;
and from the Lay-Brethren, unto Lancaster, and Sir Peter Wentworth.

6. And now we must make room for another Actor, a greater Zealot than the
other, and one that was to rob them of the glory of their Dreams and Dotages;
Hacket, an inconsiderable Fellow both for Parts and Fortune, pretends to a more
near Familiarity with Almighty God, than either of the other durst aspire to. A
Wretch of such a desperate Malice, that bearing an old grudg to one that had
been his Schoolmaster, he bit off his Nose. And when the poor man humbly
prayed him to let him have it again, to the end it might be sowed on before it
was cold, he most barbarously chewed it with his teeth, and so swallowed it
down. After this, having wasted that small Estate which he had by his Wife, he
becomes a Proselyte, pretends at first to more than ordinary zeal for a
Reformation, and afterward to extraordinary Revelations for the compassing of
it. This brings him into the acquaintance of some zealous Ministers, who were
then furiously driving on for the Holy Discipline; but none more than
Wiggington before remembered, who brings him presently to Coppinger, at such
time as the poor man was raised to the height of his Follies. Hacket had
profited so well in the School of Hypocrisy, that by his counterfeit-holiness,
his fervent and continual praying ex tempore, fasting upon the Lord's Days,
making frequent brags of his Conflicts with Satan, and pretending to many
personal Conferences with the Lord Himself, that he became of great esteem with
the rest of the Brethren; insomuch that some of them did not stick to say, not
only that he was one of God's beloved, but greater in His Favor than Moses or
John the Baptist. And he himself made show, That he was a Prophet, sent to
foretell God's Judgments, where His Mercies were neglected; prophesying, That
there should be no more Popes; and, that England this present Year should be
afflicted with Famine, War, and Pestilence, unless the Lord's Discipline and
Reformation were forthwith admitted. These men, being both governed by the same
ill spirit, were mutually over-joyed at this new acquaintance, and forthwith
entered into counsel for freeing Cartwright, Snape, and the rest of the
Ministers, not only from the several Prisons in which they lay, but from the
danger of their Censure in the Starr-Chamber, which was then at hand.

7. It was expected that the Censure would have passed upon them on the last
day of Easter-Term; of which Coppinger gives Hacket notice, and sends him word
withal, That he meant to be at the hearing of it; and that if any Severity
should be used toward them, he should be forced in the Name of the Great and
Fearful God of Heaven and Earth, to protest against it. The like expectation
was amongst them in the Term next following, at what time Coppinger was
resolved on some desperate act to divert the Sentence. For thus he writes to
Lancaster before-remembred, That if our Preachers in Prison do appear to morrow
in the Starr-Chamber, and if our great men deal with them so as it is thought
they will; and that if then God did not throw some fearful Judgment amongst
them, etc. that is to say, (for so we must make up the sense) let him give no
more credit unto him or his Revelations. But the Hearing being deferred at that
time also, and nothing like to be done in it till after Michaelmas, the
Conspirators perceived they had time enough for new Consultations. And in these
Consultations they resolve amongst them to impeach the two Archbishops, of
High Treason, that so they might be made incapable of proceeding in a Legal way
against the Prisoners, or otherwise to assassinate both together, with the Lord
Chancellor Hatton, (whom they deadly hated) if any severe Sentence was
pronounced against them. But Hacket was for higher matters. The Spirit of
Infatuation had so wrought upon him, that he conceived himself to partake of
the same Divine Nature with Almighty God. That he was appointed by his God to
be King of Europe; and therefore looked upon all Kings (but the Queen
especially) as the Usurpers of the Throne, which belonged unto him. And against
her he carried such a bitter hatred, that against her he often cast forth
dangerous speeches, That she had lost her Right to the Crown; and spared not to
do execution upon her in her Arms and Pictures, by stabbing his Dagger into
both, whenever he saw them. The people also must be dealt with, to make use
of their Power, according unto that Maxim of the Disciplinarians, That if the
Magistrate will not reform the Church and State, then the People must. And that
he might wind them to this height, he scattered certain Rhimes or Verses
amongst them; by which it was insinuated, That a true Christian, though he were
a Clown or poor Countryman, (which was Hacket's own case) might teach Kings
how to manage their Scepters; and that they might depose the Queen, if she did
not zealously promote the Reformation.

8. Finding to what an admiration he had raised himself in the esteem of
Coppinger and his Fellow Arthington, he looks upon them as the fittest
Instruments to advance his Treasons; persuading them, That they were endued not
only with a Prophetical, but an Angelical Spirit. And they, believing what he
said, performed all manner of obedience to him, as one that was appointed to
reign over them, by God himself; setting themselves, from that time forward, to
raise some Sedition, in which the people might be moved unto what they pleased.
Being thus possessed, they intimate to Wiggington forementioned, That Christ
appeared to them the night before, not in his own body, as He sits in Heaven;
but in that especial Spirit by which he dwelt in Hacket more than in any other.
They added also, That Hacket was the very Angel which should come before the
Day of Judgment, with his Fan in the one hand, and his Shepherds Crook in the
other, to distinguish the Sheep from the Goats, to tread down Satan, and ruin
the Kingdom of Antichrist. What Counsel they received from Wiggington, is not
certainly known, though it may be judged by the event. For presently on their
going from him, which was on the sixteenth of July, they repair to Hacket, whom
he found lazing in his bed in a private House at Broken-wharf; and casting
themselves upon their knees, as if they were upon the point of Adoration;
Arthington suddenly arises, and advises Coppinger, in the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to anoint their King. But Hacket cunningly declines it, telling
them, that he was already anointed by the Holy Ghost, and therefore that they
were to do what he should command them: Which said, he ordains Coppinger to be
his Prophet of Mercy, and Arthington to be his Prophet of Justice; and gives
them their Mission in this manner: Go now (says he), and tell up and down the
City, That Jesus Christ is come with his Fan in his hand, to judge the World: if
any ask you where he is, direct them to this place: if they will not believe
you, let them come and see if they can kill me. As sure as God is in Heaven, no
less assuredly is Christ now come to judge the World. With this Commission fly
the two new Prophets from one street to another, till they came to Cheapside,
crying out, Christ is come, Christ is come, all the way they went; and adding
with as loud a voice, Repent, Repent. In Cheapside they mount into a Cart, (a
proper Pulpit for such Preachers) proclaiming thence, that Hacket participated
of Christ's glorified Body, by his especial Spirit, and was now come with his
Fan, to propagate the Gospel, to settle the Discipline, (for that was the
impulsive to all this madness) and to establish in England a new Commonwealth:
They added further, That themselves were two Prophets, the one of Mercy, and
the other of Justice; the truth whereof they took upon their salvation. That
Hacket was the only Supreme Monarch of the World; and, That all the Kings of
Europe held of him as his Vassals: That therefore he only ought to be obeyed,
and the Queen deposed; and, That Vengeance should shortly fall from Heaven, not
only on the Archbishop of Canterbury, but the Lord Chancellor Hatton.

9. Infinite were the throngs of people which this strange Novelty had drawn
together to that place; but they found none so mad as themselves, none so
besotted as to cry, God save King Hacket: so that not able to be heard by
reason of the Noise, nor to go forward in their Mission, because of the Throng;
they dismounted their Chariot, and, by the help of some of their Friends,
conveyed themselves to Hacket's Lodging. They had not staid there long, when
they were all three apprehended, and brought before the Lords of the Council;
to whom they showed so little reverence, that they never moved their Hats unto
them; and told them, that they were above all Magistrates, of what rank soever.
Hacket is afterward arraigned, July 26. and two days after drawn to his
Execution, which was to be done upon him in that part of Cheapside in which his
two Prophets had proclaimed him. Neither the Sentence past upon him, nor the
fear of death, mitigated any thing of that Spirit of Infatuation with which the
Devil had possessed him. Insomuch, that he exclaimed most horribly (as he was
drawn upon the Hurdle) all the way he passed, crying out in these words,
Jehovah the Messiah, Jehovah the Messiah: behold, Heaven is opened; behold, the
Son of the Most High is coming down to deliver me. With the like ill spirit he
was governed when he came to the Gallows; at which he is affirmed to have made
this Imprecation, (for I can by no means call it Prayer) viz. Almighty
Everlasting God, Jehovah, Alpha and Omega, Lord of lords, King of kings, the
Everlasting God, thou know that I am the true Jehovah whom thou have sent.
Show some Miracle from the Clouds for the conversion of these Infidels, and
deliver me from my Enemies. The rest, too horrid and blasphemous to be imparted
to the eyes of a sober Christian, I forbear to add. Let it suffice, that after
some struggling with the Hangman, and many fearful Execrations against God and
man, he was turned off the Ladder, and presently cut down, ripped up, and
quartered, according unto the Law in that behalf. Unto such dangerous
Precipices do men cast themselves, when they forsake the Rule of the Church,
and will not be content with that sobriety in the things of God, which makes
men wise unto salvation. But as for his two Prophets, they found different
ends, though they had steered the same course with him. Coppinger by a wilful
abstinence, starved himself in Prison within few days after. But Arthington
lived to see his Errors, was pardoned upon his repentance, and published a
Retractation of his Follies, as became a Christian.

10. Many Endeavors have been used for freeing Cartwright and the rest of the
chief Presbyterians, from having any hand in these damnable practices. And it
is true enough, that many of them were so wise, as neither to admit them to a
personal Conference, nor to return Answer to those Letters which were sent unto
them from the Parties. But then it is as true withal, that Coppinger had
communicated his first thoughts touching his Extraordinary Calling, by several
Letters writ to Cartwright, Egerton, Travers, Chark, Gardener, Cooper, Philips,
and others; not to say any thing of Penry or Wiggington, who seemed to have
been of Counsel with them in the whole Design. And it is also true, that when
he descended to particulars in reference to the course which he meant to take
in the present Exigent, they would by no means entertain any Messages from him,
by which they might be made acquainted with the Plot in hand. But then it
cannot be denied, that knowing them to be intent upon some course which they
could not justify, they neither revealed it to the State, nor labored to
dissuade them from it, but seemed content to let them run their full career,
and then to take such benefit of it as the issue and success thereof should
afford unto them. And in this case it may be said too justly in the Orator's
language, that there was little difference between the advising of a Fact, and
the rejoicing at it when it was once executed: and how they then could take the
benefit of such a mischief, with which they had been pre-acquainted in the
general notion, and either not be joyful at it, and consequently be in the same
case with such as had advised unto it, let them judge that list.

11. The dangers growing to the State by these odious practices, may be
supposed to hasten the Arraignment of Vdal, one of the four which had a hand in
those scurrilous Libels which swarmed so numerously in all parts of the
Kingdom, Anno 1588, and the times since following. But more particularly, he
stood charged for being the Author of a Book, called, The Demonstration of
Discipline which Christ has prescribed in his Word for the Government of his
Church, in all times and places, until the Worlds end. In the Preface whereof
occureth these passages: First, He inscribes the same not to the Governors,
but to the supposed Governors of the Church of England. And then he flies upon
them in these following words, viz. Who can deny you, without blushing, to be
the cause of all ungodliness? seeing your Government is that which gives leave
to a man to be any thing, saving a sound Christian. For certainly, it is more
free in these days to be a Papist, Anabaptist, of the Family of Love; yea, as
any most wicked whatsoever, than that which we should be. And I could live
these twenty years, as well as any such in England, (yea in a Bishop's House,
it may be) and never be molested for it: So true is that which you are charged
with in a Dialogue lately come forth against you, and since burned by you, That
you care for nothing but the maintenance of your Dignities, be it to the
damnation of your own souls, and infinite millions more. For which whole Book,
but more especially for this passage in the Preface of it, he was indicted at
an Assizes held in Croydon, for the County of Surrey, on the 23 d of July, Anno
1590; and by sufficient Evidence found guilty of it. The Prisoner pleaded for
himself, That his Indictment was upon the Statute of 23 Eliz. Cap. 2. for
punishing Seditious words against the Queen; but that the Book for which he
stood accused, contained no offensive passages against the Queen, but the
Bishops only, and therefore could not come within the compass and intent of
that Statute. But it was answered by the Judges, and resolved for Law, That
they who speak against Her Majesty's Government in Cases Ecclesiastical, Her
Laws, Proceedings, or Ecclesiastical Officers, which ruled under Her, did
defame the Queen. Which Resolution being given, and the Evidence heard, he had
so much favor showed him, by consent of the Court, as to be put unto this
question, that is to say, Whether he would take it either on his Conscience, or
his Credit, that he was not the Author of that Book: Which if he would or could
have done, it was conceived that both the Judges and the Jurors would have
rested satisfied. But he not daring to deny it, the Jurors could not otherwise
do, than pronounce him Guilty, upon such evident Proofs, and so many Witnesses
as were brought against him. But the Archbishop, being then at his House in
Croydon, prevailed so far in his behalf, that the Judges did suspend the
Sentence of his Condemnation. This Trial happened in the interval, between the
several Commitments of Snape and Cartwright, beforementioned, when the State
had taken up a resolution to proceed severely against the Disturbers of Her
Peace; which gave some occasion of offense to the Lord Chancellor Hatton, that
the Archbishop, who seemed most concerned in the present case, should show
such favor to a man whom the Law condemned, and by whose seasonable Execution,
a stop might possibly be made to all further Troubles.

12. But Snape and Cartwright still continuing obstinate in refusing the Oath,
and the suspicion growing strong of some new Designs, he was brought again unto
the Bar at Southwark, in the March next following, and there received the
Sentence of death in due form of Law. But such was the exceeding Lenity of the
good Archbishop, that he looked more upon the Parts of the man, than upon his
Passions, upon his Learning and Abilities, though too much abused, than the ill
use that he made of them in those stirring-times. And so far he engaged himself
with his Royal Mistress, (who used to call him Her Black Husband) that she gave
way to a Reprieve, though she could not easily be induced to grant a Pardon.
Which notwithstanding the Archbishop could not escape the lash of some virulent
Tongues, by whom he stood more accused for the Condemnation, than he was
magnified for the Reprieve of the man condemned. And therefore it was after
pleaded in his justification, That Vdal's Book was clearly within the compass
of the Statute 23 Eliz. cap. 2. for punishing Seditious words against the
Queen, according to the Resolution of the Judges before laid down. That diverse
Seditious Sermons might have been objected against him, as well as the making
of that Book, which would have rendered him more culpable in the sight of his
Judges; and that whereas one Catsfield could have spoken more materially
against him, than any of the rest of the Witnesses, he was never called unto
the Bar to give in his Evidence, the Jurors being fully satisfied in the
former Proofs. So that the whole Indictment being rightly grounded, the
Prosecution favorable, and the Evidence full, the man remained a
living-Monument of the Archbishop's extraordinary Goodness to him, in the
preserving of that Life which by the Law he had forfeited. But how long he
remained alive, I am not able to say; and therefore shall add only this, That
he left a Son behind, called Ephraim, who afterward was Beneficed at the
Church of St. Augustines, near St. Paul's Churchyard, and proved as great a
Zealot for Conformity, in the time of King CHARLES, as his Father was reputed
for his Nonconformity in the times we write of. And he paid almost as deer for
it, as his Father did, being sequestered about the year 1643, not submitting to
some Oaths and Covenants then required of him; his bedridden Wife turned out of
doors, and left most unmercifully in the open Streets.

13. Now whilst the State was taken up in these Criminal Processes, the Learned
men and others interessed on each side, were no less busied in defense of their
own Concernments. Adrian Saravia, born in the Lower-Germany, but better studied
in the Fathers than the most of his Rank, had found by search into their
Writings, of what Antiquity and Necessity the Calling of Bishops had been
reckoned in the Primitive times, even in the days of the Apostles; but finding
no encouragement to maintain any such opinion in his Native Country, where the
Presbyteries governed all, and Parity of Ministers was received as an Article
of their public Confession; he put himself upon the Favor and Protection of
the Church of England. He had before fashioned his Reply to Beza's Book,
entitled, De Triplici Episcopatu, as before was said. But the first Piece
published by him on his coming hither, 1590.
was a right learned Work, entitled, De diversis gradibus Ministrorum
Evangelii: In which he proved by undeniable Arguments, That Bishops were a
different Order, as well as by Degrees superior to all other Presbyters. This
Book he dedicates to the Ministers of the Belgic Churches, as appears by his
Epistle dated March 26, Anno 1590. Amongst whom, though he could not hope for
much approbation, yet he received but little or no opposition. But so it proved
not at Geneva, where Beza governed, backed by Danaeus, and the rest of the
Consistorians, who looked upon it as destructive to their whole Contrivements.
Beza had other Work in hand, and therefore leaves him for the present to the
lash of Danaeus, who falls upon him with Reproaches instead of Arguments, (as
Saravia complained in his Reply) reckoning his Corpulency for a Crime, calling
him Swineherd, Hog, a man born only for the stuffing of a filthy paunch; with
many the like scurrilous strains of Genevian Rhetoric. Beza comes slowly on,
but he comes at last; not publishing his Answer to it, till the third year
after: to which Saravia replies in the year next following, Anno 1594. In which
he made an exact parallel (amongst other things) betwixt the practices of
Hacket and the Puritan Faction, on the one side, and those of John of Leyden
and the Anabaptists, when they reigned in Munster. In the end, Beza gave him
over; which raised him to such eminent note with the English Prelates, that he
was made a Prebendary of the Church of Westminster, and otherwise well provided
for to his full contentment.

14. In the mean time, the Minister of the Italian Church in the City of
London, could not rest satisfied with the enjoying the same Privileges which
the French and Dutch Churches had before procured; but published a Book in
maintenance and commendation of the Holy Discipline: which gave a just occasion
to Dr. Matthew Suttliff, De vera Catholica and Christiana Ecclesia
then Dean of Exon, to set out a judicious Work in Latin touching the nature of
the truly Catholic and Christian Church; wherein he grated somewhat hard on
the point of Presbytery, and was the first English man that did so in the Latin
Tongue. And though he named Beza only, and no more than named him; yet Beza
thought his Name so sacred, or himself so high, that he conceived himself to be
much dishonored; reproaches him by the name of a petulant Railer,
Convitiatorem petulantem vocari dolco. Sarav. Repl.
and complains of the affront in an Epistle to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
But he got nothing by the Bargain: For as he was handsomely shaked up for it by
Saravia in his Replication; so the Archbishop in an Answer to the said
Epistle, dated in January, 1593, severely reprehends him for his intermedling
with the Church of England, and plainly lays before him all those disturbances
which by his means had been occasioned in the same: so that being learnedly
refuted by Saravia on the one side, and gravely reprehended on the other by
that Reverend Prelate, he grows wise at last, leaving the English Puritans to
their own defenses. And more than so, in his Reply to his last Letter, he gives
him his due Titles, of the most Reverend Father in Christ, and his honored
Lord; assuring him, That in all his writings touching Church Government, he
impugned only the Romish Hierarchy, but never intended to touch the
Ecclesiastical Polity of this Church of England, nor to exact of us to frame
our selves or our Church to the pattern of their Presbyterian Discipline. And
thereunto he added this safe Conclusion, That as long as the substance of
Doctrine was uniform in the Church of Christ, they may lawfully vary in other
matters, as the circumstance of time, place, and persons, requires, and as
prescription of Antiquity may warrant. And, to that end he wished and hoped,
that the Sacred and Holy Colleges of Bishops (for so he calls them) would for
ever continue and maintain such their Right and Title in the Church's
Government, with all Equity and Christian Moderation.

15. At this time grew the Heats also betwixt Hooker and Travers: the first
being Master of the Temple, and the other Lecturer: Hooker received his
Education in Corpus Christi College in Oxon, from whence he came well stocked
in all kind of Learning, but most especially in Fathers, Councils, and other
approved Monuments of Ecclesiastical Antiquity. Travers was bred in Trinity
College in Cambridg, well skilled in the Oriental Tongues, and otherwise better
studied in Words than Matter, being Cotemporary with Cartwright, and of his
Affection: He sets up his studies in Geneva, and there acquaints himself with
Beza, and the rest of that Consistory, of whom and their new Discipline he grew
so enamoured, that before his coming into England he was made Minister (as well
at least as such hands could make him) by the Presbytery of Antwerp, as appears
by their Certificate, (for I dare not call them Letters of Orders) dated May
14, 1578. Thus qualified, he associates himself with Cartwright, whom he found
there at his coming in preaching to the Factory of English Merchants, and
follows him not long after into England also. By the commendation of some
Friends, he was taken into the House of William Lord Burleigh, whom he served
first in the nature of a Pedagogue to his younger Son, and after as one of his
Chaplains. Preferments could not choose but come in his way, considering the
Greatness of his Master, whose eminent Offices of Lord Treasurer, Chief
Secretary, and Master of the Wards, could not but give him many opportunities
to prefer a Servant to the best places in the Church. But Travers knew his
incapacity to receive such Favors, as neither lawfully ordained, according to
the Form prescribed by the Church of England, nor willing to subscribe to such
Rites and Ceremonies as he found were used in the same. But being a great
Factor for promoting the Holy Discipline, he gets himself into the Lecture of
the Temple; which could not easily be denied, when the Chaplain of so great a
Councellor was a Suitor for it.

16. In this place he insinuates himself, by all means imaginable, into the
good affections of many young Students, and some great Lawyers of both Houses,
on whom he gained exceedingly by his way of Preaching, graced with a comely
Gesture, and a Rhetorical manner of Elocution. By which advantages he possessed
many of the long Robe with a strong affection to the devices of Geneva, and
with as great a prejudice to the English Hierarchy; the fruits whereof
discovered themselves more or less in all following Parliaments, when any thing
concerning the Church came in agitation. And by the opportunity of this Place,
he had the chief managing of the Affairs of the Disciplinarians, presiding for
the most part in their Classical Meetings, and from hence issuing their
Directions to the rest of the Churches. And so it stood till Hooker's coming to
be Master; who being a man of other Principles, and better able to defend them
in a way of Argument; endeavored to instruct his Auditors in such Points of
Doctrine as might keep them in a right persuasion of the Church of England, as
well in reference to her Government, as her Forms of Worship. This troubled
Travers at the heart, as it could not otherwise, to see that the fine Web which
he had been so long in weaving, should be thus unravelled. Rather than so,
Hooker shall tell them nothing in the Morning, but what he labored to confute
in the Afternoon; not doubting but that a great part of the Auditors would pass
Sentence for him, though the truth might run most apparently on the other side.
Hooker endured it for some time; but being weary at the last of the opposition,
he complains thereof to the Archbishop, who had (deservedly) a very great
opinion of him; and this Complaint being seasonably made in that point of time
when Cartwright, Snape, and other Leadingmen of the Puritan Faction, were
brought into the High Commission; it was no hard matter for him to procure an
Order to suppress his Adversary, silenced from preaching in the Temple, and all
places else. Which Order was issued upon these grounds, that is to say, That he
was no lawfully ordained Minister according to the Church of England: That he
took upon him to preach, without being licensed: and, That he had presumed
openly to confute such Doctrine as had been publicly delivered by another
Preacher, without any notice given thereof to the lawful Ordinary, contrary to
a Provision made in the Seventh year of the Queen, for avoiding Disturbances in
the Church.

17. But Travers was too stiff, and too well supported, to sit down on the
first Assault: He makes his supplication therefore to the Lords of the Council,
where he conceived himself as strong and as highly favored as Hooker was
amongst the Bishops and the High Commissioners. In this Petition he complains
of some obliquity in the proceedings had against him, for want of some
Legalities in the conduct of it. But when he came to answer to the Charges
which were laid upon him, his Defenses appeared very weak and flat, and could
not much conduce to his justification, when they were seriously examined in the
scale of Judgment. His exercising the Ministry without lawful Orders, he
justified no otherwise, than that by the Communion of Saints, all Ordinations
were of like Authority in a Christian Church. The Bishop of London had
commended him by two Letters unto that Society, to be chosen Lecturer; and That
he took for a sufficient License, as might enable him to preach to that
Congregation. And as for his confuting in the Afternoon, what had been preached
by Mr. Hooker in the morning before, he conceived that he had warrant for it
from St. Paul's example, in withstanding St. Peter to his face, for fear lest
otherwise God's Truth might receive some prejudice. The weakness and
insufficiency of which Defenses, was presently made known in Hooker's Answer to
the Supplication. Which wrought so much upon the Lords, and was so strongly
seconded by the Archbishop himself, that all the Friends which Travers had
amongst them, could not do him good; especially when it was represented to
them, how dangerous a thing it was, that a man of such ill Principles, and of
worse Affections, should be permitted to continue in his former Lecture; which,
what else were it, in effect, but to retain almost half the Lawyers of England
to be of Council in all Causes which concerned the Church, whenever those of
the Genevian or Puritan Faction should require it of them. But so it happened,
(and it happened very well for Travers) that the Queen had erected an University
at Dublin, in the year foregoing, 1591; Founding therein a College dedicated
to the Holy Trinity; to the Provostship whereof he was invited by the
Archbishop of Dublin, who had been once a Fellow of the same House with him.
Glad of which opportunity to go off with credit, he prepares for Ireland. But
long he had not dwelt on his new Preferment, when either he proved too hot for
the Place, or the Country (by reason of the following Wars) grew too hot for
him: Which brought him back again to England; where he lived to a very great
age in a small Estate, more comfortably than before, because less troublesome
to the Church than he had been formerly.

18. Thus have we seen Travers taken off, and Beza quieted; nor was it long
before Cartwright was reduced to a better temper: But first, it was resolved to
try all means for his delivery, both at home and abroad. Abroad, they held
intelligence with their Brethren in the Kirk of Scotland, by means of Penry
here, and of Gibson there; two men as fit for their Designs, as if they had
been made of purpose to promote the Mischief. Concerning which, thus Gibson
writes in one of his Letters to Coppinger, before remembered; whereby it seems
that he was privy to his practices also. The best of our Ministers (says he)
are most careful of your estate; and had sent for that effect a Preacher of
ours the last Summer, of purpose to confer with the best affected of your
Church, to lay down a plot how our Church might best travel for your relief.
The Lord knows what care we have of you, both in our public and private
Prayers, etc. For, as feeling-members of one body, we reckon the affliction of
your Church to be our own. This showed how great they were with child of some
good Affections; but there wanted strength to be delivered of the Burden. They
were not able to raise Factions in the Court of England, as Queen ELIZABETH had
done frequently on their occasions in the Realm of Scotland. All they could do,
was to engage the King in mediating with the Queen in behalf of Cartwright,
Vdal, and some others of the principal Brethren then kept in Prison for their
contumacy in refusing the Oath. And they prevailed so far upon Him, who was not
then in a condition to deny them any thing, as to direct some Lines unto Her in
this tenor following.

19. RIght Excellent, High and Mighty Princess, Our dearest Sister and Cousin,
in Our heartiest manner We recommend Us unto You. Hearing of the Apprehension
of Master Vdal, and Master Cartwright, and certain other Ministers of the
Evangel, within Your Realm, of whose good Erudition, and Faithful Travels in
the Church, We hear a very credible commendation, however that their diversity
from the Bishops and other of Your Clergy, in matters touching their
Conscience, has been a mean by their delation to work them your misliking: at
this time We cannot (weighing the Duty which We owe to such as are afflicted
for their Conscience in that Profession) but by Our most effectuous and earnest
Letter, interpone Us at Your Hands, to stay any harder usage of them for that
cause. Requesting You most earnestly, That for Our Cause and Intercession, it
may please You to let them be relieved of their present Strait, and whatsoever
further Accusation or Pursuit depending upon that ground, respecting both their
former Merit in setting forth the Evangel, the simplicity of their Conscience
in this Defense, which cannot well be, their Let by Compulsion, and the great
slander which would not fail to fall out upon their further straitning for any
such occasion. Which We assure Us, Your Zeal to Religion, besides the
expectation We have of Your good will to pleasure Us, will willingly accord to
Our Request, having such proofs from time to time, of Our like disposition to
You, in any matter which You recommend unto Us. And thus, Right Excellent,
Right High, and Mighty Princess, Our dear Sister and Cousin, We commit You to
God's Protection.

Edenborough, June 12. 1591.
20. This Letter was presented to the Queen by the hands of one Johnson, a
Merchant of that Nation then remaining in London. But it produced not the
Effect which the Brethren hoped for: For the Queen looked upon it as extorted
rather by the importunity of some which were then about Him, than as proceeding
from Himself, who had no reason to be too indulgent unto those of that Faction.
This Project therefore not succeeding, they must try another; and the next
trial shall be made on the High Commission, by the Authority whereof,
Cartwright, and Snape, and diverse others, were committed Prisoners. If this
Commission could be weakened, and the Power thereof reduced to a narrower
compass, the Brethren might proceed securely in the Holy Discipline, the
Prisoners be released, and the Cause established. And for the questioning
thereof, they took this occasion: One Caudreys, Parson of North-Luffengham, in
the County of Rutland, had been informed against, about four years since, in
the High Commission, for preaching against the Book of Common Prayer, and
refusing to celebrate Divine Service, according to the Rules and Rubricks
therein prescribed. For which, upon sufficient proof, he was deprived of his
Benefice by the Bishop of London, and the rest of the Queen's Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Causes. Four years together he lay quiet, without acting any
thing against the Sentence of the Court. But now it was thought by some of
those Lawyers, whom Travers had gained unto the side, to question the Authority
of that Commission, and consequently the illegality of his Deprivation. In
Hillary Term, Anno 1591, the Cause was argued in the Exchequer Chamber, by all
the Judges, according to the usual custom in all cases of the like importance;
and it was argued with great Learning, as appears by the sum and substance of
their several Arguments, drawn up by Coke, then being the Queen's
Sollicitor-General, and extant amongst the rest of his Reports, both in English
and Latin, inscribed De Iure Regis Ecclesiastico; but known most commonly by
the name of Cawdrey's Case. In the debating of which Point, the Result was
^his, That the Statute of 10 of the Queen, for restoring to the Crown the
ancient Jurisdiction, etc. was not to be accounted introductory of a new
Authority, which was not in the Crown before; but only declaratory of an old,
which naturally and originally did belong to all Christian Princes, and amongst
others also, to the Kings of England. For proof whereof, there wanted not
sufficient evidence in our English Histories, as well as in some old Records of
unquestioned Credit, exemplifying the continual practice of the Kings of
England, before and since the Norman Conquest, in ordering and directing
matters which concerned the Church: In which they ruled sometimes absolutely,
without any dispute; and sometimes relatively, in reference to such opposition
as they were to make against the Pope, and all Authority derived from the Sea
of Rome.

21. Against this Case, so solidly debated, and so judiciously drawn up, when
none of the Puritan Professors could make any Reply, Parsons the Jesuit
undertook it; but spent more time in searching out some contrary Evidence,
which might make for the Pope, than in disproving that which had been brought
in behalf of the Queen. So that the struggling on both sides, much confirmed the
Power which they endeavored to destroy; the Power of that Commission being
better fortified both by Law and Argument, than it had been formerly. For, by
the overruling of Cawdrey's Case, in confirmation of the Sentence which was
past against him, and the great pains which Parsons took to so little purpose;
the Power of that Commission was so well established in the Courts of
Judicature, that it was afterward never troubled with the like Disputes. The
Guides of the Faction therefore are resolved on another course, To strike
directly at the Root, to question the Episcopal Power, and the Queen's
Authority, the Jurisdiction of their Courts, the exacting of the Oath called
the Oath Ex Officio, and their other proceedings in the same. And to this
purpose it was published in Print by some of their Lawyers, or by their
directions at the least, That men were heavily oppressed in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, against the Laws of the Realm: That the Queen could neither delegate
that Authority which was vested in it, nor the Commissioners to exercise the
same by her delegation: That the said Courts could not compel the taking of the
Oath, called the Oath Ex Officio, since no man could be bound in Reason to
accuse himself: That the said Oath did either draw men into wilful Perjury, to
the destruction of their souls; or to be guilty, in a manner, of their own
condemnation, to the loss both of their Fame and Fortunes. And finally, That
the ordinary Episcopal Courts, were not to meddle in any Causes whatsoever, but
only Testamentary and Matrimonial: by consequence, not in matter of Tithes, all
Mis-behaviours in the Church, or punishing of Incontinency, or Fornication,
Adultery, Incest, or any the like grievous or enormous Crimes: but on the
contrary, it was affirmed by the Professors of the Civil Laws, That to impugn
the Authority which had been vested in the Queen by Act of Parliament, was
nothing in effect but a plain Invasion of the Royal Prerogative, the opening of
a way to the violation of the Oath of Allegiance, and consequently to undermine
the whole Frame of the present Government. It was proved also, That the
ordinary Episcopal Courts had kept themselves within their bounds; that they
might lawfully deal in all such Causes as were then handled in those Courts;
that their proceedings in the same by the Oath Ex Officio, was neither against
Conscience, Reason, nor the Laws of the Land; and therefore, that the Clamours
on the other side, were unjust and scandalous. In which, as many both Divines
and Civilians, deserved exceeding well both of the Queen and the Church; so
none more eminently, than Dr. Richard Cosins, Dean of the Arches, in a Learned
and Laborious Treatise by him writ and published, called, An Apology for
Proceedings in Courts Ecclesiastical, etc. Printed in the year 1593.

1592.
22. But notwithstanding the Legality of these Proceedings, the punishing of
some Ringleaders of the Puritan Faction, and the Imprisonment of others, a
Book comes out under the name of A Petition to Her Majesty: The scope and drift
whereof, was this; That the Ecclesiastical Government of the Church of England,
was to be changed: That the Eldership, or Presbyterial Discipline, was to be
established, as being the Government which was used in the Primitive Church,
and commanded to be used in all Ages. That the Disciplinarian Faction has not
offended against the Statute 23 Eliz. cap. 2. And, That John Vdal was unjustly
condemned upon it. That the Consistorial Patrons are unjustly slandered with
desire of Innovation, and their Doctrine with Disorder and Disloyalty. And this
being said, the Author of the Pamphlet makes it his chief business by certain
Questions and Articles therein propounded, to bring the whole Ecclesiastical
State into envy and hatred. This gave the Queen a full assurance of the
restless Spirit wherewith the Faction was possessed; and that no quiet was to
be expected from them, till they were utterly suppressed. To which end She gives
Order for a Parliament to begin in February, for the Enacting of some Laws to
restrain those Insolences with which the Patience of the State had been so
long exercised. The Puritans on the other side are not out of hope, to make
some good use of it for themselves; presuming more upon the strength of their
Party, by reason of the Pragmaticalness of some Lawyers in the House of
Commons, than they had any just ground for, as it after proved. To which end
they prepared some Bills sufficiently destructive of the Royal Interest, the
Jurisdiction of the Bishops, and the whole Form of their Proceedings in their
several Courts. With which the Queen being made acquainted before their
meeting, or otherwise suspecting, by their former practices, what they meant to
do; She thought it best to strangle those Conceptions in the very Womb. And to
that purpose She gave Order for the signification of Her Pleasure to the Lords
and Commons, at the very first opening of the Parliament, That they should not
pass beyond their bounds; That they should keep themselves to the redressing of
such Popular Grievances as were complained of to them in their several
Countries: but, that they should leave all Matters of State to Her self and the
Council; and all Matters which concerned the Church, unto Her and Her Bishops.

23. Which Declaration notwithstanding, the Factors for the Puritans are
resolved to try their Fortune, and to encroach upon the Queen and the Church at
once. The Queen was always sensible of the Inconveniences which might arise
upon the nominating of the next Successor, and knew particularly how much the
Needle of the Puritans Compass pointed toward the North: Which made Her more
tender in that Point, than She had been formerly. But Mr. Peter Wentworth, whom
before we spoke of, a great Zealot in behalf of the Holy Discipline, had
brought one Bromley to his lure; and they together deliver a Petition to the
Lord Keeper Puckering, desiring that the Lords would join with them of the
Lower House, and become Suppliants to the Queen for entailing of the Succession
of the Crown, according to a Bill which they had prepared. At this the Queen
was much displeased, as being directly contrary to her strict Command; and
charged the Lords of the Council to call the said Gentlemen before them, and to
proceed against them for their disobedience. Upon which signification of Her
Majesty's Pleasure, Sir Thomas Hennage, then Vice-Chamberlain, and one of the
Lords of the Privy Council, convents the Parties, reprehends them for their
Misdemeanor, commands them to forbear the Parliament, and not to go out of
their several Lodgings, until further Order. Being afterward called before the
Lord Treasurer Burleigh, the Lord Buckhurst, and the said Sir Thomas; Wentworth
is sent unto the Tower, Bromley committed unto the Fleet, and with him Welsh
and Stevens, two other Members of that House, were committed also, as being
privy to the Projects of the other two. In whose behalf, when it was moved by
one Mr. Wroth, That the House should be humble Suitors to Her Majesty for the
releasing of such of their Members as were under restraint; it was answered by
such of the Privy-Councellors as were then Members of the House, That Her
Majesty had committed them for causes best known to Her self; and, that to
press Her Highness with this Suit, would but hinder those whose good it sought.
That the House must not call the Queen to an account for what she did of Her
Royal Authority. That the Causes for which they are restrained, may be high and
dangerous. That Her Majesty likes no such Questions, neither did it become the
House to deal in such matters. Upon which words the House desisted from
interposing any further in their behalf, but left them wholly to the Queen, by
whom Wentworth was continued Prisoner for some years after.

24. In the same Parliament, one Morrise, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, proposed unto the House, That some course might be taken by them
against the hard courses of Bishops Ordinaries, and other Ecclesiastical
Judges, in their several Courts, toward sundry godly Ministers, and painful
Preachers, who deserved more encouragement from them. They also spoke against
Subscription, and the Oath Ex Officio, and offered a Bill unto the House
against the imprisonment of such as refused the same. Of this the Queen had
present notice, and thereupon sends for Coke, then Speaker of the House of
Commons, (but afterward successively Chief Justice of either Bench) to whom
she gave command to deliver this Message to the House; that is to say, That it
was wholly in Her Power to call, to determine, to assent, or dissent, to any
thing done in Parliament. That the calling of this, was only that the Majesty
of God might be more Religiously observed, by compelling, with some sharp Laws,
such as neglect that Service; and, that the safety of Her Majesty's Person, and
the Realm, might be provided for: That it was not meant they should meddle with
matters of State, or Causes Ecclesiastical: That She wondered that any should
attempt a thing so contrary to Her Commandment: and, that She was highly
offended at it: and finally, that it was Her pleasure, That no Bill touching
any matters of State, or for the Reformation of Causes Ecclesiastical, should
be there exhibited. On the delivery of which Message, Morrise is said to have
been seized on in the House by a Sergeant at Arms; but howsoever, seized on and
committed Prisoner, kept for some years in Tutbury Castle, discharged from his
Office in the Duchy, and disabled from any Practice in his Profession, as a
common Lawyer. Some others had prepared a Bill to this effect, That in lieu of
Excommunication, there should be given some ordinary Process, with such suit
and coertion as thereunto might appertain; that so the dignity of so high a
Sentence being retained, and the necessity of mean Process supplied, the Church
might be restored to its ancient splendour. Which Bill, though recommended
somewhat incogitantly by one of the Gravest Counselors of State which was then
in the House, was also dashed by Her Majesty's express Command, upon a
Resolution of not altering any thing (the quality of the times considered)
which had been settled in the Church, both by Law and Practice. Which constancy
of Hers in the preserving of Her own Prerogative and the Church's Power, kept
down that swelling humor of the Puritan Faction, which was even then upon the
point of overflowing the banks, and bearing down all opposition which was made
against them.

25. And, that they might be kept the better in their natural Channel, she
caused an Act to be prepared and passed in this present Parliament, for
retaining them, and others of Her Subjects, in their due obedience. By which it
was Enacted, for the preventing and avoiding of such Inconveniences and Perils
as might happen and grow by the wicked and dangerous Practices of Seditious
Sectaries, and Disloyal persons; That if any person or persons above the age of
sixteen years, should obstinately refuse to repair to some Church, Chapel, or
usual place of Common Prayer, to hear Divine Service established, or shall
forbear to do the same by the space of a Month, without lawful cause; or should
move or persuade any other person whatsoever, to forbear and abstain from
coming to the Church to hear Divine Service, or to receive the Communion,
according to the Laws and Statutes aforesaid; or to come or be present at any
unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles, or Meetings, under pretense of Religious
Exercise, contrary to the Laws and Statutes made in that behalf; or should at
any time after forty days, from the end of that Session, by Printing, Writing,
or express Words or Speeches, advisedly and purposely go about to move or
persuade any of Her Majesty's Subjects, or any other within Her Highness Realms
and Dominions, to deny, withstand, or impugn Her Majesty's Power and Authority
in causes Ecclesiastical, united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of the
Realm; That then every person so offending, and convicted of it, should be
committed unto Prison without Bail or Main-prise, till he or they should
testify their Conformity, by coming to some Church, Chapel, or other place of
Common Prayer, to hear Divine Service, and to make open submission and
declaration of the same in such form and manner, as by the said Statute was
provided. Now that we may the better see what great care was taken, as well by
the two Houses of Parliament, as by the Queen Her self, for preserving the
Honor of the Church, the Jurisdiction of the Bishops, and the Royal
Prerogative in both; it will not be amiss to represent that Form to the eye of
the Reader, in which the said Submission was to be delivered. The tenor
whereof was as follows, viz. 26. I A. B. do humbly confess and acknowledge,
That I have grievously offended God in contemning Her Majesty's godly and
lawful Government and Authority, by absenting my self from Church, and from
hearing Divine Service, contrary to the godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm;
and in using and frequenting disordered and unlawful Conventicles and
Assemblies, under pretense and color of exercise of Religion. And I am
heartily sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and testify in my Conscience,
That no person or persons, has, or ought to have any Power or Authority over
Her Majesty. And I do promise and protest without any dissimulation, or any
color of means of any Dispensation, That from henceforth I will from time to
time, obey and perform Her Majesty's Laws and Statutes in repairing to the
Church, and hearing Divine Service; and do mine utmost endeavor to maintain
and defend the same.

27. This Declaration to be made in some Church or Chapel, before the
beginning of Divine Service, within three Months after the conviction of the
said Offenders, who otherwise were to abjure the Realm, and to depart the same,
at such time and place as should be limited and assigned unto them; with this
Proviso super-added, That if any of the said persons so abjuring, should either
not depart the Realm at the time appointed, or should come back again unto it
without leave first granted; that then every such person should suffer death as
in case of Felony, without the benefit of his Clergy. And to say the truth,
there was no reason why any man should have the benefit of his Clergy, who
should so obstinately refuse to conform himself to the Rules and Dictates of
the Church. There also was a penalty of ten pounds by the Month, imposed upon
all those who harbored any of the said Puritan Recusants, if the said Puritan
Recusants (not being of their near Relations) or any of them, should forbear
coming to some Church or Chapel, or other place of Common Prayer, to hear the
Divine Service of the Church, for the space of a Month. Which Statute being
made to continue no longer than till the end of the next Session of Parliament,
was afterward kept in force from Session to Session, till the death of the
Queen; to the great preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom, the safety of Her
Majesty's Person, aad the tranquillity of the Church, free from thenceforth
from any such disturbances of the Puritan Faction, as had before endangered the
Foundations of it.

1593.
28. And yet it cannot be denied, but that the seasonable execution of the
former Statute on Barrow, Penry, and some others of these common Barreters,
conduced as much to the promoting of this general Calm, as the making of this.
It was in the Month of November, 1587, that Henry Barrow, Gentleman, and John
Greenwood, Clerk, (of whose commitment, with some others, we have spoke before)
were publicly convented by the High Commissioners, for holding and dispersing
many Schismatical Opinions, and Seditious Doctrines, of which the principal
were these, viz. That our Church is no true Church. That the Worship of the
English Church is flat Idolatry. That we admit into our Church unsanctified
persons. That our Preachers have no lawful Calling. That our Government is
ungodly. That no Bishop or Preacher preaches Christ sincerely or truly. That
the people of every Parish ought to choose their Bishop. And, That every Elder,
though he be no Doctor or Pastor, is a Bishop. That all of the Preciser sort,
who refuse the Ceremonies of the Church, strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel,
and are close Hypocrites, and walk in a left handed Policy, as Cartwright,
Wiggington, etc. That all which make, teach, or expound Printed or Written
Catechisms, are idle Shepherds, as Calvin, Vrsin, Nowell, etc. That the
Children of ungodly Parents ought not to be baptized; as of Usurers, Drunkards,
etc. and finally, that set-prayer is blasphemous. On their Convention, and some
short restraint for so many dotages, they promised to recant, and were enlarged
upon their Bonds. But being set at liberty, they brake out again into further
Extremities, and drew some others to the side, almost as mischievous as
themselves, and no less Pragmatical: the principal whereof, (not to take notice
of the Rabble of besotted people who became their followers) were Saxio Billet,
Gentleman; Daniel Studley, Girdler; Robert Bouler, Fish-monger; committed
Prisoners to the Fleet, with their principal Leaders, in the July following.

29. The times were dangerous, in regard of the great Preparations of the King
of Spain, for the invading of this Kingdom; which rendered the imprisonment of
these furious Sectaries, as necessary to the preservation of the public
safety, as the shutting up of so many of the Leading- Papists, into Wisbich
Castle. But so it was, that the State being totally taken up with the
prosecution of that War on the Coasts of Spain, and the quenching of the fire
at home, which had been raised by Cartwright, Vdal, and the rest of the
Disciplinarians, there was nothing done against them, but that they were kept
out of harm's way, as the saying is, by a close Imprisonment. During which
time, Cartwright, who was their fellow-Prisoner, had a Conference with them;
the rather, in regard it had been reported from Barrow's mouth, That he had
neither acted nor written any thing, but what he was warranted to do by
Cartwright's Principles. The Conference was private, and the result thereof not
known to many, but left to be conjectured at by this following story. The
Reverend Whitgift had a great desire to save the men from that destruction in
which they had involved themselves by their own pervers^ess; and to that end
sends Dr. Thomas Ravis, then one of his Chaplains, (but afterward Lord Bishop
of London) to confer with Barrow. At whose request, and some directions from
the Archbishop, in pursuance of it, Cartwright is dealt with to proceed to
another Conference: but no persuasions would prevail with him for a second
Meeting. Which being signified to Barrow, by the said Dr. Ravys, in the
presence of diverse persons of good account, the poor man fetched a great sigh,
saying, Shall I be thus forsaken by him? Was it not he that brought me first
into these briars, and will he now leave me in the same? Was it not from him
alone that I took my grounds? Or, did I not out of such Premises as he pleased
to give me, infer those Propositions, and deduce those Conclusions for which I
am now kept in Bonds? Which said, the company departed, and left the Prisoners
to prepare for their following Trial. By the Imprisonment of Cartwright, the
Condemnation of Vdal, and the Execution of Hacket, the times had been reduced
to so good a temper, that there could be no danger in proceeding to a public
Arraignment. The Parliament was then also sitting; and possible it is, that the
Queen might pitch upon that time for their condemnation, to let them see, that
neither the sitting of a Parliament, nor any Friends they had in both or either
of the Houses, could either stay the course of Justice, or suspend the Laws.
Certain it is, that on the 21 of March, 1592, they were all indicted at the
Sessions-Hall without Newgate, before the Lord Mayor, the two Chief Justices,
some of the Judges, and diverse other Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer; for
writing and publishing sundry Seditious Books, tending to the slander of the
Queen and State. For which they were found guilty, and had the Sentence of
death pronounced upon them, March 23. Till the Execution of which Sentence,
they were sent to Newgate.

30. The fatal Sentence being thus passed, Dr. Lancelot Andrews, afterward
Lord Bishop of Ely; Dr. Henry Parrey, afterward Lord Bishop of Worcester; Dr.
Philip Bisse, Archdeacon of Taunton; and Dr. Thomas White, one of the
Residentiaries of St. Paul's; were sent to Barrow, to advise him to recant those
Errors, which otherwise might be as dangerous to his soul, as they had proved
unto his body. Who having spent some time to this purpose with him, were
accosted thus: You are not (says he) the men whom I most dislike in the
present differences: For, though you be out of the Way, yet you think you are
in the Right, and walk according to that light which God has given you. But I
cannot but complain of Mr. Cartwright, and all others of his opinion, from whom
we have received the truth of these things, and by whose Books we have been
taught, that your Calling is Antichristian. And yet these men, says he,
forsake us in our Sufferings, against their Consciences, and rather choose to
save their lives, than go out of Babylon. To which, when Dr. White objected,
That those Callings which he reproached as Antichristian, had been embraced by
Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, and diverse other godly persons, who
suffered Martyrdom for their Religion in Queen MARY's days. Barrow thus
gloriously replies, Most true it is, (quoth he) that they and others were
Martyrs in Queen MARY's days; but these holy Bands of mine (and therewith shook
his Fetters) are much more glorious than any of theirs, because they had the
Mark of Antichrist in their hands. Such was the Fortune of these men, that
these Learned Doctors could do as little good upon them, as Cartwright and his
Fellows had done before; though, to say the truth, it had not been in
Cartwright's power to have changed their minds, unless he had first changed his
own. And thereupon it was very well said by Dr. John Burges, (who had been once
one of Cartwright's Followers) That he was, and ever had been of that opinion,
That no just confutation could be made of the Separatists, by any of the
Non-Conformists, who had given them their Principles. That though he had seen
some endeavors that way, yet did they never satisfy him in point of
Conscience. That the Arguments published in his time against Conformity, were
pretended for the grounds of the Separation. That the Separatists did pretend
their Pedigree from none but the Puritans; which no man can deny (says he)
that has any Modesty. And finally, that therefore the Puritans might well call
them their dear Brethren of the Separation, as Dighton and some others had
began to do. To bring this business to an end, Barrow and Greenwood were
brought to Tiburn, in a Cart, on the last of March; and having been exposed for
some time to the sight of the people, were carried back again to Newgate. But
no repentance following on the sense of so great a mercy, they were both hanged
at Tiburn on the sixth of April. The other three being reprieved, with some
hope of pardon, as being only accessory to the Crimes of the other.

31. In May next following, Penry is brought upon his Trial; a man of most
Seditious Malice, and one of the chief Penners of those scurrilous Libels which
had passed under the name of Martin Mar-Prelate. But not content with having a
hand in those Pestilent Pamphlets, but must needs take upon him to be the
Inter-Nuncio, or common Agent, between the Presbyters of Scotland, and the
English Puritans. Having enflamed the Scots unto some Seditions, he remained
Leidger there till the beginning of Hacket's Treasons, and thereupon writes to
Arthington to this effect, That Reformation must be shortly erected in England:
And thereupon he makes for London, to have played his pranks, if their Design
had took effect; it being his hope, as possibly it was the hope of all the rest
of that Faction, That on the Proclamations which were made by Hacket's
Prophets, the people would have been inci^ed to an Insurrection. But when he
saw those hopes deluded, and Hacket executed, his guilty Conscience prompted
him to fear the like cruel death, which hurried him again to Scotland; where he
remained till the beginning of the Parliament before remembered. At what time
stealing privately back again toward London, we was discovered at Stebunheth,
(commonly called Stepny) apprehended by the Vicar there, committed Prisoner,
tried at the King's-Bench-Barr, at Westminster Hall, condemned of Felony on the
Statute 23 Eliz. and executed not long after at St. Thomas of Waterings; but
executed with a very thin company attending on him, for fear the Fellow might
have raised some Tumult, either in going to the Gallows, or upon the Ladder.
But what he could not do when he was alive, was put into a way of being
effected when the Hangman had done his office, by publishing one of his
Seditious Pamphlets, entitled, The History of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
applied to the Prelacy and Ministry of the Church of England; by Mr. John
Penry, a Martyr of Jesus Christ, as the Pamphlet calls him. The Work not
finished at the time of his Apprehension; but was Printed however by some
zealous Brother, that he might poison the Queen's Subjects as well dead as
living.

32. To which end we are told in the Preface of it, by the zealous, or rather
Seditious Publisher, That the Author, Mr. John Penry, was a Godly man, Learned,
Zealous, and of a most Christian Carriage and Courage. That he was born and
bred in the Mountains of Wales, and with all godly care and labor, endeavored
to have the Gospel preached amongst his Contrymen, whose case he greatly
seemed to pity, wanting all the ordinary means for their salvation. That being
used by God for a special Instrument in the manifestation of his Truth, he was
hardly entreated, imprisoned, condemned, and executed; and so suffered
Martyrdom for the Name of Christ. But more particularly, That he was adjudged
at the King's Bench by Sir John Popham, Lord Chief Justice, and the rest of the
Judges then assembled, on the 25 th of the fifth Month, and executed at St.
Thomas of Waterings, near London, on the 29 th of the same, in the year of our
God 1593. And finally, That he was not brought to execution the next second or
third day, as most men expected; but, that when men did least look for it, he
was taken while he was at dinner, carried in a close manner to his Execution,
and hastily bereaved of his life, without being suffered (though he much
desired) to make a declaration of his Faith toward God, or his Allegiance to
the Queen. And in a Postscript to the same, he concludes it thus, viz. That he
was apprehended, adjudged, and executed, for writing for the Truth of Christ,
whatsoever other things were pretended against him. Let us no longer blame the
Papists for making Martyrs of such Priests and Jesuits as suffered death
according to the Law of the Land, for their several Treasons: the Puritans, or
Presbyterians, have their Martyrs also, Penry and Hacket, and the rest,
condemned by the same Laws, for their Treasons and Felonies. And if these men,
with Barrow, Greenwood, and the rest, who had gone before them, must pass in
our account for Martyrs, because they suffered in pursuance of the Holy
Discipline. There is no question to be made, but Cartwright, Snape, with such
as suffered only by Imprisonment, or the loss of their Benefices, must be
marked for Confessors, in the next setting out of Gellibrand's Calender,
whenever it be. Which, as it was the highest honor that any of Cartwright's
Friends can pretend to for him; so in himself he seemed not very ambitious of
those glorious Attributes, which could not otherwise be purchased, than at
Penry's Price.

33. For now perceiving, when too late, to what calamitous and miserable Ends
he had brought his Followers, what horrible Confusions had disturbed the whole
Church, by his obstinate Follies; he was contented to knock off, and to give
way to those Prudential Considerations which the complexion of Affairs did
suggest unto him. He saw too clearly, that there were no more Walsinghams, or
Leicesters, at the Council Table. That the Archbishops little finger moved
more powerfully there, than those few Friends which durst speak for him, being
put together. That the Chief Justice Popham was a man of a ridged nature, not
to be trifled with, or took off from the prosecution, if he should come within
the compass of the Law: And finally, that though the Statute made in the last
Session, seemed chiefly to relate unto the Brethren of the Separation; yet
there might be some way or other to hook in all the Zealots for the Discipline
also, if they did any thing in derogation of the present Government. Of these
Relentings some intelligence had been given to Archbishop Whitgift, who
thereupon resolved to work some impression on him, when he found him like a
piece of Wax well warmed, and thereby sitted to receive it. In which Resolution
he applies himself unto the Queen, from whose Clemency he not only obtained for
him a release from Prison, but made it the more comfortable by a gracious
Pardon for all Errors past. He suffered him moreover to return to Warwick,
where he was Master of the Hospital founded by the Earl of Leicester, as before
is said, and there permitted him to preach; though with this condition, That he
should neither Write, nor Preach, nor act in any thing to the disturbance of
the Church, either in reference to her Government, or Forms of Worship. And
though it be affirmed, That Cartwright kept himself within those Restrictions;
yet when the Queen had notice of it, she was much displeased, and not a little
blamed the Archbishop for it: But he beheld not Cartwright, as he had done
Travers, though both pretending to the Ordination of a Foreign Presbytery. For
Travers never had any other Hands imposed on him, than those of the Presbytery
of Antwerp, which might stand for nothing. But Cartwright was first lawfully
ordained in the Church of England; the Character whereof could not be
obliterated, though it might possibly be defaced, either by the Rescinding of
his Letters of Orders, (which some say he did) or by the super-addition of such
other Hands as were laid upon him, after the fashion of Geneva. Neither was
Cartwright so insensible of the Obligation, as not to know and to acknowledge by
whose Favor he received that Freedom; carrying himself from that time forwards
to the Archbishop, both in his Letters and Addresses, with as much respect as
any of the Regular and Conformable Clergy; continuing in that peaceable
disposition, till the time of his death; which happened about ten years after his
enlargement, that is to say, on the 27 th day of December, Anno 1603.

34. But the Archbishop stayed not here; he knew right well, that Punishment
without Instruction, would not edify much with men of common understandings;
and therefore carefully employed both himself and others, in giving
satisfaction to all doubting-judgments: For his own part, he wrote this year
his long and learned Letter to Theodore Beza, which before we spoke of; and
therein calmly laid before him that deplorable Rupture which not without his
privity had been made in the Church of England. Which point he pressed upon him
with such Christian Modesty, and did withal so clearly justify this Church in
her whole proceedings, that Beza could not but confess himself to be conquered,
by his future carriage, which from thenceforth breathed nothing else but Peace
to the Church it self, and dutiful respects to that Reverend Prelate. And for
the satisfaction of all Parties interested amongst our selves, a Book was
published this year also, by Dr. Thomas Bilson, then Warden of the College near
Winchester, concerning The perpetual Government of the Church of Christ;
proving therein, That from the time of Christ himself, till these latter days,
neither the Universal Church, nor any National or Provincial Church, in what
place soever, had been governed otherwise than by Bishops, and their
Underofficers. True, other Books were published at the same time also, by Dr.
Richard Bancroft, so often mentioned; the one for the undeceiving of the
people, (who had been miserably abused by such counterfeit Wares) entitled, A
Survey of the pretended Holy Discipline. The other to inform them in the
Dangerous Positions and Proceedings published and practiced in this Island of
Britain, under pretense of Reformation, etc. which was the Title of the Book.
The like course was also taken for the justification of the Bishops Courts, by
publishing the Apology of Dr. Cosens before remembered. And because Hacket's
Treasons had been built on no other Foundation, than that the Holy Discipline
might be raised upon them, a Narrative thereof is penned by Dr. -- a Doctor of
the Civil Laws, collected for the most part out of the Letters and Confessions
of some Disciplinarians, which either had been intercepted, or persuaded from
them. A course exceeding prosperous to all those whom it most concerned. For
the Archbishop by this means went in peace to his Grave; Beza was gratified by
him with a liberal Pension, Bilson within a short while after made Bishop of
Winchester; Bancroft preferred about the same time to the Sea of London;
Cosens, for his encouragement, made Dean of the Arches.

35. And though we find not any Preferment to be given to Cartwright; yet was
it a Preferment to him, to enjoy his Ministry; by means whereof, he is affirmed
to have grown very wealthy, partly by the Revenues of his Place in the
Hospital; and partly by the Bounty and Munificence of his constant Auditors:
Only it is reported of him, that toward his end he was afflicted with many
infirmities; insomuch, that he could not otherwise apply himself unto his
Studies, than upon his knees; which some were willing to impute as a judgment
on him, for having so bitterly inveighed against all such men as in that
reverend and religious posture did receive the Sacrament. Some also have
informed us of him, That notwithstanding all his Clamours, and Tumultuous
manner of proceedings against the Church, he could not choose but confess there
was more Discipline exercised in the Church of England, than in any of those
Churches beyond Seas which himself had seen. Which words, as he is said to have
spoken to one Mr. Woods, then Parson of Freckenham in Norfolk, during the time
of his imprisonment in the Fleet; so the said Woods reported them to Dr. John
Burges, beforementioned, and from him I have them. But I had brought the man
to his Grave before; and should not have disturbed his rest by these sad
remembrances, if the Honor of the Church of England were not some way
vindicated as well by the one, as by the other. Thus, as before we brought the
Presbyterians in Scotland to their greatest height, in seeing their Discipline
established by Laws, and confirmed by Leagues: so have we brought the English
Puritans to their lowest fall, by diverse sharp Laws made against them, some
severe Executions done upon them for their transgressing of those Laws, their
principal Leaders humbled, or cut off by the Sword of Justice, and the whole
Mackina of their Devices brought to utter ruin: not the less active for all
this, to advance the Cause, though after a more peaceful and more cunning way;
so much the more dangerous to this Church, because less suspected, but not so
closely carried as to escape discovery. And the first practice which they fell
upon, was this that follows.

36. It has been an ancient Custom in the City of London, to have three solemn
Sermons preached on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, in the Easter-week, at the
place commonly called the Spittle; being a dissolved Hospital not far from
Bishops-Gate; at which the Lord Mayor and Aldermen used to be present in their
Robes, besides a great concourse of Divines, Gentlemen, and other Citizens: For
the performance of which Work, a decent Pulpit was erected in an open place,
which had been part of the Churchyard; the ordinary Hearers sitting upon Forms
before the Pulpit; the Lord Mayor, 1594*
Aldermen, and their Wives, with other Persons of Quality, in two handsome
Galleries; to which was added, in the year 1594, a fair large House for the
reception of the Governors and Children of the Hospital, founded in the
Grey-Fryers, who from thenceforth were tied to attend those Sermons. At what
time also the old Pulpit was taken down, and a new set up, with the Preachers
face turned toward the South, which had before been toward the West; for so in
former times the Pulpits were generally placed in all Churches of England, to
the end that the peoples faces, in all acts of Worship, might look toward the
East, according to the Custom of the Primitive times. Which alteration seemed
to be made upon design, that without noise, or any notice taken of it, they
might by little and little change the posture of Adoration from the East to the
West, or any other point of the Compass, as their humor served. In which first
they were showed the way by Sir Walter Mildmay, in his Foundation of the
Chapel of Emmanuel College, 1585. Who being a great favourer of the Puritan
Faction, gave order for this Chapel to stand North and South, and thereby gave
example unto others to affect the like. Which brings into my mind a Project of
Tiberius Gracchus, one of the most Seditious of the Roman Tribunes, for
transferring the Supreme Power of the Commonwealth, from the Lords of the
Senate, to the People: For, whereas formerly all Orators in the Public
Assemblies, used to address their Speeches to the Lords of the Senate, as the
Supreme Magistrates, this Gracchus turned his face to the common people; and by
that Artifice, (says Plutarch) transferred unto them the Supreme Majesty of
the Roman Empire, without Noise or Tumult.

37. But it is now time to look back toward Scotland, where we left them at
their highest, and the poor King so fettered or entangled by his own
Concessions, that he was not able to act any thing in the Kirk, and very little
in the State. He had not very well digested their Refusal to subscribe to His
Articles, mentioned in the close of the former Book, when he held an Assembly
at Dundee, in the end of April, 1593; at what time the King, being well
informed of the low condition of the English Puritans, sent Sir James Melvin to
them with these two Articles, amongst many others. In the first of which it was
declared, That He would not suffer the Privilege and Honor of his Crown to be
diminished, and Assemblies to be made when and where they pleased; therefore
willed them, before the dissolution of the present Assembly, to send two or
three of their number, by whom they should know His mind touching the time and
place of the next Meeting. And in the second it was required, That an Act
should be made, inhibiting Ministers to declaim in the Pulpit against the
proceedings of His Majesty, and the Lords of His Council; which He conceived He
had good reason to desire, in regard that His Majesty's good intentions were
well known to themselves, for maintaining Religion and Justice, and of the
easy access that diverse of the Ministry had unto Him, by whom they might
signify their Complaints and Grievances. To the first of which two Articles,
they returned this Answer, That in their Meetings they would follow the Act of
Parliament made by Him in the year preceding. And to the second, they replied,
That they had made an Act, prohibiting all Ministers to utter in the Pulpit any
rash or irreverent speeches against His Majesty, or His Council; but to give
their Admonitions upon just and necessary Causes, in fear, love, and reverence.
Which seeming to the King to serve then rather for a color to excuse their
Factiousness, than to lay any just restraint upon it, He turned a deaf Ear to
their Petitions, as well concerning his proceeding with the Popish Lords, as
against the erecting of Tithes into Temporal Lordships. In this Assembly also
they passed an Act, prohibiting all such as professed Religion, to traffic in
any part of the Dominions of the King of Spain, where the Inquisition was in
force. And this to be observed under the pain of Excommunication, till His
Majesty could obtain a free Trade for them, without fear of any danger to their
Goods or Consciences. Which being complained of to the King, and by Him looked
upon as an Intrenchment upon the Royal Prerogative, the Merchants were
encouraged to proceed as formerly. In opposition whereunto, the Ministers
fulminate their Censures, till the Merchants generally made offer to forbear
that Trade, as soon as their Accounts were made, and that their Creditors in
those parts had discharged their Debts. They passed another Order also in the
said Assembly, for putting down the Monday's Market in the City of Edenborough,
under pretense that the Sabbath was thereby profaned. Which so displeased the
Shoo-makers, and other Artificers, that they came tumultuously to the Ministers
Houses, and threatened to turn them out of the City, without more ado, if ever
that Act were put into execution. For fear whereof, that Project was dashed for
ever after; and thereby an occasion given unto the Court to affirm this of
them, That Rascals and Sowters could obtain that at the Ministers hands, which
the King was not able to do in matters far more just and reasonable. To such
audaciousness were they grown upon the filly confidence of their own
establishment, as to put limits upon Trade, dispose of Markets, and prostitute
both King and Council, to the lust of their Preachers. But we will let them run
unto the end of their Line, and then pull them back.

38. And first, We will begin with the Conspiracies and Treasons of Francis
Steward, Earl of Bothwell, Son of John, Prior of Coldingham, one of the many
Bastards of K. James the Fifth; who, by the Daughter and Heir of James Lord
Hepborn, the late Earl of Bothwell, became the Father of this Francis. A man he
was of a seditious and turbulent nature, principled in the Doctrines of the
Presbyterians, and thereby fitted and disposed to run their courses. 1585.
At first he joined himself to the banished Lords, who seized upon the King at
Sterling; not because he was any way engaged in their former Practices, for
which they had been forced to fly their Country; but because he would
ingratiate himself with the Lords of that Faction, and gain some credit with
the Kirk. But being a man also of a dissolute Life, gave such scandal to all
Honest and Religious men, that in the end to gain the Reputation of a Convert,
he was contented to be brought to the Stool of Repentance, to make Confession
of his Sins, and promise Reformation for the time to come. 1590.
Presuming now upon the Favor of the Kirk, he consults with Witches, enquires
into the Li^e of the King, how long he was to reign, and what should happen in
the Kingdom after his decease; and more than so, deals with the Witch of Keith,
particularly, to employ her Familiar to dispatch the King, that he might set on
foot some Title to the Crown of that Realm. For which notorious Crimes, (and so
esteemed by all the Laws both of God and Man) he was committed unto Ward, and
breaking Prison, was confiscated, proclaimed Traitor, and all Intelligence and
Commerce interdicted with him. After this, he projects a Faction in the Court
it self, under pretense of taking down the Power and Pride of the Lord
Chancellor then being. 1591.
But finding himself too weak to atchieve the Enterprise, he departs secretly
into England. His Faction in the Court being formed with some more Advantage,
he is brought privily into the Palace of Haly-Rood House, makes himself Master
of the Gates, secureth the Fort, and violently attempts to seize the King. But
the King hearing of the noise, retired himself to a strong Tower, and caused
all the Passages to be locked and barred. Which Bothwell not being able to
force, he resolves to burn the Palace and the King together. But before Fire
could be made ready, the Alarm was taken, the Edenbourgers raised, and the
Conspirators compelled, with the loss of some of their Lives, to quit the place.

1592.
39. The next year he attempts the like at Falkland, where he showed himself
with a Party of six-score Horse; but the rest of the Conspirators not
appearing, he retires again, is entertained privately by some eminent Persons;
and having much increased his Faction, lives concealed in England. The Queen
negotiates his return; and by the Lord Borough her Ambassador, desires the
King to take him into Grace and Favor. Which being denied, a way is found to
bring him into the King's Bedchamber, together with one of his Confederates,
with their Swords in their hands, followed immediately by many others of the
Faction, 1593.
by whom the King is kept in a kind of Custody, till he had granted their
Desires. At last, upon the Mediation of the English Ambassador, and some of the
Ministers of Edenborough, who were of Counsel in the Plot, the King is brought
to condescend to these Conditions; that is to say, That Pardon should be given
to Bothwell, and his Accomplices, for all matters past; and that this Pardon
should be ratified by Act of Parliament, in November following: That, in the
mean time, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Hume, the Master of Glammir, and Sir
George Hume, (who were all thought to favor the Popish Lords) should be
excluded from the Court. And finally, That Bothwell and all his Party, should
be held good Subjects. But these Conditions being extorted, were not long made
good; Agreed on August the 14 th, and declared void by a Convention of Estates
at Sterling, on the 7 th of September. Some Troubles being raised upon this
occasion, and as soon blown over; Bothwell is cited to appear at Edenborough;
and failing of his day, is declared Rebel; which only served to animate him to
some greater Mischief: For, being underhand assisted by the English
Ambassador, he prepares new Forces, desires the Lords which were of his
Confederacy to do the like, under pretense of banishing to Popish Lords; but in
plain truth to make the King of no signification in the Power of Government.
1594.
Accompanied with Four hundred Horse, he puts himself into Leith, to the great
affrightment of the King, who was then at Edenborough. But understanding that
the rest of his Associates were not drawn together, it was thought good to
charge upon him with the Bands of that City, and some Artillery from the
Castle, before his Numbers were increased. Which Counsel sped so well, that he
lost the day, and therewith all his hopes in Scotland, and in England too.

40. For Queen Elizabeth being sensible at the last of the great Dishonor
which she had drawn upon her self by favoring such an Infamous Rebel, caused
Proclamation to be made, That no man should receive or harbor him within her
Dominions. And the Kirk, moved by her Example, and the King's Request, when
they perceived that he could be no longer serviceable to their Ends and
Purposes, gave Order that the Ministers in all Places should dissuade their
Flocks from concurring with him for the time to come, or joining with any other
in the like Insurrections against that Authority which was divested by God in
His Majesty's Person. The Treasons and Seditious practices of which man, I have
laid together, the better to express those continual Dangers which were
threatened by him to the King; by which He was reduced to the necessity of
complying with the desires of the Kirk, settling their Discipline, and in all
points conforming to them for His own preservation. But nothing lost the Rebel
more, than a new Practice which he had with the Popish Lords, whereby he
furnished the King with a just occasion to lay him open to the Ministers, and
the rest of the Subjects, in his proper colors, as one that was not acted by a
Zeal to Religion, though under that disguise he masked his Ambitious Ends. In
fine, being despised by the Queen of England, and Excommunicated by the Kirk
for joining with the Popish Lords, he was reduced to such a miserable
condition, that he neither knew whom to trust, nor where to fly. Betrayed by
those of his own Party, (by whom his Brother Hercules was impeached,
discovered, and at last brought to Execution in the Streets at Edenborough) he
fled for shelter into France, where finding sorry entertainment, he removed
into Spain, and afterward retired to Naples; in which he spent the short
remainder of his Life in Contempt and Beggary.

41. About this time one of the Ministers, named Rosse, uttered diverse
Treasonable and Irreverent speeches against His Majesty, in a Sermon of his
preached at Perth; for which the King craved Justice of the next Assembly: and
he required this also of them, That to prevent the like for the times ensuing,
the Ministers should be inhibited by some Public Order, from uttering any
irreverent speeches in the Pulpit, against His Majesty's Person, Council, or
Estate, under the pain of Deprivation. This had been often moved before, and
was now hearkened to with as little care as in former times. All which the King
got by it, 1595.
was no more but this, that Rosse was only admonished to speak so reverently of
His Majesty for the time to come, as might give no just cause of complaint
against him. As ill success he had in the next Assembly; to which he
recommended some Conditions about the passing of the Sentence of
Excommunication; two of which were to this effect: 1. That none should be
excommunicated for Civil causes, for any Crimes of leight importance, or for
particular wrongs offered to the Ministers, lest the Censure should fall into
contempt. 2. That no summary Excommunication should be thenceforth used, but
that lawful citations of the Parties should go before, in all manner of Causes
whatsoever. To both which, he received no other Answer, but That the Points
were of too great weight to be determined on the sudden, and should be
therefore agitated in the next Assembly. In the mean time it was provided, That
no Summary Excommunication should be used, but in such occasions in which the
Safety of the Church seemed to be in danger. Which Exception much displeased
the King, 1596.
knowing that they would serve their turn by it, whenever they pleased. Nor
sped he better with them, when he treated severally, than when they were in the
Assembly. The Queen of England was grown old, and he desired to be in good
terms with all his Subjects, for bearing down all opposition which might be
made against his Title after her decease. To which end he deals with Robert
Bruce, a Preacher of Edenborough, about the calling home the Popish Lords, men
of great Power and Credit in their several Countries, who had been banished the
last year for holding some intelligence with the Catholic King: Bruce excepts
only against Huntley, whom the King seemed to favor above all the rest; and
positively declared, That the King must lose him, if he called home Huntley;
for that it was impossible to keep them both. And yet this Bruce was reckoned
for a Moderate man, one of the quietest and best-natur'd of all the Pack. What
was the issue of this business, we shall see hereafter.

42. In the mean time, let us pass over into France, and look upon the Actions
of the Hugonots there, of whose deserting their new King, we have spoke of
before: And though they afterward afforded him some Supplies both of Men and
Money, when they perceived him backed by the Queen of England, and thereby able
to maintain a defensive War without their assistance; yet they did it in so
poor a manner, as made him utterly despair of getting his desired Peace by an
absolute Victory. In which perplexity he beholds his own sad condition, his
Kingdom wasted by a long and tedious War; invaded, and in part possessed by
the Forces of Spain; new Leagues increasing every day both in strength and
number, and all upon the point of a new Election, or otherwise to divide the
Provinces amongst themselves. To prevent which, he reconciles himself to the
Church of Rome, goes personally to the Mass; and in all other public Offices
which concerned Religion, conformed himself unto the directions of the Pope.
And for so doing, he gives this account to Wilks, the Queen's Ambassador, sent
purposely to expostulate with him upon this occasion; that is to say, That
Eight hundred of the Nobility, and no fewer than Nine Regiments of the
Protestant Party, who had put themselves into the Service of his Predecessor,
returned unto their several homes, and could not be induced to stay with him
upon any persuasions. That such of the Protestants as he had taken at the same
time to his Privil-Council, were so intent on their own business, that they
seldom vouchsafed their presence at the Council Table: so that being already
forsaken by those on whom he relied, and fearing to be forsaken by the Papists
also, he was forced to run upon that course which unavoidable necessity had
compelled him to: and finally, that being thus necessitated to a change of
Religion, he rather chose to make it look like his own free Act, that he might
thereby free the Doctrine of the Protestants from those Aspersions which he
conceived must otherwise needs have fallen upon it, if that Conversion had been
wrought upon him by Dispute and Argument; for hearkening whereunto, he had
bound himself when he first took the Crown upon him. If by this means the
Hugonots in France shall fall to as low an ebb as the Fortunes of their
Brethren did in England at the same time; they can lay the blame on nothing but
their own Ingratitude, their Disobedience to their King, and the Genevian
Principles that were rooted in them, which made them Enemies to the Power and
Guidance of all Sovereign Princes. But the King being still in heart of his own
Religion, or at least exceeding favorable to all those that professed the
same; he willingly passed over all unkindness which had grown between them; and
by his countenance or connivence, gave them such advantages, as made them able
to dispute the point with his Son and Successor, whether they would continue
Subjects to the Crown, or not.

43. In the Low Countries all things prospered with the Presbyterians, who then
thrive best when they involve whole Nations in Blood and Sacriledg. By whose
example the Calvinians take up Arms in the City of Embden, renounce all
obedience to their Prince, and put themselves into the Form of a Commonwealth.
This Embden is the principal City of the Earl of East-Friesland, (situate on
the mouth of the River Emns, called Amasus by Latin Writers) and from thence
denominated. Beautified with a Haven so deep and large, that the greatest Ships
with full sail are admitted into it. The People rich, the Buildings general
fair, both private and public; especially the Town Hall, and the stately
Castle: Which last being situate on a rising-ground, near the mouth of the
Haven, and strongly fortified toward the Town, had for long time been the
Principal Seat of the Earls of that Province. The second Earl. hereof, called
Ezard, when he had governed this Country for the space of sixty years, or
thereabouts, did first begin to introduce the Doctrines of Luther into his
Estates, Anno 1525. But being old, he left the Work to be accomplished by Enno
his eldest Son, who first succeeded in that Earldom; and using the assistance
of Hardimbergius, a Moderate and Learned man, established the Augustine
Confession in the City of Embden; and afterward, in all places under his
command, prohibiting the exercise of all Religion, but the Lutheran only. Which
Prohibition notwithstanding, some Anabaptists from the Neighboring Westphalia,
found way to plant themselves in Embden, where liberty of Trade was freely
granted to all comers; which allured thither also many Merchants and
Artificers, with their Wives and Families, out of the next-adjoining Provinces
of Holland, Zealand, and West-Friesland, then subject to the King of Spain. Who
being generally Calvinians in point of Doctrine, were notwithstanding suffered
to plant there also, in regard of the great benefit which accrued unto it by
their Trade and Manufactures. But nothing more increased the Power and Wealth
of that City, than the Trade of England, removed from Antwerp thither, on
occasion of the Belgic Troubles, and the great fear they had conceived of the
Duke of Alva, who seemed to breathe nothing but destruction unto their
Religion. And though the English Trade was removed not long after unto
Hambourgh, upon the hope of greater Privileges and Immunities than they had at
Embden; yet still they kept a Factory in it, which added much to the
improvement of their Wealth and Power; insomuch that the Inhabitants of this
Town only are affirmed to have Sixty Ships of One hundred Tun a-piece; and Six
hundred lesser Barks of their own; besides Seven hundred Busses and Fishing
Boats; maintained for the most part by their Herring-fishing on the Coast of
England.

44. Having attained unto this Wealth, they grew proud withal; and easily
admitting the Calvinian Doctrines, began to introduce also the Genevian
Discipline; connived at by Ezardus the second, the Son of Enno, in respect of
the profit which redounded by them to his Exchequer, though they began to pinch
upon him to the diminution of his Power. In which condition it remained till
his marriage with Catharine the Daughter of Gustavus Ericus, King of Sweden;
who being zealously addicted to the Lutheran Forms, and sensible of those great
Encroachments which had been made upon the Earl's Temporal Jurisdiction by the
Consistorians, persuaded him to look better to his own Authority, and to regain
what he had lost by that Connivence. Something was done for the recovering of
his Power, but it went on slowly, hoping to compass that by time and
dissimulation, which he could not easily obtain by force of Arms. After whose
death, and the short Government of Enno the second, the matter was more stoutly
followed by Rodolphus, the Nephew of Catharine; who did not only curb the
Consistorians in the exercise of their Discipline, but questioned many of those
Privileges which the unwariness of his Predecessors had indulged unto them.
The Calvinians had by this time made so strong a Party, 1594.
that they were able to remonstrate against their Prince; complaining in the
same, That the Earl had violated their Privileges, and infringed their
Liberties: That he had interposed his Power against Right and Reason, in
matters which concerned the Church, and belonged to the Consistory. That he
assumed unto himself the Power of distributing the Alms or public Collections
by which they use to bind the poor to depend upon them. That he prohibited the
exercise of all Religions, except only the Confession of Ausberg: And that he
would not stand to the Agreement which was made betwixt them, for interdicting
all Appeals to the Chamber of Spires. Having prepared the way by this
Remonstrance, they take an opportunity when the Earl was absent, arm
themselves, and seize by force upon his Castle, demolished part of it which
looks toward the Town, and possessed themselves of all the Ordnance, Arms, and
Ammunition, with an intent hereafter to employ them against him. And this being
done, they govern all Affairs in the Name of the Senate, without relation to
their Prince; making themselves a Free-Estate, or Commonwealth, like their
Belgic Neighbors.

45. Extremely moved with this affront, and not being able otherwise to reduce
them to a sense of their duty, he borrows Men and Arms from Lubeck, to compel
them to it. With which assistance he erects a Fort on the further side of the
Haven, to spoil their Trade, and, by impoverishing the people, to regain the
Town. The Senate hereupon send abroad their Edicts to the Nobility and Commons
of East-Friesland it self, requiring them not to aid their own lawful Prince,
with Men, Arms, or Money; threatening them, if they did the contrary, to stop
the course of all Provisions which they had from their City; and, by breaking
down their Dams and Sluices, to let the Ocean in upon them, and drown all their
Country. Which done, they make their Applications to the States of Holland,
requiring their assistance in that common Cause, to which they had been most
encouraged by their Example; not doubting of their Favor to a City of their
own Religion, united to them by a long intercourse of Trade, and resemblance of
Manners; and not to be deserted by them, without a manifest betraying of their
own Security. All this the States had under their consideration. But they
consider this withal, That if they should assist the Embdeners in a public
way, the Earl would presently have recourse for some aid from the Spaniard,
which might draw a War upon them on that side where they lay most open.
Therefore they so contrived the matter, with such Art and Cunning, that
carrying themselves no otherwise than as Arbiters and Umpires between the
Parties, they discharged some Companies of Soldiers which they had in
West-Friesland, who presently put themselves into the Pay of the Embdens, and
thereby caused the Earl to desist from his Intrenchments on the other side of
the Haven. After which followed nothing but Wars and Troubles between the City
and the Earl, till the year 1606. At what time, by the Mediation of the English
Ambassador, and some other Honorable Friends, the differences were compromised
to this effect: That all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, which were found
in the Castle, should be restored unto the Earl. That he should have to his own
use the whole Profit of the Imposts which were laid on Wine; and half the
benefit of those Amercements or Fines which should be raised upon Delinquents,
together with the sole Royalties both of Fishing and Hunting. And, on the other
side, That the Embdeners should have free Trade, with all the Profits and
Emoluments belonging to it, which should be granted to them by Letters Patents.
But for admitting him to any part of the Public Government, or making
restitution of his House or Castles, the ancient Seat of his abode, as there
was nothing yielded or agreed on then, so could he never get possession of them
from that time to this. Which said, we must cross over again into the Isle of
Britain, where we shall find the English Puritans climbing up by some new
devices, and the Scottish Presbyterians tumbling down from their former height,
till they were brought almost to as low a fall as their English Brethren.

AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History OF THE PRESBYTERIANS. LIB. X. Containing A
Relation of their Plots and Practices in the Realm of England: Their horrible
Insolences, Treasons, and Seditions, in the Kingdom of Scotland; from the Year
1595, to the Year 1603.
THE English Puritans having sped so ill in a course of violence, were grown so
wise as to endeavor the subverting of that Fort by an undermining, which they
had no hope to take by storm or battery. And the first course they fell upon,
besides the Artifices lately mentioned, for altering the posture of the
Preacher, in the Spittle-Sermons; and that which was intended as a consequent
to it, was the Design of Dr. Bound, (though rather carried under his Name, than
of his devising) for lessening, by degrees, the Reputation of the ancient
Festivals. The Brethren had tried many ways to suppress them formerly, as
having too much in them of the Superstitions of the Church of Rome; but they
had found no way succesful till they fell on this; which was, To set on foot
some new Sabbath-Doctrine; and by advancing the Authority of the Lord's Day
Sabbath, to cry down the rest. Some had been hammering on this Anvil ten years
before; and had procured the Mayor and Aldermen of London to present a Petition
to the Queen for the suppressing of all Plays and Interludes on the
Sabbath Day, (as they pleased to call it) within the Liberties of their City.
The gaining of which point, made them hope for more, and secretly to retail
those Speculations which afterward Bound sold in gross, by publishing his
Treatise of the Sabbath, which came out this year 1595. And as this Book was
published for other Reasons, so more particularly for decrying the
yearly-Festivals, as appears by this passage in the same, viz. That he sees
not where the Lord has given any Authority to his Church, ordinarily and
perpetually, to sanctify any day, except that which he has sanctified
himself: And makes it an especial Argument Argument against the goodness of
Religion in the Church of Rome, That to the Seventh-day they had joined so many
other days, and made them equal with the Seventh, if not superior thereunto, as
well in the solemnity of Divine Offices, as restraint from labor. So that we
may perceive by this, what their intent was from the very beginning, To cry
down the Holy Days as superstitious, Popish Ordinances, that so their newfound
Sabbath being left alone, (and Sabbath now it must be called) might become more
eminent: Some other Ends they might have in it, as, The compelling of all
persons of what rank soever, to submit themselves unto the yoke of their
Sabbath-rigors, whom they despaired of bringing under their Presbyteries: Of
which more hereafter.

2. Now for the Doctrine, it was marshalled in these Positions; that is to say,
That the Commandment of sanctifying every Seventh day, as in the Mosaical
Decalogue, is Natural, Moral, and Perpetual. That when all other things in the
Jewish Church, were so changed, that they were clean taken away, this stands,
the observation of the Sabbath. And though Jewish and Rabinical this Doctrine
was, it carried a fair show of Piety, at the least, in the opinion of the
common people, and such as did not stand to examine the true grounds thereof,
but took it up on the appearance; such as did judge thereof, not by the
workmanship of the Stuff, but the gloss and color. In which it is not strange
to see how suddenly men were induced not only to give way unto it, but without
more (...) the same; till in the end, and that in very little time, it grew the
most bewitching error, the most popular infatuation, that ever wa^ infused into
the people of England: For what did follow hereupon* but such monstrous
Paradoxes, and those delivered in the Pulpit, as would make every good man
tremble at the hearing of them? It being preached at a Market Town, (as my
Author tells me) That to do any servile work or business on the Lord's day, was
as great a sin as to kill a man, or commit Adultery. In Somersetshire, That to
throw a Bowl on the Lord's day, was as great a sin as to kill a man. In
Norfolk, That to make a Feast, or dress a Wedding-Dinner on the same, was as
great a sin as for a Father to take a Knife and cut his Child's throat. And in
Suffolk, That to ring more Bells than one, on the Lord's day, was as great a
sin as to commit a Murder. Some of which Preachers being complained of,
occasioned a more strict enquiry into all the rest; and not into their Persons
only, but their Books and Pamphlets; insomuch that both Archbishop Whitgift,
and Chief Justice Popham, commanded these Books to be called in, and neither to
be Printed nor made common for the time to come. Which strict proceedings
notwithstanding, this Doctrine became more dispersed than can be imagined, and
possibly might increase the more for the opposition; no System of Divinity, no
Book of Catechetical Doctrine, from thenceforth published, in which these
Sabbath-Speculations were not pressed on the People's Consciences.

3. Endearing of which Doctrines, as formerly, to advance their Elderships,
they spared no place or Text of Scripture* where the Word Elder did occur;
and, without going to the Heralds, had framed a Pedigree thereof from Iethro,
from Noah's Ark, and from Adam, finally. So did these men proceed in their new
Devices; publishing out of Holy Writ, both the Antiquity and the Authority of
their Sabbath Day. No passage of God's Book unransacked, where there was
mention of a Sabbath; whether the Legal Sabbath charged upon the Jews, or the
Spiritual Sabbath of the Soul from sin, which was not fitted and applied to the
present purpose; though, if examined as it ought, with no less reason, than
Paveant illi, and non paveam Ego, was by an ignorant Priest alleged from
Scripture, to prove that his Parishioners ought to pave the Chancel. And on the
confidence of those Proofs, they did presume exceedingly of their success, by
reason of the general entertainment which those Doctrines found with the common
people, who looked upon them with as much regard, and no less reverence, than
if they had been sent immediately from the Heavens themselves, for increase of
Piety. Possessed with which, they greedily swallowed down the Hook which was
baited for them.

4. A Hook, indeed, which had so fastened them to those men who love to fish in
troubled waters, that by this Artifice there was no small hope conceived
amongst them, to fortify their Side, and make good that Cause, which till this
trim Device was so thought of, was almost grown desperate. By means whereof,
they btought so great a bondage on all sorts of people, that a greater never
was imposed on the Jews themselves, though they had pinned their Consciences on
the Sleeves of the Scribes and Pharisees. But then withal, by bringing all
sorts of people into such a bondage, they did so much improve their Power, and
increase their Party, that they were able at the last to oppose Edctis of the
two next Kings, for tolerating lawful sports upon that Day, and to confirm some
of their Sabbatarian Rigors, by Act of Parliament.

5. From this Design, let us proceed to the next, which was briefly this. When
the Genevian-English resolved to erect their Discipline, it was thought
requisite to prepare the way unto it, by introducing the Calvinian Doctrines of
Predestinationn, that so men's Judgments being formed and possessed by the one,
they might the more easily be inclined to embrace the other, so long connived
at by the Supreme Governors of the Church and State, to which they were
exceeding serviceable against the Pope; that in the end those Doctrines which
at first were counted Aliens, came by degrees to be received as Denizens, and
at last as Natives. For being supposed to contain nothing in them contrary to
Faith and Manners, they were first commended to the Church as probable, next
imposed as necessary; and finally, obtruded on the people as her Natural
Doctrines. And possibly they might in time have found a general entertainment
beyond all exception, if the Calvinian-spirit (being impatient of the least
opposition) could have permitted other men to enjoy that liberty which they had
took unto themselves, and not compelled them to Apologize in their own
defenses, and thereby show the Reasons of dissenting from them. One of the
first Examples whereof, (for I pass by the branglings between Champney and
Crowley, as long since forgotten) was the complaint of Travers to the Lords of
the Council, against incomparable Hooker. In whom he faulteth this, amongst
other things, That he had taught another Doctrine of Predestination, than what
was laid down in the Word of God, as it was understood by all the Churches
which professed the Gospel. To which it was replied, by that learned man, That
the matter was not uttered by him in a blind Alley, where there was none to
hear it who either had Judgment or Authority to comptrole the same; or covertly
insinuated by some gliding sentence; but, that it was publicly delivered at
St. Paul's Cross: not hudled in amongst other matters, to the end it might pass
without observation; but, that it was opened, proved, and for some reasonable
time insisted on. And therefore, that he could not see how the Lord Bishop of
London, that was present at it, could either excuse so great a fault, or
patiently hear, without rebuke then, and controlement afterward, that any man
should preach doctrine contrary to the Word of God; especially if the word of
God be so understood, not by the private interpretation of some, as two or
three men, or by a special construction received in some few Books; but as it
is understood by all Churches professing the Gospel, and therefore even by our
own Church amongst the rest.

6. This happened in the year 1591, or thereabouts, somewhat before the breakings
out of the stirrs at Cambridg, occasioned by a a Treatise published by William
Perkins, a well-known Divine, (but withal, a professed Presbyterian)
entitled, Armilla Aurea, or, The Golden Chain; containing the Order of the
Causes of Salvation and Damnation, according to the Word of God. Maintaining,
in this Book, the Dostrine of the Supra-lapsarians, and countenanced therein by
Dr. Whitacres, the Queen's Professor; some opposition was soon made by Dr.
Baroe, Professor for the Lady Margaret in the same University. Which Baroe
being by birth a Frenchman, but being very well studied in the Writings of the
Ancient Fathers, had constantly, for the space of more than twenty years, 1595.
maintained a different Doctrine of Predestination, from that which had been
taught by Calvin and his Disciples; but he was never quarrelled for it till the
year 1595, and then not quarrelled for it, but in the person of one Barret, who
in a Sermon at St. Mary's Church, had preached such Doctrines as were not
pleasing unto Perkins, Whitacre, and the rest of that Party. For which being
questioned and condemned to a Recantation, he rather chose to quit his place in
the University, than to betray his own Judgment, and the Church of England, by
a Retractation. The rest of Baroe's Followers, not well pleased with these
Ha^sh proceedings, begin to show themselves more publicly than before they
did; which made Baroe think himself obliged to appear more visibly in the head
of his Company, and to encounter openly with Dr. Whitacre, whom he beheld as
the Chief Leader of the opposite Forces. And the Heats grew so high at last,
that the Calvinians thought it necessary, in point of Prudence, to effect that
by Power and Favor, which they could not obtain by force of Argument. To which
end they first addressed themselves to the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, then being
their Chancellor, with the disturbances made by Barret, thereby preparing him
to hearken to such further motions as should be made by them in pursuit of that
Quarrel.

7. But finding little comfort there, they resolved to steer their course by
another Compass. And having pre-possest the most Reverend Archbishop Whitgift
with the turbulent carriage of those men, the Affionts given to Dr. Whitacre,
whom (for his learned and laborious Writings against Cardinal Bellarmine) he
most highly favored; and the great Inconveniences like to grow by that public
Discord; they gave themselves good hope of composing those differences, not by
way of an Accommodation, but an absolute Conquest. And to this end they
dispatched to him certain of their number, in the name of the rest, such as
were interested in the Quarrels, (Dr. Whitacre himself for one, and therefore
like to stir hard for obtaining their Ends). The Articles to which they had
reduced the whole state of the business, being ready drawn, and there wanting
nothing to them but the Face of Authority, wherewith, as with Medusa's Head, to
confound their Enemies, and turn their Adversaries into stones. And that they
might be sent back with the Face of Authority, the most Reverend Archbishop,
calling unto him Dr. Flecher, Bishop of Bristol, then newly elected unto
London; and Dr. Richard Vaughan, Lord Elect of Bangor; together with Dr.
Trindal, Dean of Ely; Dr. Whitacre, and the rest of the Divines which came from
Cambridg; proposed the said Articles to their consideration, at his House in
Lambeth, on the tenth of November; by whom these Articles (from thenceforth
called the Nine Articles of Lambeth) were presently agreed upon, and sent down
to Cambridg, not as the Doctrines of the Church, but as a necessary Expedient
to compose those differences which had been raised amongst the Students of that
University. And so much was acknowledged by the Archbishop himself, when he
was questioned by the Queen for his actings in it. For so it was, that the
Queen being made acquainted with all that passed, became exceedingly offended
at the Innovation; and was upon the point of causing all of them to be
attainted in a Praemunire; but by the mediation of some Friends of Whitgift's,
and the high opinion which she had of his Parts and Person, she was willing to
admit him to his defense. And he accordingly declared, in all humble manner,
That he and his Associates had not made any Canons, Articles, or Decrees, with
an intent that they should serve hereafter for a standing-Rule to direct the
Church; but only had resolved on some Propositions to be sent to Cambridg, for
quieting some unhappy differences in that University. With which Answer Her
Majesty being somewhat pacified, commanded notwithstanding, That he should
speedily recall and suppress those Articles: Which was performed with such Care
and Diligence, that a Copy of them was not to be found for a long time after.

8. As for the Articles themselves, they were so contrived, that both the
Sabbatarians, and the Supra-lapsarians, (very considerably at odds amongst
themselves) might be sheltred under them, to the intent that both may be
secured from the common Adversary. Which Articles I find translated in these
following words, viz. I. God from Eternity has predestined certain men unto
life; certain men he has reprobated. II. The moving or efficient Cause of
Predestination unto life, is not the foresight of Faith, or of Perseverance,
or of Good Works, or of any thing that is in the person predestined; but only
the Good Will and Pleasure of God. III. There is predetermined a certain number
of the Predestinate, which can neither be augmented nor diminished. IV. Those
who are not predestinate to salvation, shall be necessarily damned for their
sins. V. A true, living, and justifying-faith, and the Spirit of God
justifying, is not extinguished, falls not away, it vanishes not away in the
Elect, either totally, or finally. VI. A man truly faithful; that is, such an
one who is endued with a justifying-faith; is certain, with the full assurance
of Faith, of the remission of his sins, and of his everlasting salvation by
Christ. VII. Saving-Grace is not given, is not granted, is not communicated to
all men, by which they may be saved if they will. VIII. No man can come unto
Christ, unless it be given unto him, and unless the Father shall draw him; and
all men are not drawn by the Father, that they may come to the Son. IX. It is
not in the will or power of every one, to be saved.


9. Such were the Articles of Lambeth, so much insisted on by those of the
Calvinian Faction, in succeeding times, as comprehending in them the chief
Heads of Calvin's Doctrine, in reference to the points of the Divine Election
and Reprobation; of Universal Grace, and the impossibility of a total or a
final falling from the true justifying-faith; which were the subject of the
Controversies betwixt Baroe and Whitacre. Some have adventured hereupon to rank
this most Reverend Archbishop in the List of these Calvinists; conceiving that
he could not otherwise have agreed to those Articles, if he had not been
himself of the same Opinion. And possible it is, that he might not look so far
into them, as to consider the ill consequences which might follow on them; or
that he might prefer the pacifying of some present Dissenters, before the
apprehension of such Inconveniences as were more remote; or else, according to
the custom of all such as be in Authority, he thought it necessary to preserve
Whitacre in power and credit, against all such as did oppose him; the Merit and
Abilities of the man being very eminent. For if this Argument were good, it
might as logically be inferred, That he was a Jesuit, or a Melancthonian at the
least, in these points of Doctrine, because he countenanced those men who
openly and professedly had opposed the Calvinian. In which respect, as he took
part with Hooker at the Council Table, against the Complaints and Informations
of Travers, as before is said; so he received into his service Mr. Samuel
Harsnet, then being one of the Fellows of Pembroke-Hall; who in a Sermon
preached at St. Paul's Cross, the 27 th of October, 1584, had so dissected the
whole Zuinglian Doctrine of Reprobation, as made it seem most ugly in the ears
of his Auditors, as afterward in the eyes of all Spectators, when it came to
be Printed. Which man he did not only entertain as his Chaplain at large, but
used his Service in his House, as a Servant in ordinary, employed him in many
of his Affairs; and finally, commended him to the care of King JAMES; by whom
he was first made Master of Pembroke-Hall, and afterward preferred to the Sea
of Chichester, from thence translated to Norwich, and at last to York.

10. No less remarkable was this year for the repairing of the Cross in
Cheap Side; which having been defaced in the year 1581, and so continued ever
since, was now thought fit to be restored to its former beauty. A Cross it was
of high esteem, and of good Antiquity, erected by K. Edward the first, Anno
1290, in honor of Queen Elienor his beloved Wife, whose Body had there rested,
as it was removed to the place of her Burial. But this Cross being much
decayed, John Hatherly, Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1441, procured leave
of K. HENRY the 6 th, to take it down, and to re-edifie the same in more
beautiful manner, for the greater honor of the City. Which leave being
granted, and 200 hundred Fodder of Lead allowed him toward the beginning of the
Work, it was then curiously wrought at the charge of diverse wealthy Citizens,
adorned with many large and massy Images; but more especially advanced by the
Munificence of John Fisher, Mercer, who gave Six hundred Marks for the
finishing of it. The whole Structure being reared in the second year of K.
HENRY the 7 th, Anno 1486; was after gilded over in the year 1522, for the
entertainment of the Emperor CHARLES the fifth; new burnished against the
Coronation of Queen Anne Bullen, Anno 1533; as afterward at the Coronation of
King EDWARD the sixth: and finally, at the Magnificent Reception of King
PHILIP, 1554. And having for so long time continued an undefaced Monument of
Christian Piety, was quarrelled by the Puritans of the present Reign; who being
emulous of the Zeal of the French Calvinians, whom they found to have
demolished all Crosses wheresoever they came; they caused this Cross to be
presented by the Jurors in several Ward-Motes, for standing in the Highway, to
the hindering of Carts, and other Carriages: but finding no remedy in that
course, they resolved to apply themselves unto another. In pursuance whereof,
they first set upon it in the night, June 21, Anno 1581, violently, breaking
and defacing all the lowest Images, which were placed round about the same;
that is to say, the Images of Christ's Resurrection, of the Virgin MARY, K.
EDWARD the Confessor, etc. But more particularly, the Image of the blessed
Virgin was at that time robbed of her Son, and her Arms broke by which she held
Him in her Lap, and her whole Body haled with Ropes, and left likely to fall.
Proclamation presently was made, with promise of Reward to any one that could
or would discover the chief Actors in it. But without effect.

11. In which condition it remained till this present year, when the said Image
was again fastened and repaired; the Images of Christ's Resurrection, and the
rest, continuing broken, as before. And on the East side of the said Cross
where the steps had been, was then set up a curious wrought Tabernacle of gray
Marble, and in the same an Alablaster Image of Diana, from whose naked Breasts
there trilled continually some streams of Water, conveyed unto it from the
Thames. But the madness of this Faction could not so be stayed; for the next
year (that I may lay all things together which concern this Cross) a new
misshapen Son, as born out of time, all naked, was put into the Arms of the
Virgin's Image, to serve for matter of derision to the common people. And in
the year 1599, the figure of the Cross, erected on the top of the Pile, was
taken down by Public Order, under pretense that otherwise it might have
fallen, and endangered many; with an intent to raise a Pyramid or Spire in the
place thereof: which coming to the knowledge of the Lords of the ^^uncil, they
directed their Letters to the Lord Mayor then being, whom they required in the
Queen's Name to cause the said Cross to be repaired and advanced as formerly.
But the Cross still remaining headless for a year and more, and the Lords not
enduring any longer such a gross Contempt, they reinforced their Letters to
the next Lord Mayor, dated December 24, in the year 1600. In which they willed
and commanded him, in pursuance of her Majesty's former Directions, to cause
the said Cross, without more delay, to be re-advanced; respecting, in the same,
the great Antiquity and continuance of that stately Monument, erected for an
Ensign of our Christianity. In obedience unto which Commands, a Cross was
forthwith framed of timber, covered with lead, and set up and gilded; and the
whole body of the Pile new cleansed from filth and rubbish: Which gave such
fresh displeasure to some zealous Brethren, that within twelve nights after,
the Image of the blessed Virgin was again defaced, by plucking off her Crown,
and almost her Head; dispossessing her of her naked Child, and stabbing her
into the breast, etc. Most ridiculous Follies!

12. In the beginning of the year, 1596.
we find Sir Thomas Egerton advanced to the Custody of the Great Seal of
England, Lord Chancellor in effect, under the Title of Lord Keeper; to which
Place he was admitted on the sixth of May, to the great joy of the Archbishop,
who always looked upon him as a lover of Learning, a constant favourer of the
Clergy, zealous for the established Government, and a faithful Friend unto
himself upon all occasions. Who being now Peered with the Lord Chancellor, and
the Earl of Essex, assured of the good will of the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and
strengthened with the Friendship of Sir Robert Cicil, Principal Secretary of
State, was better fortified than ever. And at this time Her Majesty laying on
his shoulders the burden of all Church-Concernments, told him, It should fall
on his Soul and Conscience, if any thing fell out amiss; in that by reason of
her age she had thought good to ease her self of that part of her Cares, and
looked that he should yield an account thereof to Almighty God. So that, upon
the matter, he was all in all, for all Church Affairs, and more especially in
the disposing of Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Promotions. For his
first entrance on which Trust, he preferrs Dr. Thomas Bilson to the Sea of
Worcester, who received his Episcopal Consecration on the 13 th of June, Anno
1596. and by his Favor was translated within two years after to the Church of
Winchester. He advanced also his old Friend, Dr. Richard Bancroft, to the Sea
of London; whom he consecrated on the 8 th of May, Anno 1597, that he might
always have him near him for Advice and Counsel. Which Famous Prelate (that I
may note this by the way) was born at Farnworth, in the County of Lancaster,
Baptized September 1544. His Father was John Bancroft, Gentleman; his Mother,
Mary Curwin, Daughter of John, Brother of Hugh Curwin, Bishop of Oxon, whose
eldest Son was Christopher, the Father of Dr. John Bancroft, who after dyed
Bishop of that See, Anno 1640. But this Richard, of whom now we speak, being
placed by his Uncle, Dr. Curwin, in Christ's College in Cambridg; from thence
removed to Jesus College, in the same University, because the other was
suspected to incline to Novelism. His Uncle, Dr. Curwin, being preferred to the
Archbishopric of Dublin, made him a Prebend of that Church: after whose
death, he became Chaplain to Cox, Bishop of Ely, who gave him the Rectory of
Teversham, not far from Cambridg. Being thus put into the Road of Preferment,
he proceeded Batchellor of Divinity, Anno 1580, and Doctor, in the year 1585:
About which time he put himself into the Service of Sir Christopher Hatton, by
whose recommendation he was made a Prebend of St. Peter's in Westminster, 1592.
From whence he had the earlier passage to St. Paul's in London.

13. About this time brake out the Juglings of John Darrel, who without any
lawful Calling, had set up a new. Trade of Lecturing in the Town of Nottingham:
and, to advance some Reputation to his Person, pretends an extraordinary Power
in casting out Devils. He practiced first on one Catharine Wright, An. 1586.
But finding some more powerful Practices to be then on foot, in favor of the
Presbyterian Discipline, he laid that Project by till all others failed him.
But in the year 1592, he resumes the Practice, hoping to compass that by Wit
and Legerdemain, which neither Carthwright by his Learning, nor Snape by his
Diligence, Penry by his Seditions, or Hacket by his damnable Treasons, had the
good fortune to effect. He first begins with William Summers, an unhappy Boy,
whom he first met at Ashby de la Zouch, in the Country of -- Him he instructs
to do such Tricks, as might make him seem to be possessed; acquaints him with the
manner of the Fits which were observed by Catharine Wright, delivers them in
writing to him, for his better remembrance, wished him to put the same in
practice, and told him, that in so doing he should not want. But either finding
no great forwardness in the Boy to learn his Lesson, or being otherwise
discouraged from proceeding with him; he applies himself to one Thomas Darling,
commonly called, The Boy of Burton, Anno 1596, whom he found far more dextrous
in his Dissimulations; the History of whose Possessings and Dispossessings, was
writ at large by Iesse Be, a Religious sad Liar; contracted by one Denison, a
Countrey-Minister; Seen and Allowed by Hildersham, (one of the principal
sticklers in the Cause of Presbytery) and Printed with the good leave and
liking of Darrel himself; who growing famous by this means, remembers Summers
his first Scholar; to whom he gives a second meeting at the Park of Ashby
teaches him to act them better than before he did; sends him to see the Boy
and Burton, that he might learn him to behave himself on the like occasions.
And finding him at last grown perfect, sends him to Nottingham, with intimation
that he should make mention of him in his Fits. Darrel is hereupon made
Lecturer of the Town of Nottingham, (that being the Fish for which he angled)
as being thought a mavelous Bug to scare the Devil. And though he had no
lawful Calling in that behalf; yet was this given out to be so comfortable a
Vocation, and so warrantable in the sight of God, that very few Ministers have
had the like; there being no Preacher settled there (as he gave it out) since
her Majesty's Reign; as if neither Parsons, nor Vicars, nor any that bear such
Popish Names, might pass for Preachers.

14. After this, he pretends occasion for a journey to Lancashire; where he
finds seven women possessed with Devils, and out of every one of them was
affirmed to have cast as many as had entered into Mary Magdalen. Of this he
published a Book, Anno 1600, though the Exploit was done in this present year,
Anno 1597. These things being noised abroad by his Consederates, this
extraordinary Faculty of casting out Devils, was most highly magnified and
cried up both in Sermons and Printed Pamphlets, as a Candle lighted by God upon
a Candlestick in the heart and Center of the Land. And no small hopes were
built upon it, that it would prove a matter of as great consequence as ever did
any such Work that the Lord gave extraordinarily, since the time that he
restored the Gospel, and as profitable to all that profess the knowledge of
Jesus Christ. Now what this Plot was, may appear by this which is deposed by
Mr. More, one of Mr. Darrel's great Admirers and Companions, viz. That when a
Prayer was read out of the Common Prayer Book, in the hearing of those which
were possessed in Lancashire, the Devils in them were little moved with it: but
afterward, when Mr. Darrel, and one Mr. Dicon, did severally use such Prayers
as for the present occasion they had conceived, then (says he) the wicked
Spirits were much more troubled (or rather, the wicked Spirits did much more
torment the Parties): So little do premeditated Prayers which are read out of a
Book; and so extremely do extemporary and conceived Prayers torment the Devil.

15. But Summers, at the last grown weary of his frequent Counterfeitings,
tired out with his possessings, dispossessings, and repossessings; and in that
Fit discovers all to be but Forgeries, and to have been acted by Confederacy.
Darrell deals with him to revoke his said Confession, seeks to avoid it by some
shifts, discredits it by false Reports; and finally, procures a Commission from
the Archbishop of York, (to whose Province Nottingham belongs) to examine
the business. A Commission is thereupon directed to John Thorald, Esquire Sheriff
of the County; Sir John Byron, Knight; John Stanhop, etc. (most of them being
Darrell's Friends) the Commission executed, March 20: no fewer than seventeen
Witnesses examined by it, and the Return is made, That he was no Counterfeit.
But the Boy stands to it for all that; and on the last of the same Month
confesses before the Mayor of Nottingham, and certain Justices of the Peace,
the whole contrivement of the Plot; and within three days after, acts all his
Tricks before the Lord Chief Justice, at the public Assizes. Upon this news
the Boy of Burton also makes the like Confession: Darrell thereupon is
convented by the High Commissioners at Lambeth, and by them committed; his
Friends and Partizens upon that Commitment are in no small Fury; which
notwithstanding he and one of his Associates receive their Censure, little or
nothing eased by the Exclamations of his Friends and Followers, who bitterly
inveighed against the Judgment, and the Judges too. To sti^^ whose Clamours so
maliciously and unjustly raised, the story of these lewd Impostors is writ by
Harsnet, then being the Domestic Chaplain of Archbishop Whitgift; by whom
collected faithfully out of the Depositions of the Parties and Witnesses, and
published in the year next following, Anno. 1599.

16. In the same year brake out the Controversy touching Christ's Descent,
maintained by the Church of England in the litteral sense; that is to say, That
the Soul of Christ being separated from his Body, did locally descend into the
nethermost Hell, to the end that he might manifest the clear light of his Power
and Glory, to the Kingdom of Darkness, triumphing over Satan, as before he did
over Death and Sin. For which, consult the Book of Articles, Art. 4. the Homily
of the Resurrection, fol. 195. and Nowel's Paraphrase on that Article, as it
stands in the Creed, published in his Authorized Catechism, Anno 1572. But
Calvin puts another sense upon that Article, and the Genevian-English must do
the same: For Calvin understands by Christ's descending into Hell, that he
suffered in his Soul (both in the Garden of Gethsemanie, and upon the Cross)
all the Torments of Hell, even to abjection from God's Presence, and Despair it
self. Which horrid Blasphemy, though balked by many of his Followers in the
Foreign Churches, was taken up, and very zealously promoted by the English
Puritans. By these men generally it was taught in Catechisms, and preached in
Pulpits, That true it was, that the death of Christ Jesus on the Cross, and his
bloodshedding for the remission of our sins, were the first cause of our
Redemption. But then it was as true withal, That he must and did suffer the
death of the Soul, and those very pains which the damned do in Hell, before we
could be ransomed from the Wrath of God: and that this only was the descent of
Christ into Hell, which we are taught by Christ to believe. But more
particularly, it was taught by Banister, That Christ being dead, descended into
the place of everlasting Torments, where in his Soul he endured for a time the
very Torments which the damned Spirits without intermission did abide. By
Paget, in his Latin Catechism, That Christ alive upon the Cross, humbled
himself, usque ad Inferni tremenda tormenta, even to the most dreadful Torments
of Hell. By Gifford and the Houshold-Catechism, That Christ suffered the
Torments of Hell, the second death, abjection from God, and was made a Curse,
i. e. had the bitter anguish of God's Wrath in his Soul and Body, which is the
fire that shall never be quenched. Carlisle more honestly, not daring to avouch
this Doctrine, nor to run cross against the Dictates of his Master; affirmed,
That Christ descended not into Hell at all; and therefore, that this Article
might be thought no otherwise than as an Error and a Fable.

17. The Doctrine of the Church being thus openly rejected; upon some
Conference that passed between Archbishop Whitgift, and Dr. Thomas Bilson,
then Bishop of Winchester; it was resolved, That Bishop Bilson in some Sermons
at St. Paul's Cross, and other places, should publicly deliver what the
Scriptures teach touching our Redemption by the death and bloodshedding ^f
Christ Jesus the Son of God, and his descending into Hell. This he accordingly
performed in several Sermons upon the words of the Apostle, viz. God forbid
that I should glory in any thing but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world, Gal. 6.14. In
prosecuting of which Text, he discoursed at large as well concerning the
contents, as the effects of Christ's Cross; and brought the point unto this
issue, that is to say, That no Scripture did teach the death of Christ's Soul,
or the Pains of the damned, to be requisite in the Person of Christ before he
could be our Ransomer, and the Savior of the World. And because the proofs
pretended for this point, might be three; Predictions, that Christ should
suffer those pains; Causes why he must suffer them; and Signs that he did
suffer them: He likewise insisted on all three, and showed, there were no such
Predictions, Causes, or Signs, of the true pains of Hell to be suffered in the
Soul of Christ before he could save us. And next, as touching Christ's descent
into Hell, it was declared, That by the course of the Creed it ought not to be
referred to Christ living, but to Christ being dead: showing thereby, the
Conquest which Christ's Manhood had after death over all the powers of
darkness; declared by his Resurrection, when he arose Lord over all his
Enemies, in his own Person, Death, Hell, and Satan, not excepted; and had the
keys (that is, all Power) of Death and Hell; delivered to him by God, that
those in Heaven, Earth, and Hell, should stoop unto him, and be subject to the
Strength and Glory of his Kingdom. And this he proved to be the true and
genuine meaning of that Article, both from the Scriptures and the Fathers; and
justified it for the Doctrine of the Church of England, by the Book of Homilies.

18. But let the Scriptures, and the Fathers, and the Book of Homilies, teach
us what they please, Calvin was otherwise resolved, and his Determination must
be valued above all the rest. For, no sooner were these Sermons Printed, but
they were presently impugned by a Humorous Treatise, the Author whereof is said
to have writ so loosly, as if he neither had remembered what the Bishop uttered,
or cared much what he was to prove. In answer whereunto, the Bishop adds a
short Conclusion to his Sermons, and so lets him pass. The Presbyterian
Brethren take a new Alarm, Muster their Forces, compare their Notes, and send
them to the Author of the former Treatise, that he might publish his Defense.
Which he did accordingly; the Author being named Henry Jacob, a well-known
Separatist. Which Controversy coming to the Queen's knowledge, being then at
Farnham, (a Castle belonging to the Bishop) she signified Her Pleasure to him,
That he should neither desert the Doctrine, nor suffer the Function which he
exercised in the Church of England, to be trodden and trampled under-foot by
unquiet men, who both abhorred the Truth, and despised Authority. On which
Command the Bishop sets himself upon the writing of that Learned Treatise,
entitled, A Survey of Christ's Sufferings, etc. although by reason of a
sickness of two years continuance, it was not published till the year 1604. The
Controversy after this was plied more hotly in both Universities, where the
Bishop's Doctrine was maintained, but publicly opposed by many of our Zealots
both at home and abroad. At home, opposed by Gabriel Powel, a stiff
Presbyterian. Abroad, by Broughton, Parker, and some other Brethren of the
Separation. After this, justified and defended by Dr. Hill, whom Aumes replied
unto in his Rejoinder; as also, by another Parker, and many more; till in the
end the Brethren willingly surceased from the prosecution of their former
Doctrines, which they were not able to maintain. And though the Church received
some trouble upon this occasion, yet by this means the Article of Christ's
Descent became more rightly understood, and more truly stated, according to the
Doctrine of the Church of England, than either by the Church of Rome, or any of
the Protestant or Reformed Churches, of what Name soever.

19. But while the Prelates of the Church were busied upon these and the like
Disputes, the Presbyterians found themselves some better work, in making
Friends, and fastening on some eminent Patron to support their Cause. None
fitter for their purpose than the Earl of Essex, gracious amongst the Military
men, popular beyond measure, and as ambitious of Command, as he was of
Applause. He had his Education in the House of the Earl of Leicester, and took
to Wife a Daughter of Sir Francis Walsingham, as before is said, who fitted and
prepared him for those Applications which hitherto he had neglected, upon a
just fear of incurring the Queen's Displeasure. But the Queen being now grown
old, the King of Scots not much regarded by the English, and very ill obeyed by
his natural Subjects; he began to look up toward the Crown, to which a Title
was drawn for him, as the direct Heir of Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of
Gloucester, one of the younger Sons of K. EDWARD the third. This man the
Puritans cry up with most infinite Praises, both in their Pulpits, and in their
Pamphlets; telling him, That he was not only great in Honor, and the love of
the people; but temporis expectation^ major, far greater in the expectation
which his Friends had of him. And he accordingly applies himself to those of
the Puritan Faction, admits them to Places of most Trust and Credit about his
Person, keeps open House for men of those Opinions to resort unto, under
pretense of hearing Sermons; and hearing no Sermons with more zeal and
edification, than those which seemed to attribute a Power to Inferior
Magistrates for curbing and controlling their undoubted Sovereigns. Which
questionless must needs have ended in great disturbance to the Church and
State, if he had not been outwitted by Sir Robert Cicil, Sir Walter Rawleigh,
and the rest of their Party in the Court; by whom he was first shifted over
into Ireland, and at last brought upon the Scaffold, not to receive a Crown,
but to lose his Head. Which happened very opportunely for K. JAMES of Scotland,
whose Entrance might have been opposed, and his Title questioned, if this
Ambitious man had prospered in his undertakings, which he conducted generally
with more Heat than Judgment.

1596.
20. This brings me back again to Scotland. In which we left the King intent
upon the expectation of a better Crown; and to that end resolved upon the
Restitution of the banished Lords; who being advertised of his purpose,
returned as secretly as might be, offering to give good Security to live
conformable to the Laws in all peace and quietness. The King seems willing to
accept it, and is confirmed by a Convention of Estates, in those good
Intentions* The News whereof gave such offense to those of the Kirk, that
presently they assembled themselves at Edenborough, gave notice to the several
Ministers, of the present Dangers, and advised them to excite their Flocks to
be in readiness, to the end they might oppose these Resolutions of the King and
Council, as far as lawfully they might. A day was also set apart for
Humiliation, and Order given to the Presbyteries to excommunicate all such as
either harbored any of the Popish Lords, or kept company with them; and this
Excommunication to be passed summarily on the first Citation, because the
safety of the Church seemed to be in danger; which was the mischief by the King
suspected under that Reserve. They appointed also, that sixteen of their
Company should remain at Edenborough, (according to the number of the Tribunes
at Paris) who together with some of the Presbytery of that City, should be
called, The Council of the Kirk: That four or five of the said sixteen, should
attend Monthly on the Service, in their turns and courses; and, that they
should convene every day with some of that Presbytery, to receive such
Advertisements as should be sent from other places, and thereupon take counsel
of the best Expedients that could be offered in the case. And for the first
Essay of their new Authority, the Lord Seaton, President of the Sessions,
appears before them; transmitted unto their Tribunal, by the Synod of Lothian,
for keeping intelligence with the Earl of Huntley. From which, with many
affectations having purged himself, he was most graciously dismissed. Which
though the King beheld as an Example of most dangerous consequence; yet, being
willing to hold fair with the Kirk, he connived at it, till he perceived them
to be fixed on so high a pin, so cross to his Commands and Purposes, that it
was time to take them down. He therefore signifies to them, once for all, That
there could be no hope of any right understanding to be had between them,
during the keeping up of two Jurisdictions, neither depending on the other^
That in their Preachings they did censure the Affairs of the State and Council;
convocate several Assemblies without his Licenses* and there conclude what they
thought good, without his Allowance and Approbation: That in their Synods,
Presbyteries, and particular Sessions, they embraced all manner of business,
under color of scandal; and, that without redress of these Misdemeanors, there
either was no hope of a good Agreement; or that the said Agreement, when made,
could be long kept by either Party.

21. The Ministers, on the other side, had their Grievances also; that is to
say; The Favors extended by his Majesty to the Popish Lords, the inviting of
the Lady Huntley to the Baptism of the Princess Elizabeth, being then at hand;
the committing of the Princess to the Custody of the Lady Levingston; and the
^estrangement of his Countenance from themselves. And though the King gave very
satisfactory Answers to all these Complaints; yet could not the suspicions of
the Kirk be thereby removed; every day bringing forth some great cry or other,
That the Papists were favored in the Court, The Mi^^^ters troubled for the
free rebuke of sin, and the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom sought to be
overthrown. In the mean time it happened, that one David Blake, one of the
Ministers of St. Andrews, had in a Sermon uttered diverse Seditio^s Speeches of
the King and Queen; as also against the Council, and the Lords of the Session:
but more particularly, that as all Kings were the Devils Barns; so the heart of
K. JAMES was full of Treachery: That the Queen was not to be prayed for but for
fashion-sake, because they knew that she would never do them good: That the
Lords of the Council were corrupt, and takers of Bribes: and, that the Queen of
England was an Atheist, one of no Religion. Notice whereof being given to the
English Ambassador, he complains of it to the King, and Blake is cited to
appear before the Lords of the Council. Melvin makes this a common Cause, and
gives it out, That this was only done upon design against the Ministers, to
bring their Doctrine under the censure and controlment of the King and Council;
or at the least, a mere device to divert the Ministers from prosecuting their
just Suit against the coming and reception of the Popish Lords; and that if
Blake or any other should submit their Doctrines to the trial of the King and
Council, the Liberties of the Kirk would be quite subverted. By which means he
prevailed so far on the rest of the Council, (I mean the Council of the Kirk)
that they sent certain of their number to intercede in the business, and to
declare how ill it might be taken with all sorts of people, if the Ministers
should now be called in question for such trifling matters, when the Enemies of
the Truth were both spared and countenanced. But not being able by this means
to delay the Censure, it was advised, that Blake should make his Declinatour,
renounce the King and Council as incompetent Judges, and wholly put himself
upon trial of his own Presbytery. Which though it seemed a dangerous course, by
most sober men; yet was it carried by the major part of the Voices, as the
Cause of God.

22. Encouraged by this general Vote, and enflamed by Melvin, he presents his
Declinatour, with great confidence, at his next appearance. And when he was
interrogated, amongst other things, Whether the King might not as well judge in
matters of Treason, as the Kirk of Heresy? He answered, That supposing he had
spoken Treason, yet could he not be first judged by the King and Council, till
the Kirk had taken cognizance of it. In maintenance of which proceeding, the
Commissioners of the Kirk direct their Letters to all the Presbyteries of the
kingdom, requiring them to subscribe the said Declinatour, to recommend the
Cause in their Prayers to God, and to stir up their several Flocks in defense
thereof. This puts the King to the necessity of publishing his Proclamation of
the Month of November. In which he first lays down the great and manifold
encroachments of this new Tribunal, to the overthrow of his Authority: The
sending of the Declinatour to be subscribed generally by all the Ministers: The
convocating of the Subjects to assist their proceedings, as if they had no Lord
or Superior over them; and in the mean time, that the Ministers forsake their
Flocks, to wait on these Commissioners, and attend their service: which being
said, he does thereby charge the said Commissioners from acting any thing
according to that deputation; commanding them to leave Edenborough, to repair
to their several Flocks, and to return no more for keeping such unlawful
Meetings under pain of Rebellion. He published another Proclamation at the same
time also, by which all Barons, Gentlemen, and other Subjects, were commanded
not to join with any of the Ministry, either in their Presbyteries, Synods, or
other Ecclesiastical Assemblies, without his License. Which notwithstanding he
was willing to revoke those Edicts, and remit his Action against Blake, if the
Church would either wave the Declinatour, or if they would declare, at the
least, That it was not a general, but a particular Declinatour; used in the
case of Mr. Blake, as being in a case of Slander; and therefore appertaining to
the Church's Cognizance. But these proud men, either upon some confidence of
another Bothwell, or else presuming that the King was not of a Spirit to hold
out against them; or otherwise infatuated to their own destruction, resolved,
That both their Pulpits, and their Preachers too, should be exempted totally
from the King's Authority. In which brave humor, they return this Answer to
his Proposition, That they resolved to stand to their Declinatour, unless the
King would pass from the Summons, and remitting the pursuit to the
Ecclesiastical Judge, That no Minister should be charged for his Preaching; at
least before the meeting of the next general Assembly, which should be in their
Power to call, as they saw occasion. Which Answer so displeased the King, that
he charged the Commissioners of the Kirk to depart the Town, and by a new
Summons cites Blake to appear on the last of November. This fills the Pulpit
with Invectives against the King, and that too on the day of the Princess's
Christning, at what time many Noble men were called to Edenborough, to attend
that Solemnity. With whose consent it was declared at Blake's next appearance,
That the Crimes and Accusations charged in the Bill, were Treasonable and
Seditious; and that his Majesty, his Council, and all other Judges substitute
by his Authority, were competent Judges in all matters, either Criminal, or
Civil, as well to Ministers, as to other Subjects. Yet still the King was
willing to give over the Chase, makes them another gracious Offer, treats
privately with some Chiefs amongst them, and seems contented to revoke his two
Proclamations, if Blake would only come before the Lords of the Council, and
there acknowledge his offense against the Queen. But when this would not be
accepted, the Court proceeds unto the Examination of Witnesses. And upon proof
of all the Articles objected, Sentence was given against him to this effect:
That he should be confined beyond the North water, enter into Ward within six
days, and there remain till his Majesty's pleasure should be further signified.
Some Overtures were made after this, for an Accommodation. But the King not
being able to gain any reason from them, sends their Commissioners out of the
Town, and presently commands, That Twenty four of the most Seditious persons in
Edenborough, should forsake the City; hoping to find the rest more cool and
tractable, when these Incendiaries were dismissed.

23. The Preachers of the City notwithstanding, take fire up on it, and the
next day excite the Noblemen, assembled at the Sermon upon Sunday the
fifteenth of December, to join with them in a Petition to the King, To preserve
Religion. Which being presented in a rude and disorderly manner, the King
demands by what Authoririty they durst convene together without his leave: We
dare do more than this, (said the Lord of Lindsey) and will not suffer our
Religion to be overthrown. Which said, he returns unto the Church, stirrs up
the people to a tumult, and makes himself the Head of a Factious Rabble, who
crying out, The Sword of the Lord, and Gideon, thronged in great numbers to the
place, in which the King had locked himself for his greater safety; the doors
whereof they questionless had forced open, and done some outrage to his
Person, if a few honest men had not stopped their Fury: The Lord-Provost of the
City, notwithstanding he was then sick, and kept his Bed, applied his best
endeavors to appease the Tumult, and with some difficulty brought the people
to lay down their Arms; which gave the King an opportunity to retire to his
Palace, where with great fear he passed over all the rest of that day. The next
morning he removes with his Court and Council, to the Town of Lintithgoe, and
from thence publishes a Proclamation to this effect, viz. That the Lords of
the Session, the Sheriffs, Commissioners, and Justices, with their several
Members and Deputies, should remove themselves forth of the Town of
Edenborough, and be in readiness to go to any such place as should be
appointed; and, that all Noblemen and Barons should return unto their Houses,
and not presume to convene in that or in any other place, without License,
under pain of his Majesty's Displeasure. The Preachers, on the contrary, are
resolved to keep up the Cause, to call their Friends together, and unite their
Party; and were upon the point of Excommunicating certain Lords of the Council,
if some more sober than the rest, had not held their hands.

24. In which confusion of Affairs, they indict a Fast: For a preparatory
whereunto, a Sermon is preached by one Welsh, in the chief Church of that City:
Who taking for his Theme the Epistle sent to the Angel o^ the Church of
Ephesus, did pitifully rail against the King, saying, That he was possessed
with a Devil; and that one Devil being put out, seven worse were entered in the
place: and, that the Subjects might lawfully rise and take the Sword out of his
hands. Which last he confirmed by the Example of a Father that falling into a
Frenzy, might be taken by the Children and Servants of the Family, and tied
hand and foot from doing violence. Which brings into my mind an usual saying of
that King, to this effect, viz. That for the twelve last years of his living in
Scotland, he used to pray upon his knees, before every Sermon, That he might
hear nothing from the Preacher which might justly grieve him; and that the case
was so well altered when he was in England, that he was used to pray, that he
might profit by what he heard. But all exorbitancy of Power is of short
continuance, especially if abused to Pride and Arrogance. The madness of the
Presbyterians was now come to the height, and therefore in the course of Nature
was to have a fall; and this the King resolves to give them, or to lose his
Crown. He had before been so afflicted with continual Baffles, that he was many
times upon the point of leaving Scotland, putting himself into the Seignury of
Venice, and living there in the capacity of a Gentleman (so they call the
Patricians of that Noble City). And questionless he had put that purpose in
execution, if the hopes of coming one day to the Crown of England, had not been
some temptation to him to ride out the storm. But now a Sword is put into his
hands by the Preachers themselves, wherewith he is enabled to cut the
Gordian-knot of their Plots and Practices, which he was not able to untye. For,
not contented to have raised the former Tumults, they keep the Noblemen
together, invite the people to their aid, and write their Letters to the Lord
of Hamilton, to repair unto them, and make himself the Head of their
Association. A Copy of which Letter being showed unto the King by that Noble
Lord, command is given unto the Provost of Edenborough, To attach the
Ministers. But they had notice of his purpose, and escape into England, making
Newcastle their retreat, as in former times.

25. It is a true saying of the wise Historian, That every Insurrection of the
people, when it is suppressed, does make the Prince stronger, and the Subject
weaker. And this the King found true in his own particular. The Citizens of
Edenborough being pinched with the Proclamation, and the removal of the Court
and the Courts of Justice, offered to purge themselves of the late Sedition,
and tendered their obedience unto any thing whatsoever which his Majesty and the
Council should be pleased to enjoin, whereby they might repair the huge
Indignity which was done to his Majesty; provided that they should not be
thought guilty of so great a Crime, which from their hearts they had detested.
But the King answers, That he would admit of no purgation; that he would make
them know, that he was their King: And the next day proclaims the Tumult to be
Treason, and proclaims all for Traitors who were guilty of it. This made them
fear their utter ruin to be near at hand. The ordinary Judicatories were
removed to Leith, the Sessions ordained to be held at Perth; their Ministers
were fled, their Magistrates without regard; and none about the King, but their
deadly Enemies. And to make up the full measure of their disconsolation,
Counsel is given unto the King to raze the Town, and to erect a Pillar in the
place thereof, for a perpetual Monument of so great an Insolence. But he
resolves to travel none but Legal ways; and being somewhat sweetened by a Letter
from the Queen of England, he gives command unto the Provost, and the rest of
the Magistrates, to enter their persons at Perth on the first of February,
there to keep ward until they either were acquitted or condemned of the former
uproar. Whilst things remained in this perplexity and suspense, he is advised
to make his best use of the conjuncture, for settling matters of the Church, and
to establish in it such a decent Order as was agreeable to God's Word. To which
end he appoints a National-Assembly to be held at Perth; and prepares certain
Queries, fifty five in number, to be considered and debated in the said
Assembly, all of them tending to the rectifying of such Abuses which were
either crept into the Discipline, or occasioned by it. Nothing so much
perplexed the principal Ministers, who had the leading of the rest, as, that
the Discipline should be brought under a dispute, which they had taught to be a
part of the Word of God. But they must sing another Tune before all be ended.

26. For, the King having gained a considerable Party amongst the Ministers of
the North, and treated with many of the rest in several, whom he thought most
tractable; prevailed so far on the Assembly, that they condescend at the last
upon many particulars which in the pride of their prosperity had not been
required. The principal of which were these, viz. That it should be lawful to
his Majesty by himself or his Commissioners, or to the Pastors* to propone in a
general Assembly, whatsoever point he or they desired to be resolved in, or
reformed in matters of External Government, alterable according to
Circumstances; providing it be done in right time and place, Animo aedificandi
non tentandi. 2. That no Minister should reprove his Majesty's Laws and
Statutes, Acts or Ordinances, until such time as he has first by the advice of
his Presbytery, or Synodal, or General Assemblies, complained and sought remedy
of the same from his Majesty, and made report of his Majesty's Answer, before
any further proceedings. 3. That no man's Name should be expressed in the
Pulpit, except the Fault be notorious and public, and so declared by an
Assize, Excommunication, Contumace, and lawful Admonition; nor should he be
described so plainly by any other Circumstances, than public Vices, always
damnable. 4. That in all great Towns the Ministers shall not be chosen without
his Majesty's consent, and the consent of the Flock. 5. That no matter of
Slander should be called before them, wherein his Majesty's Authority is
pre-judged, Causes Ecclesiastical only excepted. 6. And finally, That no
Conventions shall be amongst Pastors, without his Majesty's knowledge, except
their Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synods, the Meetings at the Visitation of
Churches, admission or deprivation of Ministers, taking up of deadly Feuds, and
the like, which had not already been found fault with by his Majesty. According
to which last Artiele, the King consents unto another general Assembly to be
held at Dundee, and nominates the tenth of May for the opening of it.

27. It was about this time that Dr. Richard Bancroft, Bishop of London, began
to run a constant course of Correspondence with the King of Scots, whom he
beheld as the undoubted Heir and Successor of the Queen then Reigning. And well
considering how conducible it was to the Peace of both Kingdoms, that they
should both be governed in one Form of Ecclesiastical Policy; he chalked him
out a ready way, by which he might restore Episcopacy to the Kirk of Scotland.
To which end, as the King had gained the liberty in the last Assembly to
question and dispute the Government then by Law established; and gained a power
of nominating Ministers in the principal Cities; so in the next, they gratified
him in this point, That no man should from thenceforth exercise a Minister,
without having a particular Flock; nor be admitted to that Flock, without
Ordination, by the Imposition of hands. He required also in the same, That
before the conclusion of any weighty matter, his Highness Advice and
Approbation should be first obtained. And so far they consented to the
Proposition, as to express how glad they were to have his Majesty's Authority
interposed to all Acts of importance which concerned the Church, so as matters
formerly concluded, might not be drawn in question. He gained some other points
also in the same Assembly, no less important than the other toward his Design;
as namely, 1. That no Minister shall exercise any Jurisdiction, either by
making of Constitutions, or leading of Processes, without advice and
concurrence of his Session, Presbytery, Synod, or General Assembly. 2. That
Presbyteries shall not meddle with any thing that is not known without all
controversy to belong to the Ecclesiastical Iudicatory; and that therein
Uniformity should be observed throughout the Country. And, 3. That where any
Presbyteries shall be desired by his Majesty's Missive to stay their
proceedings, as being prejudicial to the Civil Jurisdiction, or private men's
Rights, they should desist until his Majesty did receive satisfaction. But that
which made most toward his purpose, was, the appointing of Thirteen of their
number to attend his Majesty, as the Commissioners of the Kirk, whom we may
call the High Commissioners of Scotland, the King's Ecclesiastical Council, the
Seminary of the future Bishops, to whom they gave Authority for the planting of
Churches in Edenborough, St. Andrews, Dundee, etc. as also, to present the
Petitions and Grievances of the Kirk, to his Majesty; and to advise with him in
all such matters as conduced unto the peace and welfare of it.

28. It was no hard matter for the King, by Rewards and Promises, to gain these
men unto himself; or at the least, to raise amongst them such a Party as should
be ready at all times to serve his turn. And such a general compliance he found
amongst them, that they not only served him in the punishment of David Blake,
in whose behalf they had stood out so long against him; but in the sentencing
of Wallace, who in a Sermon at St. Andrews had abused his Secretary: both
which, upon the cognizance of their several Causes, they deprived of their
Churches, and decreed others of more moderation to be placed therein. They
served him also in the reformation of that University where Andrew Melvin for
some years had continued Rector; and thereby gained an excellent opportunity
for training up young Students in the Arts of Sedition. To which end he had so
contrived it, that instead of Lecturing in Divinity, they should read the
Politics, as namely, Whether Election or Succession of Kings were the best
Form of Government? How far the Royal Power extended? And, Whether Kings were
to be Censured and Deposed by the Estates of the Kingdom, in case their Power
should be abused? For remedy whereof, the King not only ordered by the Advice
of his Commissioners, That no man from thenceforth should continue Rector of
that University above the space of a year; but appointed also on what Books,
and after what manner every Professor for the time to come, was to read his
Lectures. He next proceeds unto a Reformation of the Churches of Edenborough,
but had first brought the Town to submit to mercy. Failing of their attendance
at Perth, in so full a number as were appointed to appear, the whole Town was
denounced Rebel, and all the Lands, Rents, and other Goods, which formerly
belonged to the Corporation, confiscate to the use of the King: the news
whereof, brought such a general disconsolation in that Factious City, that the
Magistrates renounced their Charges, the Ministers forsook their Flocks, and
all things seemed to tend to a dissolution. But at the end of fifteen days, his
Majesty was graciously inclined, upon the mediation of some Noblemen who took
pity on them, to re-admit them to his Favor. Upon Advertisement whereof the
Provost, Bailiffs, and Deacons of Crafts, being brought unto his presence the
21 of March, and falilng upon their knees, did with tears beg pardon for their
negligence, in not timely preventing that Tumult; beseeching his Majesty to
take pity of the Town, which did simply submit it self to his Majesty's Mercy.

29. The King had formerly considered of all Advantages which he might raise
unto himself out of that Submission; but aimed at nothing more than the
reduction of the people to a sense of their duty; the curbing of the
City-Preachers, and settling some good Order in the Churches of it. In these
last times, the Ministers had lived together in one common House, situate in
the great Churchyard, and of old belonging to the Town; which gave them an
opportunity to consult in private, to hatch Seditions, and put their Treasons
into form. This House the King required to be given up to him, to the end that
the Ministers might be disposed of in several Houses, far from one another, so
as they might not meet together without observation. The Ministers of late had
preached in common, without consideration of particular Charges; and were
reduced also to a less number than in former times, which made them of the
greater Power amongst the people. But now the King resolves upon the dividing
of the Town into several Parishes, and fixing every Minister in his proper
Church, according to the Acts of the last Assembly. This had been thought of
two years since; but the Town opposed it. Now they are glad to yield to any
thing which the King propounded, and to this point amongst the rest. And
hereupon the payment of a Fine of Twenty thousand pounds to the King, and
entering into a Recognizance (as our Lawyers call it) of Forty thousand Marks
more, for the indempnifying of the Lords of the Session in the time of their
sitting; the City is restored to the good Grace of the King, and the Courts of
Justice to the City. His Majesty was also pleased, that the Fugitive Preachers
of the City should be restored unto their Ministry, upon these conditions, that
is to say, That each of them should take the Charge of a several Flock: That
four new Preachers should be added to the former number, and each of them
assigned to his proper Charge: That they should use more moderation in their
Preachings, for the time to come, and not refuse to render an account thereof
to the King and Council. And finally, That such as had not formerly received
Ordination by the imposition of hands, should receive it now. In which last,
Bruce created no small trouble to the King's Commissioners (who labored very
zealously to advance that Service); but he submitted in the end.

30. After these preparations, comes a Parliament, which was to take beginning
in the Month of December. Against which time the King had dealt so dexterously
with Patrick Galloway, and he so handsomely had applied himself to his
Associates, that the Commissioners were drawn to join in a Request to the Lords
and Commons, That the Ministers, as representing the Church, and Third Estate
of the Kingdom, might be admitted to give voice in Parliament, according to the
ancient Rites and Privileges of the Kirk of Scotland. The King was also humbly
moved to be-friend them in it. And he so managed the Affair to his own
advantage, that he obtained an Act to pass to this effect, viz. That such
Pastors and Ministers as his Majesty should please to provide to the Place,
Dignity, and Title of a Bishop, Abbot, or other Prelate, at any time should
have voice in Parliament, as freely as any other Ecclesiastical Prelate had in
the times foregoing; provided, that such persons as should be nominated to any
Archbishopric or Bishopric within the Realm, should either actually be
Preachers at the time of their nomination; or else assume and take upon them to
be actual Preachers; and according thereunto should practice and perform that
duty; and that neither this Act, nor any thing in the same contained, should
prejudice the Jurisdiction of the Kirk, established by Acts of Parliament; nor
any of the Presbyteries, Assemblies, or other Sessions of the Church. After
which, followed another General Assembly, appointed to be held at Dundee, in
the March ensuing, the King himself being present at it. In which it was
concluded, after some debate, That Ministers lawfully might give voice in
Parliament, and other public Meetings of the Estates; and that it was
expedient to have some always of that number present, to give voice in the name
of the Church. It was agreed also, That so many should be appointed to have
voice in Parliament, as there had been Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and
Priors, in the times of Popery: Which coming to the number of Fifty, or
thereabouts, gave every Minister some hopes to be one of that number. It was
resolved also, That the Election of the Persons, should belong partly to the
King, and in part to the Church. But as for the manner of the Election, the
Rents to be assigned unto them, and their continuance in that Trust, for life,
or otherwise; these points were left to be considered of at better leisure.

31. For the dispatch whereof, 1589.
with the more convenience, it was appointed, That the matter should be first
debated in each Presbytery, and afterward in Provincial Synods, to be holden
all upon one day, that to be the first Tuesday of June, three men to be
selected out of every Synod, to attend the King; and they, together with the
Doctors of the Universities, to conclude the business, with reference,
notwithstanding, to the approbation of the next Assembly. Accordingly they meet
in Synods, and appoint their Delegates; who being called to Falkland in the end
of July, did then and there conclude upon these particulars; first, for the
manner of Elections; That for each Prelacy that was void, the Church should
nominate six persons, and the King choose one; and that if his Majesty should
like none of that number, six others should be named by the Church, of which
his Majesty was to choose one without more refusal. Next, for the Rents; That
the Churches being sufficiently planted, and no prejudice done to Schools,
Colleges, and Universities, already erected, he should be put into possession
of the rest of that Prelacy, to which he was to be preferred. As to the term of
his continuance in that trust, there was nothing done, that point being left
unto the consideration of the next Assembly. And for the naming of the Child,
the Godfathers agreed, that he should be called the Commissaire, or
Commissioner of such a place, if the Parliament could be induced by his Majesty
to accept that Title, or else the General Assembly to devise some other. But
fearing lest this Commissaire might in time become a Bishop, it was resolved to
tie him up to such Conditions as should disable him from aspiring above the
rest of his Brethren. But more particularly, it was cautioned and agreed upon,
That he should propound nothing in the Name of the Church, without express
warrant from the same; nor give consent to any thing proposed in Parliament,
which tended to the diminution of the Liberties of it. That he should be bound
to give an account of his proceedings, to the next General Assembly, and to
submit himself to their judgment in it, without any Appeal. That he should
faithfully attend his particular Flock, and be as subject to the Censure of his
own Presbytery, or Provincial Synod, as any other Minister which had no
Commission. That in the Administration of Discipline, Collation of Benefices,
Visitation, and other points of Ecclesiastical Government, he should neither
usurp, nor claim to himself any more Power and Jurisdiction than the rest of
his Brethren. That if he shall usurp any part of Ecclesiastical Government, the
Presbytery, Synod, or General Assembly, protesting against it, whatsoever he
should do therein, shall be null and void. That if he chance to be deposed from
the Ministry, by the Presbytery, Synod, or Assembly, he should not only lose
his Place and Vote in Parliament, but the Prelacy should be also voided for
another man. And finally, That he should subscribe to all these Cautions,
before he was admitted to his Place and Trust.

1599.
32. In the Assembly of Montross, which began on the 28 th of March, Anno 1599,
these Cautions were approved, and two new ones added: 1. That they who had
voice in Parliament, should not have place in the General Assembly, unless they
were authorized by a Commission from the Presbyteries whereof they were
Members. 2. That Crimen Ambitur. or any sinister endeavors to procure the
Place, should be a sufficient reason to deprive him of it. As for the term of
their continuance in this Trust, the Leading-members were resolved not to make
it certain, and much less to endure for term of life: all they would yield
unto, was this, That he who was admitted unto that Commission, should yearly
render an account of his Employment to the next General Assembly. That he
should lay down his Commission at the feet thereof, to be continued if they
pleased, or otherwise to give place unto any other whom his Majesty and the
said ^s^embly should think fit to employ. To all which Cautions and
Restrictions, the King was willing to consent, that so the business might
proceed without interruption; not doubting but to find a way, at some time or
other, in which these Rigors might be moderated, and these Chains knocked off.
Nothing now rested, but the nominating of some able persons to possess those
Prelacies which either were vacant at that time, or actually in the King's
disposing. The Bishoprics of St. Andrews, and Glascow, had been given or sold
to the Duke of Lenox; the Bishopric of Murray, to the Lord of Spinie; and that
of Orkney, to the Earl; which must be first compounded with, before the King
would nominate any man to either of them. The Sands of Galloway and the Isles,
were so delapidated, that there was nothing left to maintain a Prelate, and
therefore must be first endowed. The Sees of Aberdeen and Argile, had their
Bishops living, both of them being actual Preachers; and those of Brechen,
Dunkeld, and Dumblane, had their Titulars also, but no Preaching-Ministers. So
as there were but two Churches to be filled at the present, that is to say, the
Bishoprics of Rothes, and Cathness; to which the King presents Mr. David
Lindesay, Minister of Leith; and Mr. George Gladstaves, one of the Ministers of
St. Andrews; of whose sobriety and moderation, he had good experience. Which
two enjoyed their places in the following Parliament, and rode together with
the rest in the Pomps thereof.

33. Thus far the business went on smoothly in the outward show; but inwardly
were great thoughts of heart; which first appeared in words of Danger and
Discontent, and afterward in acts of the highest Treason. The Leading-members
of the Kirk, which had so long enjoyed an Arbitrary Power in all parts of the
Realm, could with no patience brook the Limitations which were put upon them in
the Assembly at Dundee; and much less able to endure that such a fair
Foundation should be laid for Episcopacy, which must needs put a final end to
their Pride and Tyranny; of which sort was a Letter writ by Davidson, to the
next Assembly: In which he thus expostulates with the rest of his Brethren; How
long shall we fear or favor Flesh and Blood, and follow the Counsel and
Command thereof? Should our Meetings be in the Name of Man? Are we not to take
up our selves, and to acknowledge our former errors and feebleness in the Work
of the Lord? It is time for us now, when so many of our worthy Brethren are
thrust out of their Callings, without all order of just proceedings; and
Jesuits, Atheists, and Papists, are suffered, countenanced, and advanced to
great Rooms in the Realm, for the bringing in Idolatry, and Captivity more than
Babylonical, with an high hand, and that in our chief City: Is it time for us,
I say, of the Ministry, to be inveigled and blind-folded with pretense of the
preferment of some small number of our Brethren to have voice in Parliament,
and have Titles of Prelacy? Shall we, with Sampson, sleep still on Dalilah's
knees, till she say, The Philistines be upon thee, Sampson? etc. Which Letter
speaks the words of Davidson, but the sense of others, who having the like
discontentments, privately whispered them in the ears of those who either
seemed zealous for Religion, or Factiously inclined to make new Disturbances in
this unsetledness of Affairs: In which conjuncture, it was no hard matter for
them so to work upon men's Affections, as to assure them to themselves, and to
be ready to fly out upon all occasions, especially when any powerful Head
should be offered to them.

1600.
34. Of the last sort was the Conspiracy and Treason of the Earl of Goury, Son
of that William Earl of Goury who had been executed for surprising the King's
Person at Ruthen-Castle, Anno 1584. And though this Son of his had been
restored by the King to his Blood and Hononrs, one of his Sisters married to
the Duke of Lenox, another placed in the Attendance of the Queen, and that his
Brother Alexander was advanced to a Place in the Bedchamber; yet all these
Favors were not able to obliterate the remembrance of the Execution so justly
done upon their Father. By nature he was Proud, Aspiring, and of a Mind greater
than his Fortune. Ill principled in the course of his Education; which made him
passionately affected to the Disciplinarians, of whom he was ambitious to be
thought a Patron. To this man they apply themselves; who by the loss of their
Authority, or Tyranny rather, measured the Fortunes of the Church; as though
Religion could not stand, if their Empire fell. To him they frequently
insinuated their Fears and Jealousies, the King's aversness from the Gospel,
his extraordinary Favor to the Popish Lords, his present Practices and Designs
to subvert the Discipline, the only Pillar and Support of the Kirk of Scotland;
not without some Reflections on the death of his Father, whose Zeal to God was
testified by the loss of his Life, which cried aloud for vengeance, both to God
and Man. By which insinuations they so wrought upon him, that he began to study
nothing but Revenge; and to that end engaged his Brother Alexander (a fierce
young man, and of a very daring Spirit) in the practice with him. He also held
intelligence with such of the Ministers as were supposed to be most
discontented at the present Transactions; but most especially, with the
Preachers of Edenborough, who could not easily forget the Injuries (so they
must be called) which they had suffered from the King for some years last past.
The like intelligence he kept with many Malcontents amongst the Laics;
preparing all, but opening his Design to few; but opening it howsoever to Logen
of Restalrig, in whom he had more confidence than all the rest.

35. Concerning which, it was averred by one Sprot a Notary, as well upon
Examination before the Lords of the Session, as his Confession at the Gallows,
Anno 1608, That he had seen a Letter written by this Logan to the Earl of
Goury, in which was signified, That he would take part with him in revenge of
his Father's death. That to effect it, he must find some way or other to bring
the King to Fast-Castle. That it was easier to be done by Sea, than Land: and,
that they might safely keep him there, till they had given advertisement of it
to the other Conspirators. For proof of which Confession, (being free and
voluntary) he told the people on the Ladder, that he would give them a Sign;
which he performed by clapping his hands three times after his turning off by
the Executioner. It was affirmed also by Mr. William Cowper, a right godly man,
then being Minister at Perth, and afterward made Bishop of Galloway; That
going to the House of the Earl, (the Hereditary Provost of that Town) not many
days before the intended Treason, he found him reading a Book entitled, De
Conjurationibus adversus Principes, containing a Discourse of Treasons and
Conspiracies against several Princes; of which he was pleased to give this
Censure, That most of them were very foolishly contrived, and faulty in some
point or other, which was the reason that they found not the desired effect. By
which it seems that he intended to out-go all former Conspirators in the
contrivance of his Treason; though in the end he fell upon a Plot which was
most ridiculous, not to be paralleled by any in that Book which he so much
vilified. The Design was, To draw the King to his House in the Town of Perth,
under pretense of coming secretly to see a man whom he had lately intercepted
with Letters, and some quantity of Gold, from Rome; and having brought him to
some remote part of the House, to make sure work of him. The King was then at
Falkland-Castle; and going out betimes on Tuesday the fifth of August, to take
his pleasure in the Park, he is met by Alexander, who tells him of the News of
Perth, and that a speedy posting thither, would be worth his travel. The King
comes thither before Dinner, accompanied with the Duke of Lenox, the Earl of
Mar, Evesking the Captain of his Guard, and some other Gentlemen, all of them
in their Hunting-Coats, as minding nothing but a Visit to the Nobleman. Thus is
he brought into the toil; but they shall only hunt him to the view, and not
pull him down.

36. The King's own Dinner being ended, the Lords fall to theirs, which
Alexander takes to be the fittest time to effect the Enterprise; and therefore
takes the King along with him to an upper Chamber. But seeing Eveskin at his
heels, he willed him to stay behind, and made fast the doors. Being brought
into a Chamber on the top of the House, the King perceived a man in a secret
corner, and presently asked Alexander, if he were the Party who had brought the
Letters and the Gold. But Alexander then changed his countenance, upbraided him
with the death of his Father, for which he was now brought to make
satisfaction; and therewith left him to the mercy of the Executioner. I shall
not stand on all particulars of the story; the sum whereof, is briefly this:
That the King having having by much struggling gained a Window, a corner whereof
looked toward the Street, cried out so loud, that he was heard by all the Lords
and Gentlemen of his Retinue, who thereupon prepared themselves for his
assistance. In the pursuit whereof, the Earl himself is killed by Eveskin as he
was making haste to help his Brother; and Alexander is dispatched by Ramsey,
one of the King's Pages; who being acquainted with the House, came by the
back-stairs time enough to preserve his Master. Of this great Danger and
Deliverance, the King gives notice to all his Subjects, desiring them to join
with him in thanks to Almighty God for so great a Mercy; which was accordingly
performed by all honest men; but the whole Story disbelieved, discredited,
mis-reported by the Presbyterians, whom it concerned to wash their hands of so
foul a Treason. And how far they were Parties in it, or at least well-wishers
to it, may appear by this, That when the Ministers of Edenborough were desired
to convene their people, and give God thanks for this deliverance of the King,
they excused themselves, as not being well acquainted with all particulars. And
when it was replied unto them, That they were only required to make known to
the people, That the King had escaped a great Danger, and to excite them to
Thansgiving for his deliverance: They answered, That they were not very well
satisfied in the truth of the matter: That nothing was to be delivered in the
Pulpit, the truth whereof was not certainly known: and, that they were to utter
nothing in that place, but that which migh be spoke in Faith. On which Refusal
it was ordered by the Lords of the Council, That the people should be drawn
together into the Marketplace, That the Bishop of Ross should make a
Declaration of the whole Design, and therewithal conceive a Prayer of
Thanksgiving for the King's Deliverance. Which was performed on his part with a
true affection, and entertained by the people with great joy and gladness.

37. But the whole Nation was not so besotted by the Presbyterians, as either
to dispute the Story, or despise the Mercy. Which wrought so far upon the
Consciences of all honest men, that in a Parliament held at Edenborough, in
November following, the Estate of Goury was confiscate, his Sons disherited,
the Name of Ruthen utterly abolished, (but the last dispensed with) the bodies
of the two Brothers brought to Edenborough, there hanged and quartered, the
Heads of both being fixed upon the top of the Common Prison: and finally, The
Fifth of August ordained by Act of Parliament for a Day of Thanksgiving in all
times succeeding. The like done also two years after, at a General Assembly of
the Ministers of the Church, 1602.
held in Haly-Rood-House, as to the Day of Thanksgiving, which they decreed to
be kept solemnly from thenceforth, in all the Churches of that Kingdom. And it
was well they did it then, the King not venturing the Proposal to them in the
year foregoing, when they assembled at Burnt-Island, whether in reference to
some indisposition of Body which he found in himself; or rather of some greater
indisposition of Mind which he found in them. But now it went clearly for him
without contradiction, as did some other things propounded to their
consideration. His Ey now looks unto the Crown of England, and he resolved to
bring the Churches of both Kingdoms to an Uniformity: but so to do it as might
make neither noise nor trouble. The solemnizing of Marriage had been prohibited
on Sundays by the Rules of the Discipline: but by an Order made in the present
Assembly, it was indifferently permitted on all days alike, Sundays as well as
other days, at the will of the Parties. Before this time the Sacrament of
Baptism was not administered but only at the times of Preaching, on some opinion
which they had of the indifferency, or at the least the non-necessity thereof.
But now it was ordained with a joint consent, That the Ministers should not
refuse the Sacrament of Baptism to Infants, nor delay the same upon whatsoever
pretext, the same being required by the Parents, or others in their name Which
brought them two steps nearer to the Church of England, than before they were.

38. It was not long after the end of this Assembly, when the King received
Intelligence of Queen Elizabeth's death, and of the general acknowledgment of
his Succession, both by Peers and People. This puts him on a preparation for a
Journey to England, where he is joyfully received, and found no small
contentment in the change of his Fortunes; here sitting amongst Grave, Learned,
and Reverend men; not as before, a King without State, without Honor, without
Order, where Beardless Boys would every day brave him to his face; where Jack,
and Tom, and Will, and Dick, did at their pleasures cen^^re the proceedings of
him and his Council; where Will stood up and said, he would have it thus: and
Dick replied, Nay marry, but it shall be so: as he describes their carriage in
the Conference at Hampton Court, p. 4. and 80. So leaves he Scotland, and the
Puritans there, with this Character of them, recorded in the Preface of his
Book, called Basilicon Doron; in which he paints them out, as people which
refusing to be called Anabaptists, too much participated of their Humors, not
only agreeing with them in their General Rule, the contempt of the Civil
Magistrate, and in leaning to their own Dreams, Imaginations, and Revelations;
but particularly, in accounting all men profane that agree not to their
Fancies; in making, for every particular Question of the Polity of the Church,
as much Commotion as if the Article of the Trinity was called in question; in
making the Scripture to be ruled by their Conscience, and not their Conscience
by the Scripture; in accounting every body Ethnicus and Publicanus, not worthy
to enjoy the benefit of breathing, much less to participate with them in the
Sacraments, that denies the least jot of their Grounds: and in suffering King,
People, Law, and all, to be trod under foot, before the least jot of their
Grounds be impugned; in preferring such Holy Wars to an Ungodly Peace; not
only in resisting Christian Princes, but denying to pray for them; for Prayer
must come by Faith, and it is not revealed that God will bear their Prayers for
such a Prince. To which He adds this Clause in the Book it self, viz. That they
used commonly to tell the people in their Sermons, That all Kings and Princes
were naturally Enemies to the Liberty of the Church, and could never patiently
bear the Yoke of Christ. And thereupon he gives this Counsel to the Prince, To
take heed all of such Puritans, whom he calls the very Pests of the Church and
Commonwealth; whom no deserts can oblige, neither Oaths nor Promises bind;
breathing nothing but Sedition and Calumnies; aspiring without measure, railing
without reason, and making their own imaginations the square of their
Conscience: protesting before the Great God, That he should never find in any
Highlander, baser Thieves, greater Ingratitude, and more Lies and vile
Perjuries, than amongst those Fanatical spirits he should meet withal.

39. But on the contrary, he tells us of the Church of England at his first
coming thither, That he found that Form of Religion which was established under
Queen ELIZABETH of famous memory, by the Laws of the Land, to have been blessed
with a most extraordinary Peace, and of long continuance; which he beheld as a
strong evidence of God's being very well pleased with it. He tells us also,
That he could find no cause at all, on a full debate, for any Alteration to be
made in the Common Prayer Book, though that most impugned; that the Doctrines
seemed to be sincere, the Forms and Rites to have been justified out of the
Practice of the Primitive Church. And finally, he tells us, That there was
nothing in the same which might not very well have been born withal, if either
the Adversaries would have made a reasonable construction of them; or that his
Majesty had not been so nice, or rather jealous, (as himself confesses) for
having all public Forms in the Service of God, not only to be free from all
blame, but from any su^spition. For which, consult his Proclamation of the
fifth of March, before the Book of Common Prayer. And herewith he declared
himself so highly pleased, that in the Conference at Hampton Court, he entered
into a gratulation to Almighty God, for bringing him into the Promised Land,
(so he pleased to call it) where Religion was purely professed, the Government
Ecclesiastical approved by manifold blessings from God himself, as well in the
increase of the Gospel, as in a glorious and happy Peace; and where he had the
happiness to sit amongst Grave and Learned men, and not to be a King (as
elsewhere he had been) without State, without Honor, without Order, as before
was said. And this being said, we shall proceed unto the rest of our Story,
casting into the following Book, all the Successes of the Puritans, or
Presbyterians, in his own Dominions, during the whole time of his Peaceful
Government; and so much also of their Fortunes in France and Belgium, as shall
be necessary to the knowledge of their future Actings.

AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History OF THE PRESBYTERIANS LIB. XI. Containing
Their Successes whether good or bad, in England, Scotland, Ireland, and the
Isle of Jersey, from the Year 1602, to the Year 1623; with somewhat touching
their Affairs, as well in France and Sweden, as the Belgic Provinces.
1. THE Puritans and Presbyterians in both Kingdoms, were brought so low, when
King JAMES first obtained the Crown of England, that they might have been
suppressed for ever, without any great danger, if either that King had held the
Rains with a constant hand, or been more fortunate in the choice of his
Ministers, after the old Counselors were worn out, than in fine he proved. But
having been kept to such hard meats when he lived in Scotland, he was so taken
with the Delicacies of the English Court, that he abandoned the Severities and
Cares of Government, to enjoy the Pleasures of a Crown. Which being perceived
by such as were most near unto him, it was not long before the Secret was
discovered to the rest of the people; who thereupon resolved to husband all
occasions which the times should give them, to their best advantage. But none
conceived more hopes of him, than some Puritan Zealots; who either presuming on
his Education in the Kirk of Scotland, or venturing on the easiness of his
Disposition, began to intermit the use of the Common Prayer, to lay aside the
Surplice, and neglect the Ceremonies; and more than so, to hold some Classical
and Synodical Meetings, as if the Laws themselves had dyed, when the Queen
expired. But these Disorders he repressed by his Proclamation, wherein he
commanded all his Subjects, of what sort soever, not to innovate any thing
either in Doctrine or Discipline, till he upon mature deliberation should take
order in it.

2. But some more wary than the rest, refused to join themselves to such
forward Brethren, whose Actions were interpreted to savor stronger of
Sedition, than they did of Zeal. And by these men it was thought better to
address themselves by a Petition to His Sacred Majesty, which was to be
presented to him in the name of certain Ministers of the Church of England,
desiring Reformation of sundry Ceremonies and Abuses: Given out to be
subscribed by a thousand hands, and therefore called the Millenary Petition;
though there wanted some hundreds of that number to make up the sum. In which
Petition deprecating first the imputation of Schism and Faction, they rank
their whole Complaints under these four heads; that is to say, The Service of
the Church, Church-Ministers, the Livings and Maintenance of the Church, and
the Discipline of it. In reference to the first, the Public Service of the
Church, it was desired, That the Cross in Baptism, Interrogatories ministered to
Infants, and Confirmations, (as superfluous) might be taken away. That Baptism
might not be administered by Women. That the Cap and Surplice might not be
urged. That Examination might go before the Communion; and, that it be not
administered without a Sermon. That the terms of Priest, and Absolution, with
the Ring in Marriage, and some others, might be corrected. That the length of
Service might be abridged. Church-Songs and Music, moderated. And, that the
Lord's Day be not profaned, nor Holy Days so strictly urged. That there might
be an Uniformity of Doctrine prescribed. That no Popish Opinion be any more
taught or defended. That Ministers might not be charged to teach their people
to bow at the Name of Jesus. And, that the Canonical Scriptures be only read in
the Church.

3. In reference to Church-Ministers, it was propounded, That none hereafter be
admitted into the Ministry, but Able and Sufficient men; and those to preach
diligently, especially upon the Lord's Day: but such as be already entered, and
cannot preach, may either be removed, and some charitable course taken with
them for their Relief; or else to be forced, according to the value of their
Livings, to maintain Preachers. That Non-residency be not permitted. That K.
Edward's Statute for the lawfulness of Ministers marriage, might be revived.
That Ministers might not be urged to subscribe (but according to the Law) the
Articles of Religion, and the King's Supremacy. It was desired also, in
relation to the Church's Maintenance, That Bishops might leave their
Commendams, some holding Prebends, some Parsonages, some Vicaridges, with their
Bishoprics. That double-beneficed men might not be suffered to hold some two,
some three Benefices, and as many Dignities. That Impropriations annexed to
Bishoprics and Colleges, be demised only to the Preachers Incumbents for the
old Rent. That the Impropriations of Lay-men's Fee, may be charged with a sixth
or seventh part of the worth, to the maintenance of a Preaching-Minister. And
finally, in reference to the execution of the Church's Discipline, it was
humbly craved, That the Discipline and Excommunication, might be administered
according to Christ's own Institution; or at the least, that Enormities might
be redressed: as namely, That Excommunication might not come forth under the
name of Lay-persons, Chancellors, Officials, etc. That men be not
excommunicated for Trifles, and Twelve-penny matters. That none be
excommunicated without consent of his Pastors. That the Officers be not
suffered to extort unreasonable Fees. That none having Jurisdiction, or a
Register's Place, put the same to Farm. That diverse Popish Canons as for
restraint of Marriage at certain times, be reversed. That the length of Suits
in Ecclesiastical Courts, (which hung sometimes two, three, four, five, six,
seven years) may be restrained. That the Oath Ex Officio, whereby men are
forced to accuse themselves, be more sparingly used. That Licenses for
Marriages, without being Asked, may be more sparingly granted.

4. And here it is to be observed, that though there was not one word in this
Petition either against Episcopal Government, or Set-forms of Prayer, yet the
design thereof was against them both. For if so many of the Branches had been
lopped at once, the Body of the Tree must needs have rotted and consumed in a
short time after. The two Universities, on the contrary, were no less zealous
for keeping up the Discipline and Liturgy of the Church, then by Law
established. And to that end it was proposed, and passed at Cambridg, on the
ninth of June, That whosoever should oppose by word or writing, either the
Doctrine or the Discipline of the Church of England, or any part thereof
whatsoever, within the Verge and Limits of the same University (otherwise than
in the way of Disputation) he should be actually suspended from all Degrees
already taken, and utterly disabled for taking any in the time to come. They
resolved also to return an Answer to the said Petition; but understanding that
the University of Oxon was in hand therewith, and had made a good progress in
the same, they laid by that purpose, congratulating with their
Sister-University for her forwardness in it, as appears plainly by their Letter
of the 7 th of October. All this was known unto the King, but he resolved to
answer them in another way; and to that end designed a Conference between the
Parties: A Conference much desired by those of the Puritan Faction in Queen
Elizabeth's time, who could not be induced to grant it; knowing full well, how
much it tended to the ruin of all public Government, that matters once
established in due form of Law, should be made subject to Disputes. But K.
JAMES, either out of a desire of his own satisfaction, or to show his great
Abilities in Judgment, Oratory, and Discourse, resolved upon it, and
accordingly gave Order for it. To which end, certain Delegates of each Party
were appointed to attend upon Him at His Royal Palace of Hampton Court, on the
14 th of January then next following, there to debate the Heads of the said
Petition, and to abide his Majesty's Pleasure and Determination. At what time
there attended on behalf of the Church, the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Lord Bishop of London, the Bishops of Durham, Winchester, Worcester, St.
David's, Chichester, Carlisle, and Peterborough. The Dean of the Chapel,
Westminster, Christ-Church, Paul's, Worcester, Salisbury, Chester, and Windsor:
together with Dr. King, Archdeacon of Nottingham, and Dr. Field, who
afterward was Dean of Gloucester. Apparelled all of them in their Robes and
Habits, peculiar to their several Orders.

5. There appeared also in the behalf of the Millenaries, Dr. John Reynolds,
and Dr. Thomas Spark, of Oxford; Mr. Chatterton, and Mr. Knewstubs, of
Cambridg: Apparelld neither in Priest's Gowns, or Canonical Coats; but in such
Gowns as were then commonly worn (in reference to the form and fashion of them)
by the Turkey Merchants; as if they had subscribed to the Opinion of old T. C.
That we ought rather to conform in all outward Ceremonies to the Turks, than
the Papists. Great hopes they gave themselves for settling the Calvinian
Doctrines in the Church of England, and altering so much in the Polity and
Forms of Worship, as might bring it nearer by some steps to the Church of
Geneva. In reference to the first, it was much pressed by Dr. Reynolds, in the
name of the rest, That the Nine Articles of Lambeth (which he entitled by the
name of Orthodoxal Assertions) might be received amongst the Articles of the
Church. But this Request, (upon a true account of the state of that business)
was by that prudent King rejected, with as great a constancy as formerly the
Articles themselves had been suppressed under Queen ELIZABETH. It was moved
also, That these words, [ neither totally nor finally] might be inserted in the
Sixteenth Article of the public Confession, to the intent that the Article so
explained, might speak in favor of the Zuinglian or Calvinian Doctrine,
concerning the impossibility of falling from the state of Grace, and
Justification. Which Proposition gave a just occasion to Bishop Bancroft to
speak his sense of the Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination, which he called in
plain terms, a desperate Doctrine. Upon whose interposings in that particular,
and a short Declaration made by the Dean of St. Paul's, touching some Heats
which had been raised in Cambridg, in pursuit thereof, this second Motion
proved as fruitless as the first had done.

6. Nor sped they better in relation to the Forms of Worship, than they had
done in reference unto points of Doctrine: some pains they took in crying down
the Surplice and the Cross in Baptism, the Ring in Marriage, and the
Interrogatories proposed to Infants. And somewhat also was observed touching
some Errors in the old Translation of the English Psalter, as also in the
Gospels and Epistles, as they stood in the Liturgy: But their Objections were
so stale, and so often answered, that the Bishops and Conformable Party went
away with an easy Victory; not only the King's Majesty, but the Lords of his
Council, being abundantly well satisfied in such former scruples as had been
raised against the Church and the Orders of it. The sum and substance of which
Conference, collected by the hand of Dr. Barlow, then Dean of Chester, can
hardly be abbreviated to a lesser compass, without great injury to the King and
the Conferrees. Let it suffice, that this great Mountain which had raised so
much expectation, was delivered only of a Mouse: The Millenary Plaintifs have
gained nothing by their fruitless travel, but the expounding of the word
Absolution, by Remission of sins; the qualifying of the Rubric about private
Baptism; the adding of some Thanksgivings at the end of the Letany, and of some
Questions and Answers in the close of the Catechism. But on the other side, the
Brethren lost so much in their Reputation, that the King was very well
satisfied in the weakness of their Objections, and the Injustice of their
Cavils; insomuch, that turning his head toward some of the Lords, If this be
all (quoth he) which they have to say, I will either make them conform
themselves, or hurry them out of the Land, or do somewhat which is worse, p.
85. Which notwithstanding they gave out, That all was theirs; and that they had
obtained an absolute Victory: but more particularly, that the King gratified
Dr. Reynolds in every thing which he proposed; and that Dr. Reynolds obtained
and prevailed in every thing they did desire. That if any man report the
contrary, he does lie; and, that they could give him the lie from Dr. Reynolds
his mouth: that these things now obtained by the Reformers, were but the
beginning of Reformation; the greater matters being yet to come. That my Lord
of Winton stood mute, and said little or nothing. That my Lord of London called
Dr. Reynolds, Schismatic; (he thanks him for it) but otherwise said little to
the purpose. That the King's Majesty used the Bishops with very hard words; but
embraced Dr. Reynolds, and used most kind speeches to him. That my Lord of
Canterbury, and my Lord of London, falling on their knees, besought his Majesty
to take their Cause into his own Hands, and to make some good end of it, such
as might stand with their Credit.

7. All this, and more, they scattered up and down in their scurrilous Papers,
to keep up the spirits of their Party; two of which, coming to the hands of Dr.
Barlow, beforementioned, he caused them to be published at the end of the
Conference: The Truth and Honesty of whose Collections, having been universally
approved above fifty years, has been impugned of late by some sorry Scriblers
of the Puritan Faction; and a report raised of some Retractation which he is
fabled to have made at the time of his death, of the great wrong which he had
done to Dr. Reynolds, and the rest of the Millenaries. The silliness of which
Fiction has been elsewhere canvased, and therefore not to be repeated in this
time and place. But for the clearing of that Reverend person from so soul a
Calumny, we shall not make use of any other Argument, than the words of K.
JAMES, who tells us in his Proclamation of the fifth of March, that he could
not conceal, That the success of that Conferrence was such as happens to many
other things, which moving great expectations before they be entered into, in
their issue produce small effects: That he found mighty and vehement
Informations supported with so weak and slender Proofs, as it appeared unto him
and his Council, that there was no cause why any change should be in that which
was most impugned, namely, the Book of Common Prayer, containing the public
Service of God here established; nor in the Doctrine, which appeared to be
sincere; nor in the Forms and Rites, which were justified out of the practice
of the primitive Churrh: And finally, that though with the consent of the
Bishops and other Learned men then and there assembled, some passages therein
were rather explained than altered; yet, that the same might very well have
been born amongst such men who would have made a reasonable construction of
them. Which I conceive to be sufficient for the vindication of that Learned
Prelate, for clearing him from doing any injury to Dr. Reynolds, in the
repeating of his words, as is suggested by some Puritan Scriblers of these
present times.

8. But to proceed, this Conference was followed with the Proclamation of the
fifth of March; in which his Majesty having first declared the occasion and
success thereof, in the words formerly laid down, proceeds to signify the
present course which he had taken for causing the Book of Common Prayer to be
so explained; and being so explained, to be forthwith Printed; not doubting but
that all his Subjects, both Ministers and others, would receive the same with
due reverence, and conform themselves to it. Which notwithstanding he conceived
it necessary to make known his Authorizing of the same by his Proclamation, and
by that Proclamation to require and enjoin all men, as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal, to conform themselves thereunto, as to the only public Form of
serving God, established and allowed in this Realm. Which said, he lays a
strict Command on all Archbishops, and Bishops, and all other public
Ministers, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, for causing the same to be
observed, and punishing all Offenders to the contrary, according to the Laws of
the Realm made in that behalf. Finally, He admonishes all his Subjects of what
sort soever, not to expect hereafter any Alteration in the public Form of
God's Service, from that which he had then established. And this he signified
(as afterward it follows in the said Proclamation) because that he neither
would give way to any to presume, that his Judgment having determined in a
matter of such weight, should be swayed to any Alteration by the Frivolous
Suggestions of any leight head; nor could be ignorant of the inconveniences
that do arise in Government, by admitting Innovation in things once settled by
mature deliberation; and how necessary it was to use constancy in the public
Determinations of all States: for that (says he) such is the unquietness and
unsteadfastness of some dispositions, affecting every year new Forms of things,
as if they should be followed in their unconstancy, would make all Actions of
State ridiculous and contemptible; whereas the steadfast maintaining of things
by good Advice established, is the Preservative and Weal of all public
Governments.

9. The main Concernments of the Church being thus secured, his Majesty
proceeds to his first Parliament; accompanied, as the custom is, with a
Convocation; which took beginning on the twentieth day of March then next
ensuing. In the Parliament there passed some Acts which concerned the Church;
as namely, one for making void all Grants and Leases which should be made of
any of the Lands of Archbishops and Bishops, to the King's Majesty, or any of
his Heirs and Successors, for more than One and twenty years, or Three Lives.
Which Act was seasonably procured by Bishop Bancroft, to prevent the begging of
the Scots, who otherwise would have picked the Church to the very bone. There
also past an Act for the repealing of a Statute in the Reign of Queen Mary, by
means whereof the Statute of King Edward the sixth, touching the Lawfulness of
Ministers Marriages, were revived again, as in the Millenary Petition was
before desired. And either by the Practice of some Puritan Zealots, who had
their Agents in all corners, or by the carelessness and connivence of his
Majesty's Council, learned in the Laws of this Realm, who should have had an
eye upon them, that Statute of K. EDWARD was revived also, by which it was
enacted, That all Processes, Citations, Judgments, etc. in any of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, should be issued in the King's Name, and under the
King's Seal of Arms; which afterward gave some color to the Puritan Faction,
for creating trouble to the Bishops in their Jurisdiction. The Convocation was
more active; some days before the sitting whereof, the most Reverend
Archbishop Whitgift departs this life, and leaves it to the managing of Dr.
Richard Bancroft, Bishop of London, as the President of it. By whose great
industry, and indefatigable pains, a Body of Canons was collected, to the
number of One hundred forty one, out of the Articles, Injunctions, and
Synodical Acts, during the Reigns of Queen ELIZABETH, and K. EDWARD the sixth.
Which being methodically digested, approved of in the Convocation, and ratified
by his Majesty's Letters Patents in due form of Law, were stoutly put in
execution by the said Dr. Bancroft, translated to the Sea of Canterbury in the
Month of December, Anno 1604.

10. And to say truth, it did concern him to be resolute in that prosecution,
considering how strict a Bond was made by many of the Brethren, when they
agreed unto the drawing of the former Petition; by which they bound themselves
not only to seek redress of those Particulars which are comprehended in the
same; but that the state of the Church might be reformed in all things needful,
according to the Rule of God's holy Word, and agreeable to the example of other
Reformed Churches, which had restored both their Doctrine and Discipline, as it
was delivered by our Savior Christ and his holy Apostles. And how far that
might reach, none knew better than he; who in his Note of Dangerous Positions
and Proceedings, and his Survey of the pretended Holy Discipline, had founded
the depth of their Designs, and found that nothing could ensue upon their
Positions, but a most unavoidable ruin to the Church and State. He had observed
with what a peevish malice they had libelled against Archbishop Whitgift, (a
Prelate of a meek and moderate spirit) after his decease; and could not but
expect a worse dealing from them; which he after found, by how much he had
handled them more coarsly than his Predecessor. For, though the Lords had
showed their Zeal unto the memory of that famous Prelate, by the severe
punishment of Pickering who made the Libel; yet well he knew, that the terror
of that Punishment would be quickly over, if a hard hand were not also kept
upon all the rest: And for keeping a hard hand upon all the rest, he was
encouraged by the words of K. JAMES at the end of the Conference, when he
affirmed, That he would either make the Puritans conform themselves, or else
would hurry them out of the Land, or do that which was worse. Upon which
grounds he sets himself upon the Work, requires a strict Conformity to the
Rules of the Church, according to the Laws and Canons in that behalf; and
without sparing Non-conformists, or Half-Conformists, at last reduced them to
that point, That they must either leave their Churches, or obey the Church. The
Altar of Damascus tells us, if we may believe him, That no fewer than Three
hundred Preaching-Ministers, were either silenced or deprived upon that
account. But the Authors of that Book, whosoever they were, who use sometimes
to strain at Gnats, and swallow a Camel; at other times can make a Mountain of
a Molehill, if it stand in their way: For it appears upon the Rolls brought in
by Bishop Bancroft before his death, that there had been but Forty nine
deprived upon all occasions; which in a Realm containing Nine thousand
Parishes, could be no great matter. But so it was, that by the punishment of
some few of the Principals, he struck such a general terror into all the rest,
that Inconformity grew out of fashion in a less time than could be easily
imagined.

11. Hereupon followed a great alteration in the Face of Religion; more
Churches beautified and repaired in this short time of his Government, than had
been in many years before: The Liturgy more solemnly officiated by the Priests,
and more religiously attended by the common people; the Fasts and Festivals
more punctually observed by both, than of later times. Coaps brought again
in^to the Service of the Church, the Surplice generally worn without doubt or
haesitancy; and all things in a manner are reduced to the same estate in which
they had been first settled under Queen ELIZABETH: which, though it much
redounded to the Honor of the Church of England; yet gave it no small trouble
to some sticklers for the Puritan Faction, expressed in many scandalous Libels,
and seditious railings; in which this Reverend Prelate suffered both alive and
dead. Some who had formerly subscribed, but not without some secret evasion, or
mental reservation which they kept to themselves, are now required to testify
their Conformity by a new subscription, in which it was to be declared, that
they did willingly and ex animo subscribe to the three Articles, (formerly
tendered to the Clergy under Archbishop Whitgift, but now incorporated into the
thirty six Canons) and to all things in the same contained. Which leaving them
no starting-hole either for practicing those Rites and Ceremonies which they
did not approve, or for approving that which they meant not to practice, as
they had done formerly; occasioned many of them to forsake their Benefices,
rather than to subscribe according to the true intention of the Church in the
said three Articles: Amongst which, none more eminent than Dr. John Burges,
beneficed at that time in Lincoln Diocese, who for some passages in a Sermon
preached before the King, on the 19 th of June, 1604, was committed Prisoner:
and being then required by the Bishop of London to subscribe those Articles, he
absolutely made refusal of it; and presently thereupon resigned his Benefice;
the reasons whereof, he gives in a long Letter to Dr. William Chatterton, then
Bishop of Lincoln. He applied himself also, both by Letter and Petition, to his
Sacred Majesty, clearing himself from all intention of preaching any thing in
that Sermon which might give any just offense; and humbly praying for a
restitution, not to his Church, but only to his Majesty's Favor. Which gained
so far upon the King, that he admitted him not long after to a personal
Conference, recovered him unto his station in the Church, from which he was
fallen: and finally, occasioned his preferring to the Rectory of Colshill, in
the County of Warwick. After which, he became a professed Champion of the
Government and Liturgy of the Church of England; both which he justified
against all the Cavils of the Non-conformists, as appears by a Learned Book of
his, entitled, An Answer rejoyned to the applauded Pamphlet, etc. published in
the year 1631.

12. But the gaining of this man did not still the rest: For presently on the
neck of this, 1605
comes out a Factious Pamphlet, published by the Lincoln-shire-Ministers, which
they call The Abridgment; containing the sum and substance of all those
Objections which either then were, or formerly had been made against the
Church, in reference to Doctrine, Government, or Forms of Worship: Concerning
which, it is observed by the said Dr. Burges, That he found the state of the
Questions to be very much altered in the same; that Cartwright, and the rest,
in the times foregoing, though they had sharpened both their Wits and Pens
against the Ceremonies, opposed them as inconvenient only, but not unlawful:
That therefore they endeavored to persuade the Ministers rather to conform
themselves, than to leave their Flocks; the people, rather to receive the
Communion kneeling, than not to receive the same at all: but, that the Authors
of that Book, and some other Pamphlets, pronounced them to be simply unlawful,
neither to be imposed nor used; some of them thinking it a great part of
godliness to cast off the Surplice, and commanded their Children so to do. This
made the Bishops far more earnest to reduce them to a present Conformity, than
otherwise they might have been, though by so doing they increased those
discontentments, the seeds whereof were sown at the end of the Conference. All
this the Papists well observed, and rejoiced at it, intending in the carrying
on of the Gunpowder Treason, to lay the guilt thereof on the Puritans only.
But the King and his Council mined with them, and undermined them, and by so
doing blew them up in their own Invention; the Traitors being discovered,
condemned, and executed, as they most justly had deserved. But this Design
which was intended for a ruin of the Puritan Faction, proved in conclusion very
advantageous to their Ends and Purposes: For, the King being thoroughly
terrified with the apprehension of so great a danger, turned all his thoughts
upon the Papists, and was content to let the Puritans take breath, and regain
some strength, that they might serve him for a counterpoise against the other:
as afterward he gave some countenance to the Popish Party, when he perceived
the opposite Faction to be grown too headstrong. Nor were the Puritans wanting
to themselves upon this occasion, but entertained the Court and Country with
continual fears of some new dangers from the Papists; and by appearance of much
zeal for the true Religion, and no less care for the preserving of their common
Liberty against the encroachments of the Court, came by degrees to make a Party
in the House of Commons. And hereunto K. JAMES unwittingly contributed his
assistance also; who being intent upon uniting the two Kingdoms by Act of
Parliament, suffered the Commons to expatiate in Rhetorical Speeches, to call
in question the extent of his Royal Prerogative, to embrue many
Church-concernments, and to dispute the Power of the High Commission: By means
whereof they came at last to such an height, that the King was able in the end
to do nothing in Parliament, but as he courted and applied himself to this
popular Faction.

13. Worse fared it with the Brethren of the Separation, who had retired
themselves unto Amsterdam in the former Reign, than with their first Founders
and Forefathers in the Church of England: For having broken in sunder the bond
of peace, they found no possibility of preserving the spirit of unity; one
Separation growing continually on the neck of another, till they were crumbled
into nothing. The Brethren of the first Separation had found fault with the
Church of England for reading Prayers and Homilies as they lay in the Book, and
not admitting the Presbytery to take place amongst them. But the Brethren of
the second Separation take as much distaste against retaining all set-forms of
Hymns and Psalms, committing their Conceptions, both in Praying and
Prophesying, to the help of Memory; and did as much abominate Presbytery, as
the other liked it: For first, They pre-suppose for granted, as they safely
might, that there be three kinds of Spiritual Worship, Praying, Prophesying,
and Singing of Psalms; and then subjoyn this Maxim, in which all agreed, that
is to say, That there is the same reason of Helps in all the parts of Spiritual
Worship, as is to be admitted in any one, during the performing of that
Worship. Upon which ground they charge it home on their fellow-Separatists,
That, as in Prayer, the Book is to be laid aside, by the confession of the
ancient Brethren of the Separation, so must it also be in Prophesying, and
Singing of Psalms: and therefore, whether we pray, or sing, or prophecy, it is
not to be from the Book, but out of the heart. For Prophesying, next, they tell
us, that the Spirit is quenched two manner of ways, by Memory, as well as
Reading. And to make known how little use there is of Memory in the Act of
Prophesying or Preaching, they tell us, That the citing of Chapter and Verse
(as not being used by Christ and his Apostles in their Sermons or Writings), is
a mark of Antichrist. And as for Psalms, which make the Third part of Spiritual
Worship, they propose these Queries: 1. Whether in a Psalm a man must be tied
to Meeter, Rythme, and Tune? and, Whether Voluntary be not as necessary in Tune
and Words, as well as Matter? And, 2. Whether Meeter, Rythme, and Tune, be not
quenching the Spirit?

14. According to which Resolution of the New Separation, every man, when the
Congregation shall be met together, may first conceive his own Matter in the
Act of Praising; deliver it in Prose or Meeter, as he lists himself; and in the
same instant chant out in what Tune soever, that which comes first into his own
head: Which would be such a horrible confusion of Tongues and Voices, that
hardly any howling or gnashing of teeth, can be like unto it. And yet it
follows so directly on the former Principles, that if we banish all set-forms
of Common Prayer, (which is but only one part of God's Public Worship) from
the use of the Church, we cannot but in Justice and in Reason both, banish all
studied and premeditated Sermons, from the House of God, and utterly cast out
all King David's Psalms, (whether in Prose or Meeter, that comes all to one)
and all Divine Hymns also into the bargain. Finally, as to Forms of Government,
they declared thus, (or to this purpose, at the least, if my memory fail not)
That as they which live under the Tyranny of the Pope and Cardinals, worship
the very Beast it self; and they which live under the Government of
Archbishops and Bishops, do worship the Image of the Beast; so they which
willingly obey the Reformed Presbytery of Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, worship
the shadow of that Image. To such ridiculous Follies are men commonly brought,
when once presuming on some New Light to direct their Actions, they suffer
themselves to be mis-guided by the Ignis fatuus of their own Inventions. And in
this posture stood the Brethren of the Separation, Anno 1606, when Smith first
published his Book of the present differences between the Churches of the
Separation, as he honestly calls them. But afterward there grew another great
dispute between Ainsworth and Broughton, Whether the color of Aaron's Linen
Ephod were of Blew, or a Seawater Green: Which did not only trouble all the
Dyers in Amsterdam, but drew their several Followers into Sides and Factions,
and made good sport to all the World, but themselves alone. By reason of which
Divisions and Sub-divisions, they fell at last into so many Fractions, that one
of them in the end became a Church of himself, and having none to join in
Opinion with him, baptized himself, and thereby got the name of a Se-baptist;
which never any Sectary or Heretic had obtained before.

15. It fell not out much otherwise in the Belgic Provinces, with those of the
Calvinian Judgment, who then began to find some diminution of that Power and
Credit wherewith they carried all before them in the times preceding. Iunius, a
very moderate and learned man, and one of the Professors for Divinity in the
Schools of Leyden, departed out of this life in the same year also; into whose
Place the Overseers, or Curators, as they call them, of that University, made
choice of Jacob Van Harmine, a man of equal Learning, and no less Piety. He had
for fifteen years before, been Pastor (as they love to phrase it) to the great
Church of Amsterdam, the chief City of Holland; during which time he published
his Discourse against the Doctrine of Predestination, as laid down by Perkins,
who at that time had printed his Armilla Aurea, and therein justified all the
Rigours of the Supra-lapsarians. Encouraged with his good success in this
Adventure, he undertakes a Conference on the same Argument, with the Learned
Iunius, one of the Sub-lapsarian Judgment; the sum whereof being spread abroad
in several Papers, was afterward set forth by the name of Amica Collatio. By
means whereof, as he attained a great esteem with all moderate men, so he
exceedingly exasperated most of the Calvinian Ministers, who thereupon opposed
his coming to Leyden with their utmost power, accusing him of Heterodoxies and
unsound Opinions, to the Council of Holland. But the Curators being constant in
their Resolutions, and Harmin having purged himself from all Crimes objected,
before his Judges at the Hague; he is dispatched for Leyden, admitted by the
University, and confirmed by the Estate: Toward which, the Testimonial-Letters
sent from Amsterdam, did not help a little; in which he stands commended for a
man of an (...) and mo^^^m sumam integritatem, Hunc. Orat.
unblamable life, sound Doctrine, and fair behavior; as by their Letters may
appear, exemplified in an Oration which was made at his Funeral.

16. By which Attractives he prevailed as much amongst the Students of Leyden,
as he had done amongst the Merchants at Amsterdam. For during the short time of
his sitting in the Chair of Leyden, he drew unto him a great part of that
University; who by the Piety of the man, his powerful Arguments, his extreme
diligence in that place, and the clear light of Reason which appeared in all
his Discourses, became so wedded at the last unto his Opinions, that no time or
trouble could divorce them from Harmin: Dying in the year 1609, the Heats
betwixt his Scholars, and those of a contrary Persuasion, were rather increased
than abated; the more increased for want of such prudent Moderators as had
before preserved the Churches from a public Rupture. The breach between them
growing wider and wider, each side thought fit to seek the countenance of the
State; and they did accordingly. For in the year 1610, the Followers of
Arminius address their Remonstrance (containing the Antiquity of their
Doctrines, and the substance of them) to the States of Holland, which was
encountered presently by a Contra-Remonstrance, exhibited by those of Calvin's
Party: from hence the Name of Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants, so
frequent in their Books and Writings. Which though it brought some trouble for
the present on the Churches of Holland, conduced much more to the advantage of
the Church of England, whose Doctrine in those points had been so overborn, if
not quite suppressed, by those of the Calvinian Party, that it was almost
reckoned for a Heresy to be sound and Orthodox, according to the tenor of the
Book of Articles, and other public Monuments of the Religion here by Law
established. For being awakened by the noise of the Belgic Troubles, most men
began to look about them, to search more narrowly into the Doctrines of the
Church, and by degrees to propagate, maintain, and teach them against all
Opposers, as shall appear more largely and particularly in another place.

17. At the same time more troubles were projected in the Realm of Sweden;
Prince Sigismund, the eldest Son of John, and the Grandchild of Gustavus
Ericus, the first King of that Family, was in his Father's lifetime chosen
King of Poland, in reference to his Mother, the Lady Catherine, Sister to
SIGISMVND the Second. But either being better pleased with the Court of Poland,
or not permitted by that people to go out of the Kingdom, he left the
Government of Sweden to his Uncle CHARLES; a Prince of no small Courage, but of
more Ambition. At first he governed all Affairs as Lord Deputy only, but
practiced by degrees the exercise of a greater Power than was belonging to a
Viceroy. Finding the Lutherans not so favorable unto his Designs, as he
conceived that he had merited by his Favors to them, he raised up a Calvinian
Party within the Realm, according to whose Principles he began first to
withdraw his obedience from his Natural Prince, and after to assume the
Government to himself. But first, he suffers all Affairs to fall into great
Disorders, the Realm to be invaded by the Muscovites on the one side, by the
Danes on the other, that so the people might be cast on some necessity of
putting themselves absolutely under his protection. In which distractions he is
earnestly solicited by all sorts of people, except only those of his own Party,
to accept the Crown; which he consents to at the last, as if forced unto it by
the necessities of his Country. But he so played his Game withal, that he
would neither take the same, nor protect the Subjects, till a Law was made for
entailing the Crown for ever unto his Posterity, whether Male or Female, as an
Hereditary Kingdom. In all which Plots and Purposes, he thrived so luckily, (if
to usurp another Prince's Realm may be called Good luck) that after a long
War, and some Bloody Victories, he forced his Nephew to desist from all
further Enterprises, and was Crowned King at Stockholm, in the year 1607, But
as he got this Kingdom by no better Title than of Force and Fraud; so by the
same, the Daughter of his Son Gustavus Adolphus, was divested of it, partly
compelled, and partly cheated out of her Estate. So soon expired the Race of
this great Politician, that many thousands of that people who saw the first
beginning of it, lived to see the end.

18. Such Fortune also had the French Calvinians in their glorious Projects,
though afterward it turned to their destruction. For in the year 1603, they
held a general Synod at Gappe in Daulphine, anciently the chief City of the
Apencenses, and at this time a Bishop's-See. Nothing more memorable in this
Synod (as to points of Doctrine) than, that it was determined for an Article of
their Faith, That the Pope was Antichrist. But far more memorable was it for
their Usurpations on the Civil Power. For at this Meeting they gave Audience to
the Ambassadors of some Foreign States, as if they had been a Commonwealth
distinct from the Realm of France. More than which, they audaciously importuned
the King (of whose affection to them they presumed too far) by their several
Agents, for liberty of going wheresoever they listed, or sending whomsoever
they pleased, to the Councils and Assemblies of all Neighbouring-Estates and
Nations which professed the same Religion with them. This, though it had not been
the first, was looked on as their greatest encroachment on the Royal Authority,
which in conclusion proved the ruin of their Cause and Party. For what else
could this aim at, (as was well observed by the King then reigning) but to make
themselves a State distinct and independent, to raise up a new Commonwealth in
the midst of a Kingdom, and to make the Schism as great in Civil, as in Sacred
matters: Which wrought so far upoa the Councils of his next Successor, who had
not been trained up amongst them as his Father was, that he resolved to call
them to a sober reckoning on the next occasion, and to deprive them all at once
of those Powers and Privileges which they so wantonly abused unto his
disturbance. Of which we shall speak more hereafter in its proper place.

1605.
In the mean time let us cross over into Scotland, where all Assairs moved
retrograde, and seemed to threaten a relapse to their old Confusions. A general
Assembly had been intimated to be held at Aberdeen, in the Month of July, Anno
1604: which by reason that the King was wholly taken up with effecting the
Union, was adjourned to the same Month, in the year next following. In the mean
season, some of the more Factious Ministers, hoping to raise no small advantage
to themselves and their Party, by the absence of so many persons of most Power
and Credit, began to entertain new Counsels for the unravelling of that Web
which the King had lately wrought with such care and cunning. The King hears of
it, and gives Order to suspend the Meeting till his further Pleasure were
declared. Wherein he was so far obeyed by the major part, that of the fifty
Presbyteries, into which the whole Kingdom was divided, Anno 1592, nine only
sent Commissioners to attend at Aberdeen. When the day came, the Meeting was so
thin and slender, that there appeared not above one and twenty, when they were
at the fullest. But they were such as were resolved to stand stoutly to it,
each man conceiving himself able, in the Cause of God, to make resistance to an
Army. The Lord of Lowreston commands them in the King's Name to return to
their Houses, to discontinue that unlawful Assembly, and not to meet on any
public occasion which concerned the Church, but by his Majesty's Appointment.
They answer, That they were assembled at that time and place, according to the
word of God, and the Laws of the Land; and, that they would not betray the
Liberties of the Kirk of Scotland, by obeying such unlawful Prohibitions. Which
said, and having desired him to withdraw a while, they made choice of one
Forbes for their Moderator, and so adjourned themselves to September following.
Lowreston thereupon denounced them Rebels; and fearing that some new affront
might be put upon him, and consequently on the King, in whose Name he acted, he
seeks for Remedy and Prevention, to the Lords of the Council: Forbes and Welsh,
the two chief sticklers in the Cause, are by them convented; and not abating
any thing of their former obstinacy, are both sent Prisoners unto Blackness: A
day is given for the appearance of the rest, which was the third day of
October; at what time thirteen of the number made acknowledgment of their
offense, and humbly supplicated, that their Lordships would endeavor to
procure their Pardon: the rest remaining in their disobedience, are by the
Lords disposed of into several Prisons.

19. But these proceedings did so little edify with that stubborn Faction,
that the Lords of the Council were condemned for their just severity, and all
their Actings made to aim at no other end, but by degrees to introduce the
Rights and Ceremonies of the Church of England. The King endeavors by a
Declaration to undeceive his good people, and reclaim these obstinate persons
from the ways of ruin; and intimates withal, that a new Assembly should be
held at Dundee in the July following. But this prevails as little as the former
course. Which puts the business on so far, that either the King must be
conformable to their present humor, or they submit themselves to the King's
just Power. The Lords resolve upon the last, command them to appear at the
Council Table, to receive their Sentence, and nominated the 24 th of October
for the Day of Doom. Accordingly they came, but they came prepared, having
subscribed a public Instrument under all their hands, by which they absolutely
decline the Judgment of the King and Council, as altogether incompetent, and
put themselves upon the trial of the next Assembly, as their lawful Judge.
Before they were convented only for their Disobedience; but by this Declinator,
they have made themselves Traitors. The King is certified of all this; and
being resolved upon the maintenance of his own Authority, gave order, That the
Law should pass upon them, according to the Statute made in Parliament, Anno
1584. Hereupon Forbes, Welsh, Duncam, Sharp, Davie, Straghan, are removed from
Blackness, arraigned at an Assize held in Linlithgoe, found guilty by the Jury,
and condemned to death; but all of them returned to their several Prisons, till
the King's Pleasure should be known for their Execution. The Melvins, and some
other of the principal Zealots, caused Prayers and Supplications to be made in
behalf of the Traitors though they had generally refused to perform that office
when the King's Mother was upon the point of losing her life, upon a more
unwarrantable Sentence of Condemnation. This brought forth first a
Proclamation, inhibiting all Ministers to recommend the condemned persons unto
God in their Prayers or Sermons; and afterward, a Letter to some Chiefs
amongst them* for waiting on His Majesty at the Court in England, where they
should be admitted to a public Conference, and have the King to be their Judge.

20. Upon this Summons there appear in behalf of the Church, the Archbishops
of St. Andrews and Glasgow, the Bishops of Orkney and Galloway; together with
Nicolson, the designed Bishop of Dunkeeden: And for the Kirk, the two Melvins,
Colt, Carmichall, Scot, Balfour, and Watson. The place appointed for the
Conference, was Hampton Court, at which they all attended on September. 20. But
the Kirk-Party came resolved neither to satisfy the King, nor be satisfied by
him, though he endeavored all fit ways for their information. To which end he
appointed four Eminent and Learned Prelates to preach before them in their
turns: the first of which, was Dr. Barlow, then Bishop of Rochester, who
learnedly asserted the Episcopal Power, out of those words to the Elders at
Ephesus, recorded Acts 20. v. 28. The second was Dr. Buckeridg, then Master of
St. John's College in Oxon, and afterward preferred to the Sea of Rochester;
who no less learnedly evinced the King's Supremacy in all Concernments of the
Church; selecting for his Text, the words of same Apostle, Romans 13. v. 1. Next
followed Dr. Andrews, then Bishop of Chichester; who taking for his Text those
words of Moses, viz. Make thee two Trumpets of silver, etc. Numb. 10. v. 2.
convincingly demonstrated out of all Antiquity, That the calling of all General
and National Councils, had appertained unto the Supreme Christian Magistrate.
Dr. King, then Dean of Christ-Church, brings up the Rear; and taking for his
Text those words of the Canticles, Cap. 8. v. 11. disproved the calling of
Lay Elders, as men that had no Power in governing the Church of Christ; nor
were so much as heard of in the Primitive times. But neither the Learned
Discourses of these Four Prelates, nor the Arguments of the Scottish Bishops,
nor the Authority and Elocution of the King, could gain at all on these deaf
Adders, who came resolved not to hear the voice of those Charmers, charmed they
never so wisely. Thus have we seen them in their Crimes, and now we are to look
upon them in their several Punishments. And first, the Ministers which had been
summoned into England, were there commanded to remain until further. The six
which were condemned for Treason, were sentenced by the King to perpetual
banishment, and never to return to their Native Country upon pain of death.
And as for those which had acknowledged their offense, and submitted to mercy,
they were confined unto the Isles, and out-parts of the Kingdom, where they may
possibly work some good, but could do no harm. After which, Andrew Melvin
having made a Seditious Libel against the Altar, and the Furniture thereof, in
His Majesty's Chapel, was brought into the Starr-Chamber by an Ore tenus,
where he behaved himself so malepertly toward all the Lords, and more
particularly toward the Archbishop of Canterbury, that he was sentenced to
imprisonment in the Tower of London, and there remained till he was begged by
the Duke of Bouillon, and by him made Professor of Divinity in the School of
Sedan.

21. During the time that all men's Eyes were fastened on the issue of this
great Dispute, the King thought fit to call a Parliament in Scotland, which he
managed by Sir George Hume, his right trusty Servant, not long before created
Earl of Dunbar, and made Lord Treasurer of that Kingdom. His chief Work was to
settle the Authority of the King, and the Calling of Bishops, that they might
mutually support each other in the Government of the Church and State^punc; It
was supposed, that no small opposition would be made against him by some
Puritan Ministers, who repaired in great numbers to the Town, as on their parts
it was resolved on. But he applied himself unto them with such Art and
Prudence, that having taken off their edg, the Acts passed easily enough with
the Lords and Commons. By the first Act, the King's Prerogative was confirmed
over all Persons* and in all Causes whatsoever: Which made Him much more
Absolute in all Affairs which had relation to the Church, than he had been
formerly. And by the next, entitled, An Act for Restitution of the Estate of
Bishops; the Name of Bishops was conferred upon such of the Ministers, as by
the King were nominated unto any of the Bishop-Sees, and thereby authorized to
have place in Parliament: A course was also taken by it, to repossess the
Bishops of the Lands of their several Churches, as well as their Titles and
Degree: not that a Plenary re-possession of their Lands was then given unto
them; but, that by a Repeal of the late Act of Annexation, the King was put
into a capacity of restoring so much of the Rents as remained in the Crown,
1606.
and otherwise providing for them out of his Revenues. And, that the like
distraction might not be made of their Estates for the time to come, an Act was
passed for restraining such Dilapidations as had impoverished all the
Bishoprics since the Reformation. After which, and the dooming of the greater
Zealots to their several Punishments, he indicts a general Assembly at
Linlithgow, in December following: at which convened One hundred thirty six
Ministers, and about Thirty three of the Nobility and principal Gentry. In this
Assembly it was offered in behalf of his Majesty, That all Presbyteries should
have their constant Moderators; for whose encouragement his Majesty would
assign to each of them a yearly stipend, amounting to One hundred pounds, or
Two hundred Marks in the Scots account: That the Bishops should be Moderators
of all Presbyteries in the Towns and Cities where they made their residence; as
also, in Provincial and Diocesan Synods: and that the Bishops should assume
upon themselves the charge of prosecuting Papists, till they returned to their
obedience to the King and the Church. In the obtaining of which Acts, there was
no small difficulty; but he obtained them at the last, though not without some
limitations and restrictions super-added to them, under pretense of keeping the
Commissioners (hereafter to be called Bishops) within their bounds.

22. The Presbyterians, notwithstanding, were not willing to forgo their Power;
but struggling, like half-dying men betwixt life and death, laid hold on all
advantages which were offered to them, in opposition to the Acts before agreed
on. Gladstanes, Archbishop of St. Andrews, taking upon him to preside as
Moderator in the Synod of Fife, being within his proper Diocese and
Jurisdiction, was for a while opposed by some of the Ministers, who would have
gone to an Election as at other times. The Presbyteries also in some places,
refused to admit the Bishops for their Moderators, according to the Acts and
Constitutions of the said Assembly. Which though it put the Church into some
disorder, yet the Bishops carried it at the last, the stoutest of the Ministers
su^mitting in the end unto that Authority which they were not able to contend
with. In which conjuncture the King gives order for a Parliament to be held in
June; 1609.
in which He passed some severe Laws against the Papists, prohibiting the
sending of their Children to be educated beyond the Seas, and giving order for
the choice of Pedagogues or Tutors to instruct them there; as also, against
Jesuits, and the Sayers and Hearers of Mass. The cognizance of several Causes
which anciently belonged to the Bishops Courts, had of late times been settled
in the Sessions or College of Justice: But by an Act of this Parliament, they
are severed from it, and the Episcopal Jurisdiction restored as formerly; the
Lords of the Session being, in lieu thereof, rewarded with Ten thousand pounds
yearly, (which must be understood according to the Scottish account) out of the
Customs of that Kingdom. It was enacted also, That the King from thenceforth
might appoint such Habit as to him seemed best, to Judges, Magistrates, and
Churchmen. Which Acts being past, Patterns were sent from London, in a short
time after, for the Apparel of the Lords of the Session, the Justice, and other
inferior Judges; for the Advocates, the Lawyers, the Commissairs, and all that
lived by practice of the Law; with a command given to every one whom the
Statutes concerned, to provide themselves of the Habits prescribed, within a
certain space, under the pain of Rebellion. But for the habit of the Bishops,
and other Churchmen, it was thought fit to respite the like appointment of
them, till the new Bishops had received their Consecration; to which now we
hasten.

23. But by the way, we must take notice of such preparations as were made
toward it in the next General Assembly held at Glasgow, Anno 1610, and managed
by the Earl of Dunbar, as the former was: in which it was concluded, That the
King should have the indiction of all General Assemblies. That the Bishops, or
their Deputies, should be perpetual Moderators of the Diocesan Synods. That no
Excommunication, or Absolution, should be pronounced without their approbation.
That all presentations of Benefices should be made by them; and, that the
deprivation or suspension of Ministers, should belong to them. That every
Minister, at his admission to a Benefice, should take the Oath of Supremacy,
and Canonical Obedience: That the Visitation of the Diocese shall be performed
by the Bishop or his Deputy only. And finally, That the Bishop should be
Moderator of all Conventions, for Exercisings, or Prophesyings, (call them
which you will) which should be held within their bounds. All which Conclusions
were confirmed by Act of Parliament, in the year 1612: in which the Earl of
Dumferling, then being Lord Chancellor of that Kingdom, sat as chief
Commissioner; who in the same Session, also, procured a Repeal of all such
former Acts (more patticularly, of that which passed in favor of the
Discipline, 1592.) as were supposed to be derogatory to the said Conclusions.
In the mean time, the King being advertised of all which had been done at
Glasgow, calls to the Court by special Letters under his Sign-Manual, Mr. John
Spotswood, the designed Archbishop of Glasgow: Mr. Gawen Hamilton, nominated
to the Sea of Galloway: and Mr. Andrew Lamb, appointed to the Church of
Brechin; to the intent that being consecrated Bishops in due Form and Order,
they might at their return give consecration to the rest of their Brethren.
They had before been authorized to vote in Parliament, commended by the King
unto their several Sees, made the perpetual Moderators of Presbyteries and
Diocesan Synods: and finally, by the Conclusions made at Glasgow, they were
restored to all considerable Acts of their Jurisdiction. The Character was only
wanting to complete the Work, which could not be imprinted but by Consecration
according to the Rules and Canons of the Primitive times.

24. And that this Character might be indelibly imprinted on them, His Majesty
issues a Commission under the Great Seal of England, to the Bishops of London,
Ely, Wells, and Rochester, whereby they were required to proceed to the
Consecration of the said three Bishops, according to the Rules of the English
Ordination; which was by them performed with all due solemnity, in the Chapel
of the Bishop of London's House, near the Church of St. Paul's, October. 21, 1610.
But first, a scruple had been moved by the Bishop of Ely, concerning the
capacity of the persons nominated, for receiving the Episcopal Consecration, in
regard that none of them had formally been ordained Priests: which scruple was
removed by Archbishop Bancroft, alleging, that there was no such necessity of
receiving the Order of Priesthood, but that Episcopal Consecrations might be
given without it; as might have been exemplified in the Cases of Ambrose and
Nectarius; of which the first was made Archbishop of Millain; and the other,
Patriarch of Constantinople, without receiving any intermediate Orders, whether
of Priest, Deacon, or any other (if there were any other) at that time in the
Church. And on the other side, the Prelates of Scotland also had their Doubts
and Scruples, fearing lest by receiving Consecration of the English Bishops,
they might be brought to an acknowledgment of that Superiority which had been
exercised and enjoyed by the Primates of England, before the first breaking out
of the Civil Wars betwixt York and Lancaster. Against which fear, the King
sufficiently provided, by excluding the two Archbishops of Canterbury and York
(who only could pretend to that Superiority) out of His Commission; which
Bancroft very cheerfully condescended to, though he had chiefly laid the plot,
and brought on the work; not caring who participated in the Honor of it, as
long as the Churches of both Kingdoms might receive the Benefit.

25. This great Work being thus past over, the King erects a Court of High
Commission in the Realm of Scotland, for ordering all matters which concerned
that Church, and could not safely be redressed in the Bishops Courts. He also
gave them some Directions for the better exercise of their Authority, by them
to be communicated to the Bishops, and some principal Churchmen, whom he
appointed to be called to Edenborough in the following February; where they
were generally well approved. But as all general Rules have some Exceptions; so
some Exceptions were found out against these Commissions, and the proceedings
thereupon. Not very pleasing to those great Persons who then sat at the Helm,
and looked upon it as a diminution to their own Authority, and could not brook
that any of the Clergy should be raised to so great a Power; much more
displeasing to the principal sticklers in the Cause of Presbytery, who now
beheld the downfall of their glorious Throne, which they had erected for
themselves in the Name of Christ. One thing perhaps might comfort them in the
midst of their sorrows, that is to say, the death of the most Reverend
Archbishop Bancroft, who left this life upon the second of November, not
living above thirteen days after the Scottish Bishops had received
Consecration. For which great blessing to the Church, he had scarce time to
render his just acknowledgments unto God and the King, when he is called on to
prepare for his Nunc Dimittis. And having seen so great a work accomplished for
the glory of God, the honor of his Majesty, and the good of both Kingdoms,
beseeches God to give him leave to depart in peace, that with his eyes he
might behold that great Salvation which was ordained to be a Light unto the
Gentiles, and to be the Glory of his people Israel.

26. Bancroft being dead, some Bishops of the Court held a Consultation
touching the fittest Person to succeed him in that eminent Dignity: The great
Abilities and most exemplary Piety of Dr. Lancelot Andrews, then Bishop of Ely,
pointed him out to be the man, as one sufficiently able to discharge a Trust of
such main importance; and rather looked on as a Preferment to that See, than
preferred unto it. Him they commended to King JAMES, who had him in a high
esteem for his Parts and Piety; and settled all things, as they thought, in so
good a posture, that some of them retired to their Countrey-houses, and others
slackned their attendance about the Court. Which opportunity being taken by the
Earl of Dunbar, he puts in for Abbot, who had attended him in some of his
Negotiations with the Kirk of Scotland. Upon the merits of which Service, he
was preferred first to the Sea of Litchfield, to which he received his
Episcopal Consecration on the third of December, 1609; and within the compass
of the year, was removed to London. But Dunbar was resolved to advance him
higher. And he put in so powerfully on his behalf, that at last he carried it
to the great detriment of the Church, as it after proved. For, as one very well
observes of him, he seemed to be better qualified with merit to attain the
Dignity, than with a spirit answerable to so great a Function. Which made him
slack and negligent in the course of his Government, and too indulgent to that
Party, which Bancroft had kept under with such just severity. But take his
Character in the words of the said Historian, and we shall find that he was a
man too facil and yielding in the exercise of that great Office: that by his
extraordinary remisness in not exacting strict conformity to the prescribed
Orders of the Church in point of Ceremony, he seemed to resolve those Legal
determinations to their first indifferency: and finally, That he brought in
such a habi^ of Nonconformity, that the future reduction of those tender
Conscienced-men to a long discontinued obedience, was at the last interpreted
for an Innovation.

27. But to go forwards where we left, Bancroft being dead, the English
Puritans began to put forth again, not pushing at the Liturgy and Episcopal
Government (as in former times); but in pursuance of the Sabbatarian and
Calvinian Rigors: Which having been advanced in the year 1595, as is there
declared, and afterward laid aside till a fitter season, were now thought fit
to be resumed as the most proper Mediums for inferring the desired Conclusion.
In both which, they received some countenance from K. JAMES himself; but more
from the connivence (if I may not call it, the encouragement) of the new
Archbishop. In reference to the first, the King had published a Proclamation
in the first year of his Reign, prohibiting some rude and disorderly Pastimes,
(as namely, Ball, Baitings, Bear-baitings, and common Interludes) from being
followed on the Sunday, because they drew away much people from God's public
Service. And he had caused the Morality of the Lord's-day-Sabbath, to be
conf^^^ed amongst the rest of the Irish Articles, Anno 1615, of which more
anon. Which Condescentions were so husbanded by the Puritan Faction, that by
the raising of the Sabbath, they depressed the Festivals; and with the
Festivals, all those ancient and Annual Fasts which had been kept upon the
Eves. And following close upon the Doctrines of Aerius, before remembered, they
introduced, by little and little, a general neglect of the Weekly Fasts, the
holy time of Lent, and the Embring-days; reducing all the Acts of Humiliation,
to solemn and occasional Fasts, as amongst the Scots; and yet this was not all
the mischief which ensued on their Sabbath-Doctrines. By which, and by the
temper of the present Government, they gave occasion to some Preachers, and not
a few public Ministers of Justice, in their several Countries, to interdict
all lawful sports upon that Day. By means whereof, the people were persuaded by
some Priests and Jesuits, especially in Lancashire, and some others of the
Northern Counties, that the Reformed Religion, was incompetible with that
Christian Liberty which God and Nature had indulged to the sons of men. And
having brought them to that point, it was no hard matter to persuade them to
fall off to Popery, as a Religion more agreeable to human Society, and such as
would permit them all such lawful pleasures as by the Stoicism of the other had
been interdicted. Which brought the King to a necessity of publishing his
Declaration about lawful sports, dated at Greenwich on the 24 th day of May,
Anno 1620. Which as it put some Water into the Wine of the Sabbatarians; so
showed he, within few years after, how little he affected the Calvinian Rigors.

28. In reference to which last, some of the Zealots in the Cause had took
encouragement from his Declaration against Vorstus, a Divine of the
Netherlands, in which he had bestowed some unhandsome Epethetes upon the
Followers of Van Harmine, in the Belgic Provinces. This seemed sufficient to
expose all those of the same Persuasions, unto scorn and hatred; and on the
other side, to animate all those who favored Calvinism, to act such things as
drew upon them at the last the King's high displeasure. Calvin had published a
blasphemous Fancy touching Christ's suffering of Hell Torments in the time of
his Passion, even to the horrors of Despair. Which being touched upon by
Corbet, one of the Students of Christ-Church, in a Passion-Sermon, 1613, he was
most sharply reprehended by the Repetitioner, for so great a sauciness. Dr.
John Houson, one of the Canons of that Church, who had most worthily discharged
the Office of Vice Chancellor twelve years before, declared himself somewhat to
the prejudice of the Annotations which were made on the Genevian Bibles; and
for so doing, is condemned to a Recantation much about that time; though the
said Annotations had been censured for their partiality and seditiousness, by
the Tongue of K. JAMES. And finally, Dr. William Laud, being then President of
St. John's College, had showed himself no Friend to Calvinism, in Doctrine or
Discipline; and must be therefore branded for a Papist, in a public Sermon
preached upon Easter Su^^ay, by Dr. Robert Abbot, then Vice Chancellor and
Doctor of the Chair in that University: Which passages so closely following
upon one another, ocsioned (as most conceived) the publishing of some
Directions by His Majesty, in the year next following: In which it was
enjoined, among other things, That young Students in Divinity should be
directed to study such Books as were most agreeable in Doctrine and Discipline
to the Church of England; and be excited to bestow their time in the Fathers
and Councils; Schoolmen, Histories, and Controversies; and not to insist too
long upon Compendiums and Abbreviators, making them the grounds of those Sacred
Studies. Which as it was the first great blow which was given to Calvinism, so
was it followed not long after, by the King's Instructions touching Preaching
and Preachers. In which it was precisely cautioned amongst other things, That
no Preacher, of what Title* soever, under the Degree of a Bishop, or Dean at
the least, should from thenceforth presume to preach in any popular Auditory,
the deep points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or of the
Universality, Efficacity, Resistibility, or Irresistibility, of God's Grace;
but should rather leave those Theams to be handled by Learned men; as being
fitter for Schools and Universities, than for simple Auditories. Which said
Instructions bearing date at Windsor, on the 10 th of August, 1622, opened the
way to the suppression of that heat and fierceness by which the Calvinists had
been acted in some years foregoing.

29. During which Heats and Agitations between the Parties, a Plot was set on
foot to subvert the Church, in the undoing of the Clergy; and there could be no
readier way to undo the Clergy, than to reduce them unto such a Beggarly
Competency (for by that name they love to call it) as they had brought them to
in all the rest of the Calvinian or Genevian Churches. This the design of many
hands, by whom all passages had been scored in Cotton's Library, which either
did relate to the point of Tithes, or the manner of payment. But the
Collections being brought together, and the Work completed, there appeared no
other Name before it, than that of Seldom, then of great Credit in the World
for his known Abilities in the retired Walks of Learning. The History of Tithes
writ by such an Author, could not but raise much expectation amongst some of
the Laity, who for a long time had gaped after the Church's Patrimony, and now
conceived and hoped to swallow it down without any chewing. The Author highly
magnified, the Book held unanswerable, and all the Clergy looked on but as
Pigmies to that great Goliath, who in his Preface had reproached them with
Ignorance and Laziness; upbraided them with having nothing to keep up their
Credit, but Beard, Title, and Habit; and that their studies reached no further
than the Breviary, the Postills, and the Polyanthea. Provoked wherewith, he was
so galled by Tillesly, so gagged by Mountague, and stung by Netles; that he
never came off in any of his Undertakings, with more loss of Credit. By which
he found, that some of the Ignorant and Lazy Clergy, were of as retired Studies
as himself; and could not only match, but over-match him too, in his own
Philology. But the chief Governors of the Church went a shorter way, and not
expecting till the Book was answered by particular men, resolved to seek for
reparation of the wrong, from the Author himself, upon an Information to be
brought against him in the High Commission. Fearing the issue of the business,
and understanding what displeasures were conceived against him by the King and
the Bishops, he made his personal appearance in the open Court at Lambeth, on
the 28 th day of January, 1618; where in a full Court he tendered his submission
and acknowledgment, all of his own handwriting, in these following words.

My Lords, I most humbly acknowledge my Error which I have committed, in
publishing The History of Tithes; and especially, in that I have at all, by
showing any Interpretations of Holy Scriptures, by meddling with Councils,
Fathers, or Canons, or by whatsoever occurrs in it, offered any occasion of
Argument against any Right of Maintenance ^ure Divino, of the Ministers of the
Gospel; beseeching your Lordships to receive this ingenuous and humble
acknowledgment, together with the unfeigned Protestation of my grief, for that
through it I have so incurred both His Majesty's and your Lordships Displeasure
conceived against me in behalf of the Church of England.

JOHN SELDOM.

This for the present was conceived to be the most likely Remedy for the
preventing of the Mischief; but left such smart Remembrances in the mind of the
Author, as put him on to act more vigorously for the Presbyterians, (of which
more hereafter) by whom he seemed to be engaged in the present Service.

30. But it is now high time for us to cross over St. George's Channel, and
take a short view of the poor and weak Estate of the Church of Ireland, where
these Designs were carried on with better Fortune. A Church which for the most
part had been modelled by the Reformation which was made in England. But lying
at a greater distance, and more out of sight, it was more easily made a prey to
all Invaders; the Papists prevailing on the one side, and the Puritans on the
other, getting so much ground, that the poor Protestants seemed to be crucified
in the midst between them. Some Order had been taken for establishing the
English Liturgy, together with the Bible in the English Tongue, in all the
Churches of that Kingdom: which not being understood by the natural Irish, left
them as much in Ignorance and Superstition, as in the darkest times of the
Papal Tyranny. And for the Churches of the Pale, which very well understood the
English Language, they suffered themselves to be seduced from the Rules of the
Church, and yielded to the prevalency of those zealous Ministers who carried on
the Calvinian Project with their utmost power. In order whereunto, it was held
necessary to expose the Patrimony of the Bishops and Cathedral Churches, to a
public Port-sale; that being as much weakened in their Power as they were in
Estate, they might be rendered inconsiderable in the eyes of the people.
Hence-forward such a general devastation of the Lands of the Church, that some
Episcopal-Sees were never since able to maintain a Bishop, but have been added
to some others; two or three, for failing, to make up somewhat like a
Competency for an Irish Prelate. The Bishopric of Ardagh was thereupon united
unto that of Kill more; but the Cathedral of the one, together with the
Bishop's House adjoining to it, had been levelled with the very ground: the
other in some better repair; but neither furnished with Bell, Font, or Chalice.
The like union had been also made between the Bishoprics of Clonfert and
Killmare, Ossery and Kilkenny, Down and Connour, Waterford and Lismore, Cork
and Rosse, etc. and was projected by the late Lord Primate, between the Sea of
Kilfanore, and that of Killallow: not to descend any more particulars of the
like Conjunctions.

31. Such also were the Fortunes of the Rural Clergy, whose Churches in some
places lay unrooted, in others unrepaired, and much out of order. The Tithes
annexed, for the most part, to Religions Houses, fell (by the ruin of those
Houses) to the Power of the Crown, and by the Kings and Queens of England, were
aliened from the Church, and by them became Lay-Fees. The Vicaridges generally
so ill provided, that in the whole Province of Connaught, most of the Vicars
Pensions came but to forty shillings per annum, and in some places but sixteen
only. And of such Vicaridges as appeared to be better endowed, three, four, or
five, were many times engrossed into one man's hands, who neither understood
the Language, nor performed the Service. In which respect it was no marvel if
the people took up that Religion which came next to hand, such as did either
serve most fitly to continue them in their former Errors, or to secure them in
the quiet enjoyment of those Estates which they had ravished from the Church,
and still possessed by the Title of the first Usurpers. In which estate we find
the Church of Ireland, at the death of the Queen, not much improved, in case it
were not made more miserable. In the time of K. JAMES, some Propositions had
been offered by Him in the Conference at Hampton Court, about sending Preachers
into Ireland, of which he was but half King, as himself complained, their
Bodies being subject unto his Authority, but their Souls and Consciences to the
Pope. But I find nothing done in pursuance of it, till after the year 1607,
where the Earl of Ter-ownen, Ter-connel, Sir John Odaghartie, and other great
Lords of the North, together with their Wives and Families, took their flight
from Ireland, and left their whole Estates to the King's disposing. Hereupon
followed the Plantation of Vlster, first undertaken by the City of London, who
fortified Colraine, and built London-Derrie, and purchased many thousand Acres
of Lands in the parts adjoining. But it was carried on more vigorously, as more
unfortunately withal, by some Adventurers of the Scottish Nation, who poured
themselves into this Country as the richer Soil: And though they were
sufficiently industrious in improving their own Fortunes there, and set up
Preaching in all Churches whersoever they fixed; yet, whether it happened for
the better, or for the worse, the event has showed: For they brought with them
hither such a stock of Puritanism, such a contempt of Bishops, such a neglect
of the public Liturgy, and other Divine Offices of this Church, that there was
nothing less to be found amongst them, than the Government and Forms of Worship
established in the Church of England.

32. Nor did the Doctrine speed much better, if it sped not worse: For
Calvinism by degrees had taken such deep root amongst them, that at the last it
was received and countenanced as the only Doctrine which was to be defended in
the Church of Ireland. For, not contented with the Articles of the Church of
England, they were resolved to frame a Confession of their own; the drawing up
whereof was referred to Dr. James Usher, then Provost of the College of Dublin,
and afterward Arce-bishop of Armagh, and Lord Primate of Ireland. By whom the
Book was so contrived, that all the Sabbatarian and Calvinian Rigors were
declared therein to be the Doctrines of that Church. For first, the Articles of
Lambeth, rejected at the Conference at Hampton Court, must be inserted into
this Confession, as the chief parts of it. And secondly, An Article must be
made of purpose to justify the Morality of the Lord's-day-Sabbath, and to
require the spending of it wholly in Religious Exercises. Besides which
deviations from the Doctrine of the Church of England, most grievous Torments
immediately in His Soul, are there affirmed to be endured by Christ our
Savior, which Calvin makes to be the same with his descent into Hell. The
Abstinencies from eating Flesh upon certain days, declared not to be Religious
Fasts, but to be grounded upon Politic Ends and Considerations: All Ministers
adjudged to be lawfully called, who are called unto the work of the Ministry by
those that have public Authority given them in the Church (but whether they be
Bishops, or not, it makes no matter, so they be authorized unto it by their
several Churches). The Sacerdotal Power of Absolution, made declarative only;
and consequently, quite subverted. No Power ascribed to the Church in making
Canons, or Censuring any of those who either carelessly or maliciously do
infringe the same. The Pope made Antichrist, according to the like
determination of the French Hugonots at Gappe in Daulphine. And finally, Such a
silence concerning the Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops (expressly
justified and avowed in the English Book), as if they were not a distinct Order
from the common Presbyters. All which, being Usher's own private Opinions, were
dispersed in several places of the Articles for the Church of Ireland; approved
of in the Convocation of the year 1615: and finally, confirmed by the Lord
Deputy Chichester, in the Name of King JAMES.

33. What might induce King JAMES to confirm these Articles, differing in so
many points from his own Opinion, is not clearly known: but it is probable,
that he might be drawn to it on these following grounds: For first, He was much
governed at that time, in all Church-concernments, by Dr. George Abbot,
Archbishop of Canterbury; and Dr. James Mountague, Bishop of Bath and Wells:
who having formerly engaged in maintenance of some or most of those Opinions,
as before is said, might find it no hard matter to persuade the King to a like
approbation of them. And secondly, The King had so far declared himself in the
Cause against Vorstius, and so affectionately had espoused the Quarrel of the
Prince of Orange against those of the Remonstrant Party in the Belgic
Churches, that he could not handsomely refuse to confirm those Doctrines in the
Church of Ireland, which he had countenanced in Holland. Thirdly, The Irish
Nation at that time were most tenaciously addicted to the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome, and therefore must be bended to the other
Extreme, before they could be straight and Orthodox in these points of
Doctrine. Fourthly, and finally, It was an usual practice with that King, in
the whole course of His Government, to balance one Extreme by the other;
countenancing the Papists against the Puritans, and the Puritans against the
Papists; that betwixt both, the true Religion, and Professors of it, might be
kept in safety. But whether I hit right, or not, certain it is, that it proved
a matter of sad consequence to the Church of England; there being nothing more
ordinary amongst those of the Puritan Party, when they were pressed in any of
the points aforesaid, then to appeal unto the Articles of Ireland, and the
infallible Judgment of K. JAMES, who confirmed the same. And so it stood until
the year 1634, when by the Power of the Lord Deputy Wentworth, and the
Dexterity of Dr. John Bramhall, then Lord Bishop of Derry, the Irish Articles
were repealed in a full Convocation, and those of England authorized in the
place thereof.

34. Pass we next over to the Isles of Iersey and Guernsey, where the Genevian
Discipline had been settled under Queen ELIZABETH; and being so settled by that
Queen, was confirmed by K. JAMES at his first coming to this Crown; though at
the same time he endeavored a subversion of it in the Kirk of Scotland. But
being to do it by degrees, and so to practice the restoring of the old
Episcopacy, as not to threaten a destruction to their new Presbyteries; it was
thought fit to tolerate that Form of Government in those petit Islands, which
could have no great influence upon either Kingdom. Upon which ground he sends
his Letter to them of the 8 th of August, first writ in French, and thus
translated into English; that is to say: 35. JAMES, by the Grace of God, King
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. Unto all those whom these
Presents shall concern, greeting. Whereas We Our selves, and the Lords of Our
Council, have been given to understand, that it pleased God to put into the
heart of the late Queen, Our most dear Sister, to permit and allow unto the
Isles of Jersey and ^uernsey, parcel of the Duchy of Normandy, the use of the
^^^^ment of the Reformed Churches of the said Duchy, whereof they have stood
possessed until Our coming to the Crown. For this cause We, desiring to follow
the pious Example of Our said Sister in this behalf, as well for the
advancement of the Glory of Almighty God, as for the edification of his Church;
do will and ordain, That Our said Isles shall quietly enjoy their said Liberty
in the use of Ecclesiastical Discipline, there now established. For^idding any
one to give them any trouble or impeachment, so long as they contain themselves
in Our obedience, and attempt not any thing against the Power and Sacred Word
of God. Given at our Palace at Hampton Court, the 8th of August, in the first
year of Our Reign of England, 1603.



36. This Letter was communicated unto all whom it might concern, in a Synod of
both Islands, held in Iersey, Anno 1605. But long they were not suffered to
enjoy the benefit of this Dispensation: For sir John Peiton, who succeeded
Governor of Iersey in the place of Raleigh, had of himself no good affections
to that Platform, and possibly might be furnished with some secret Instructions
for altering it in the Island on the first convenience. 1603.
The ground whereof was laid upon this occasion: The Curate of St. John's being
lately dead, it pleased the Colloquie of that Island, according to their former
method, to appoint one Brevin to succeed him. Against this course, the
Governor, the King's Attorney, and other the Officers of the Crown, protested
publicly, as being prejudicial to the Rights and Profits of the King. Howbeit,
the Case was overruled, and the Colloquie for that time carried it. Hereupon a
Bill of Articles was exhibited to the Lords of the Council, against the
Ministers of that Island, by Peiton the Governor, Marret the Attorney, and the
rest; as, viz. That they had usurped the Patronage of all Benefices in the
Island: That thereby they admitted men to Livings without any Form or
Presentation; and by that means deprived his Majesty of Vacancies and
First Fruits. That by the connivance (to say no worse of it) of the former
Governors, they exercised a kind of Arbitrary Jurisdiction, making and
disannulling Laws at their own most uncertain pleasure. In consideration
whereof, they humbly pray His Sacred Majesty to grant them such a Discipline as
might be fittest to the nature of the Place, and less derogatory to the Royal
Prerogative.

37. In the pursuance of this Project, Sir Robert Gardener, once Chief Justice
of Ireland; and James Husley, Dr. of the Laws, are sent Commissioners unto that
Island, though not without the color of some other business. To these
Commissioners the Ministers give in their Answer, which may be generally
reduced to these two heads: First, That their appointment of men into the
Ministry, and the exercise of Jurisdiction, being principal parts of the
Church Discipline, had been confirmed unto them by His Sacred Majesty. And
secondly, That the payment of First Fruits and Tenths, had never been exacted
from them since they were freed from their subordination to the Bishops (...)
^onstance, to whom formerly they had been due. But these An^^^^ giving no just
satisfaction unto the Council of England, and nothing being done in order to a
present Settlement, a foul deformity both of Confusion and Distraction, did
suddenly overgrow the face of those wretched Churches. For in the former times,
all such as took upon them any public Charge either in Church or
Commonwealth, had bound themselves by Oath to cherish and maintain the
Discipline: That Oath is now disclaimed as dangerous and unwarrantable. Before,
it was their custom to exact subscription to their Platform, of all such as
purposed to receive the Sacrament: but now the King's Attorney, and others of
that Party, chose rather to abstain from the Communion, than to yield
Subscription. Nay, even the very Elders, silly souls, that thought themselves
as sacro sancti as a Roman Tribune, were drawn with Process into the Civil
Courts, and there reputed with the Vulgar. Nor was the Case much better in the
Sacred Consistory; the Jurates in their Cohu, or Town Hall, relieving such by
their Authority, whom that (once paramount) Tribunal had condemned or censured.
And yet this was not all the Mischief which befell them neither: Those of the
lower rank seeing the Ministers begin to stagger in their Chairs, refused to
set out their Tithes; and if the Curates mean to exact their Dues, the Law is
open to all comers, to try their Title. Their Benefices, which before were
accounted as exempt and privileged, are now brought to reckon for First Fruits
and Tenths; and that not according to the Book of Constance (as they had been
formerly), but by the will and pleasure of the present Governor. And, to make
up the total sum of their Misfortunes, one of the Constables preferrs a Bill
against them in the common Cohu, in which they were accused of Hypocrisy in
their Conversation, and Tyranny in the Exercise of their Jurisdiction: and
finally, of holding some secret practices against the Governor, which
consequentially did reflect on the King Himself.

38. In this Confusion they address themselves to the Earl of Salisbury, 1612.
then being Lord Treasurer of England, and in great credit with King JAMES; who
seeming very much pleased with their Application, advised them to invite their
Brethren of the Isle of Guernsey, to join with them in a Petition to the King,
for a redress of those Grievances which they then complained of. A Counsel
which then seemed rational, and of great respect; but in it self of greater
cunning than it seemed in the first appearance. For by this means (as certainly
he was a man of a subtle Wit) he gave the King more time to compass his
Designs in Scotland, before he should declare himself in the present business;
and, by engaging those of Guernsey in the same desires, intended to subject
them also to the same conclusion. But this Counsel taking no effect by reason
of the death of the Councellor, 1615.
they fall into another trouble of their own creating. The Parish of St. Peter's
falling void by the death of the Minister, the Governor presents unto it one
Aaron Messering, one that had spent his time in Oxon, and had received the
Order of Priesthood from the Right Reverend Dr. Bridges, then Bishop of that
Diocese, but of himself a Native of the Isle of Iersey. A thing so infinitely
stomacked by those of the Colloquy, that they would by no means yield unto his
admission; not so much in regard of his presentation by the Power of the
Governor, as because he had taken Orders from the hands of a Bishop: For now
they thought that Popery began to break in upon them, and therefore that it did
concern them to oppose it to the very last. A new Complaint is hereupon
preferred against them to the Lords of the Council; in which their Lordships
were informed, That the Inhabitants generally of the Isle were discontented
with the present Discipline and guidance of the Church, that most of them would
be easily persuaded to submit to the English Government, and that many of them
did desire it.

1618.
39. This brings both Parties to the Court; the Governor and his Adherents, to
prosecute the Suit, and make good their Intelligence; the Ministers to answer
to the Complaint, and stand to the Pleasure of His Majesty in the final
Judgment. And at the first, the Ministers stood fast together: but as it always
happens, that there is no Confederacy so well jointed, but one Member of it
may be severed from the rest, and thereby the whole Practice overthrown: so was
it also in this business. For those who there solicited some private business
of the Governor's, had kindly wrought upon the weakness and ambition of De la
Place, (one of the Ministers appointed to attend the Service) persuading him,
That if the Government were altered, and the Dean restored, he was infallibly
resolved on to be the man. Being fashioned into this hope, he speedily betrayed
the Counsels of his Fellows, and furnished their Opponents at all their
Interviews, with such Intelligence as might make most for their advantage. At
last the Ministers not well agreeing in their own demands, and having little to
say in defense of their proper Cause, whereunto their Answers were not provided
beforehand; my Lord of Canterbury, at the Council Table, thus declared unto
them the Pleasure of the King and Council, viz. That for the speedy redress of
their disorders, it was reputed most convenient to establish amongst them the
Authority and Office of the Dean. That the Book of Common Prayer being again
Printed in the French, should be received into their Churches; but the
Ministers not tied to the strict observance of it in all particulars. That
Messervy should be admitted to his Benefice, and that so they might return to
their several Charges. This said, they were commanded to depart, and to
signify to those from whom they came, the full scope of His Majesty's
Resolution, and so they did. But being somewhat backward in obeying this
Decree, the Council intimated to them by Sir Philip de Carteret, chief Agent
for the Governor and Estates of the Island. That the Ministers from among
themselves should make choice of three Learned and Grave persons, whose Names
they should return unto the Board, out of which His Majesty should resolve on
one to be their Dean.

1619.
40. But this Proposal little edified amongst the Brethren; not so much out of
any dislike of the alteration, with which they seemed all well enough
contented; but because every one of them gave himself some hopes of being the
man: And being that all of them could not be elected, they were not willing to
destroy their particular hopes, by the appointment of another. In the mean
time, Mr. David Bandinell, an Italian born, then being Minister of St. Mary's,
under pretense of other business of his own, is dispatched for England, and
recommended by the Governor as the fittest person for that Place and Dignity.
And being well approved of by the Archbishop of Canterbury, who found him
answerable in all points to the Governor's Character, he was established in
the Place by his Majesty's Letters Patents bearing date Anno 1619, and was
accordingly invested in all such Rights as formerly had been inherent in that
Office, whether it were in point of Profit, or of Jurisdiction. And for the
executing of this Office, some Articles were drawn and ratified by His Sacred
Majesty, to be in force until a certain Body of Ecclesiastical Canons should be
digested and confirmed: Which Articles he was pleased to call the Interim, 1620.
(a Name devised by CHARLES the fifth, on the like occasion) as appears by His
Majesty's Letters Paters Patents, for confirmation of the Canons, not long
after made. And by this Interim it was permitted for the present, that the
Ministers should not be obliged to bid the Holy Days, to use the Cross in
Baptism, or to wear the Surplice, or not to give the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper unto any others but such as did receive it kneeling; but in all other
things, it little differed from the Book of Canons; which being first drawn up
by the Dean and Ministers, was afterward carefully perused, corrected, and
accommodated for the use of that Island, by the Right Reverend Fathers in God,
George, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; John, Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England; and Lancelot, Lord Bishop of Winchester,
whose Diocese or Jurisdiction did extend over both the Islands. In which
respect it was appointed in the Letters Patents (by which His Majesty confirmed
these Canons, 1623.
Anno 1623), That the said Reverend Father in God, the Bishop of Winchester,
should forthwith by his Commission under his Episcopal Seal, as Ordinary of the
place, give Authority unto the said Dean to exercise Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in the said Isle, according to the Canons and Constitutions thus
made and established. Such were the Means, and such the Counsels, by which this
Island was reduced to a full conformity with the Church of England.

41. Gu^rnsey had followed in the like, if first the breach between K. JAMES
and the King of Spain; and afterward between K. CHARLES and the Crown of
France, had not took off the edg of the prosecution. During which time, the
Ministers were much heartned in their Inconformity, by the Practices of De la
Place, before remembered: Who stomacking his disappointment in the loss of the
Deanery, abandoned his Native Country, and retired unto Guernsey, where he
breathed nothing but disgrace to the English Liturgy, the Person of the new
Dean, and the change of the Government. Against the first, so perversely
opposite, that when some Forces were sent over by King CHARLES for defense of
the Island, he would not suffer them to have the use of the English Liturgy in
the Church of St. Peter's, being the principal of that Island, but upon these
Conditions; that is to say, That they should neither use the Liturgy therein,
nor receive the Sacrament. And secondly, Whereas there was a Lecture weekly,
every Thursday, in the said Church of St. Peter's, when once the Feast of
Christ's Nativity fell upon that day, he rather chose to disappoint the
Hearers, and put off the Sermon, than that the least honor should reflect on
that ancient Festival. An Opposition far more superstitious, than any
observation of a day, though merely Jewish. By his Example others were
encouraged to the like perverseness, insomuch that they refused to baptize any
Child or Children, though weak, and in apparent danger of present death, but
such as were presented unto them on the day of Preaching: And when some of them
were compelled by the Civil Magistrate to perform their duty in this kind, a
great Complaint thereof was made to the Earl of Darby, being then Governor of
that Island, as if the Magistrate had entrenched on the Minister's Office, and
took upon them the administration of the blessed Sacraments. Of these
particulars, and many others of that nature, intelligence was given to the late
Archbishop, Dr. Laud, who had proceeded thereupon to a Reformation, Anno 1637,
if the Distraction then arising in the Realm of Scotland, had not enforced him
to a discontinuance of that Resolution.

AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History OF THE PRESBYTERIANS LIB. XII. Containing
Their Tumultuating in the Belgic Provinces; their Practices and Insurrections
in the Higher Germany; the frustrating of their Design on the Churches of
Brandenbourgh; the Revolts of Transylvania, Hungary, Austria, and Bohemia, and
the Rebellions of the French, from the Year 1610, to the Year 1628.
FRom Guernsey we set sail for Holland, in which we left the Ministers divided
into two main Factiions; the one being called the Remonstrants, the other
taking to themselves the Name of Contra-Remonstrants. To put an end to those
Disorders, a Conference was appointed between the Parties, held at the Hague,
before the General Assembly of Estates of the Belgic Provinces, Anno 1610. The
Controversi^ reduced to five Articles only, and the Dispute managed by the
ablest men who appeared in the Quarrel on either side. In which it was
conceived, that the Remonstrants had the better of the day, and came off with
Victory. But what the Contra-Remonstrants wanted in the strength of Argument,
they made good by Power: For, being far the greater number, and countenanced by
the Prince of Orange, as their principal Patron, they prosecuted their
Opponents in their several Consistories, by Suspensions, Excommunications, and
Deprivations, the highest Censures of the Church. This forced the Remonstrant
Party to put themselves under the protection of John Olden Barnevelt, an
Hollander by birth, and one of the most powerful men of all that Nation; who
fearing that the Prince of Or^nge had some secret purpose to make Himself
absolute Lord of those Estates, received them very cheerfully into his
protection, not without hope of raising a strong Party by them to oppose the
Prince. This draws K. JAMES into the Quarrel; who being displeased with the
Election of Conradus Vorstius, to a Divinity-Reader's Place in the Schools of
Leiden, and not so readily gratified by the Estates in the choice of another;
published a Declaration against this Vorstius, and therein falls exceeding foul
upon James Van Harmine, and all that followed his Opinions in the present
Controversies. Which notwithstanding, Barnevelt gains an Edict from the States
of Holland, Anno 1613, 1613.
by which a mutual Toleration was indulged to either Party, more to the benefit
of the Remonstrants, than the contentment of the others. An Edict highly
magnified by the Learned Grotius, in his Pietas Ordinum, etc. Against which,
some Answers were returned by Bogerman, Sibrandus, and some others, not without
some reflections on the Magistrates for their actings in it.

2. This made the breach much wider than it was before; King JAMES appearing
openly in favor of the Prince of Orange; the Spaniard secretly fomenting the
Designs of Barnevelt, as it was afterward suggested, with what truth I know
not. But sure it is, that as K. JAMES had formerly aspersed the Remonstrant
Party, in His Declaration against* Vorstius, before remembered; so He continued
a most bitter Enemy unto them, till he had brought them at the last to an
extermination. But what induced him thereunto, has been made a question. Some
think that he was drawn unto it by the powerful persuasions of Archbishop
Abbot, and Bishop Mountague, who then much governed his Counsels in all
Church-concernments. Others impute it to his Education in the Church of
Scotland, where all the Heterodoxies of Calvin were received as Gospel; which
might incline him the more strongly to those Opinions, which he had sucked in,
as it were, with his Nurse's Milk. Some say, that he was carried in this
business, not so much by the clear light of his own understanding, as by a
transport of affection to the Prince of Orange, to whom he had a dear regard,
and a secret sympathy. Others more rationally ascribe it unto Reason of State,
for the preventing of a dangerous and uncurable Rupture, which otherwise was
like to follow in the State of the Netherlands. He had then a great Stock going
amongst them, in regard of the two Towns of Brill and Vlushing, together with
the Fort of Ramekins, which had been put into the hands of Queen ELIZABETH, for
great sums of money. In which regard, the Governor of the Town of Vlushing,
and the Ambassador resident for the Crown of England, were to have place in all
public Councils which concerned those Provinces; on whose Tranquillity and
Power, he placed a great part of the peace and happiness of his own Dominions.
He knew that Concord was the strongest Ligament of their Confederation; and
looked on the Remonstrants as the breakers of that Bond of Unity which formerly
had held them so close together.

3. Upon this reason he exhorts them in his said Declaration, To take heed of
such infected persons; their own Contrymen being already divided into
Factions upon this occasion; which was a matter so opposite to Unity, (the only
prop and safety of their State, next under God) as must of necessity, by little
and little, bring them to utter ruin, if wisely and in time they did not
provide against it. And on the same reason he concurred in Counsel and Design,
with the Prince of Orange, for the suppressing of that Party which he conceived
to be so dangerous to the common Peace; and sending such of his Divines to the
Synod of Dort, as were most like to be sufficiently active in their
condemnation. For so it happened, that the Prince of Orange being animated by so
great a Monarch, suddenly puts himself into the head of his Forces, marches
from one strong Town to another, changes the Garrisons in some, the chief
Commanders in the rest, and many of the principal Magistrates in most Towns of
Holland, Vtrecht, and the rest of those Provinces. Which done, he seizes on
the person of Barnevelt, as also on Grotius, and Leidebrogius; and then
proclaims a National Synod to be held at Dort, 1618.
in November following; to which the Calvinists were invited from all parts of
Christendom. And yet not thinking themselves strong enough to suppress their
Adversaries, they first disabled some of them by Ecclesiastical Censures, from
being chosen Members of it. Others who had been lawfully chosen, were not
permitted to give suffrage with the rest of the Synodists, unless they would
renounce their Party. And finally, They took such Order with the rest, that
they would not suffer them to sit as Judges in the present Controversies, but
only to appear before them as Parties Criminal. All which being condescended
to, though against all reason, they were restrained to such a method in their
disputation, as carried with it a betraying of their Cause and Interest; and
for not yielding hereunto, they were dismissed by Bogerman in a most bitter
Oration, uttered with fiery eyes, and most virulent language.

4. It might be rationally conceived, that they who did conspire with such
unanimity, to condemn their opposites, should not fall out amongst themselves:
but so it was, that there was scarce a point in difference between the Parties,
wherein they had not very frequent and most fearful bickerings with one
another; the Provincials many times enterfering with the Foreign Divines, and
sometimes falling foul on those of different Judgment, though of the same
University with them. The British Divines, together with one of those that
came from Breme, maintained an Universality of Redemption of Mankind by the
death of Christ. But this by no means would be granted by the rest of the
Synod, for fear of yielding any thing in the least degree to the opposite
Party. Martinius, another of the Divines of Breme, declared his dissent from
the common Opinion, touching the manner of Christ's being Fundamentum
Electionis; and that he thought Christ not only to be the Effector of our
Election, but also the Author and Procurer of it. But hereupon Gomarus flings
down his Glove, and openly defies Martinius to a Duel, telling the Synod, that
he knew Martinius was able to say nothing at all in refutation of that
Doctrine. The said Martinius had affirmed, That God was Causa Physica
Conversionis; and for the truth thereof, appealed unto Goclenius, a Renowned
Philosopher, who was then present in the Synod, and confirmed the same. But
presently Sibrandus Lubbertus takes fire at this, and falls expressly upon both.
And though the Controversy for the present was stilled by Bogerman; yet was it
revived by Gomarus within few days after; who being backed by some of the
Palatine Divines, behaved himself so rudely and uncivilly against Martinius,
that he had almost driven him to a resotion of forsaking their company.

5. The General Body of the Synod not being able to avoid the Inconveniences
which the Supra-lapsarian way brought with it, were generally intent on the
Sub-lapsarian. But on the other side, the Commissioners of the Churches of
South-Holland thought it not necessary to determine whether God considered man
fallen, or not fallen, while he passed the degrees of Election and Reprobation.
But far more positive was Gomarus, one of the Four Professors of Leyden, who
stood as strongly to the Absolute, Irrespective, and Irreversible Decree,
(exclusive of man's sin, and our Savior's sufferings) as he could have done
for the Holy Trinity. And not being able to draw the rest unto his Opinion, nor
willing to conform to theirs, he delivered his own Judgment in writing, apart
by it self, not joining in subscription with the rest of his Brethren, for
Conformity sake, as is accustomed in such cases. But Macrovius, one of the
Professors of Franekar, in West-Friesland, went beyond them all, contending
with great heat and violence, against all the rest, That God propounds his Word
to Reprobates, to no other purpose, but to leave them wholly inexcusable. That
if the Gospel is considered in respect of God's intention, the proper end
thereof, and not the accidental* in regard of Reprobates, is to deprive them
totally of all excuse. And finally, That Christ knows all the hearts of men;
and therefore only knocks at the hearts of Reprobates, not with a mind of
entering in (because he knows they cannot open to him if they would); but
partly, that he might upbraid them for their impotency; and partly, that he
might increase their damnation by it. Nor rested the Blasphemer here, but
publicly maintained against Sibrandus Lubbertus, his Colleague (in the open
Synod), That God wills Sin: That he ordains Sin, as it is Sin. And, That by no
means he would have all men to be saved. And more than so, he publicly
declared at all adventures, That if those points were not maintained, they must
forsake the chief Doctors of the Reformation. Which, whether it were more
unseasonably, or more truly spoken, I regard not now. In the agitation of which
Points, they suffered themselves to be transported into such extremities, that
greater noise and tumult has been seldom heard of in a sober Meeting.
Insomuch, that when the Bishop of Landaff, to avoid the scandal, put them in
mind of Moderation, and to endeavor to retain the Spirit of Unity in the Bond
of Peace; Non agendum hic est in Synodo. Authoritate sed Ratione.
Gomarus snapt him up, and told him, That matters were not to be carried in
Synodicol Meetings, by the Authority of the Person, but the strength of the
Argument. For further proof of which particulars, if more proof be necessary, I
shall refer the English Reader to two Books only; that is to say, the Golden
Remains of Mr. Hales; and the Arcana Anti-Remonstrantium, by Tilenus Junior.

6. From Consultation and Debate, let us proceed in the next place to
Execution, which we find full of Cruelty and accursed Rigor. The Acts hereof
first ratified in the Blood of Barnevelt, for whose dispatch they violated all
the Fundamental Laws of the Belgic Liberty; in maintenance whereof, they first
pretended to take Arms against the Spaniard, their most Rightful Prince. The
Party being thus beheaded, it was no hard matter to disperse the whole Trunk or
Body: For presently upon the ending of the Synod, the Remonstrants are required
to subscribe to their own condemnation; and for refusing so to do, they were
all banished by a Decree of the States General, with their Wives and Children,
(to the number of Seven hundred Families, or thereabout) and forced to beg
their bread, even in desolate places. But yet this was no end of their sorrows
neither; they must come under a new Cross, and be calumniated for holding many
horrid Blasphemies, and gross Impieties, which they most abhorred. For in the
Continuation of the History of the Netherlands, writ by one Cross, a Fellow of
neither Judgment nor Learning, and so more apt to be abused with a false
report; it is there affirmed. (whether with greater Ignorance, or Malice, it is
hard to say) That there was a Synod called at Dort, to suppress the Arminians;
and that the said Arminians held, amongst other Heresies, first, That God was
the Author of sin. Secondly, That he created the far greater part of Mankind,
for no other purpose but only to find cause to damn them. And to say truth, it
had been well for them in respect of their Temporal Fortunes, had they taught
those Heresies, for then they might have sped no worse than Macrovius did, who
notwithstanding all his Heterodoxies, and most horrid Blasphemies, was only
looked upon as one of their Erring-Brethren; subjected to no other Censure, but
an Admonition to forbear all such Forms of Speech as might give any just
offense to tender Ears, and could not be digested by persons ignorant and
incapable of so great Mysteries. As on the other side it is reported of
Franciscus Auratus, a right Learned man, and one of the Professors for Divinity
in the Schools of Sedan, (a Town and Seignury belonging to the Dukes of
Bouil^on) That he was most disgracefully deprived of his Place and Function, by
those of the Calvinian Party, because he had delivered in a Sermon on those
words of St. ^ames, c. 1. v. 13. God tempts no man, etc. That God was not the
Author of Sin.

1619.
7. But possibly it may be said, That these Oppressions, Tyrannies, and
Partialities, are not to be ascribed to the Sect of Calvin, in the capacity of
Presbyterians, but of Predestinarians; and therefore we will now see what they
acted in behalf of Presbytery, which was as dear to all the Members of that
Synod, but the English only, as any of the Five Points, whatsoever it was: For
in the Hundred forty fifth Session, being held on the 20 th of April, the
Belgic Confession was brought in to be subscribed by the Provincials, and
publicly approved by the Foreign Divines: In which Confession there occurred
one Article which tended plainly to the derogation and dishonor of the Church
of England. For in the Thirty one Article, it is said expressly, That forasmuch
as does concern the Ministers of the Church of Christ, in what place soever,
they are all of equal Quantum vero attinet divini Verbi ministros, eandem illi
Potestatem and Authoritatem habent. Confess. Belg. Art. 31.
Power and Authority with one another, as being all of them the Ministers of
Jesus Christ, who is the only Universal Bishop, and sole Head of His Church.
Which Article being as agreeable to Calvin's Judgment in point of Discipline,
as their Determinations were to his Opinion in point of Doctrine; was very
cheerfully entertained by the Foreign Divines, though found in few of the
Confessions of the Foreign Churches. But being found directly opposite to the
Government of the Church by Archbishops and Bishops, with which a parity of
Ministers can have no consistence, was cordially opposed by the Divines of the
British College, but most especially by Dr. George Carlton, then Lord Bishop of
Landaff, and afterward translated to the Sea of Chichester; who having too
much debased himself beneath his Calling, in being present in a Synod or
Synodical Meeting, in which an ordinary Presbyter was to take the Chair, and
have precedence before him, thought it high time to vindicate himself, and the
Church of England; to enter a Legal Protestation against those proceedings.
Which though it was admitted, and perhaps recorded, received no other Answer
but neglect, if not scorn withal. Concerning which, he published a Declaration
after his return, in these words ensuing.

8. When we were to yield our consent to the Belgic Confession at Dort, I made
open protestation in the Synod, That whereas in the Confession there was
inserted a strange conceit of the Parity of Ministers to be instituted by
Christ; I declared our dissent utterly in that point. I showed, that by Christ
a Parity was never instituted in the Church: that he ordained Twelve Apostles,
as also Seventy Disciples: that the Authority of the Twelve was above the
other: that the Church preserved this Order left by our Savior. And therefore,
when the extraordinary Power of the Apostles ceased; yet this ordinary
Authority continued in Bishops, who succeeded them, who were by the Apostles
left in the Government of the Church, to ordain Ministers, and to see that they
who were so ordained, should preach no other Doctrine: that in an inferior
degree, the Ministers were governed by Bishops, who succeeded the Seventy
Disciples: that this Order has been maintained in the Church from the times of
the Apostles; and herein I appealed to the Judgment of Antiquity, and to the
Judgment of any Learned man now living; and craved herein to be satisfied, if
any man of Learning could speak to the contrary. My Lord of Salisbury is my
Witness, and so are all the rest of our Company, who speak also in the Cause.
To this there was no answer made by any; whereupon we conceived that they
yielded to the truth of the Protestation. But it was only he and his Associates
which conceived so of it: and so let it go.

9. His Lordship adds, that in a Conference which he had with some Divines of
that Synod, he told them, That the cause of all their troubles, was because
they had no Bishops amongst them, who by their Authority might repress
turbulent spirits, that broached Novelty, every man having liberty to speak or
write what they list; and that as long as there were no Ecclesiastical men in
Authority to repress and censure such contentious Spirits, their Church could
never be without trouble. To which they answered, That they did much honor and
reverence the good Order and Discipline of the Church of England, and with all
their hearts would be glad to have it established amongst them; but that could
not be hoped for in their State: that their hope was, That seeing they could
not do what they desired, God would be merciful to them, if they did what they
could. This was, says he, the sum and substance of their Answer, which he
conceived to be enough to free that people from aiming at an Anarchy, and
open-Confusion; adding withal, that they groaned under the weight of that
burden, and would be eased of it if they could. But by his Lordship's leave, I
take this to be nothing but a piece of dissimulation of such a sanctified
Hypocrisy as some of the Calvinians do affirm to be in Almighty God: For
certainly they might have Bishops if they would, as well as the Popish Cantons
of the Switzers, or the State of Venice; of which, the one is subject to an
Aristocracy, the other to a Government no less popular than that of the
Netherlands. In which respect it was conceived more lawful, by the late Lord
Primate, for any English Protestant to communicate with the Reformed Churches
in France, who cannot have Bishops if they would; than with the Dutch, who will
not have Bishops, though they may; there still remaining in their hands Seven
Episcopal Sees, with all the Honors and Revenues belonging to them; that is to
say, the Bishopric of Harlem in Holland, of Middlebourgh in Zealand, of
Lewarden in Friesland, of Groining in the Province so called, of Deventer in
the County of Overyssell, and of Ruremond in the Duchy of Gueldress; all of
them, but the last, subordinate to the Church of Vtrect, which they keep also
in their Power.

10. Somewhat was also done in the present Synod, in order to the better
keeping of the Lord's Day, than it had been formerly: For till this time they
had their Faires and Markets upon this day, their Kirk-masses, as they commonly
called them: Which, as they constantly kept in most of the great Towns of
Holland, Zealand, etc. even in Dort it self; so by the constant keeping of
them, they must needs draw away much people from the Morning-Service, to attend
the business of their Trades. And in the Afternoon (as before was noted) all
Divine Offices were interdicted by a Constitution, which received life here,
Anno 1574, that time being wholly left to be disposed of as the people pleased,
either upon their profit, or their recreation. But their acquaintance with the
English, brought them to more sense of Piety. And now they took the opportunity
to train the people to the Church in the Afternoon by the Authority and
Reputation of the present Synod: For, having entertained the Palatine Catechism
in their public Schools, it was resolved that it should be taught in all their
Churches on Sunday in the Afternoon: That the Ministers should be bound to
read and expound that Catechism, though none were present at the Exercises, but
those of their own Families, only in hope that others might be drawn after
their example; and that the Civil Magistrate should be employed by the Synod to
restrain all Servile Works, and other Prophanations of that day, wherewith the
Afternoons had commonly been spent, that so the people might repair to the
Catechisings. And though some Reformation did ensue upon it in the greater
Towns; yet in their lesser Villages (where men are more intent on their Worldly
businesses) it remains as formerly.

11. As little of the Sabbatarian, had the Palatine Churches, which in all
points adhered tenaciously unto Calvin's Doctrine: For in those Churches it was
ordinary for the Gentlemen to betake themselves in the Afternoon of the Lord's
Day, unto Hawking and Hunting, as the season of the year was fit for either; or
otherwise, in taking the Air, visiting their Friends, or whatsoever else shall
seem pleasing unto them. As usual it was also with the Husbandman, to spend
the greatest part of the Afternoon in looking over his Grounds, ordering his
Cattle, and following of such Recreations as are most agreeable to his Nature
and Education: no public Divine Offices being prescribed for any part of that
Day, but the Morning only. And so it stood in the year 1612: 1612.
At what time the Lady ELIZABETH, Daughter to K. James, and Wife to Frederick
the fifth, Prince Elector Palatine, came first into that Country; whose having
Divine Service every Afternoon in her Chapel, or Closet, officiated by her
own Chaplains, according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, gave the
first hint unto that Prince to cause the like Religious Offices to be
celebrated in his part of the Family; afterward, by degrees, in all the
Churches of Heldenbourgh; and finally, in most other Cities and Towns of his
Dominions. Had he adventured no further on the confidence of that Power and
Greatness which accrued to him by contracting an Alliance with so great a
Monarch, it had been happy for himself and the Peace of Christendom. But being
tempted by Scultetus, and some other of the Divines about him, Not to neglect
the opportunity of advancing the Gospel, and making himself the principal
Patton of it, he fell on some Designs destructive to himself and his. Who,
though he were a Prince of a Phlegmatic nature, and of small Activity; yet
being pressed by the continual solicitation of some eager Spirits, he drew all
the Provinces and Princes which professed the Calvinian Doctrines, to enter into
a strict League or Union amongst themselves, under pretense of looking to the
Peace and Happiness of the true Religion.

12. It much advantaged the Design, that the Calvinians in all parts of
Germany, had began to stir, as men resolved to keep the Saddle, or to lose the
Horse. In Aix, (the Latins call it Aquisgranum) an Imperial City, they first
appeared considerable for their Power and Numbers, Anno 1605, at what time they
shrewdly shaked the Estate thereof. But being thereupon debarred the exercise
of their Religion, and punished for the Misdemeanor, they kept themselves quiet
till the year 1614; when in a popular Tumult they surprise the City, secure the
principal Magistrates of it, and eject the Jesuits. And though by the Mediation
of the French Agents, and those of Iulier's, a Peace was for the present clapped
up between them; yet neither Party was resolved to stand longer to it, than
might serve their turns. But whosoever made the reckoning, the Calvinists were
at last compelled to pay the shot: For the Town being proscribed by Matthias
the Emperor, and the execution of the Ban committed to Archduke Albert; he
sends the Marquess of Spinola with an Army thither, by whom the Town is brought
to a surrender, the ancient Magistrates restored, and the Calvinians either
forced to forsake the place, or to submit themselves unto Fine and Ransom, if
they kept their dwellings. Nor did they speed much better in the City of Colen,
where their Party was not strong enough to suppress the Catholics; and
therefore they forsook the City, and retired to Mulleime, which they began to
build and fortify for their habitation. But those of Colen fearing that this
new Town might in short time overtop that City both in Wealth and Power,
addressed themselves unto the Emperor Matthias: By whose Command the Duke of
Newbourgh falls upon it, destroys the greatest part thereof, and leaves the
finishing of that Work to the Marquess Spinola.

13. In Hassia their Affairs succeeded with more prosperous Fortune, where
Lodowick, of the second House of the Lantgraves, who had the City of Marperge
for his Seat and Residence, declared himself in favor of their Forms and
Doctrines, at such time as the Calvinists of Aix (before remembered) first began
to stir, followed therein by George his Brother, commonly called the Lantgrave
of Darmstad, from the place of his dwelling; half of which Town belonging to
the Patrimony of the Prince Elector, had easily made way for Calvinism into all
the rest. And though this Lodowick was disturbed in his Government or
Possession, by his Cousin Maurice, commonly called the Lantgrave of Cassells,
from his principal City; who seized upon the Town of Marperge, Anno 1612; yet
was he shortly after restored to his whole Estate, by the Palatine-League,
which for the time carried a great sway in those parts of Germany. But, of
greater consequence were the agitations about Cleve and Gulick, occasioned by a
difference between the Marquess of Brandenbourgh, and the Duke of Newbourgh,
about the partage of the Patrimony and Estates of the Duke of Cleve: For
Iohn-William, the last Duke of Cleve, deceasing without Issue, in the year
1610, left his Estates between the Children of his Sisters; of which the
eldest, called Maria Leonora, was married to Albert of Brandenbourgh, Duke of
Prussia; whose Daughter Ann being married to John Sigismund, the Elector of
Brandenbough, was Mother of George-William, the young Marquess of
Brandenbourgh, who in her Right pretended to the whole Estate. The like
pretense was made by Wolfgangus Guilielmus, Duke of Newbourgh, descended from
the Electoral Family of the Princes Palatine, whose Mother Magdalen was the
second Sister of the said Iohn-William. The first of these Pretenders was
wholly of a Lutheran Stock; and the other as inclinable to the Sect of Calvin;
though afterward, for the better carrying on of their Affairs, they forsook
their Parties.

14. For so it happened, that the Duke of Newbourgh finding himself too weak for
the House of Brandenbourgh, put himself under the protection of the Catholic
King; who having concluded a Truce of Twelve years with the States United,
wanted Employment for his Army; and, that he might engage that King with the
greater confidence, he reconciles himself to the Church of Rome, and marries
the Lady Magdalen, Daughter to the Duke of Bavaria, the most potent of the
German Princes of that Religion; which also he established in his own Dominions
on the death of his Father. This puts the young Marquess to new Counsels; who
thereupon calls in the Forces of the States United; the War continuing upon
this occasion betwixt them and Spain, though the Scene was shifted. And that
they might more cordially espouse his Quarrel, he took to Wife the Sister of
Frederick the fifth, Prince Elector Palatine, and Niece of William of Nassaw,
Prince of Orange, by his youngest Daughter; and consequently, Cousin-German,
once removed to Count Maurice of Nassaw, Commander-General of the Forces of the
Sates United, both by Sea and Land. This kept the Balance eeven between them;
the one possessing the Estates of Cleve and Mark; and the other, the greatest
part of Berge and Gulick. But so it was, that the old Marquess of Brandenbourgh
having settled his abode in the Dukedom of Prussia, and left the management of
the Marquissate to the Prince his Son; left him withal unto the Plots and
Practices of a subtle Lady: Who being thoroughly instructed in all points of
Calvinism, and having gotten a great Empire in her Husband's Affections,
prevailed so far upon him in the first year of their Marriage, Anno 1614, that
he renounced his own Religion, and declared for Here Is; which he more cheerfully
embraced, in hope to arm all the Calvinians both of the Higher and the Lower
Germany, in defense of his Cause, as his Competitor of Newbourgh had armed the
Catholics to preserve his Interest.

15. Being thus resolved, he publishes an Edict in the Month of February, Anno
1615; published in his Father's Name, but only in his own Authority and sole
Command, under pretense of pacifying some distempers about Religion; but
tending, in good earnest, to the plain suppression of the Lutheran forms: for,
having spent a tedious and impertinent Preamble touching the Animosities
fomented in the Protestant Churches, between the Lutherans, and those of the
Calvinian Party, he first requires that all unnecessary Disputes be laid aside,
that so all grounds of strife and disaffection might be also buried. Which
said, he next commands all Ministers within the Marquissate, to preach the Word
purely and sincerely, according to the Writings of the holy Prophets and
Apostles, the Four Creeds commonly received (amongst which the Te Deum is to go
for one), and the Confession of Ausberg, of the last Correction; and that
omitting all new glosses and interpretations of idle and ambitious men,
affecting a Primacy in the Church, and a Power in the State, they aim at
nothing in their Preachings, but the Glory of God, and the Salvation of
Mankind. He commands also, That they should abstain from all calumniating of
those Churches which either were not subject to their Jurisdiction, nor were
not lawfully convicted of the Crime of Heresy; which he resolved not to
connive at for the time to come, but to proceed unto the punishment of all
those who wilfully should refuse to conform themselves to his Will and
Pleasure. After which, giving them some good Counsel for following a more
moderate course in their Preachings and Writings, than they had been accustomed
to in the times foregoing, and in all points to be obedient to their principal
Magistrate; he pulls off the Disguise, and speaks plainly thus.

16. These are Ceterum Reformationi in Electoratu Brandenburgico instituendae,
haec capita memorantur. Thuan. Contin. lib. 1. An. 1614.
(says he) the Heads of that Reformation, which is to be observed in all the
Churches of Brandenbourgh; that is to say, All Images, Statua's, and Crosses,
to be removed out of the place of public Meetings; all Altars, as the Relics
of Popery, and purposely erected for the Sacrifices of the Popish Mass, to be
taken away; that in their room they should set up a Table of a long square
Figure, covered at all times with a Carpet of Black, and at the time of the
Communion with a Linen Cloth: That Wafers should be used instead of the former
Hosts; which being cut into long pieces, should be received and broken by the
hands of those who were admitted to communicate at the holy Table. That
ordinary Cups should be made use of for the future, instead of the old Popish
Chalice. That the Vestments used in the Mass, should be forborne; no Candles
lighted in any of their Churches at noonday. No Napkin to be held to those
that received the Sacrament; nor any of them to receive it upon their knees, as
if Christ were corporally present. The sign of the Cross to be from thenceforth
discontinued: The Minister not to turn his back to the people at the
Ministration. The Prayers and Epistles before the Sermon, to be from
thenceforth read, not sung; and the said Prayers not to be muttered with a low
voice in the Pulpit, or Reading-Pew, but pronounced audibly and distinctly.
Auricular Confession to be laid aside, and the Communion not to be administered
to sick persons in the time of any common Plague, or Contagious Sickness. No
bowing of their knee at the Name of Jesus. Nor Fonts of stone to be retained in
their Churches, the want whereof may be supplied by a common Basin. The
Decalogue to be repeated wholly without mutilation; and the Catechism, in some
other points no less erroneous, to be corrected and amended. The Trinity to be
adored, but not expressed in any Images, either carved or painted. The words of
Consecration in the holy Supper, to be interpreted and understood according
unto that Analogy which they held with the Sacrament, and other Texts of holy
Scripture. And finally, That the Ministers should not be so tied to preach upon
the Gospels and Epistles that were appointed for the day, but that they might
make choice of any other Text of Scriptures, as best pleased themselves. Such
was the tenor of this Edict; on which I have insisted the more at large, to
show the difference between the Lutheran and Genevian Churches; and the great
correspondence of the first, with the Church of England. But this Calvinian
Pill did not work so kindly, as not to stir more Humors than it could remove.
For the Lutherans being in possession, would not deliver up their Churches, or
desert those Usages to which they had been trained up, and in which they were
principled, according to the Rules of their first Reformation. And hereupon
some Rupture was like to grow betwixt the young Marquess and his Subjects, if
by the intervention of some honest Patriots it had not been closed up in this
manner, or to this effect: That the Lutheran Forms only should be used in all
the Churches of the Marquissate, for the contentation of the people; and, that
the Marquess should have the exercise of his new Religion, for Himself, his
Lady, and those of his Opinion, in their private Chapels.

17. But the main business of these times, were the Commotions raised in
Transylvania, Hungary, Austria, and Bohemia, by those of the Calvinian Party;
which drew all the Provinces of the Empire into such confusions, as have
disturbed the Peace thereof to this very day. For, laying down the true
Original thereof, we may please to know, that Ferdinand the younger, Brother of
Charles the fifth, succeeding on the death of Maximilian the Emperor, in the
Dukedom of Austria, and afterward attaining, by Marriage, to the Crown of
Hungary and Bohemia, which he was not born to, endeavored to oblige his
Subjects in all those Dominions, by a connivance at such Deviations from the
Church of Rome, as were maintained by those who adhered to Luther, and held
themselves to the Confession of Ausberg; which afterward was ratified by
Imperial Edict. Followed therein by Maximilian the second, who succeeded him in
his Estates; and being a mild and gracious Prince, not only showed himself
unwilling to challenge any Power over Souls and Consciences, but was pleased to
mediate in behalf of his Protestant Subjects, with the Fathers at Trent,
amongst whom he incurred the suspicion of being a Lutheran. But Rodolphus the
eldest of his Sons, and his next Successor, was of a different temper from his
Father and Grandfather, a professed Enemy to all that held not a Conformity with
the Church of Rome, which he endeavored to promote with such terrible Edicts,
as threatened nothing but destruction unto all gainsayers. He had five Brethren
at that time, but none of them the Father of any children; which made him cast
his eyes on Ferdinand of Gratts, Son of Charles Duke of Gratts, and Nephew of
Ferdinand the Emperor, before remembered. Who going to Rome in the Year of
Iubile, Anno 1600, obliged himself by Oath to the Pope then being, to extirpate
all the Protestants out of his Dominions; which upon the instigation of the
Jesuits he did accordingly, by pillaging and banishing all of the Augustan
Confession, thorough Styria, Carinthia, and Carniola, though they had paid for
the Freedom of their Conscience, a great sum of Money.

18. This so endeared him to Rodolphus, that he resolved upon him for his next
Successor, and at the present to estate him in the Realm of Hungary, as a step
unto it. In which Design, as he was seconded by the Pope and Spaniard, so
questionless it had been effected, if Matthias the Emperor's Brother, and next
Heir, had not countermined them, by countenancing those of the Calvinian or
Reformed Religion, who then began to seem considerable in the eye of that
Kingdom. To carry on which Spanish Plot to the End desired, the Prelates of
Hungary, in an Assembly held at Presburgh, Anno 1604, 1604.
published a Decree without the consent of the Nobility and Estates of the
Kingdom, for the burning or perpetual banishment of all such as were of the
Reformed Religion. Which having been entertained in the Realm of Poland, found
no great difficulty in crossing the Carpathian Mountains, and gaining the like
favorable admission in this Kingdom also. Against which Edict of the Bishops,
a Protest is presently made by the Estates of the Realm, under the Seal of the
Palatine, the chief Officer of it: By whom it was publicly affirmed, That they
would with just Arms defend themselves, if they should be questioned for the
Cause of Religion. Which notwithstanding, Beliojosa (one of the Emperor's chief
Commanders in the Realm of Hungary) first got into his hands the strong Town of
Cassovia, standing upon the borders of Transylvania. And that being done, he
did not only interdict all those of the Reformed Religion from making any uses
of them as they had done formerly; but he inhibits them from having Sermons in
their private Houses, from reading in the holy Bible, and from the burying of
their dead in hallowed places.

19. Nor staid he there, but picked a needless quarrel with Istivon ^otscay, a
great man of that Country; two of whose Castles he surprised and razed, and
thereupon provoked him to become ^his Enemy. For, being so provoked, he takes
upon himself the Patronage of his Native Country, then miserably oppressed by
the German Soldiers; calls himself Prince of Transylvania, confederates himself
with the Turkish Bassa's, and thrived so well in his Designs, that he compelled
the Emperor to recall his Forces out of Transylvania, and procured Liberty of
Conscience for all his Followers. For, being assisted by the Turks, he
encountered the said Beliojosa, cuts off 6000 of his men, and sends a great part
of the Enemy's Ensigns, to the Vizier Bassa, as a sign of his Victory. Which
Blow he followed by a Proclamation to this effect, viz. That all such as
desired Liberty of Conscience, and to live free from the Corruptions and
Idolatries of the Church of Rome, should repair to him as to their Head, and
that he would allow to each of them Five Dollars weekly. Which Proclamation did
not only draw unto him many thousands of the common people, together with a
great part of the Nobility and Gentry; but tempted many of the Emperor's
Soldiers to forsake their General, and join themselves unto his Party.
Strengthened wherewith, he makes himself Master of Cassovia; in which he changed
not only the Religion, but the Civil Government: insomuch that many of those
which were addicted to the Church of Rome, were presently slain upon the place,
and most of the rest turned out of the City, together with the greatest part of
the Churchmen, the Bishops, and the Emperor's Treasurer. Upon which fortunate
Success, a great Party in the Upper Hungary declare in favor of his Cause,
violently break open the Religious Houses, compel the Friars to put themselves
into fortified places; and finally, to abandon Presburgh, the chief Town of
that Kingdom, and to fly for shelter to Vienna, as their surest Refuge.

1605.
20. After this, Basta, the Lord-General of the Emperor's Forces, obtained the
better of them in some Fortunate Skirmishes, which rather served to prolong,
than to end the War. For Botscay was grown to so great strength, and made such
spoil in all places wherever he came, that Pallas Lippa his Lieutenant, was
found to be possessed at the time of his death, of no fewer than Seven hundred
Chains of Gold, and One hundred thousand Ducats in ready money, which he had
raked together within less than a year. This Treasure coming into Botscay's
hands by the death of Lippa, he mightily increased his Army, with which he took
in many strong Towns, and brought in some of the Nobility of the Upper Hungary,
sending his Forces into Styria, Austria, and Moravia, which he spoiled and
wasted. Insomuch that the Emperor, being forced to send Commissioners to him to
accord the Differences, could obtain no better Conditions from him, but, That
Liberty of Conscience, and the free exercise of the Reformed Religion, should
be permitted to all those who demanded the same; and that himself should be
estated in the Principality of Transylvania, for the term of his life. And
though the Emperor at first refused to yield to these hard Conditions; yet in
the next year, Anno 1606, 1606.
upon a second Treaty with the Estates of that Kingdom, it was agreed upon by
the Commissioners on both sides, That the free exercise as well of the
Reformed, as of the Romish Religion, should be permitted to all men in the
Realm of Hungary, as in the time of Maximilian the Father, and Ferdinand the
Grandfather, of the present Emperor. Which Articles were more fully ratified in
the Pacification made at Vienna, on the fourteenth of September then next
following. In which it was expressly cautioned and capitulated, That the
Calvinian Religion should from thenceforth be exercised as freely as either the
Lutheran or the Romish. In managing which Negation between the Parties,
Matthias the Archduke, who hitherto had secretly encouraged the Hungarian
Gospellers, was not only present, but openly gave both countenance and consent
unto it.

21. The gaining of this point, put them upon a hope of obtaining greater, even
to the abrogating of all Laws and Ordinances for the burning of Heretics, and
whatsoever else were contrary to their Religion; as also, to the nominating of
the Palatine, or Principal Officers, and to the making of Confederacies with
their neighbour-Nation. During the agitating of which matters, Botscay dies in
Cassovia; but leaves his Faction so well formed, that they are able to go on
without their Leader. An Assembly of the States of Hungary is called, by the
Emperor, at Presburgh, in the middle of August, Anno 1607; but nothing done,
for want of the presence of Archduke Matthias, who was appointed by the
Emperor to preside therein. Which happened also to the like Assembly of Estates
of the Dukedom of Austria, and of the whole Empire, the next year, at the City
of Ratisbone. Matthias, in the mean season, had his own Designs apart: For, at
such time as the Assembly of the Estates was held at Ratisbone, he makes a
journey unto Presburgh, convocates thither the Estates of Hungary, confirms the
Pacification made before at Vienna, suffers them to confederate with their
Neighbors of Austria, and makes himself the Head of that Confederation. By
virtue whereof, he commands the people of both Countries to put themselves into
Arms, 1608.
pretending an Expedition into Moravia, but aiming directly against Prague, the
chief Town of Bohemia, where the Emperor RODOLPHVS then resided: Whom he so
terrified with his coming with an Army of Eighteen thousand, that he consented
to deliver the Crown of Hungary into the hands of Matthias, to yield unto him
the possession of all that Kingdom, and to discharge his Subjects from their
former Allegiance; upon condition that the Estates of that Realm should choose
no other King but the said Archduke. Which Agreement being made the 17 th of
June, 1608, Matthias is accordingly Crowned King of Hungary; and Illisachius, a
professed Calvinian, and one of the principal Sticklers in these Agitations, is
made Palatine of it.

22. By this Transaction, the whole Dukedom of Austria, and so many of the
Provinces subordinate to it, as were not actually possessed by the Archduke
Ferdinand, are consigned over to Matthias. Many Inhabitants whereof, professing
the Calvinian Forms and Doctrines, (which only must be called the Reformed
Religion) and building on the late Confederation with the Realm of Hungary,
presumed so far upon the patience of their Prince, as to invade some public
Churches for the exercise of it. But they soon found themselves deceived: For
Matthias having somewhat of the Statesman in him, and being withal
exasperated by the Pope's Nuncio, interdicts all such public Meetings. He had
now served his turn in getting the possession of the Crown of Hungary, and was
not willing to connive at those Exorbitances in his Austrian Subjects, (over
whom he challenged a more absolute Sovereignty, than over any of the rest)
which he had cherished for self ends in the Kingdom of Hungary. The Austrians,
on the other side, who professed the Reformed Religion, refuse to take the Oath
of Allegiance to him, if they might not exercise their Religion in as free a
manner as the Hungarians were permitted to do by the Pacification. And
thereupon they presently give Order to their Tenants and Vassals, to put
themselves into Arms, appoint a general Assembly of the Protestant and Reformed
States, to be held at Horn, and there resolve to extort that by way of Force,
which they could not hope to gain by Favor. Some pains was took by Maximilian
the Archduke, another of the Emperor's Brothers, to accord the difference; who
offered them, in the name of the King, to tolerate the free exercise of their
Religion without the Cities; and that in the bestowing of the public Offices,
there should be no exception taken at them in regard of their difference in
Religion; and withal, gave them many Reasons why such a general Liberty as
they desired, could not be granted by the King, with reference to his Honor,
Conscience, or particular safety.

23. But this reasonable Offer did not satisfy the Reformed Party, (for so the
Calvinians must be called) by whom the Hungarians and Moravians are solicited
to associate with them, till they had compassed their desires: And upon
confidence thereof, refused more obstinately to take the Oath, than before they
did; levying new Forces for the War, and quartering them in great numbers
round about the City of Crema, the chief City of the Upper Austria. But in the
end, upon the intervention of the Moravian Ambassadors, 1609.
the new King was content to yield to these Conditions following, viz. That the
Nobility in their Castles or Towns, as also in their City-Houses, should for
themselves and their people, have the free exercise of their Religion. That the
free exercise of Preaching might be used in the three Churches of Iserdorf,
Trihelcuincel, and Horn. That the like freedom of Religion might be also
exercised in all those Churches in which they enjoyed the same till the King's
late Edict: and, that the Counselors of State, and other public Officers,
should from thenceforth chose promiscuously out of both Religions. Upon the
granting of which Articles, but not before, they did not only take the Oath of
Allegiance, but gave him a Magnificent Reception in the Town of Lintz; which
happened on the 17 th of May, 1609.

24. No sooner were the Austrians gratified in the point of Religion, but the
Bohemians take their turn to require the like; concerning which, we are to look
a little backward, as far as to the year 1400. About which time, we find a
strong Party to be raised amongst them, against some Superstitions and
Corruptions in the Church of Rome; occasioned, as some say, by reading the
Works of Wickliff, and by the Diligence of Piccardus, a Flemming born, as is
affirmed by some others, from whom they had the Name of Piccards; cruelly
persecuted by their own Kings, and publicly condemned in the Council of
Constance; they continued constant, notwithstanding, to their own Persuasions:
Distinguished also from the rest of the Bohemians, by the Name of Calixtins,
from the use of the Chalice; and Subutraque, from communicating in both kinds,
against all opposers. Their Adversaries in the Church of Rome, reproached them
by the Name of Adamites, and sometimes of Piccards; imputing to them many
Heterodoxies, and some filthy Obscenities, of which they never proved them
guilty. In this condition they remained till the preaching of Luther, and the
receiving of the Augustine Confession in most parts of the Empire; which gave
them so much confidence, as to purge themselves from all former Calumnies, by
publishing a Declaration of their Faith and Doctrine: Which they presented at
Vienna to the Archduke Ferdinand, about ten years before chosen King of
Bohemia, together with a large Apology prefixed before it. By which Confession
it appears, that they ascribe no Power to the Civil Magistrate in the
Concernments of the Church. That they had fallen upon a way of Ordaining
Ministers amongst themselves, without recourse unto the Bishop, or any such
Superior Officer, as a Super-intendent. And finally, That they retained the use
of Excommunication, and other Ecclesiastical Censures, for the chastising of
irregular and scandalous persons. In which last Point, and almost all the other
Branches of the said Confession, though they appeared as sound and Orthodox as
any others which had separated from the Church of Rome; yet by their
symbolizing with Geneva in so many particulars, it was no hard matter for the
whole Body of Calvinianism to creep in amongst them; the growth whereof
inflamed them to such desperate courses as they now pursued.

25. For this, they laid a good Foundation in the former year, 1609.
1609: when Matthias with his great Army was preparing for Prague, they found
the Emperor in some fear, from which he could not be secured, but by their
assistance; and they resolved to husband the conjuncture for their best
advantage. In confidence whereof, they propose unto him these Conditions, viz.
That the free exercise of Religion, as well according to the Bohemian, as the
Augustine Confession, might be kept inviolable; and that they which professed
the one, should neither scoff or despise the other. That all Arch-bishopricks,
Bishoprics, Abbotships, and other Spiritual Preferments, should be given to
the Bohemians only; and that Ecclesiastical Offices should be permitted to
Protestant Ministers as in former times. That it should be lawful for all men
in their own Bounds and Territories, to build Churches for their own Religion:
and that the Professors and Patrons of the University of Prague, should be
joined to the Consistory as in former times. That all Political Offices should
be indifferently permitted unto men of both Religions. With many other things
of like weight and moment, in their Civil Concernments. But the Emperor was not
yet reduced to that necessity, as to consent to all at once. He gratified them
at the present with a Conformation of their Civil Rights; but put off the
Demands which concerned Religion, to the next Assembly of Estates; conniving,
in the mean time, at the exercise of that Religion which he could not tolerate.

26. But the Calvinian Calixtins, or Confessionists, call them which you will,
perceiving a strong Party of the Catholics to be made against them, appointed
a General Assembly to be holden in the City of New Prague, the 4 th of May, to
consult of all such Matters as concerned their Cause, protesting publicly
(according to the common Custom of that kind), That this Assembly, though not
called by the Emperor's Authority, aimed at no other End than his Service only,
and the prosperity of that Kingdom; that both the Emperor and the Kingdom too,
might not through the Persuasions of his Evil Counselors, be brought to
extreme peril and danger. This done, they send their Letters to the new King of
Hungary, the Prince Elector Palatine; the Dukes of Saxony and Brunswick, and
other Princes of the Empire; beseeching them, That by their powerful
intercession with His Imperial Majesty, they might be suffered to enjoy the
exercise of their own Religion, which they affirmed to differ in no material
Point from the Confession of Ausberg. Following their blow, they first
Remonstrate to the Emperor how much they had been disappointed of their hopes
and expectations, from one time to another; and, in fine, tells him in plain
terms, That they will do their best endeavor for the raising of Arms, to the
end they might be able with their utmost power, to defend him their Sovereign,
together with themselves and the whole Kingdom, against the Practices of their
Foreign and Domestic Enemies. According to which Resolution, they forthwith
raised a great number both of Horse and Foot, whom they ranged under good
Commanders, and brought them openly into Prague. They procured also, that
Ambassadors were sent from the Elector of Saxony, and the Estates of Silesia,
(a Province many years since incorporated with the Realm of Bohemia) to
intercede in their behalf. This gave the Emperor a fair color to consent to
that, which nothing but extreme necessity could have wrested from him.

27. For thereupon he published his Letters of the 14 th of July, 1610, by
which it was declared, That all his Subjects communicating under one or both
kinds, should live together peaceably and freely, and without wronging or
reviling one another, under the pain and penalty of the Law to be inflicted
upon them who should do the contrary. That as they who communicated under one
kind, enjoyed the exercise of their Religion in all points, throughout the
Kingdom of Bohemia; so they which did communicate under both kinds, should
enjoy the field, without the let or interruption of any; and that they should
enjoy the same till a general union in Religion, and an end of all
Controversies, should be fully made: That they should have the lower Consistory
in the City of Prague, with Power to conform the same according to their own
Confession. That they might lawfully make their Priests as well of the
Bohemian, as of the German Nation; and settle them in their several Parishes,
without let or molestation of the Archbishop of Prague: and, that besides the
Schools and Churches which they had already, it might be lawful for them to
erect more of either sort, as well in Cities, as in Towns and Country
Villages. He declared also, that all Edicts formerly published against the free
exercise of Religion, should be void, frustrate, and of none effect: and that
no contrary Edict against the States of the Religion, should either be
published by Himself, or any of his Heirs and Successors; or if any were,
should be esteemed of any force or effect in Law: and finally, That all such of
His Majesty's Subjects that should do any thing contrary to these His Letters,
whether they were Ecclesiastical or Temporal persons, should be severely
punished as the Troublers of the Common Peace.

28. The passing of this Gracious Edict (which the Confessionists were not slow
of putting into execution), exceedingly exasperated all those of the Catholic
Party; who thereupon called in the Archduke Leopold, Bishop of Passaw, and one
of the Emperor's younger Brothers: Which Invitation he obeyed, entered the
Country with an Army of Twelve thousand men, makes himself Master of New
Prague, and attempts the Old. But he found such resistance there, that K.
Matthias, with a powerful Army, came time enough to their relief, and dislodged
the Besiegers. Which Aid he brought them at that time, not out of love to their
Religion, or their Persons either, but only upon some Advertisement which had
been given him of Duke Leopold's purposes, of getting that Kingdom to himself,
as formerly Matthias had extorted the Realm of Hungary, in despite of the
Emperor. But meaning to make sure work of it, he prevailed so far, that the
Emperor resigned unto him that Kingdom also, to which he was cheerfully elected
by the Estates of the Country, before the end of this year, Anno 1610. And
within two years after, was raised to the Imperial Dignity on the death of his
Brother. Advanced unto which Power and Height, he governed his Dominions with
great Moderation, till the year 1617. When being Himself, and all his Brothers,
without hope of Children, he cast his eyes upon his Cousin Ferdinand, then Duke
of Gratzi, (a Prince wholly acted by the Jesuits) whom he adopted for his Son,
declared him for his Successor in all the Patrimony and Estates belonging to
the House of Austria; and in the year 1618, put him into the actual possession
of the Realms of Hungary and Bohemia; but not with any such formality of
Election unto either of them, as in his own case had been observed.

29. This gave encouragement to some of the Catholic Party, to take offense at
some Churches lately erected by those of the Reformed Religion, ^^d either
totally to deface them, or to shut them up. Complaint hereof is made unto the
Emperor, but without any remedy. So that being doubly injured, as they gave it
out, they called an Assembly of the States, that order might be taken for the
preservation of Religion, and their Civil Rights, both equally endangered by
these new encroachments. The Emperor disallows the Meeting, commanding them by
Proclamation to dissolve the same. Which so exasperated some hot spirits, that
the Emperor's Secretary, and two of his principal Counselors, were cast
headlong out of the Castle-Windows. And though all three miraculously escaped
with life, yet the Conspirators conceived the Fact to be so unpardonable, that
they could find no means of doing better, but by doing worse. For hereupon they
set a Guard of Soldiers on the Baron of Sternberge, Governor of the Castle and
Kingdom; they secure Prague, displace all the Emperor's old Counselors, and
totally clear the Kingdom of all the Jesuits; and presently, as well by Letters
to Matthias himself, as by a public Declaration scattered in all parts of the
Kingdom, they justify themselves and their actings in it. Which done, they
nominate Two and thirty persons of their own Persuasion, to have a
superintendency over all Affairs which concerned that Kingdom, whom they called
by the name of Directors; and enter into a Solemn League or Covenant, to defend
each other against all persons whatsoever, without excepting either King or
Emperor. For punishing these Insolences, on the one side; and preserving the
Malefactors, on the other, from the hands of Justice; a terrible Confusion
first, and afterward a more terrible War, breaks out amongst them. In the
first heats whereof, the Emperor Matthias dies, and Ferdinand is lawfully
elected to succeed in the Empire. To stop the course of whose good Fortunes,
the Bohemian Confederates renounce all Allegiance to him, proclaim him for no
King of theirs, nor so to be acknowledged by the Princes and Estates of Germany.

30. But their new Governors (or Directors, as they called them) being
generally worsted in the War, and fearing to be called to a strict account for
these multiplied Injuries, resolve upon the choice of some Potent Prince, to
take that unfortunate Crown upon him. And who more like to carry it with
success and honor, than Frederick the fifth, Prince Elector Palatine, the Head
of the Calvinian Party, Son-in-law to the King of England, descended from a
Daughter of the Prince of Orange, and by his Wife allied to the King of
Denmark, the Dukes of Holstein and Brunswick, three great Lutheran Princes.
These were the Motives on their part to invite him to it; and they prevailed as
much with him to accept the offer, to which he was pushed forward by the secret
instigation of the States United, whose Truce with Spain was now upon the point
of exspiration; and they thought fit, in point of State-craft, that he should
exercise his Army further off, than in their Dominions. And unto these it may
be added, He had before incurred the Emperor's Displeasure on a double account;
first, for projecting the Confederacy of the Chiefs of the Calvinists, (whom
they called the Princes of the Union) for defense of themselves and their
Religion. And secondly, for demolishing the Fortifications which were raised at
Vdenhaine, though authorized by the Placart of Matthias himself, for which he
was impleaded in the Chamber of Spires. Upon which Motives and Temptations, he
first sends forth his Letters to the Estates of Bohemia, in which he signified
his acceptance of the Honor conferred upon him, and then acquaints K. JAMES
with the Proposition, whose Counsel he desired therein for his better
direction. But King JAMES was not pleased in the precipitancy of this rash
adventure, and thought himself unhandsomely handled, in having his Advice asked
upon the post-fact, when all his Counsels to the contrary must have come too
late. Besides, he had a strong Party of Calvinists in his own Dominions, who
were not to be trusted with a Power of disposing Kingdoms, for fear they might
be brought to practice that against Himself, which he had countenanced in
others. He knew no Prince could reign in safety, or be established on his
Throne with Peace and Honor, if once Religion should be made a Cloak to
disguise Rebellions.

31. Upon these grounds of Christian Prudence, he did not only disallow the
Action in his own particular, but gave command that none of his Subjects should
from thenceforth own his Son-in-law for the King of Bohemia, or pray for him in
the Liturgy, or before their Sermons, by any other Title than the Prince
Elector. At which the English Calvinists were extremely vexed, who had already
fancied to themselves upon this occasion the raising of a Fifth Monarchy in
these parts of Christendom, even to the dethroning of the Pope. the setting up
of Calvin in St. Peter's Chair, and carrying on the War to the Walls of
Constantinople. No man more zealous in the Cause, than Archbishop Abbot, who
pressed to have the News received with Bells and Bonfires, the King to be
engaged in a War for the defense of such a Righteous and Religious Cause, and
the Jewels of the Crown to be pawned in pursuance of it, as appears plainly by
his Letters to Sir Robert Naunton, principal Secretary of Estate. Which Letters
bearing date on the 12 th of December, Anno 1619, are to be found at large in
the Printed Cabala, p. 169, etc. and thither I refer the Reader for his
satisfaction. But neither the Persuasions of so great a Prelate, nor the
solicitations of the Princess and her public Ministers, nor the troublesome
interposings of the House of Commons in a following Parliament, were able to
remove that King from his first Resolution. By which, though he incurred the
high displeasure of the English Puritans, and those of the Calvinian Party in
other places; yet he acquired the Reputation of a Just and and Religious
Prince, with most men besides, and those not only of the Romish, but the
Lutheran Churches. And it is hard to say which of the two were most offended
with the Prince Elector, for his accepting of that Crown; which of them had
more ground to fear the ruin of their Cause and Party, if he had prevailed; and
which of them were more impertinently provoked to make Head against him, after
he had declared his acceptance of it.

32. For when he was to be Inaugurated in the Church of Prague, he neither
would be crowned in the usual Form, nor by the hands of the Archbishop, to
whom the performing of that Ceremony did of Right belong; but after such a form
and manner as was digested by Scultetus, his Domestic Chaplain, who chiefly
governed his Affairs in all Sacred matters. Nor would Scultetus undertake the
Ceremony of the Coronation, though very ambitious of that Honor, till he had
cleared the Church of all Carved Images, and defaced all the Painted also. In
both respects a-like offensive to the Romish Clergy, who found themselves
dis-priviledged, their Churches Sacrilegiously invaded, and further ruin
threatened by these Innovations. A Massy Crucifix had bin erected on the bridge
of Prague, which had stood there for many hundred years before; neither
affronted by the Lutherans, nor defaced by the Jews, though more averse from
Images than all people else: Scultetus takes offense at the sight thereof, as
if the Brazen Serpent were set up and worshipped; persuades the King to cause
it presently to be demolished, or else he never would be reckoned for an
Hezekiah; in which he found Conformity to his Humor also. And thereby did as
much offend all sober Lutherans, (who retain Images in their Churches, and
other places) as he had done the Romish Clergy by his former Follies. This gave
some new increase to those former Jealousies which had been given them by that
Prince; first, by endeavoring to suppress the Lutheran Forms in the Churches
of Brandenburgh, by the Arts and Practices of his Sister. And secondly, By
condemning their Doctrine at the Synod of Dort, (in which his Ministers were
more active than the rest of the Foreigners) though in the persons of those
men whom they called Arminians. But that which gave them greatest cause of
offense and fear, was his determinarion in a Cause depending between two
Sisters, at his first coming to the Crown; of which, the youngest had been
married to a Calvinian, the eldest to a Lutheran Lord. The place in difference,
was the Castle and Seignury of Gutscin, of which the eldest Sister had took
possession, as the Seat of her Ancestors. But the King passing Sentence for the
younger Sister, and sending certain Judges and other Officers, to put the place
into her actual possession, they were all blown up with Gunpowder, by the
Lutheran Lady, not able to concoct the Indignity offered, nor to submit unto
Judgment which appeared so partial.

33. In the mean time, whilst the Elector was preparing for his Journey to
Prague, the Faction of Bohemia not being able to withstand such Forces as the
Emperor had poured in upon them, invited Bethlem Gabor (not long before made
Prince of Transylvania, by the help of the Turks) to repair speedily to their
success. Which invitation he accepts, raises an Army of Eighteen thousand men,
ransacks all Monasteries and Religious Houses, wheresoever he came; and in
short time becomes the Master of the Upper Hungary, and the City of Presburgh;
the Protestants in all places, but most especially the Calvinians, submitting
readily unto him, whom they looked upon as their Deliverer from some present
servitude. From thence he sends his Forces to the Gates of Vienna, and
impudently craves that the Provinces of Styria, Carinthia, and Carniola, should
be united from thenceforth to the Realm of Hungary, the better to enable the
Hungarians to resist the Turk. 1620.
And having a design for ruining the House of Austria, he does not only crave
protection from the Ottoman Emperor, but requires the new King and Estates of
Bohemia; with the Provinces incorporate to it, to send their Ambassadors to
Constantinople, for entering into a Confederacy with the common Enemy. Hereupon
followed a great Meeting of Ambassadors from Bohemia, Austria, Silesia,
Lusatia, Venice, ^oland, and Turkey. All which assembled at Newhasall, in the
Upper Hungary; where the Turk readily entered into the Association, and the
Venetian Ambassador undertook the like in the Name of that Seignury. Encouraged
wherewith, the Transylvanian is proclaimed King of Hungary; who to make good a
Title so unjustly gotten, provides an Army of no fewer than Thirty thousand
(others say Fifty thousand) men. With which if he had entered into any part of
Bohemia, before the new King had lost himself in the Battle of Prague, it is
most probabable that he might have absolutely assured that Kingdom to the
Prince Elector, acquired the other for himself, and parted the Estates of
Austria amongst their Confederates.

34. But so it happened, that some Lutheran and Popish Princes, being both
equally jealous of their own Estates, and careful to preserve the Interest of
their several Parties, entered into League with the Emperor FERDINAND, for the
defense of one another, and the recovery of that Kingdom to the House of
Austria. In prosecution of which League, Iohn-George, the Duke Elector of
Saxony, invades Lusatia (another of the incorporate Provinces) with a puissant
Army, and in short time reduces it under his Command. And with like puissance,
Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, the most potent of the Catholic Princes, falls
into Bohemia, and opens all the way before him, to the Walls of Prague.
Joining with the Imperial Forces under Count Bucquoy, they are said to have
made up an Army of Fifty thousand. With which they gave battle to the Army of
the Prince Elector, consisting of Thirty thousand men, under the Conduct of the
Prince of Anhalt, and the Count of Thurne. It is reported, that the Prince
Elector was so good a Husband for the Emperor, as to preserve his Treasures in
the Castle of Prague, without diminishing so much thereof as might pay his
Soldiers: which made many of them throw away their Arms, and refuse to fight.
But sure it is, that the Imperials gained a great and an easy Victory; in the
pursuit whereof, the young Prince of Anhalt, together with Count Thurne, and
Saxon Weimar, were taken Prisoners, the Bohemian Ordnance all suprised, Prague
forced to yield unto the Victor, the King and Queen compelled to fly into
Silesia, from whence by many difficult passages, and untravelled ways, they
came at last in safety to the Hague in Holland. Nor is it altogether unworthy
of our observation, That this great Victory was obtained on a Sunday morning,
being the 8 th of November, and the 23 d Sunday after Trinity; in the Gospel of
which day occurred that memorable passage, Reddite Caesari, qua sunt Caesaris:
that is to say, Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's: Which seemed
to judg^ the Quarrel on the Emperor's side. Hereupon followed the most
Tragical, or rather most Tyranical Execution of the chief Directors, who had a
hand in the Design; the suppressing of the Protestant Reformed Religion, in all
the Emperor's Estates, the falling back of Bethlem Gabor into Transylvania, the
proscribing of the Prince Elector and his Adherents, the transferring of the
Electoral Dignity, together with the Upper Palatinate, on the Duke of Bavaria;
the Conquest of the lower Palatinate by the King of Spain, and the setting up
of Popery in all parts of both. In which condition they remained till the
restoring of Charles Lodowick, 1618.
the now Prince Elector, to the best part of his Estate, by the Treaty of
Munster, 1648.

35. Such was the miserable end of the War of Bohemia, raised chiefly by the
Pride and Pragmaticalness of Calvin's Followers, out of a hope to propagate
their Doctrines, and advance their Discipline in all parts of the Empire. Nor
sped the Hugonots much better in the Realm of France; where, by the countenance
and connivance of King HENRY the 4 th, who would not see it; and during the
minority of LEWIS the 13 th, who could not help it; they possessed themselves
of some whole Countries, and near Two hundred strong Towns, and fortified
places. Proud of which Strength, they took upon them as a Commonwealth, in the
midst of a Kingdom; summoned Assemblies for the managing of their own Affairs,
when, and as often as they pleased. Gave Audience to the Ministers of Foreign
Churches; and empowered Agents of their own to negotiate with them. At the same
Meetings they consulted about Religion, made new Laws for Government, displaced
some of their old Officers, and elected new ones; the King's consent being
never asked to the Alterations. In which licentious calling of their own
Assemblies, they abused their Power to a neglect of the King's Authority; and
not dissolving those Assemblies when they were commanded, they improved that
Neglect to a Disobedience. Nay, sometimes they run cross therein to those very
Edicts which they had gained by the effusion of much Christian Blood, and the
expense of many Hundred thousand Crowns. For by the last Edict of Pacification,
the King had granted the free exercise of both Religions, even in such Towns as
were assigned for Caution to the Hugonot Party. Which liberty being enjoyed for
many years, was at last interrupted by those very men who with so much
difficulty had procured it. For in an Assembly of theirs which they held at
Loudun, Anno 1619, they strictly commanded all their Governors, Mayors, and
Sheriffs, not to suffer any Jesuit, nor those of any other Order, to preach in
any of the Towns assigned to them, though licensed by the Bishop of the
Diocese, in due Form of Law. And when, upon a dislike of their proceedings, the
King had declared their Meetings to be unlawful, and contrary to the Public
Peace; and had procured the Declaration to be verified in the Court of
Parliament; they did not only refuse to separate themselves, as they were
required, but still insisted upon terms of Capitulation, even to a plain
justifying of their actings in it.

36. These carriages gave the King such just offense, that he denied them leave
to send Commissioners to the Synod of Dort, to which they had been earnestly
invited by the States of the Netherlands. For being so troublesome and
imperious, when they acted only by the strength of their Provincial or National
Meetings; what danger might not be suspected from a general Confluence, in
which the Heads of all the Faction might be laid together? 1619.
But then to sweeten them a little after this Refusal, he gave them leave to
hold an Assembly at Charenton, four miles from Paris, there to debate those
points, and to agree those differences which in that Synod had been agitated by
the rest of their Party. Which Liberty they made such use of, in the said
Assembly, that they approved all the Determinations which were made at Dort,
commanded them to be subscribed, and bound themselves and their Successors in
the Ministry, by a solemn Oath, Non tau^um constanter firmiterque sed ad
extremum usque halitium perstiturus. Exa. Cens.
Not only steadfastly and constantly to adhere unto them, but to persist in
maintenance thereof, to the last gasp of their breath. But to return to the
Assembly at Loudun; They would not rise from thence, though the King commanded
it, till they had taken order for another Assembly to be held at Rochel, the
chief place of their strength, and the Metropolis or principal City of their
Commonwealth. Which General Assembly being called by their own Authority, and
called at such a time as had given the King some trouble in composing the
Affairs of Bearn, was by the King so far disliked, and by especial Edict so far
prohibited, that they were all declared to be guilty of Treason, who should
continue in the same without further Order. Which notwithstanding, they sat
still, and very undutifully proceeded in their former purposes. Their business
was to draw up a Remonstrance of their present Grievances, or rather of the
Fears and Jealousies which they had conceived on the King's journey into Bearn.
This they presented to the King by their own Commissioners, and thereunto
received a fair and plausible Answer, sent in a Letter to them by the Duke Des
Diguiers; by whom they were advised to dissolve the Assembly, and submit
themselves unto the King. Instead whereof, they published a Declaration in
defense of their former Actions, and signified a Resolution not to separate or
break up that Meeting, until their Grievances were redressed.

37. It happened at the same time, that the Lord of Privas (a Town in which the
Hugonots made the strongest Party) married his Daughter and Heir to the
Viscount of Cheylane; and dying, left the same wholly unto his disposal. Who
being of different persuasions from the greatest part of his Vassals, altered
the Garrison, and placed his own Servants and Dependents in it, as by Law he
might. This moved the Hugonots of the Town, and the Neighboring Villages, to
put themselves into a posture of War, to seize upon the places adjoining, and
thereby to compel the young Nobleman to forsake his Inheritance. Which being
signified to the King, he presently scored this insolence on the account of the
Rochellers, who standing in defiance of his Authority, was thought to have
given some animation unto the Town of Privas, to commit those outrages. Doubly
affronted and provoked, the King resolves to right Himself in the way of Arms.
But at the instant request of Des Diguiers, before remembered, (who had been
hitherto a true Zealot to the Hugonot Cause) he was content to give them Four
and twenty days of deliberation before he drew into the Field. He offered them
also very fair and reasonable Canditions; not altogether such as their
Commissioners had desired for them; but far better than those which they were
glad to accept at the end of the War, when all their strengths were taken from
them. But the Hugonots were not to be told, that all the Calvinian Princes and
Estates of the Empire, had put themselves into a posture of War; some for
defense of the Palatinate, and others in pursuance of the War of Bohemia. Of
which they gave themselves more hopes than they had just cause for. In which
conjuncture, some hot spirits then assembled at Rochel, blinded with pride, or
hurried on by the fatality of those Decrees which they maintained to be
resolved upon by God before all Eternity, reject all offers tending to a
Pacification, and wilfully run on to their own destruction. For presently upon
the tendry of the King's Proposals, they publish certain Orders for the
regulating of their Disobedience; as namely, That no Agreement should be made
with the King, but by the consent of a General Convocation of the Chiefs of
their Party; about the payment of their Soldiers Wages, and intercepting the
Revenues of the King and Clergy, toward the maintenance of the War. They also
Cantoned the whole Kingdom into seven Divisions; assigned to each of those
Divisions, a Commander in Chief; and unto each Commander, their particular
Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and other Officers, with several Limitations
and Directions prescribed to each of them for their proceeding in this service.

1621.
38. This makes it evident, that the King did not take up Arms, but on great
necessities. He saw his Regal Authority neglected, his especial Edicts wilfully
violated, his Gracious Offers scornfully slighted, his Revenues Feloniously
intercepted, his whole Realm Cantoned before his face, and put into the power
of such Commanders as he could not trust: So that the War being just on his
part, he had the more reason to expect such an issue of it, as was agreeable to
the Equity of so good a Cause. He had besides, all those Advantages both at
home and abroad, which in all probability might assure him of the End desired.
The Prince Elector Palatine had been worsted in the War of Bohemia, and all
the Princes of the Union scattered to their several Homes, which they were
hardly able to defend against so many Enemies; so that there was no danger to
be feared from them. And on the other side, the King of Great Britain, whom he
had most cause to be afraid of, had denied assistance to his own Children in
the War of Bohemia, which seemed to have more Justice in it than the War of
the Hugonots; and therefore was not like to engage in behalf of strangers, who
rather out of wantonness, than any unavoidable necessity, had took up Arms
against their Lawful and Undoubted Sovereign. At home the Rochellers were worse
befriended than they were abroad; I mean the Commonwealth of Rochel, as King
LEWIS called it. The whole Confederacy of the Hugonots there contrived and
sworn to; they had Cantoned the whole Realm into seven Divisions, which they
assigned to the Command of the Earl of Chastillon, the Marquess De la Force,
the Duke of So^bize, the Duke of Rohan, the Duke of Trimoville, the Duke Des
Diguer, and the Duke of Bouillon, whom they designed to be the Generalissimo
over all their Forces. But neither he, nor Des Diguers, nor the Duke of
Trimoville, nor Chastillon, would act any thing in it, or accept any such
Commissions as were sent unto them: Whether it were that they were terrified
with the ill success of the War of Bohemia; or that the Conscience of their
duty did direct them in it, I dispute not now. So that the Rochellers being
deserted both at home and abroad, were forced to rely upon the Power and
Prudence of the other three; and to supply all other wants, out of the Magazine
of Obstinacy and Perverseness; with which they were plentifully stored. Two
instances I shall only touch at, and pass over the rest. The town of Clerack
being summoned the 21 of July, 1621, returned this Answer to the King, viz.
That if he would permit them to enjoy their Liberties, withdraw his Armies, and
leave their Fortifications in the same estate in which he found them, they
would remain his faithful and obedient Subjects. More fully, those of Mount
Albon on the like occasion, That they resolve to live and dye (not in obedience
to the King, as they should have said, but) in the Union of the Churches. Most
Religious Rebels!

39. Next, let us look upon the King; who being brought to a necessity of
taking Arms, first made his way unto it by his Declaration of the second of
April, published in favor of all those of that Religion who would contain
themselves in their due obedience. In pursuance whereof, he caused five persons
to be executed in the City of Tours, who had tumultuously disturbed the
Hugonots, whom they found busied at the burial of one of their dead. He also
signified to the King of Great Britain, the Princes of the Empire, and the
States of the Netherlands, That he had not undertook this War to suppress the
Religion, but to chastise the Insolences of Rebellious Subjects. And what he
signified in words, he made good by his deeds: For when the War was at the
hottest, all those of the Religion in the City of Paris, lived as securely as
before, and had their accustomed Meetings at Charenton, as in times of peace.
Which safety and security was enjoyed in all other places, even where the
King's Armies lodged and quartered. Nay, such a care was taken of their
preservation, that when some of the Rascality in the City of Paris, upon the
first tidings of the death of the Duke of Mayenne, (who had been slain at the
Siege of Mont-albon, amongst many others) breathed nothing but slaughter and
revenge to the Hugonot Party; the Duke of Mounbazon, being then Governor of
the City, commanded their Houses and the Streets to be safely guarded, so that
no hurt was done to their Goods or Persons. And when the Rabble, being
disappointed of their Ends in Paris, had run tumultuously the next day to
Charenton, and burned down their Temple, an Order was presently made by the
Court of Parliament, for the re-edifying it at the King's sole Charges, and
that too in a far more beautiful Fabric than before it had. But in the conduct
of the War, he governed not his Counsels with like moderation, suffering the
Sword too often to range at liberty; as if he meant to be as terrible in his
Executions, as he desired to be accounted just in his Undertakings. But
possibly this may be excused, though not defended, as being done in hot blood,
when the spirits of the Soldiers were enflamed with anger, by reason of the
loss of so many of their Chief Commanders, occasioned by the holding out of the
obstinate Party; or the loss of their Fellows; and could not easily be quenched
but by the blood of their Enemies.

1622.
40. I shall not touch upon the particulars of this War, which was quick and
violent; and as succesful on the King's part, as he could desire. Let it
suffice, that within the compass of Eighteen Months, or thereabouts, he stripped
them of no fewer than One hundred of their strongest places: so that their
whole strength was reduced in a manner to two Towns only; that is to say, the
strong Town of Montalbon, and the Port of Rochel; the rest submitting one by
one, at the first demand. A Peace is thereupon concluded before Montpellier,
agreeable enough to the Will of the Victor, and with security enough to the
vanquished Party, if all Conclusions had been kept with as great a constancy,
as they had been agreed upon with a seeming alacrity. By which Accord, the said
two Towns were to be held in caution for three years only; and the last seemed
much overawed by the Fort of K. Lewis, erected by the Count of Soiscons, when
he lay before it. For the demolishing of which Fort, the King was earnestly
solicited by their Commissioners; and for the not granting whereof, when it
was desired, he was accused for violating the Pacification which he had made
with them before Montpellier, and solemnly confirmed in the Courts of
Parliament. And on the other side, the King complained as sensibly against the
Hugonots, in regard they had not settled the Ecclesiastics in their lawful
Possessions, nor admitted those of the Roman Catholic Religion, unto Civil
Offices, in any of their Towns and Territories, as by the Articles of that
Pacification they were bound to do. So that the Wound seemed rather to be
skinned, than healed; and suddenly became more dangerous than at first it was.
For those of Rochel being somewhat blocked up by Fort Lewis, toward the Land,
practiced with the Duke of Soubize to grow strong by Sea, and make up a Fleet
consisting of Eleven men of War, besides lesser Vessels, enter the large Haven
of Blavet in Bretagne, seize upon all the Ships which they found therein; and
amongst others, six of great strength and beauty, belonging to the Duke of
Nevers. By the accession of this Strength, they seize upon the Isles of The and
Oleron, with all the Shipping in the same; and having gathered together a Navy
of no fewer than Seventy Sail, they infest the Seas, and interrupt the course
of Traffic.

1625.
41. For the repressing of these Pirates, (for they were no better) the King
sends out the Duke of Montmorency, with a Naval Power; hires Twenty men of War
of the States of Holland, and borrows Eight tall Ships of the King of England:
With which he gives battle to Soubize, beats him at Sea, and forces him to
fly dishonourably from the Isle of The, which the French presently possess,
and begin to fortify. For the removal of whose Forces from that Island, which
blockt up their Haven, the Rochellers mediate, by Soubize, with K. CHARLES of
England; betwixt whom, and his Brother of France, some disgust had happened, for
sending back the French of both Sexes, whom the Queen brought with her. For
hereupon the French King seizes upon all the English Ships which traded on the
River of Bourdeaux; and the English, to revenge the wrong, sets out a Fleet of
Thirty sail, 1626.
all Men of War, commanded by the Earls of Denbigh and Lindsey, with an intent
to steer for Rochel, and relieve that Town. But being encountered with cross
winds, they came back again, and leave the prosecuting of the Action to the
Duke of Buckingham. Who, 1627.
the next year, sets forward with a puissant Army, consisting of Ten thousand
men, and wafted over in One hundred and fifty Sail of Ships, all fit for
Service. His Design was for the recovering of the Isle of The, and relieving
Rochel. Both which he might have compassed without any great difficulty, if he
had not lost the opportunities which he gained at his landing; passed by the
Fort of La Pre, as not worth the taking, and suffering himself to be
complemented out of the storming of St. Martins, when it was at his mercy. For
the French Forces entering by the Fort of La Pre, compelled him to an unsafe
Retreat, but of a great part of his Army; and sent him back with far less
Honor than he brought a-long with him.

42. But the Relief of Rochel is not so given over. 1628.
A strong Fleet is prepared for the year next following, to be commanded by the
Duke, who gave himself more hopes of good Fortune in it, than his Fates
assigned him. For being villanously slain at Portsmouth, when he was almost
ready to embark his Soldiers, the Conduct of the Action is committed to the
Earl of Lindsey; who very cheerfully and courageously undertook the Service.
But the French had blockt up the Haven of Rochel, with Piles and Ramparts, and
other most stupendous Works in the midst of the Ocean, that it was utterly
impossible for the Earl to force his passage, though he did most gallantly
attempt it. Which being observed by those of Rochel, who were then besieged to
Landward, by the King in Person, and even reduced unto the last extremity, by
Plagues and Famine; they presently set open their Gates, and without making any
Conditions for their preservation, submitted absolutely to that Mercy which
they had scorned so often in their prosperous Fortunes. The King thus Master of
the Town, dismantleth all their Fortifications, leaves it quite open both to
Sea and Land, commands them to renounce the Name of Rochel, and to take unto
the Town the Name of Mary Ville, or Bourg de St. Mary. But herein his Command
found but small compliance; the Name of Rochel still remaining, and that of
Mary Ville, or Bourg de St. Mary, almost as soon forgotten as it had been
given. After which followed the surrendry of Nismess, and Montalbon, two
impregnable places; the first of which had been re-fortified in these last
Commotions. For, What Town could presume of standing out against the King, when
Rochel had been forced to submit to Mercy.

43. See now to what a low condition these hot Calvinian spirits have reduced
themselves by their frequent Insolences; how different their Affairs were at
the end of this War, from that Felicity which they enjoyed when they first
began it. Before the beginning of the War, Anno 1620, they were possessed of
well-near Two hundred strong Towns and Castles, well fortified for their
personal safety, besides many fair Houses, and large Territories, which they
had in the Villages, in which their Pleasures and their Profits were a-like
consulted; they slept all of them under their own Vines, and their own
Fig Trees, neither fearing, nor having cause to fear the least disturbance.
With those of the Catholic Party they were grown so intimate, by reason of
their frequent inter-marriages with one another, that in few years they might
have been incorporated with them, and made of the same Family, though of
different Faiths. The exercise of their Religion had been permitted to them
since the passing of the Edict of Nants, 1598, without interruption. And that
they might have satisfaction also in the Courts of Justice, some Courts were
purposely erected for their ease and benefit, which they called Les Chambres d'
l' Edict, wherein there were as many Judges and other Officers of their own
Persuasions, as there were of the contrary. In a word, they lived so secure and
happy, that they wanted nothing to perpetuate their Felicities to succeeding
Ages, but Moderation in themselves, Gratitude to Almighty God, and good
Affections toward their King.

44. Such were the Fortunes and Successes of the Presbyterians in the rest of
Christendom, during the last ten years of the Reign of K. JAMES, and the
beginnings of K. CHARLES. By which both Kings might see how unsafe they were,
if men of such Pragmatical Spirits, and Seditious Principles, should get ground
upon them. But K. JAMES had so far supported them in the Belgic Provinces,
that his own Calvinists presumed on the like Indulgence; which prompted them to
set naught by his Proclamations, to vilify his Instructions, and despise his
Messages. Finally, they made trial of his patience also, by setting up one
Knight, of Broadgates (now called Pembroke College) to preach upon the Power of
such popular Officers as Calvin thinks to be ordained by Almighty God, for
curbing and restraining the Power of Kings. In which, though Knight himself was
censured, the Doctrines solemnly condemned, and execution done upon a Book of
Pareus, which had misguided the unfortunate and ignorant man; yet the
Calvinians most tenaciously adhered to their Master's tendries, with an intent
to bring them into use and practice, when occasion served. So that K. JAMES
with all his King-craft, could find no better way to suppress their
Insolences, than by turning Mountague upon them; a man of mighty Parts, and an
undaunted Spirit; and one who knew, as well as any, how to discriminate the
Doctrines of the Church of England, from those which were peculiar to the Sect
of Calvin. By which he galled and gagged them more than his Popish Adversary;
but raised thereby so many Pens against himself, that he might seem to have
succeeded in the state of Ismael.

45. In this conjuncture of Affairs, K. JAMES departs this life, and K. CHARLES
succeeds; who to ingratiate himself with this powerful Faction, had plunged his
Father in a War with the House of Austria, by which he was brought under the
necessity of calling Parliaments, and gave those Parliaments the courage to
dispute his Actions. For though they promised to stand to him with their Lives
and Fortunes, in prosecution of that War; yet when they had engaged him in it,
they would not part with any money to defray that Charge, till they had
stripped him of the Richest Jewels in the Regal Diadem. But he was much more
punished in the consequence of his own Example in aiding those of Rochel
against their King, whereby he trained up his own Subjects in the School of
Rebellion, and taught them to confederate themselves with the Scots and Dutch,
to seize upon his Forts and Castles, invade the Patrimony of the Church, and to
make use of his Revenue against himself. To such Misfortunes many Princes do
reduce themselves, when either they engage themselves to maintain a Party, or
govern not their Actions by the Rules of Justice; but are directed by
self ends, or swayed by the corrupt Affections of untrusty Ministers. These
things I only touch at here, which I reserve for the Materials of another
History, as I do also all the intermediate passages in the Reign of K. CHARLES,
before the breaking out of the Scottish Tumults, and most of the preparatives
to the War of England.

AERIVS REDIVIVVS: OR, The History OF THE PRESBYTERIANS. LIB. XIII. Containing
The Insurrections of the Presbyterian or Puritan Faction, in the Realm of
Scotland: The Rebellions raised by them in England: Their horrid Sacriledges,
Murders, Spoils, and Rapines, in pursuit thereof: Their Innovations both in
Doctrine and Discipline: And the greatest Alteration made in the Civil
Government, from the year 1636, to the year 1647, when they were stripped of all
Command by the Independents.
1. THE Presbyterian-Scots, and the Puritan-English, were not so much
discouraged by the ill successes of their Brethren in France and Germany, as
animated by the prosperous Fortunes of their Friends in Holland. Who by
Rebellion were grown Powerful; and by Rapine, Wealthy; and by the Reputation of
their Wealth and Power, were able to avenge themselves on the opposite Party.
To whose Felicities, if those in England did aspire, they were to entertain
those Counsels, and pursue those courses, by which the others had attained
them; that is to say, They were by secret practices to diminish the King's
Power and Greatness, to draw the people to depend upon their Directions, to
dissolve all the Ligaments of the former Government; and either call in
Foreign Forces, or form an Army of their own to maintain their doings. And
this had been the business of the Puritan Faction, since the death of Bancroft;
when by the retirements of K. JAMES from all cares of Government, and the
connivance or remisness of Archbishop Abbot, the Reins were put into their
hands. Which gave them time and opportunity to grow strong in Parliaments,
under pretense of standing for the Subjects Property, against the encroachments
of the Court, and for the preservation of the true Religion, against the
practices of the Papists. By which two Artifices, they first weakened the
Prerogative Royal, to advance their own; and by the diminution of the King's
Authority, endeavored to erect the People's, whom they represented. And then
they practiced to asperse with the Name of Papist, all those who either join
not with them in their Sabbath-Doctrines, or would not captivate their
Judgments unto Calvin's Dictates. Their actings in all which particulars,
either as Zealots for the Gospel, in maintaining Calvinism; or Patriots for the
Commonwealth, in bringing down the Power and Reputation of the two last Kings;
shall be at large delivered in the Life of the late Archbishop, and
consequently may be thought unnecessary to be here related. And therefore,
pretermitting all their former practices, by which their Party was prepared,
and the Design made ready to appear in public; we will proceed to a Relation
of the following passages, when they had pulled off their Disguise, and openly
declared themselves to be ripe for Action.

2. The Party in both Kingdoms being grown so strong that they were able to
proceed from Counsel unto Execution; there wanted nothing but a fair occasion
for putting themselves into a posture of defense; and from that posture,
breaking out into open War. But finding no occasion, they resolve to make one;
and to begin their first Embroilments upon the sending of the new Liturgy and
Book of Canons to the Kirk of Scotland. For though the Scots in a general
Assembly held at Aberdeen, 1617.
had given consent unto the making of a Liturgy for the use of that Kirk, and
for drawing up a Book of Canons out of the Acts of their Assemblies, and some
Acts of Parliament; yet* when those Books were finished by the Care of King
CHARLES, and by his Piety recommended unto use and practice, it must be looked
on as a violation of their Rights and Liberties. And though in another of their
Assemblies which was held at Perth, 1618.
they had past five Articles for introducing private Baptism, communicating of
the sick, kneeling at the Communion, Episcopal Confirmation, and the observing
of such ancient Festivals as belonged immediately unto Christ: yet when those
Articles were incorporated in the Common Prayer Book* they were beheld as
Innovations in the Worship of God, and therefore not to be admitted in so pure
and Reformed a Church as that of Scotland. These were the Hooks by which they
drew the people to them, who never look on their Superiors with a greater
reverence, than when they see them active in the Cause of Religion; and
willing, in appearance, to lose all which was dear unto them, whereby they
might preserve the Gospel in its native purity. But it was rather Gain than
Godliness, which brought the great men of the Realm to espouse this Quarrel;
who by the Commission of Surrendries (of which more elsewhere), began to fear
the losing of their Tithes and Superiorities, 1630.
to which they could pretend no other title, than plain Usurpation. And on the
other side, it was Ambition, and not Zeal, which enflamed the Presbyters; who
had no other way to invade that Power which was conferred upon the Bishops by
Divine Institution, and countenanced by many Acts of Parliament in the Reign of
K. JAMES, than by embracing that occasion to incense the people, to put the
whole Nation into tumult, and thereby to compel the Bishops and the Regular
Clergy to forsake the Kingdom. So the Genevians dealt before with their Bishop
and Clergy, when the Reforming-Humour came first upon them: And what could they
do less in Scotland, than follow the Example of their Mother-City?

3. These breakings-out in Scotland, smoothed the way to the like in England,
from which they had received encouragement, and presumed on Succors. The
English Puritaus had begun with Libelling against the Bishops, as the Scots did
against the King: For which, the Authors and Abettors had received some
punishment; but such, as did rather reserve them for ensuing Mischiefs, than
make them sensible of their Crimes, or reclaim them from it. So that upon the
coming of the Liturgy and Book of Canons, 1637.
the Scots were put into such heat, that they disturbed the execution of the
one by an open Tumult, and refused obedience to the other by a wilful
obstinacy. The King had then a Fleet at Sea, sufficiently powerful to have
blockt up all the Havens of Scotland; and, by destroying that small Trade which
they had amongst them, to have reduced them absolutely to His Will and
Pleasure. But they had so many of their Party in the Council of Scotland, and
had so great a confidence in the Marquess of Hamilton, and many Friends of both
Nations in the Court of England, that they feared nothing less than the Power
of the King, or to be enforced to their obedience in the way of Arms. In
confidence whereof, they despise all His Proclamations, with which Weapons only
He encountered them in their first Seditions; and publicly protested against
all Declarations which He sent unto them, in the Streets of Edenborough.
Nothing else being done against them in the first year of their Tumults, they
cast themselves into four Tables for dispatch of business; but chiefly, for the
cementing of their Combination. For which, they could not easily bethink
themselves of a speedier course, than to unite the people to them by a League
or Covenant. Which to effect, it was thought necessary to renew the old
Confession, excogitated in the year 1580, for the abjuring of the Tyranny and
Superstitions of the Church of Rome; subscribed first by the King and His
Houshold-Servants; and the next year by all the Natives of the Kingdom, as was
said before. And it was also said before, that unto this Confession they
adjoined a Band, Anno 1592, for standing unto one another in defense thereof,
against all Papists, and other professed Adversaries of their Religion. This is
now made to serve their turn against the King: For by a strange interpretation
which was put upon it, it was declared, That both the Government of the Church
by Bishops, and the Five Articles of Perth, the Liturgy, and the Book of
Canons, were all abjured by that Confession, and the Band annexed; though the
three last had no existency or being in the Kirk of Scotland, when that
Confession was first formed, or the Band subjoined.

1638.
4. These Insolences might have given the King a just cause to arm, when they
were utterly unprovided of all such necessaries as might enable them to make
the least show of a weak resistance. But the King deals more gently with them,
negotiates for some fair accord of the present differences, and sends the
Marquess of Hamilton as his chief Commissioner for the transacting of the same.
By whose solicitation he revokes the Liturgy and the Book of Canons, suspends
the Articles of Perth, and then rescinds all Acts of Parliament which confirmed
the same; submits the Bishops to the next General Assembly, as their competent
Judges; and thereupon gives intimation of a General Assembly to be held at
Glasgow, in which the point of Church Government was to be debated, and all his
Condescentions enrolled and registered. And, which made most to their advantage,
he caused the Solemn League or Covenant to he imposed on all the Subjects, and
subscribed by them. Which in effect was to legitimate the Rebellion, and
countenance the Combination with the face of Authority. But all this would not
do his business, though it might do theirs. For they had so contrived the
matter, that none were chosen to have voices in that Assembly, but such as were
sure unto the side, such as had formerly been under the Censures of the Church
for their Inconformity, and had refused to acknowledge the King's Supremacy, or
had declared their disaffections to Episcopal Government. And that the Bishops
might have no encouragement to sit amongst them, they cite them to appear as
Criminal persons, Libel against them in a scandalous and unchristian manner;
and finally, make choice of Henderson, a Seditious Presbyter, to sit as
Moderator or chief President in it. And though upon the sense of their
disobedience, the Assembly was again dissolved by the King's Proclamation; yet
they continued, as before, in contempt thereof. In which Session they condemned
the Calling of Bishops, the Articles of Perth, the Liturgy, and the Book of
Canons, as inconsistent with the Scripture, and the Kirk of Scotland. They
proceed next to the rejecting of the five controverted points, which they
called Arminianism: and finally, decreed a general subscription to be made to
these Constitutions. For not conforming whereunto, the Bishops, and a great
part of the Regular Clergy, are expelled the Country, although they had been
animated unto that Refusal, as well by the Conscience of their duty, as by his
Majesty's Proclamation which required it of them.

5. They could not hope that the King's Lenity so abused, might not turn to
Fury; and therefore thought it was high time to put themselves into Arms, to
call back most of their old Soldiers from the Wars in Germany; and almost all
their Officers from such Commands in the Netherlands; whom to maintain, they
intercept the King's Revenue, and the Rents of the Bishops, and lay great Taxes
on the people, taking up Arms and Ammunition from the States United, with whom
they went on Ticket, and long days of payment, for want of ready money for
their satisfaction. But all this had not served their turn, if the King could
have been persuaded to have given them battle, or suffered any part of that
great Army which he brought against them, to lay waste their Country. Whose
tenderness when they once perceived, and knew withal how many friends they had
about him, they thought it would be no hard matter to obtain such a
Pacification as might secure them for the present from an absolute Conquest,
and give them opportunity to provide better for themselves in the time to come,
upon the reputation of being able to divert or break such a puissant Army. And
so it proved in the event. For the King had no sooner retired his Forces both
by Sea and Land, and given his Soldiers a License to return to their several
Houses, but the Scots presently protest against all the Articles of the
Pacification, put harder pressures on the King's Party, than before they
suffered, keep all their Officers in pay; by their Messengers and Letters,
apply themselves to the French King for support and succors. By whom
encouraged underhand, and openly countenanced by some Agents of the Cardinal
Richelieu, who then governed all Affairs in France, they enter into England
with a puissant Army, making their way to that Invasion, by some Printed
Pamphlets, which they dispersed into all parts, thereby to color their
Rebellions, and bewitch the people.

6. And now the English Presbyterians take the courage to appear more publicly
in the defense of the Scots and their proceedings, 1640.
than they had done hitherto. A Parliament had been called on the 13 th of
April, for granting Moneys to maintain the War against the Scots. But the
Commons were so backward in complying with the King's Desires, that he found
himself under the necessity of dissolving the Parliament, which else had
blasted his Design, and openly declared in favor of the public Enemies. This
puts the discontented Rabble into such a fury, that they violently assaulted
Lambeth-House, but were as valiantly repulsed; and the next day break open all
the Prisons in Southwark, and release all the Prisoners whom they found
committed for their Inconformities. Benstead, the Ringleader in these Tumults,
is apprehended and arraigned, condemned and executed; the whole proceeding
being grounded on the Statute of the 25 th of K. EDWARD the 3 d, for punishing
all Treasons and Rebellions against the King. But that which threatened greater
danger to the King and the Church, than either the Arms of the Scots, or the
Tumults in Southwark; was a Petition sent unto the King, who was then at York,
subscribed by sundry Noblemen of the Popular Faction; concluded on the 28 th
of August; carried by the Lord Mandevil, and the Lord Howard of Escrigg: and
finally, presented on the third of September. In which it was petitioned,
amongst other things, That the present War might be composed without loss of
blood. That a Parliament should be forthwith called for redress of Grievances,
(amongst which, some pretended Innovations in Religion must be none of the
least) and that the Authors and Counselors of such Grievances as are there
complained of, might be there brought to such a Legal Trial, and receive such
condign punishment as their Crimes required. This hastened the assembling of the
great Council of the Peers at York, and put the King upon the calling of a
Parliament of His own accord, which otherwise might be thought extorted by
their importunity.

7. The Scots, in the mean time, had put by such English Forces as lay on the
South Side of the Tine, at the passage of Newborn, make themselves Masters of
Newcastle, deface the goodly Church of Durham, bring all the Countries on the
North-side of the Tees, under contribution, and tax the people to all payments
at their only pleasure. The Council of Peers, and a Petition from the Scots,
prepare the King to entertain a Treaty with them; the managing whereof was
chiefly left unto those Lords who had subscribed the Petition before remembered.
But the third day of November coming on a-pace, and the Commissioners seeming
desirous to attend in Parliament, which was to begin on that day, the Treaty is
adjourned to London; which gave the Scots a more dangerous opportunity to
infect that City, than all their Emissaries had obtained in the times
foregoing. Nor was it long before it openly appeared what great power they had
upon their Party in that City; which animated Pennington, attended with some
hundreds of inferior note, to tender a Petition to the House of Commons,
against the Government of Bishops here by Law established. It was affirmed,
that this Petition was subscribed by many thousands; and it was probable enough
to be so indeed. But whether it were so or not, he gave thereby such an
occasion to the House of Commons, that they voted down the Canons which had
passed in the late Convocation, condemned the Bishops and Clergy in great sums
of Money* which had subscribed to the same: decry the Power of all Provincial
or National Synods, for making any Canons or Constitutions which could bind the
Subject, until they were confirmed by an Act of Parliament. And having brought
this general terror on the Bishops and Clergy, they impeach the Archbishop of
High Treason, cause him to be committed to the Black Rod, and from thence to
the Tower. Which being done, some other of the Bishops and Clergy must be
singled out, informed against by scandalous Articles, and those Articles
printed, without any consideration either true or false.

1641.
8. And though a Convocation were at that time sitting; yet to increase the
Miseries of a falling-Church, it is permitted, that a private Meeting should be
held in the Deanery of Westminster, to which some Orthodox and Conformable
Divines were called, as a foil to the rest, which generally were of
Presbyterian or Puritan Principles. By them it was proposed, That many passages
in the Liturgy should be expunged, and others altered to the worse. That
Decency and Reverence in officiating God's public Service, should be brought
within the compass of Innovations. That Doctrinal Calvinism should be
entertained in all parts of the Church; and all their Sabbath-Speculations,
though contrary to Calvin's Judgment, super-added to it. But before any thing
could be concluded in those weighty matters, the Commons set their Bill on foot
against Root and Branch, for putting down all Bishops and Cathedral Churches;
which put a period to that Meeting without doing any thing. And though the
Bill, upon a full debate thereon amongst the Peers, was cast out of that House,
and was not by the course of Parliaments to be offered again; yet, contrary to
all former Custom, it was pressed from one time to another, till in the end they
gained the point which they so much aimed at. Hereupon followed some Petitions
from the Universities, in favor of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, without
which, Learning must be destitute of its chief encouragements; and some
Petitions from whole Counties, in behalf of Episcopacy, without which there was
like to be no preservative against Sects and Heresies. But nothing was more
memorable than the inter-pleadings in the House of Commons, between Dr. John
H^cket, one of the Prebendaries of St. Paul's, and Archdeacon of Bedford; and
Dr. Cornelius Burges, a right doubty Disputant; but better skilled in drawing
down his Myrmidons, than in mustering Arguments: the issue of whose Plea was
this, That though Cathedrals were unnecessary, and the Quire-men scandalous;
yet, that their Lands could not be alienated unto private persons, without
guilt of Sacriledg.

9. But little did this edify with the Leading-part in the House of Commons,
who were resolved to practice on the Church by little and little, and at the
last to play at sweep-stake, and take all together. First therefore, they began
with taking down the Starr-Chamber, and the High Commission, without which
Courts the Subjects could not easily be kept in order, nor the Church from
Faction. And in the Act for taking down the Court of the High Commission, a
clause is cunningly inserted, which plainly took away all Coercive Power which
had been vested in the Bishops and their Underofficers, disabling them from
imposing any pain or penalty; and consequently, from inflicting all
Church Censures on notorious sinners. Their Jurisdiction being thus gone, it
was not likely that their Lands should stay long behind; though in good manners
it was thought convenient to strip them first from having any place or suffrage
in the House of Peers. And when they once were rendered useless to the Church
and State, the Lands would follow of themselves without any great trouble. And
that they might attain the end which they so much aimed at, Burges draws down
his Myrmidons to the Doors of he Parliament, and teaches them to cry, No
Bishops, No Bishops, with their wonted violence. By which confused Rabble, some
indignities and affronts are very frequently put upon them, either in keeping
them off from landing, if they came by water; or offer violence to their
persons, if they came by Land. Which multiplied Injuries gave such just cause
of fear and trouble, that they withdrew themselves from the House of Peers, but
sent withal a Protestation to preserve their Rights: In which it was declared,
That all Acts made, or to be made, in the time of their absence, considering
their absen^e was enforced, not voluntary, should be reputed void and null to
all intents and purposes in the Law whatsoever. This Protestation being tendered
in the House of Peers, communicated to the House of Commons, and the supposed
offense extremely aggravated by the Lord Keeper Littleton, the Bishops are
impeached of Treason, nine of them sent Prisoners to the Tower, and two
committed to the custody of the Gentleman Usher.

10. And there we leave them for a while, to look into the Fortunes of the
public Liturgy; not like to stand, when both the Scots and English
Presbyterians did conspire against it. The Fame whereof had either caused it
totally to be laid aside, or performed by halfs in all the Counties where the
Scots were of strength and power; and not much better executed in some Churches
of London, wherein that Faction did as much predominate, as if it had been
under the protection of a Scottish Army. But the first great interruption which
was made at the officiating of the public Liturgy, was made upon a Day of
Humiliation, when all the Members of the House of Commons were assembled
together at St. Margaret's in Westminster. At what time, as the Priest began
the second Service at the Holy Table, some of the Puritans or Presbyterians
began a Psalm; and were therein followed by the rest in so loud a Tune, that
the Minister was thereby forced to desist from his duty, and leave the Preacher
to perform the rest of that day's Solemnity. This gave encouragement enough to
the rest of that Party to set as little by the Liturgy in the Country, as they
did in the City; especially in all such usages and rights thereof, as they were
pleased to bring within the compass of Innovations. But they were more
encouraged to it, by an Order of the Lower House, bearing date on the 8 th of
September, Anno 1641. By which all Churchwardens were required in their
several Parishes to remove the Holy Table from the East End of the Chancel, to
any other part of the Church; to take away the Ralis before it, and not to
suffer any Tapers, Candlesticks, or Basins, to be placed upon it. It was
required also by the same, That there should be no bowing at the Name of Jesus,
nor adoration toward the East, nor any reverence used in men's approaches to
the Holy Table. And by the same, all Dancing, and other lawful Recreations,
were prohibited on their Lord's-day-Sabbath, after the duties of the Day; and
Catechizing turned into After-noon-Sermons, directly contrary to His Majesty's
Declarations and Instructions given in that behalf. And though the Lords
refused to join with them in that Vote, and sent them back unto an Order of the
16 th of January, by which they had confirmed and enjoined the use of the
Liturgy; yet Pym commands the Order to be put in execution by a Warrant under
his own hand only, and that too during the Recess, when almost all the Lords
and Commons had retired themselves to their several dwellings.

11. Hereupon followed such an alteration in all Churches and Chapels, that
the Churchwardens pulled down more in a Week or two, than all the Bishops and
Clergy had been able to raise in two Weeks of years. And hereupon there
followed such irreverences ni God's public Service, and such a discontinuance
of it in too many places, that His Majesty was compelled to give new life to it
by His Proclamation of the tenth of December; and taking order in the same for
punishing all the wilful Contemners and Disburbers of it. But this Proclamation
being published in that point of time in which the Commons were intent on the
War of Ireland, and the Puritans as much busied in blowing the Trumpet of
Sedition in the Kingdom of England; it only showed the King's good meaning,
with his want of Power. In which conjuncture happened the Impeachment and
Imprisonment of Eleven of the Bishops: Which made that Bench so thin, and the
King so weak, that on the 6 th of February the Lords consented to the taking
away of their Votes in Parliament. The News whereof was solemnized in most
places of London, with Bells and Bou^^res. Nothing remained, but that the King
should pass it into Act by his Royal Assent; by some unhappy Instrument
extorted from Him when he was at Canterbury; and signified by His Message to
the Houses on the fourteenth of that Month. Which Condescension wrought so much
unquietness to His Mind and Conscience, and so much unsecureness to His Person,
for the rest of His Life, that He could scarce truly boast of one day's
Felicity, till God was pleased to put a final period to His Grie^s and Sorrows.
For in relation to the last, we find that the next Vote which passed in
Parliament, deprived Him of His Negative Voice, and put the whole Militia of
the Kingdom into the hands of the Houses. Which was the first beginning of His
following Miseries. And looking on Him in the first, He will not spare to let
us know in one of his Prayers, That the injury which he had done to the Bishops
of England, did as much grate upon his Conscience, as either the permitting of
a wrong way of Worship to be set up in Scotland; or suffering innocent blood to
be shed under color of Justice.

12. For so it was, that some of the prevailing-Members in the House of
Commons, considering how faithfully and effectually the Scots had served them,
not only voted a Gratuity of Three hundred thousand pounds of good English
Money, to be freely given them; but kept their Army in a constant and continual
Pay, for Nine Months together. And by the terror of that Army, they forced the
King to pass the Bill for Trienial Parliaments, and to perpetuate the present
Session at the will of the Houses; to give consent for Murdering the Earl of
Strafford with the Sword of Justice; and suffering the Archbishop of
Canterbury to be banished from him; to fling away the Starr-Chamber, and the
High Commission, and the Coercive Power of Bishops; to part with all his right
to Tonnage and Poundage, to Ship Money, and the Act for Knighthood; and by
retrenching the Perambulation of His Forests and Chases, to leave his Game to
the destruction of each Bore or Peasant. And by the terror of this Army, they
took upon them to engage all the Subjects of the Kingdom in a Protestation,
first hammered on the third of May, in order to the condemnation of the Earl of
Strafford, for maintenance of the Privileges and Rights of Parliament,
standing to one another in pursuance of it, and bringing all persons to condign
punishment who were suspected to oppose them. Encouraged also by the same, they
took upon them an Authority of voting down the Church's Power in making of
Canons, condemning all the Members of the late Convocation, calumniating many
of the Bishops and Clergy, in most odious manner, and vexing some of them to
the Grave. And they would have done the like to the Church it self, in pulling
down the Bishops and Cathedral Churches, and taking to themselves all their
Lands and Houses, if by the Constancy and Courage of the House of Peers, they
had not failed of their Design. But at the last, the King prevailed so far with
the Scots Commissioners, that they were willing to retire and withdraw their
Forces, upon His Promise to confirm the Acts of the Assembly at Glasgow, and
reach out such a Hand of Favor unto all that Nation, as might estate them in a
happiness above their hopes. On this assurance they march homewards, and He
follows after. Where he consents to the abolishing of Bishops, and alienating
all their Lands by Act of Parliament; suppresseth, by like Acts, the Liturgy,
and the Book of Canons, and the five Articles of Perth; rewards the chief
Actors in the late Rebellion, with Titles, Offices, and Honors; and parts with
so much of His Royal Prerogative to content the Subjects, that He left Himself
nothing of a King, but the empty Name. And to sum up the whole in brief, In one
hour He unravelled all that excellent Web, the weaving whereof had took up more
than Forty years; and cost His Father and Himself so much Pains and Treasure.

13. By this Indulgence to the Scots, the Irish Papists are invited to expect
the like, and to expect it in the same way which the Scots had traveled; that
is to say, by seizing on His Forts and Castles, putting themselves into the
Body of an Army, and forcing many of His good Protestant-Subjects to forsake
the Kingdom. The Motives which induced them to it, their opportunities for
putting it in execution, and the miscarriage of the Plot, I might here relate,
but that I am to keep my self to the Presbyterians, as dangerous Enemies to the
King and the Church of England, as the Irish Papists. For so it happened, that
His Majesty was informed at His being in Scotland, That the Scots had neither
took up Arms, nor invaded England, but that they were encouraged to it by some
Members of the Houses of Parliament, on a design to change the Government both
of Church and State. In which he was confirmed by the Remonstrance of the state
of the Kingdom, presented to Him by the Commons at His first coming back; the
forcible attempt for breaking into the Abbey of Westminster; the concourse of
seditious people to the Doors of the Parliament, crying out, that they would
have no Bishops nor Popish Lords; and their tumultuating in a fearful manner,
even at White Hall Gates, where they cried out with far more horror to the
Hearers, That the King was not worthy to live; that they would have no Porter's
Lodge between Him and them; and, That the Prince would govern better. Hereupon
certain Members of both Houses; that is to say, the Lord Kimbolton of the
Upper; Hollis and Haslerig, Hampden, Pym, and Stroud, of the Lower House, are
impeached of Treason, a Sergeant sent to apprehend them, and command given for
sealing up their Trunks and Closets.

14. But on the contrary, the Commons did pretend and declared accordingly,
That no Member of theirs was to be impeached, arrested, or brought unto a Legal
Trial, but by the Order of that House; and, that the sealing up of their Trunks
or Closets, was a breach of Privilege. And thereupon it was resolved on Monday,
Ian. 3. being the day of the Impeachment, That if any persons whatsoever,
should come to the Lodgings of any Member of the House, or seize upon their
persons, that then such Members should require the aid of the Constable to keep
such persons in safe custody till the House gave further Order. And it was then
resolved also, That if any person whatsoever, should offer to arrest or detain
the person of any Member of their House, without first acquainting the House
therewith, and receiving further Order from the House; that then it should be
lawful for such Member, or any person, to resist him, and to stand upon his or
their guard of defense; and to make resistance, according to the Protestation
taken to defend the Liberties of Parliament. This brings the King on Tuesday
morning to the Commons House, attended only by His Guard, and some few
Gentlemen, no otherwise weaponed than with Swords; where having placed Himself
in the Speaker's Chair, He required them to deliver the Impeached Members to
the hands of Justice. But they had notice of His Purpose, and had retired into
London as their safest Sanctuary; to which the whole House is adjourned also,
and sits in the Guild Hall as a Grand Committee. The next day brings the King
to the City also; where in a Speech to the Lord Mayor and Common Council, He
signified the Reasons of His going to the House of Commons; That He had no
intent of proceeding otherwise against the Members, than in a way of Legal
Trial; and thereupon desired, That they might not be harbored and protected in
despite of Law. For answer whereunto, He is encountered with an insolent and
saucy Speech, made by one Fowk, a Member of the Common Council, concerning the
Impeached Members, and the King's proceedings; and followed in the Streets by
the Rascal-Rabble; by some of which, a Virulent and Seditious Pamphlet,
entitled* Every man to his Tents, O Israel; is cast into His Coach; and
nothing sounded in His Ears, but Privileges of Parliament, Privileges of
Parliament, with most horrible outcries. The same night puts them into Arms,
with great fear and tumult, upon a rumor that the King and the Cavaliers (for
so they called such Officers of the late Army as attended on him for their Pay)
had a design to sack the City, who were then sleeping in their beds, and little
dreamed of any such Seditious practices as were then on foot for the enflaming
of the people.

15. And now comes Calvin's Doctrine for restraining the Power of Kings, to be
put in practice. His Majesty's going to the House of Commons on the fourth of
January, is voted for so high a breach of their Rights and Privileges, as was
not to be salved by any Retractation, or Disclaimer, or any thing by Him
alleged in excuse thereof. The Members are brought down in triumph both by
Land and Water, guarded with Pikes and Protestations, to their several Houses;
and the forsaken King necessitated to retire to Windsor, that he might not be
an eyewitness of his own disgraces. The Lord Digby goes to Kingston in a Coach
with six Horses, to bestow a visit upon Colonel Lundsford, and some other
Gentlemen; each Horse is reckoned for a Troop, and these Troops said to have
appeared in a warlike manner. Which was enough to cause the prevailing-party of
the Lords and Commons to declare against it; and by their Order of the 13 th of
January, to give command, That all the Sheriffs of the Kingdom, assisted by the
Justices and Trained-Bands of the Country, should take care to suppress all
unlawful Assemblies, and to secure the Magazines of their several Counties. The
King's Attorney must be called in question, examined, and endangered, for doing
his duty in the impeachment of their Members, that no man might hereafter dare
to obey the King. And though His Majesty had sent them a most Gracious Message
of the twentieth of January, in which He promised them to equal or exceed all
Acts of Favor which any of His Predecessors had extended to the People of
England; yet nothing could secure them from their fears and jealousies, unless
the Trained-bands, and the Royal Navy, the Tower of London, and the rest of the
Forts and Castles, were put into such hands as they might confide in. On this
the King demurrs a while; but having shipped the Queen for Holland, with the
Princess Mary, and got the Prince into his power, he denies it utterly. And
this denial is reputed a sufficient reason to take the Militia to themselves,
and execute the Powers thereof, without His consent.

1642.
16. But leaving them to their own Councils, he removes to York, assembleth the
Gentry of that County, acquaints them with the reasons of His coming thither,
and desires them not to be seduced by such false reports as had been raised to
the dishonor of His Person, and disgrace of His Government. By their Advice he
makes a journey unto Hull, in which he had laid up a considerable Magazine of
Cannon, Arms, and Ammunition; intended first against the Scots, and afterward
designed for the War of Ireland; but now to be made use of in his own defense.
And possibly He might have got it into His possession, if He had kept His own
Counsel, and had not let some words fall from Him in a Declaration, which
betrayed His purpose. For hereupon Hotham, a Member of their House, and one of
the two Knights for the County of York, is sent to Garrison the Town; who most
audaciously refused to give him entrance, (though he was then accompanied with
no more than his private Guards) and for so doing, is applauded and
indempnified by the rest of the Members. This sends him back again to York, and
there he meets as great a Baffle as he did at Hull. For there he is encountered
with a new Committee from the House of Commons, consisting of Ferdinand Lord
Fairfax, Sir Henry Cholmnly, Sir Hugh Cholmnly, and Sir Philip Stapleton; sent
thither on purpose to serve as Spies upon his actions, to undermine all his
proceedings, and to insinuate into the people, that all their hopes of peace
and happiness, depended on their adhering to the present Parliament. And they
applied themselves to their Instructions with such open Confidence, that the
King had not more meetings with the Gentry of that County, in his Palace called
the Mannor-house, than they had with the Yeomanry and Freeholders, in the
great Hall of the Deanery. All which the King suffered very strangely, and
thereby robbed himself of the opportunity of raising an Army in that County,
with which he might have marched to London, took the Hen sitting on her Nest
before she had hatched; and possibly, prevented all those Calamities which
after followed.

17. But to proceed, during these counter-workings betwixt them and the King,
the Lords and Commons plied him with continual Messages for his return unto the
Houses; and did as frequently endeavor to possess the people with their
Remonstrances and Declarations, to his disadvantage. To each of which, his
Majesty returned a significant Answer, so handsomely apparelled, and
comprehending in them such a strength of Reason, as gave great satisfaction to
all equal and unbyassed men. None of these Messages more remarkable, than that
which brought the Nineteen Propositions to his Majesty's hands. In which it was
desired, That all the Lords of his Majesty's Council, all the great Officers
both of Court and State, the two Chief Justices, and the Chief Barons of the
Exchequer, should be from thenceforth nominated and approved by both Houses of
Parliament. That all the great Affairs of the Kingdom, should be managed by
them, even unto the naming of a Governor for his Majesty's Children, and for
disposing them in Marriage, at the will of the Houses. That no Popis^ Lord (as
long as he continued such) should vote in Parliament. And amongst many other
things of like importance, That he would give consent to such a Reformation of
Church Government and Liturgy, as both the Houses should advise. But he knew
well enough, that to grant all this, was plainly to divest himself of all
Regal-Power which God had put into his hands. And therefore he returned such an
Answer to them, as the necessity of his Affairs, compared with those impudent
Demands, did suggest unto him. But as for their Demand about Reformation, he
had answered it in part, before they made it, by ordering a Collection of
sundry Petitions presented to himself and both Houses of Parliament, in behalf
of Episcopacy, and for the preservation of the Liturgy, to be printed and
published. By which Petitions it appeared, that there was no such general
disaffection in the Subjects, unto either of them, (whether they were within
the power of the Houses, or beyond their reach) as by the Faction was
pretended; the total number of Subscribers unto seven of them only, (the rest
not being calculated in the said Collection) amounting to Four hundred eighty
two Lords and Knights, One thousand seven hundred and forty Esquires and
Gentlemen of note, Six hundred thirty one Doctors and Divines, and no fewer
than Forty four thousand five hundred fifty nine Freeholders of good name and
note.

18. And now the War begins to open. The Gentlemen of Yorkshire being sensible
of that great affront which had been offered to his Majesty at the Gates of
Hull; and no less sensible of those dangers which were threatened to him by so
ill a Neighborhood, offered themselves to be a Guard unto his person. The
Houses of Parliament upon the apprehension of some fears and jealousies, had
took a Guard unto themselves in December last; but they conceived the King had
so much innocence, that he needed none: and therefore his accepting of this
Guard of Gentlemen, is voted for a levying of War against the Parliament, and
Forces must be raised in defense thereof. It happened also, that some Members of
the House of Commons, many of his Domestic Servants, and not a few of the
Nobility and great men of the Realm, repaired from several places to the King
at York; so far from being willing to involve themselves in other men's sins,
that they declared the constancy of their adhaesion to his Majesty's service.
These men they branded first by the Name of Malignants, and after looked upon
them in the notion of evil Counselors; for whose removing from the King, they
pretend to arm, (but now the stale device must be taken up) as well as in their
own defense: Toward the raising of which Army, the Presbyterian Preachers so
bestir themselves, that the wealthy Citizens send in their Plate, the zealous
Sisters robbed themselves of their Bodkins and Thimbles, and some poor Wives
cast in their Wedding-Rings, like the Widow's Mite, to advance the Service.
Besides which, they set forth Instructions, dispersed into all parts of the
Realm, for bringing in of Horses, Arms, Plate, Money, Jewels, to be repayed
ag^in on the Public Faith; appoint their Treasurers for the War; and nominate
the Earl of Essex for their chief Commander, whom some Disgraces from the Court
had made wholly theirs. Him they commissionate to bring the King from his Evil
Counselors, with power to kill and slay all such as opposed them in it. And
that he might perform the Service with a better Conscience, they laid fast hold
on an Advantage which the King had given them, who in his Declaration of the 16
th of June, either by some incogitancy, or the slip of his Pen, had put himself
into the number of the Three Estates; for thereupon it was inferred, That the
Two Houses were coordinate with him in the Public Government; and being
coordinate, might act any thing without his consent, especially in case of his
refusal to cooperate with them, or to conform to their desires. Upon which
ground, both to increase their Party, and abuse the people, (who still had held
the Name of King in some veneration) the War is managed in the Name of King
and Parliament, as if both equally concerned in the Fortunes of it. It was also
Preached and Printed by the Presbyterians to the same effect, (as Buchanan and
Knox, Calvin and some others of the Sect had before delivered) That all Power
was originally in the people of a State or Nation; in Kings no otherwise than
by Delegation, or by way of Trust; which Trust might be recalled when the
People pleased. That when the underived Majesty (as they loved to phrase it) of
the Common People, was by their voluntary act transferred on the Supreme
Magistrate, it rested on that Magistrate no otherwise than cumulative; but
privative by no means, in reference unto them that gave it. That though the
King was Major singulis, yet he was Minor universis; Superior only unto any
one; but far inferior to the whole Body of the People That the King had no
particular property in his Lands, Rents, Ships, Arms, Towers, or Castles; which
being of a public nature, belonged as much to the people, as they did to him.
That it was lawful for the Subjects to resist their Princes, even by force of
Arms* and to raise Armies also, if need required, for the preservation of
Religion, and the common Liberties. And finally, (for what else can follow such
dangerous premises?) That Kings being only the sworn Officers of the
Commonwealth, they might be called to an account, and punished in case of
Maladministration, even to Imprisonment, Deposition, and to Death it self, if
lawfully convicted of it. But that which served their turns best, was a new
distinction which they had coined between the Personal and Political capacity
of the Supreme Magistrate; alleging, that the King was present with the Houses
of Parliament, in his Political capacity, though in his Personal at York. That
they might fight against the King in his Personal capacity, though not in his
Politic; and consequently, might destroy CHARLES STVART, without hurting the
King. This was good Presbyterian Doctrine; but not so edifying at York, as it
was at Westminster. For his Majesty finding a necessity to defend CHARLES
STVART, if he desired to save the King, began to entertain such Forces as
repaired unto him, and put himself into a posture of defense against all his
Adversaries.

19. In Yorkshire he was countermined, and prevailed but little, not having
above Two thousand men when he left that County. At Nottingham he sets up his
Standard, which by an unexpected Tempest was blown down to the ground, and
looked on as a sad presage of his following Fortunes. Passing thorough
Staffordshire, he gained some small increase to his little Party; but never
could attain unto the reputation of an Army, till he came to Shrewsbury; to
which great multitudes flocked unto him out of Wales and Cheshire, and some of
the adjoining Countries. Encouraged with which supplies, and furnished as well
by the Queen from Holland, as by the Countrey-Magazins, with Cannon, Arms, and
Ammunition, he resolves for London, gives the first brush unto his Enemies at
Poick, near Worcester, and routs them totally at Edg-hill, in the County of
Warwick: This battle was fought on Sunday, the 23 d of October, Anno 1642,
being a just Twelvemonth from the breaking out of the Irish Rebellion; this
being more dangerous than that, because the King's Person was here aimed at
more than any other. For so it was, that by corrupting one Blake, (once an
English Factor, but afterward employed as an Agent from the King of Morocco)
they were informed from time to time of the King's proceedings; and more
particularly, in what part of the Army he resolved to be; which made them aim
with the greater diligence and fury, at so fair a Mark. But the King being
Master of the Field, possessed of the dead Bodies, and withal of the Spoil of
some of the Carriages, discovered by some Letters this most dangerous practice.
For which, that wretched Fellow was condemned by a Court of War, and
afterward hanged upon the Bough of an Oak, not far from Abington.

20. In the mean time the King goes forward, takes Banbury both Town and
Castle, in the sight of the Enemy, and enters triumphantly into Oxon, (which
they had deserted to his hands) with no fewer than Six-score Colors of the
vanquished Party. But either he stayed there too long, or made so many halts in
his way, that Essex with his flying-Army had recovered London, before the King
was come to Colebrook. There he received a Message for an Accommodation; made
ineffectual by the Fight at Brentford on the next day after. Out of which Town
he beat two of their choicest Regiments, sunk many pieces of Cannon, and much
Ammunition, put many of them to Sword in the heat of the Fight, and took about
Five hundred Prisoners for a taste of his Mercy. For knowing well how miserably
they had been mis-guided, he spared their Lives, and gave them liberty on no
other Conditions, but only the taking of their Oaths not to serve against him.
But the Houses of Parliament being loath to lose so many good men, appointed
Mr. Stephen Marshall, (a principal Zealot at that time in the Cause of
Presbytery) to call them together, and to absolve them from that Oath: Which he
performed with so much Confidence and Authority, that the Pope himself could
scarce have done it with the like. The next day, being Sunday, and the 13 th of
November, he prepares for London; but is advertised of a stop at Turnham-Green,
two miles from Brentford; where both the remainders of the Army under the Earl
of Essex, and the Auxiliaries of London, under the Conduct of the Earl of
Warwick, were in a readiness to receive him. On this Intelligence it was
resolved on mature deliberation, in the Council of War, That he should not
hazard that Victorious Army by a fresh encounter, in which if he should lose
the day, it would be utterly impossible for him to repair that Ruin.
Accordingly he leads his Army over Kingston-Bridg, leaves a third part of it in
the Town of Reading, and with the rest takes up his Winter Quarters in the City
of Oxon.

21. But long he had not been at Oxon, when he received some Propositions from
the Houses of Parliament, which by the temper and complexion of them, might
rather seem to have proceeded from a conquering, than a losing-side. One to be
sure must be in favor of Presbytery, or else Stephen Marshal's zeal had been
ill regarded. And in relation to Presbytery it was thus desired; that is to
say, That his Majesty would give consent to a Bill for the utter abolishing and
taking away of all Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and Commissaries,
Deans, Sub-deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons, and Prebendaries,
and all Chaunters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-treasurers, Succentors, and
Sacrists, and all Vicars, Choral, and Choristers, old Vicars and new Vicars, of
any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and all other their Under-officers, out of
the Church of England. And that being done, that he would consent to another
Bill for consultation to be had with Godly, Religious, and Learned Divines, and
then to settle the Church Government in such a way, as upon consultation with
the said Divines should be concluded and agreed on by both Houses of
Parliament. A Treaty howsoever did ensue upon these Propositions; but it came
to nothing: the Commissioners for the Houses being so straightened in point of
time, and tied up so precisely to the Instructions of their Masters, that they
could yield to nothing which conduced to the Public peace. Nor was the North
or South more quiet than the rest of the Kingdom: For in the North, the Faction
of the Houses was grown strong and prevalent, commanded by Ferdinand Lord
Fairfax, who had possessed himself of some strong Towns and Castles; for
maintenance whereof, he had supplies from Hull upon all occasions. The care of
York had been committed by the King to the Earl of Cumberland; and Newcastle
was then newly Garrisoned by the Ecrl thereof; whose Forces being joined to
those of the Earl of Cumberland, gave Fairfax so much work, and came off so
gallantly, that in the end both Parties came to an accord, and were resolved to
stand as Neutrals in the Quarrel. Which coming to the knowledge of the Houses of
Parliament, they found some Presbyterian Trick to dissolve that Contract,
though ratified by all the Obligations both of Honor and Conscience.

22. But in the South, the King's Affairs went generally from bad to worse;
Portsmouth in Hampshire declared for him when he was at York: but being
besieged, and not supplied either with Men, Arms, or Victuals, as had been
promised and agreed on, it was surrendered by Col. Goring, the then Governor of
it, upon Capitulation. Norton, a Neighboring Gentleman of a fair Estate, was
one of the first that showed himself in Arms against it for the Houses of
Parliament, and one that held it out to the very last. For which good Service
he was afterward made a Colonel of Horse, Governor of Southampton, and one of
the Committee for Portsmouth, after the Government of that Town had been taken
from Sir William Lewis, on whom it was conferred at the first surrendry. A
Party of the King's, commanded by the Lord Viscount Grandison, was followed so
closely at the heels by Brown and Hurrey, too mercenary Scots in the pay of the
Houses, that he was forced to put himself into Winchester-Castle; where having
neither Victuals for a day, nor Ammunition for an hour, it was some favor to
his Soldiers to be taken to Mercy. But whatsoever Mercy was expressed to them,
the poor Town found but little, and the Church much less: the Town being
miserably plundered for no other reason, but that they were not able to keep
Grandison out, had they been so minded. Which though it was sufficient to
impoverish a more Wealthy City; yet Waller had two pulls more at it in the
course of the War, to the undoing of some Families, and the spoil of others.
But it was more defaced by Ogle about three years after, in burning down some
Houses about the Castle; but most of all, by pulling down the Bishop's Palace,
the Deanery, and no fewer than eight Prebends Houses, sold by the Presbyterians,
to make money of the Lead and Timber, the Iron, Glass, and Stones, which made
up those Edifices.

23. But for the Church, though it was not the first Example of their
Reformation, according to the practice of the Hugonot-French, the Scottish and
the Belgic Zealots; yet fared it worse in some respects than the other
Cathedrals, because it fell unto the Scots (commanding some Scotizing English)
to do execution. For they not only broke the Organs in pieces, and defaced the
Carved Work of the Quire, containing the story of the Old and New Testament, in
most excellent Imagery; but threw down the Communion Table, and broke down the
Rails (which they burnt afterward in an Alehouse), and strewed the Pavements
of the Quire, with the torn leaves and Fragments of the Common-prayer-Books.
Next, they proceeded to the spoiling of the Tombs and Monuments, erected to the
memory of some eminent Prelates, which had been formerly both an Ornament and
an Honor to it; as namely, that of Cardinal Beaufort, a principal Benefactor
to the Church and Hospital of St. Cross, neighboring near unto the City; and
that of William Wainflet, the Magnificent and sole Founder of Magdalen-Colledg
in Oxon. And whereas the Remainders of the Bodies of some Saxon Kings, and many
Bishops of those times, had been gathered into several Leaden Chests, by Bishop
Fox, who lived and flourished in the last times of K. HENRY the 7th; the
barbarous Soldiers Sacrilegiously threw down those Chests, scattered the dust
remaining of their Bodies, before the wind, and threw their bones about the
Pavements of the Church. They break down as many of the Glass Windows as they
could reach with Swords and Pikes; and at the rest they threw the Bones of the
dead Kings, or shot them down with their Muskets; the spoil of which Windows
could not be repaired for one thousand pounds. After all this, they seize upon
the Communion-Plate, the Surplices of the Priests and Quire-men, all the rich
Hangings, and large Cushions of Velvet, and the costly Pulpit-clothes, somes of
which were of Cloth of Silver, and others of Gold. And finding two Brazen
Statua's of K. JAMES, and K. CHARLES, at the first entrance of the Quire, they
brake off the two Swords which were placed by their sides; and with their own,
mangled the Crown upon the head of K. CHARLES, swearing in scorn, That they
would bring him back again to his Houses of Parliament.

24. This happened upon Thursday the fifteenth of December; and the same Month
proved as calamitous to the Church of Chichester; which City had received some
Soldiers of His Majesty's Party, who either were too few to keep it, or found
it not tenable enough to make any resistance. Waller presents himself before
it, and without any great dispute, becomes Master of it; by which the Town got
little, and the Church lost more. For upon Innocents-day, the Soldiers forcibly
break into it, where they seize upon the Vestments and Ornaments of the Church,
together with the Consecrated Plate serving for the Altar, not leaving so much
as a Cushion for the Pulpit, or a Chalice for the blessed Sacrament. But this
rich spoil being committed by the Marshal and other Officers, the rest was left
unto the hands and weapons of the common Soldiers, who with their Pole-axes did
not only break down the Organs, but cut in pieces the Communion Table, with the
Rail before it. They defaced the two Tables of the Law at the East end of the
Quire, for fear they should rise up against them in the Day of Judgment; most
miserably made havoc of the History of that Churches Foundation, which they
found on the one side of the South-cross Isle, pourtrayed in Artificial manner,
with the Statues of the Kings of England; and coming to the Portraiture of K.
EDWARD the sixth, they picked out his eyes, saying in scorn, That all this
Mischief came from him, in establishing the Book of Common Prayer. Which that
it might not be officiated as in former times, they break open all the Chests
and Cupboards in which the Quire-men had laid up their Singing-Books,
Common-Prayer-Books, Gowns, and Surplices; strewing the Pavements of the Church
with the Leaves of the Books, but turning the Gowns and Surplices into ready
money. To all which Acts of Sacrilegious Spoil and Rapine, as Waller gave some
countenance by his personal presence; and in that, somewhat worse than Nero Et
jus^it scelera Nero, non spectavit. Tacit. in vit. Agr^c.
, as the story tells us: So Haslerig gave much more, by his Voice and Actions:
For, forcing his way into the Chapter House, he did not only command the
Soldiers to break down the Wainscot, but seized on all the rich Plate which
belonged to the Church. And when it was desired, that they would leave one
Chalice only for the use of the Sacrament; answer was most profanely made by
one of the Scots, (of which Nation the two Houses had employed too many) That
they might serve the turn with a Wooden Dish. Nor were some Presbyterian
Zealots in the City of Exeter, more favorable to their own Cathedrals, than
the rude Soldiers were to this; where being incensed by some of their Sedi^ious
Preachers, they acted over all those outrages of Spoil and Rapine, which have
been formerly recited, and added to them such prodigious and unheard
Irreverences, by turning the Church into a ^akes, and leaving their filth on
and about the holy Altar, as fills me with Religious horror at the thinking of
it.

25. But their first Furies in this kind, brake out in the Cathedral Church of
Canterbury, and that of Rochester, under the conduct and command of Colonel
Sandys, one of the Natives of that County; who taking some Forces with him to
make sure of Canterbury, came thi^her in the end of August; and having got the
Keys of the Cathedral into his possession, gave a free entrance to the Rabb^e
which attended on him; forcing their way into the Quire, they overthrew the
Communion Table, tore the Velvet Cloth which they found about it; defaced the
goodly Screen or Tabernacle-work, violated the Monuments of the dead, spoiled
the Organs, brake down the ancient Rails and Seats, with the brazen Eagle which
did support the Bible, forced open the Cupboards of the Singing-men, rent some
of their Surplices, Gowns, and Bibles, and carried away others; mangled all the
Service-Books, and Books of Common Prayer, bestrewing the whole Pavement with
the Leaves thereof. They also exercised their madness on the Arras Hangings
which adorned the Quire, representing the whole story of our Savior. And
meeting with some of his Figures amongst the rest, some of them swore that they
would stab him; and others, that they would rip up his bowels; which they did
accordingly, so far forth at the least as those figures in the Arras Hanging
could be capable of it. And finding another Statua of Christ placed in the
Frontispiece of the South-Gate there, they discharged Forty Muskets at it,
exceedingly triumphing when they hit him in the Head or Face. And it is thought
they would have fallen upon the Fabric, if at the humble suit of the Mayor and
Citizens, they had not been restrained by their principal Officers. Less spoil
was made at Rochester, though too much in that; their Follies being chiefly
exercised in tearing the Book of Common Prayer, and breaking down the Rails
before the Altar. Seaton a Scot, and one of some command in the Army
afterward, took some displeasure at the Organs, but his hands were tied;
whether it were that Sandys repented of the Outrages which were done at
Canterbury, or else afraid of giving more scandal and offense to the Kentish
Gentry, I am not able to determine. But sure it is, that he enjoyed but little
eomfort in these first beginnings, receiving his death's wound about three
Weeks after, in the fight near Powick; of which, within few Weeks more, he dyed
at Worcester.

26. But I am weary of reciting such Spoils and Ravages as were not acted by
the Goths in the sack of Rome. And on that score I shall not take upon me to
relate the Fortunes of the present War, which changed and varied in the West,
as in other places, till the Battle of Stratton; in which Sir Ralph Hopton,
with an handful of his gallant Cornish, raised by the reputation of Sir Bevil
Greenvile, and Sir Nicholas Slaining, gave such a general defeat to the Western
Rebels, as opened him the way toward Oxon with small opposition. Twice
troubled in his March, by Waller, grown famous by his taking of Malmsbury, and
relieving Gloucester; but so defeated in a fight at Roundway-Down, ( Runaway
Down, the Soldiers called it) that he was forced to fly to London for a new
Recruit. Let it suffice, that the King lost Reading in the Spring, received the
Queen triumphantly into Oxon within a few Weeks after, by whom he was supplied
with such a considerable stock of Arms and other Necessaries, as put him into a
condition to pursue the War. This Summer makes him Master of the North and
West; the North being wholly cleared of the Enemy's Forces, but such as seemed
to be imprisoned in the Town of Hull. And having lost the Cities of Bristol and
Exon, no Towns of consequence in the West remained firm unto them, but Pool,
Lime, and Plymouth: so that the leading-members were upon the point of
forsaking the Kingdom, and had so done (as it was generally reported, and
averred for certain) if the King had not been diverted from his march to
London, upon a confidence of bringing the strong City of Gloucester to the like
submission. This gave them time to breathe a little, and to advise upon some
course for their preservation; and no course was found fitter for them, than to
invite the Scots to their aid and succor, whose amity they had lately
purchased at so deer a rate. Hereupon Armin and some others are dispatched for
Scotland; where they applied themselves so dexterously to that proud and
rebellious people, that they consented at the last to all things which had been
desired. But they consented on such terms as gave them an assurance of One
hundred thousand pound in ready money; the Army to be kept both with Pay and
Plunder; the chief Promoters of the Service to be rewarded with the Lands and
Houses of the English Bishops, and their Commissioners; to have as great an
influence in all Counsels both of Peace and War, as the Lords and Commons.

27. But that which proved the strongest temptation to engage them in it, was
an assurance of reducing the Church of England to an exact conformity, in
Government and Forms of Worship, to the Kirk of Scotland; and gratifying their
Revenge and Malice, by prosecuting the Archbishop of Canterbury to the end of
his Tragedy. For compassing which Ends, a Solemn League and Covenant is agreed
between them; first taken and subscribed to, by the Scots themselves; and
afterward by all the Members in both Houses of Parliament; as also, by the
principal Officers of the Army, all the Divines of the Assembly, almost all
those which lived within the Lines of Communication, and in the end by all the
Subjects which either were within their power, or made subject to it. Now by
this Covenant the Party was to bind himself, amongst other things, first, That
he would endeavor in his place and calling, to preserve the Reformed Religion
in Scotland, in Doctrine, Discipline, and Government: That he would endeavor,
in like manner, the Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches; but more particularly, to bring the Churches of God in all the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, and Directory for Worship, and Catechizing.
Secondly, That without respect of persons they would endeavor to extirpate
Popery and Prelacy; that is to say, Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops,
their Chancellors and Commissairs, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and
all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on it. And thirdly, That he would
endeavor the discovery of such as have been, or shall be Incendiaries,
Malignants, and evil Instruments, either in hindering the Reformation of
Religion, or in dividing between the King and his people, etc. whom they should
bring to condign punishment before the Supreme Iudicatories of either Kingdom,
as their offenses should deserve. Of which three Articles, the two first tended
to the setting up of their dear Presbyteries; the last, unto the prosecution of
the late Archbishop, whom they considered as their greatest and most mortal
Enemy.

28. The terror of this Covenant, and the severe penalty imposed on those which
did refuse it, compelled great numbers of the Clergy to forsake their
Benefices, and to betake themselves to such Towns and Garrisons as were kept
under the command of his Majesty's Forces; whose vacant places were in part
supplied by such Presbyterians who formerly had lived as Lecturers or
Trencer-Chaplains: or else bestowed upon such Zealots as flocked from Scotland
and New England, like Vultures and other Birds of Rapine, to seek after the
prey. But finding the deserted Benefices not proportionable to so great a
multitude, they compelled many of the Clergy to forsake their Houses, that so
they might avoid imprisonment or some worse Calamity. Others they sent to
several Gaols, or shut them up in Ships whom they exposed to storms and
tempests, and all the miseries which a wild Sea could give to a languishing
stomach. And some again they sequestered under color of scandal, imputing to
them such notorious and enormous Crimes, as would have rendered them incapable
of Life, as well as Livings, if they had been proved. But that which added the
most weight to these Oppressions, was the publishing of a malicious and
unchristian Pamphlet, entitled, The first Century of Scandalous and Malignant
Priests: which, whether it were more odious in the sight of God, or more
disgraceful to the Church, or offensive to all sober and religious men, it is
hard to say. And as it seems, the scandal of it was so great, that the
Publisher thereof, though otherwise of a fiery and implacable nature, desisted
from the putting forth of a Second Century, though he had promised it in the
First, and was inclinable enough to have kept his word. Instructions had been
sent before to all Counties in England, for bringing in such Informations
against their Ministers as might subject them to the danger of a Deprivation.
But the times were not then so apt for mischief, as to serve their turns; which
made them fall upon these wretched and unchristian courses to effect their
purpose. By means whereof, they purged the Church of almost all Canonical and
Orthodox men. The greatness of which desolation in all the parts of the
Kingdom, may be computed by the havoc which they made in London, and the
Parishes thereunto adjoining, according as it is presented in the Bill of
Mortality hereunto subjoined.

29. A General Bill of Mortality of the Clergy of London, which have been
defunct by reason of the Contagious breath of the Sectaries of that City, from
the year 1641, to the year 1647: with the several Casualties of the same. Or, A
brief Martyrology and Catalogue of the Learned, Grave, Religious, and Painful
Ministers of the City of London, who have been imprisoned, plundered, and
barbarously used, and deprived of all Livelihood for themselves and their
Families; for their constancy to the Protestant Religion established in this
Kingdom, and their Loyalty to their Sovereign.

THE Cathedral Church of St. Paul, The Dean, Residentiaries, and other Members
of that Church, sequestered, plundered, and turned out. St. Albans Woodstreet,
Dr. Wats sequestered, plundered, his Wife and Children turned out of doors,
himself forced to fly. Alhallows Barking, Dr. Layfield persecuted, imprisoned
in Ely-house, and the Ships; sequestered and plundered; afterward forced to
fly. Alhallows Breadstreet -- Alhallows Great -- Alhallows Honey-Lane --
Alhallows Less -- Alhallows Lumbardstreet, Mr. Weston sequestered. Alhallows
Stainings -- Alhallows the Wall -- Alphage, Dr. Halsie shamefully abused, his
Cap pulled off to see if he were not a shaven Priest; voted out, and forced to
fly; dead with grief. Andrew Hubbard, Dr. Chambers sequestered. Andrew
Undershaft, 1. Mr. Mason through vexation forced to resign. 2. Mr. Prichard,
after that sequestered. Andrew Wardrobe, Dr. Isaacson sequestered. Ann
Aldersgate, Dr. Clewet sequestered. Ann Blackfriars -- Antholin's Parish --
Austin's Parish, Mr. Vdal sequestered, his Bedridden Wife turned out of doors, and
left in the streets. Barthol. Exchange, Dr. Grant sequestered. Bennet Fink, Mr.
Warfeild sequestered. Bennet Grace-Church, Mr. Guelch sequestered. Bennet Paul's
Wharf, Mr. Adams sequestered. Bennet Shere-hog, Mr. Morgan dead with grief.
Botolph Billingsgate, Mr. King sequestered, and forced to fly. Christ Church --
turned out, and dead. Christophers, Mr. Hanslow. Clement Eastcheap, Mr. Stone
shamefully abused, sequestered, sent Prisoner to Plymouth, and plundered.
Dionyse Back-Church, Mr. Humes sequestered and abused. Dunstans East, Dr.
Chiderly reviled, abused, and dead. Edmonds Lombardstreet, Mr. Paget, molested,
silenced, and dead. Ethelborough, Mr. Clark sequestered and imprisoned. Faiths,
Dr. Brown sequestered and dead. Fosters, Mr. Batty sequestered, plundered, forced
to fly, and dead. Gabriel Fenchurch, Mr. Cook sequestered. George Botolphlane
-- Gregory's by Paul's -- Hellens, Mr. Miller turned out and dead. James
Duke-place, Mr -- sequestered. James Garlickhithe, Mr. Freeman plundered and
sequestered, and Mr. Anthony turned out. John Baptist, Mr. Weemsly
sequequestred. John Evangelist -- John Zachary, Mr. Eldlin sequestered, forced
to fly, and plundered. Katherine Coleman, Dr. Hill, and Mr. Ribbuts,
sequestered. Katharine Greechurch, Mr. Rush turned out. Laurence Jury, Mr. Crane
sequestered. Laurence Poutney -- Leonard Eastcheap, Mr. Calf forced to give up
to Mr. Roborow, Scribe to the Assembly. Leonard Foster-lane, Mr. Ward forced to
fly, plundered, sequestered, and dead for want of necessaries. Margaret
Lothbury, Mr. Tabor plundered, imprisoned in the King's Bench, his Wife and
Children turned out of doors at midnight, and himself sequestered. Margaret
Moses -- Margaret New-Fishstreet, Mr. Pory forced to fly, plundered, and
sequestered. Margaret Pattons, Mr. Megs plundered, imprisoned in Ely-house, and
sequestered. Mary Abchurch, Mr. Stone plundered, sent Prisoner by Sea to
Plymouth, and sequestered. Mary Aldermanbury -- Mary Aldermary, Mr. Brown forced
to forsake it. Mary le Bow, Mr. Leech sequestered and dead with grief. Mary
Bothaw, Mr. Proctor forced to fly, and sequestered. Mary Colechurch -- Mary
Hill, 1. Dr. Baker sequestered, pursivanted, and imprisoned. 2. Mr. Woodcock
turned out, and forced to fly. Mary Mounthaw, Mr. Thrall sequestered, and
shamefully abused. Mary Sommerset, Mr. Cook sequestered. Mary Stainings -- Mary
Woolchurch, Mr. Tireman forced to forsake it. Mary Woolnoth, Mr. Shute
molested, and vexed to death, and denied a Funeral-Sermon to be preached by Dr.
Holdsworth, as he desired. Martins Ironmonger-lane, Mr. Spark sequestered and
plundered. Martins Ludgate, Dr. Iermine sequestered. Martins Orgars, Dr. Walton
assaulted, sequestered, plundered, and forced to fly. Martins Outwich, Dr.
Pierce sequestered, and dead. Martins Vintry, Dr. Ryves sequestered, plundered,
and forced to fly. Matthew Friday-street, Mr. Chestlin violently assaulted in
his House, imprisoned in the Counter, thence sent to Colchester Gaol in Essex,
sequestered, and plundered. Maudlins Milk-street, Mr. Jones sequestered. Maudlins
Old-Fishstreet, Dr. Gryffith sequestered, plundered, imprisoned in Newgate, and
when let out, forced to fly. Michael Bassishaw, Dr. Gyfford sequestered.
Michael Cornhil, Dr. Brough sequestered, plundered, Wife and Children turned out
of doors, and his Wife dead with grief. But Mr. Weld, his Curate, assaulted,
beaten in the Church, and turned out. Michael Crooked-lane -- Michael
Queenhithe, Mr. Hill sequestered. Michael Quern, Mr. Lance sequestered. Michael
Royal, Mr. Proctor sequestered, and forced to fly. Michael Woodstreet --
Mildred Breadstreet, Mr. Bradshaw sequestered. Mildred Poultry, Mr. Maden
sequestered and gone beyond Sea. Nicholas Acons, Mr. Bennet sequestered. Nicholas
Coleabby, Mr. Chibbald sequestered. Nicholas Olaves, Dr. Cheshire molested, and
forced to resign. Olaves Hartstreet, Mr. Haines sequestered. Olaves Jury, Mr.
Tuke sequestered, plundered, and imprisoned. Olaves Silver-street, Dr. Boobe
abused, and dead with grief. Pancras Soper-lane, Mr. Eccop sequestered,
plundered, and forced to fly; his Wife and Children turned out of doors. Peter's
Cheap, Mr. Votier sequestered and dead with grief. Peter's Cornhil, Dr. Fairfax
sequestered, plundered, imprisoned in Ely-House, and the Ships, his Wife and
Children turned out of doors. Peter's Pauls-Wharf, Mr. Marbury sequestered.
Peter's Poor, Dr. Holdsworth sequestered, plundered, imprisoned in Ely-House, then
in the Tower. Stephens Colemanstreet -- Stephens Walbrook, Dr. Howel through
vexation forced to forsake it, sequestered out of all, and fled; diverse since
turned out. Swithens, Mr. Owen sequestered. Thomas Apostle, Mr. Cooper
sequestered and plundered, sent prisoner to Leeds-Castle in Kent. Trinity Parish,
Mr. Harrison dead with grief.
In the 97 Parishes within the Walls, besides St. Paul's, outed 85, dead 16.

Parishes without the Walls.
Andrew Holborn, Dr. Hacket sequestered. Bartholomew Great, Dr. Westfield abused
in the streets, sequestered, forced to fly, and dead. Bartholomew Less --
Brides Parish, Mr. Palmer sequestered. Bridewel Precinct, Mr. Brown turned out.
Botolph Aldersgate, Mr. Booth sequestered. Botolph Aldgate, Mr. Swadlin
sequestered, plundered, imprisoned at Gresham-Colledg and Newgate, his Wife and
Children turned out of doors. Botolph Bishopsgate, Mr. Rogers sequestered.
Dunstans West, Dr. March sequestered, and dead in remote parts. George
Southwark, Mr. Cook sequestered. Giles Cripplegate, Dr. Fuller sequestered,
plundered, and imprisoned at Ely-House: and Mr. Hatton, his Curate, assaulted in
the Church, and imprisoned. Olaves Southwark, Dr. Turner sequestered, plundered,
fetched up Prisoner with a Troop of Soldiers, and afterward forced to fly.
Saviors Southwark -- Sepulchers Parish, Mr. Pigot the Lecturer turned out.
Thomas Southwark, Mr. Spencer sequestered and imprisoned. Trinity Minories --
In the 16 Parishes without the Walls, outed 14, and 2 dead.

In the Ten out-Parishes.
Clement Danes, Dr. Dukeson sequestered, and forced to fly. Covent Garden, Mr.
Hail sequestered, and forced to fly. Giles in the Fields, Dr. Heywood
sequestered, imprisoned in the Counter, Ely-House, and the ships; forced to
fly; his Wife and Children turned out of doors. James Clerkenwell -- Katharine
Tower -- Leonard Shoreditch, Mr. Squire sequestered, imprisoned in
Gresham-Colledg, Newgate, and the King's Bench; his Wife and Children plundered
and turned out of doors. Martins in the Fields, Dr. Bray sequestered,
imprisoned, plundered* forced to fly, and dead in remote parts. Mary
Whitechappel, Dr. Johnson sequestered. Magdalen Bermondsey, Dr. Paske
sequestered. Savoy, Dr. Balcanqual sequestered, plundered, forced to fly, and
dead in remote parts; and Mr. Fuller forced to fly.
In the ten out-Parishes, outed 9, dead 2.

In the adjacent Towns.
The Dean and Prebends of the Abby-Church of Westminster, (but only Mr. Lambert
Osbaston) sequestered. Margarets Westminster, Dr. Wimberly sequestered. Lambeth,
Dr. Featly sequestered, plundered, imprisoned, and dead a prisoner. Newington,
Mr. Heath sequestered. Hackney, Mr. Moor sequestered. Rederif -- Islington,
Diverse turned out. Stepney, Dr. Stamp sequestered, plundered, and forced to fly.
In the adjacent Towns, besides those of the Abby-Church, and Islington, outed
7, dead 1.

The Total of the Ministers of London, within this Bill of Mortality, besides
Paul's and Westminster, turned out of their Livings 115. Whereof Doctors in
Divinity above most of them plundered of their Goods, their Wives and Children
turned out of doors. 40. Imprisoned in London, and in the Ships, and in several
Gaols and Castles in the Country 20 Fled to prevent Imprisonment 25. Dead in
remote parts and Prisons, with grief 22. And at the same time about forty
Churches void, having no constant Minister in them.
Usque quo Domine, Rev. 6.10?

30. By this sad Bill confined within the Lines of Commuuication, and some
Villages adjoining, we may conjecture at the greatness of that Mortality which
fell amongst the Regular Clergy in all parts of the Kingdom, by Plundring,
Sequestring, and Ejecting; or finally, by vexing them into their Graves, by so
many Miseries as were inflicted on them in the Ships, or their several Prisons.
In all which ways, more men were outed of their Livings by the Presbyterians in
the space of Three years, than were deprived by the Papists in the Reign of
Queen Mary; or had been silenced, suspended, or deprived, by all the Bishops,
from the first year of Queen ELIZABETH, to these very times. And that it might
be done with some color of Justice, they instituted a Committee for Plundered
Ministers, under pretense of making some provision for such godly Preachers as
had either suffered loss of Goods by His Majesty's Soldiers, or loss of Livings
for adhering to the Houses of Parliament. Under which styles they brought in a
confused Rabble of their own persuasions, or such at least as were most likely
to be serviceable to their ends and purposes; some of which had no Goods, and
most of them no Livings at all to lose. But the truth was, they durst not trust
the Pulpits to the Regular Clergy; who if they had offended against the Laws,
by the same Laws they ought to have been tried, condemned, and deprived
accordingly; that so the Patrons might present more deserving persons to the
vacant Churches. But then this could not stand with the main Design: For
possibly the Patrons might present such Clarks as would go on in the old way,
and could not be admitted but by taking the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance
to our Lord the King; and by subscribing to the Discipline and Doctrine of the
Church of England, which they were then resolved to alter. Or, could they have
prevailed so far with the several Patrons, as to present those very men whom
they had designed unto the Profits of the Sequestered Benefices; yet then they
were to have enjoyed them for term of life, and might pretend a Legal Right and
Title to them, which would have cut off that dependence on the Houses of
Parliament, which this Design did chiefly aim at. So that the best of this new
Clergy were but Tenants at will; and therefore must be servile and obsequious
to their mighty Landlords, upon whose pleasure they depended for their present
Livelihood.

31. Such were the Mischiefs of this year. For remedy whereof, His Majesty most
graciously published two Proclamations, one of them bearing date the 15 th of
May; and the other, on the 9 th of October. In the first of which, His Majesty
takes especial notice, That many of the Clergy, no less eminent for their
Learning, than their Zeal and Piety, were either driven or forced from their
habitations, or silenced, or discharged from attending on their Cures: That
they suffered these oppressions for no other reasons, but because they
published his legal and just Commands, or had refused to pray against Him, or
to submit, against their Consciences, to illegal Taxes for the continuance of
the War; or were comformable to the Book of Common Prayer, or preached God's
Word according to the purity of it, without any mixture of Sedition: That being
for these Crimes discharged of their several Cures, others were put into their
Places to sow Sedition, and seduce His Majejesty's good Subjects from their due
obedience, contrary to the Word of God, and the Laws of the Land. His Majesty
thereupon commands, That all such courses be forborne for the time to come.
That all His good Subjects for the present set forth their Tithes, and pay them
to the lawful Incumbents, or their Farmers only. That the Churchwardens,
Sidemen, and other Parishioners, shall resist all such persons as have been, or
shall be intruded into any of the Cures aforesaid: but, that they should
contribute their best assistance to the lawful Ministers, for the receiving and
enjoying of their Glebes and Tithes. With an Injunction to all Sheriffs,
Mayors, and other Ministers of Justice, to be aiding to them, and to resist by
force of Arms all such as should endeavor to disturb them in their lawful
possessions. But this served rather for a Declaration of His Majesty's Piety,
than an Example of His Power. For notwithstanding all this Care, his faithful
Subjects of the Clergy in all parts of the Realm, were plundered, sequestered,
and ejected for the Crime of Loyalty; some of them never being restored, and
others most unjustly kept from their Estates till this present year, Anno 1660.

32. In the other Proclamation he forbids the tendering or taking of the
Covenant before remembered. Which Proclamation being short, but full of
substance, shall be recited in His Majesty's own words, which are these that
follow. Whereas (says he) there is a printed Paper entitled, A Solemn League
and Covenant for Reformation and Defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness
of the King, the Peace and Safety of the Three Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland; pretended to be ordered by the Commons in Parliament, on the 21 of
September last, to be printed and published. Which Covenant, though it seems to
make some specious expressions of Piety and Religion, is in truth nothing else
but a Traitorous and Seditious Combination against Us, and against the
established Religion and Laws of the Kingdom, in pursuance of a Traitorous
Design and Endeavor to bring in Foreign Forces to invade this Kingdom. We do
therefore straightly charge and command all Our loving Subjects, of what degree
or quality soever, upon their Allegiance, that they presume not to take the
said Seditious and Traitorous Covenant. And We do likewise hereby forbid and
inhibit them to impose, administer, or tender the said Covenant, as they and
every of them will answer the contrary at their utmost and extremest perils.
Such was the tenor of this Proclamation of the 9 th of October; which though
it served for a sufficient testimony of His Majesty's Prudence, yet it
prevailed as little as the other did: For, as the Two Houses did extend their
Quarters, and enlarge their Power; so were the Subjects forced more generally
to receive this yoke, and to submit themselves to those Oaths and Covenants
which they could neit^^r take for fear of God's and the King's Displeasure; and
dared not to refuse, for fear of losing all which was dear unto them. So that
it was esteemed for a special favor, as indeed it was, for all those which
came in on the Oxford Articles, to be exempted from the taking of this lewd and
accursed Covenant, by which they were to bind themselves to betray the Church,
and to stand no further to the King, than as he stood for the defense of that
Religion which they then allowed of, and of those Liberties which they had
acquired by what way soever.

33. And to say truth, it was no wonder that the Presbyterians should impose
new Oaths, when they had broken all the old; or seize upon the Tithes and
Glebes of the Regular Clergy, when they had sequestered the Estates of the Loyal
Gentry, and intercepted the Revenues of the King and Queen. And it would be no
wonder neither that they should seize on the Revenues of the King and Queen,
when they were grown to such a high degree of impudence, as to impeach the
Queen of Treason, and were resolved of having no more Kings to comptroll their
Actions. They had already voted for the making of a new Great Seal, (though so
to do, was made High Treason by the Statute of K. EDWARD the third) that they
might expedite their Commissions with the more Authority, and add some
countenance of Law to the present War. Which must be managed in the Name of
the King and Parliament, the better to abuse the people, and add some
Reputation to the Crime of their undertakings. And being Masters of a Seal,
they thought themselves in a capacity of acting as a Commonwealth, as a State
distinct; but for the present, making use of His Majesty's Name as their
State-holder, for the ordering of their new Republic. But long He must not
hold that neither; though that was locked up as a Secret amongst those of the
Cabala, till it was blurted out by Martin, then Knight for Berks. By whom it
was openly declared, That the felicity of this Nation did not consist in any of
the House of STVART. Of which His Majesty complained, but without reparation.
And for a further evidence of their good intentions, a view is to be taken of
the old Regalia, and none so fit as Martin to perform that Service. Who having
commanded the Sub-dean of Westminster to bring him to the place in which they
were kept, made himself Master of the Spoil. And having forced open a great
Iron Chest, took out the Crowns, the Robes, the Swords, and Scepter, belonging
anciently to K. EDWARD the Confessor, and used by all our Kings at their
Inaugurations. With a scorn greater than his Lusts, and the rest of His Vices,
he openly declares, That there would be no further use of those Toys and
Trifles. And in the jollity of that humor, invests George Withers (an old
Puritan Satyrist) in the Royal Habiliments. Who being thus Crowned, and Royally
arrayed, (as right well became him) first marched about the Room with a stately
Garb, and afterward with a thousand Apish and Ridiculous actions, exposed
those Sacred Ornaments to contempt and laughter. Had the Abuse been script and
whipped, as it should have been, the foolish Fellow possibly might have passed
for a Prophet, though he could not be reckoned for a Poet.

34. But yet the mischief stayed not here. Another visit is bestowed upon these
Regalia; not to make merry with them, but some money of them: Mildmay, a
Puritan in Faction, and Master of the Jewel-House by his Place and Office,
conceived that Prey to belong properly to him; and having sold the King, must
needs buy the Crowns. But being as false to his new Masters, as he was to his
old, he first picked out the richest Jewels, and then compounded for the rest at
an easy rate. The like ill fortune fell unto the Organs, Plate, Coaps,
Hangings, Altar-Cloaths, and many other costly Utensils which belonged to the
Church; all which were either broke in pieces, or seized upon and plundered for
the use of the State. Amongst the rest, there was a goodly Challice of the
purest Gold; which though it could not be less worth than 300 l. was sold to
Allyn a decayed Goldsmiths, but then a Member of the House, at the rate of 60
l. The Birds being flown, the Nest is presently designed to the use of the
Soldiers, who out of wantonness, and not for want of Lodging in that populous
City, must be quartered there. And being quartered, they omitted none of those
shameless Insolences which had been acted by their Fellows in other Churches.
For they not only brake down the Rails before the Table, and burnt them in the
very place in the heats of July; but wretchedly profaned the very Table it
self, by setting about it with their Tobacco and Ale before them, and not
without the company of some of their zealous Lecturers to grace the Action.
What else they did in imitation of the Brethren of Exon, in laying their filth
and execrements about it also, I abhor to mention. And now I must crave leave
to step into the College, the Government whereof was taken from the Dean and
Prebendaries, and given to a select Committee of fifty persons, some Lords, but
Members, for the most part, of the Lower House; who found there a sufficient
quantity of Plate, and some other good Household Stuff, to a very good value;
which was so Husbanded amongst them, that it was either stolen, or sold, or
otherwise imbezilled and inverted to the use of some private persons, who best
knew how to benefit themselves by the Church's Patrimony.

35. But the main business of this year, and the three next following, was the
calling, sitting, and proceedings of the new Assembly, called the Assembly of
Divines; but made up also of so many of the Lords and Commons, as might both
serve as well to keep them under, and comptroll their Actions, as to add some
countenance unto them in the eye of the people. A Convocation had been
appointed by the King when he called the Parliament, the Members whereof being
lawfvlly chosen and returned, were so discountenanced and discouraged by the
Votes of the Lower House, the frequent Tumults raised in Westminster by the
Rascal Rabble, and the preparatives for a War against the King* that they
retired unto their Houses, but still continued undissolved, and were in a
capacity of acting as a Convocation, whenever they should be thereunto
required, and might do it with safety. But being for the most part well
affected to the Church of England, they were not to be trusted by the Houses of
Parliament, who then designed the hammering of such a Reformation both in
Doctrine and Discipline, as might unite them in a perpetual Bond and
Confederation with their Scottish Brethren. And that they might be furnished
with such men, the Knights of every Shire must make choice of two to serve as
Members for that County; most of them Presbyterians, some few Royallists, four
of the Independent Faction, and two or three to represent the Kirk of Scotland.
Which ploughing with an Ox and an Ass, (as it was no other) was anciently
prohibited by the Law of Moses. And yet these men, associated with some Members
of either House, as before is said, no ways impow'red or authorized by the rest
of the Clergy, must take upon them all the Powers and Privileges of a
Convocation; to which they were invited by an Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons, bearing date June the 12 th. His Majesty makes a start at this
encroachment on His Royal Prerogative, and countermands the same by His
Proclamation of the 22 d. In which He takes notice, amongst other things, That
the far greatest part of those who had been nominated to the present Service,
were men of neither Learning or Reputation, eminently disaffected to the
Government of the Church of England, and such as had openly preached Rebellion,
by their exciting of the people to take Arms against Him; and therefore were
not like to be proper Instruments of Peace and Happiness, either unto the
Church or State: For maintenance whereof, and for the preservation of His own
Authority, he inhibits them from meeting at the time appointed, declares their
Acts to be illegal, and threatens them with the punishments which they had
incurred by the Laws of the Land.

36. But they go forwards howsoever, hold their first Meeting on the first of
July, and elect Dr. Twisse of Newberry, (a rigid Sabbatarian, but a professed
Calvinian in all other points) for their Prolocutor) called to this
Iourney-work by the Houses; they were dispensed with for Non-residence upon
their Livings, against the Laws, preferred to the best Benefices of the
Sequestered Clergy, (some of them three or four together) and had withal four
shillings a man for their daily wages, besides the honor of assisting in so
great an action, as the ruin of the Church, and the subversion of the present
Government of the Realm of England. In reference whereunto, they were to be
employed from time to time, as occasion was, to stir up the people of the
Counties for which they served, to rise and arm themselves against the King,
under color of their own defense, as appears plainly by the Order of the tenth
of August. And that they might be looked upon with the greater reverence, they
maintain a constant intercourse, by Letters, with their Brethren of Scotland,
the Churches of the Netherlands, the French and Switzers; but chiefly, with
Geneva it self. In which they laid such vile Reproaches on His Majesty and the
Church of England; the one, for having a design to bring in Popery; the other,
for a readiness to receive the same; that His Majesty was necessitated to set
out a Manifest in the Latin Tongue, for laying open the Imposture to the
Churches of all Foreign Nations. Amongst the rest of this Assembly, Dr. Dan.
Featly, not long before made Chaplain in Ordinary to the King, must needs sit
for one; whether to show his Parts, or to head a Party, or out of his old love
to Calvinism, may best be gathered from some Speeches which he made and
printed. But he was theirs in heart before, and therefore might afford them his
body now, though possibly he may be excused from taking the Covenant, as the
others did. An Exhortation whereunto, was the first great work which was
performed by these Masters in Israel, after their assembling; the Covenant
taken by them in most solemn manner at St. Margarets in Westminster, on the
25th of September, the Exhortation voted to be published on the 9th of February.

37. Now to begin the blessed Reformation which they had in hand, the Houses
were resolved upon exterminating all external Pomp, and comely Order, out of
the Worship of Almighty God. And to this end, upon the humble motion of these
Divines of the Assembly, and the solicitation of some zealous Lecturers, who
were grown very powerful with them; or to ingratiate themselves with the
Scottish Covenanters, whose help they began to stand in need of; or finally,
out of the perverseness of their own cross humors, they published an Ordinance
on the 28 th of August, For the utter demolishing, removing, and taking away
all Monuments of Superstition and Idolatry. Under which notion it was ordered,
That before the last of November then next following, all Altars and Tables of
stone (as if any such were then erected!) should be demolished in all Churches
and Chapels throughout the Kingdom. That the Communion-Tables should in all
such places be removed from the East end of the Chancel, unto some other part
of the Church or Chapel. That all such Rails as had been placed before or
about the same, should be taken away, and the ground levelled with the rest,
which had been raised for the standing of any such Table, within the space of
twenty years then last past. That all Tapers, Candlesticks, and Basins, which
had of late been used on any of the said Tables, should also be removed and
taken away; neither the same, nor any such like, to be from thenceforth used in
God's Public Service. That all Crucifixes, Crosses, and all Images and
Pictures of any one or more Persons of the Trinity, or of the Virgin Mary, and
all other Images and Pictures of Saints, should be also demolished and defaced,
whether they stood in any of the said Churches or Chapels, or in any
Churchyard or other open place whatsoever, never to be erected or renewed
again: With a Proviso notwithstanding, for preserving all Images, Pictures, and
Coats of Arms, belonging to any of their Ancestors, or any of the Kings of this
Realm, or any other deceased persons which were not generally considered and
beheld as Saints.

38. But yet to make sure work of it, this Ordinance was reinforced and
enlarged by another of the 9th of May, in the year next following; wherein,
besides the particulars before recited, they descend to the taking away of all
Coaps, Surplices, and other Superstitious Vestments (as they pleased to call
them); as also to the taking away of all Organs, and the Cases in which they
stood, and the defacing of the same; requiring the same course to be also taken
in the removing and defacing of Roods, Rood-Lofts, and Holy-water-water-Fonts
(as if any such things had been of late erected or permitted in the Church of
England, as indeed there were not): whereupon followed the defacing of all
Glass Windows, and the demolishing of all Organs within the compass of their
power; the transposing of the holy Table from the place of the Altar, into some
other part of the Church or Chancel; the tearing and defacing of all Coaps and
Surplices, or otherwise employing them to domestic uses; and finally, the
breaking down and removing of the Sacred Fonts anciently used for the
Ministration of holy Baptism; the name of Holy-water-fonts being extended and
made use of to comprise them also: hereupon followed also the defacing and
demolishing of many Crosses erected as the Monuments of Christianity, in
Cities, Towns, and most of our Country-Villages; none being spared which came
within the compass of those Enemies of the Cross of Christ. Amongst which
Crosses none more eminent for Cost and Workmanship, than those of Cheapside in
London, and Abington in the County of Berks; both of them famous for the
excellencies of the Statua's which were placed in them; more for the richness
of the trimming which was used about them. But the Divine Vengeance fell on
some of the Executioners, for a terror to others; one of them being killed in
pulling down the Cross of Cheapside; and another hanged at Stow on the Would,
within short time after he had pulled down the first Image of the Cross in
Abington. And because no Order had been made for the executing of this Order in
His Majesty's Chapels (as there was in all Cathedral and Parish-Churches), a
private Warrant was obtained by Harlow, a Knight of Herefordshire, for making
the said Chapels equal to all the rest, by depriving them of all such
Ornaments of State and Beauty with which they had been constantly adorned in
all times since the Reformation. And all this done, (or at the least pretended
to be done, as the Ordinance tell us) as being pleasing unto God, and visibly
conducing to the blessed Reformation so much desired; but desired only, as it
seems, by those Lords and Commons who had a hand in the Design.

39. So far they went to show their hatred unto Superstition, their dislike of
Popery: but then they must do somewhat also for expressing their great zeal to
the glory of God, by some Acts of Piety. And nothing seemed more pious, or more
popular rather, than to enjoin the more strict keeping of their
Lords-day-Sabbath, by some public Ordinance. With this they had begun already
on the fifth of May, on which it was ordered by no worse men than the Commons
in Parliament, (the Lords being either not consulted, or not concurring) That
His Majesty's Book for tolerating sports on the Lord's Day, should be forthwith
burned by the hands of the common Hangman, in Cheapside and other usual places;
and that the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex should see the same put in
execution; which was done accordingly. Than which, an Act of a greater scorn,
an Act of greater Insolency and disloyal impudence, was never offered to a
Sovereign and Anointed Prince. So as it was no marvel if the Lords joined with
them in the Ordinance of the sixth of April, 1644, for to expose all Books to
the like disgrace which had been writ, or should be writ hereafter by any
person or persons, against the Morality of the Sabbath: By which Ordinance it
was also signified, That no manner of person whatsoever* should publicly cry,
show forth, and expose to sale any Wares, Merchandises, Fruits, Herbs, or other
Goods, upon that day, on pain of forfeiting the same; or travel, carry
burdens, or do any act of Labor on it on pain of forfeiting Ten shillings for
the said offense. That no person from thenceforth on the said day should use,
exercise, keep, maintain, or be present at any wrestling, shooting, bowling,
ringing of Bells for pleasure or pastime, Mask, Wake, (otherwise called Feasts)
Church-Ale, Games, Dancing, Sport, or other pastimes whatsoever, under the
several penalties therein contained. And that we may perceive with what weighty
cares the heads of these good men were troubled, when the whole Nation was
involved in Blood and Ruin; a Clause was added for the taking down of May-poles
also; with a Command unto all Constables and Tything-men, to see it done* under
the penalty of forfeiting five shillings weekly, till the said May-poles (which
they looked upon as an Heathenish Vanity) should be quite removed. Which Nail
was driven so far at last, that it was made unlawful for any Tailor to carry
home a new Suit of Clothes, or any Barber to trim the man that was to wear
them; for any Water-man to Ferry a passenger cross the Thames; and finally, to
any person whatsoever (though neither new trimmed, or new apparelled) to sit at
his own door, or to walk the streets, or take a mouth-full of fresh air in the
open Fields. Most Rabinical Dotages!

40. The day of public Worship being thus new-molded, they must have new
Priests also, and new Forms of Prayer, a new Confession of the Faith, new
Catechisms, and new Forms of Government. Toward the first, an Ordinance comes
out from the Lords and Commons in October following, (Advice being first had
with the Assembly of Divines) by which a power was given to some chief men of
the Assembly, and certain Ministers of London, or to any seven or more of them,
to impose hands upon such persons whatsoever whom they found qualified and
gifted for the holy Ministry; a Clause being added thereunto, That every person
and persons which were so ordained, should be reputed, deemed, and taken for a
Minister of the Church of England, sufficiently authorized for any Office or
Employment in it, and capable of receiving all advantages which appertained to
the same. To show the nullity and invalidity of which Ordinations, a learned
Tractate was set out by Dr. Bohe, Chaplain sometimes to the Right Reverend Dr.
Houson, Bishop of Oxford first, and of Durham afterward. Never since answered
by the Presbyterians, either Scots or English. Next after, comes the Directory,
or new Form of Worship, accompanied with an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
on the third of January* for authorizing the said Directory or Form of Worship;
as also, for suppressing the public Liturgy, repealing all the Acts of
Parliament which confirmed the same, and abrogating all the ancient and
established Festivals, that so Saint Sabbath (as sometimes they called it)
might be all in all. The insufficiency of which Directory to the Ends proposed
in the same, pronounced the weakness of the Ordinance which authorized it, and
the excellency of the public Liturgy in all the parts and offices of it; was
no less learnedly evinced by Dr. Hammond* then newly made a Chaplain in
ordinary to His Sacred Majesty. Which though it might have satisfied all equal
and unbyassed men, yet neither Learning nor Reason could be heard in the new
Assembly; or if it were, the voice thereof was drowned by the noise of the
Ordinances.

41. For on the 23 d of August, Anno 1645, another Ordinance comes thundering
from the Lords and Commons, for the more effectual Execution of the Directory
for public Worship; with several Clauses in the same, not only for dispersing
and use thereof, but for calling in the Book of Common Prayer, under several
penalties. Which coming to His Majesty's knowledge, as soon as he returned to
His Winter Quarters, He published His Proclamation of the 13th of November,
commanding in the same the use of the Common Prayer, notwithstanding any
Ordinance to the contrary from the Houses of Parliament. For taking notice,
first, of those notable Benefits which had for Eighty years redounded to this
Nation by the use of the Liturgy; He next observes, that by abolishing the said
Book of Common Prayer, and imposing the Directory, a way would be left open for
all Ignorant, Factious, and Evil men, to broach their Fancies and Conceits, be
they never so erroneous, to mislead people into Sin and Rebellion against the
King, to raise Factions and Divisions in the Church; and finally, to utter
those things for their Prayers in the Congregation, to which no Conscientious
can say Amen. And thereupon He gives Commandment to all Ministers in their
Parish-Churches, to keep and use the said Book of Common Prayer, in all the
Acts and Offices of God's Public Worship, according to the Laws made in that
behalf; and that the said Directory should in no sort be admitted, received, or
used; the said pretended Ordinances, or any thing contained in them to the
contrary notwithstanding. But His Majesty sped no better by His Proclamation,
than the two Doctors did before by their Learned Arguments. For if He had found
little or no obedience to his Proclamations when he was strong, and in the head
of a victorious and successful Army, He was not to expect it in a low
condition, when his Affairs were ruinated and reduced to nothing.

42. For so it was, that the Scots having raised an Army of Eighteen thousand
Foot, and Three thousand Horse, taking the Dragoons into the reckoning, break
into England in the depth of Winter, Anno 1643, and marched almost as far as
the Banks of the River Tine, without opposition. There they received a stop by
the coming of the Marquess of Newcastle, with his Northern Army, and
entertained the time with some petit skirmishes, till the sad news of the
surprise of Selby by Sir Thomas Fairfax, compelled him to return toward York
with all his Forces, for the preserving of that place, on which the safety of
the North did depend especially. The Scots march after him amain, and besiege
that City, in which they were assisted by the Forces of the Lord Fairfax, and
the Earl of Manchester, who by the Houses were commanded to attend that
Service. The issue whereof was briefly this; that having worsted the great Army
of Prince Rupert at Marston-moor, on the second of July, York yielded on
Composition upon that day fortnight; the Marquess of Newcastle, with many
Gentlemen of great Note and Quality, shipped themselves for France; and the
strong Town of Newcastle took in by the Scots on the 19th of October then next
following. More fortunate was His Majesty with His Southern Army, though at the
first he was necessitated to retire from Oxon at such time as the Forces under
Essex and Waller did appear before it. The news whereof being brought unto
them, it was agreed that Waller should pursue the King, and that the Earl's
Army should march Westward to reduce those Countries. And here the Mystery of
Iniquity began to show its self in its proper colors. For whereas they
pretended to have raised their Army for no other end, but only to remove the
King from his Evil Counselors, those Evil Counselors, as they call them, were
left at Oxon, and the King only hunted by his insolent Enemies. But the King
having totally broken Waller in the end of June, marched after Essex into
Devonshire, and having shut him up in Cornwall, where he had neither room for
forage, nor hope of succors, he forced him to fly ingloriously in a Skiff or
Cockboat, and leave his Army in a manner to the Conqueror's Mercy. But his
Horse having the good fortune to save themselves, the King gave quarter to the
Foot, reserving to Himself their Cannons, Arms, and Ammunition, as a sign of
His Victory. And here again the War might possibly have been ended, if the
King had followed his good fortune, and marched to London before the Earl of
Essex had united his scattered Forces, and Manchester was returned from the
Northern Service. But setting down before Plymouth now, as he did before
Gloucester the last year, he lost the opportunity of effecting his purpose, and
was fought withal at Newberry, in his coming back, where neither side could
boast of obtaining the Victory.

43. But howsoever, having gained some reputation by his Western Action, the
Houses seem inclinable to accept His offer of entering into Treaty with Him for
an Accommodation. This He had offered by His Message from Evesham on the 4th of
July, immediately after the defeat of Waller; and pressed it by another from
Tavestock on the 8th of September, as soon as he had broken the great Army of
the Earl of Essex. To these they hearkened not at first. But being sensible of
the outcries of the common people, they condescend at last, appointing Vxbridg
for the place, and the thirtieth day of January for the time thereof. For a
preparative whereunto, and to satisfy the importunity and expectation of their
Brethren of Scotland, they attaint the Archbishop of High Treason, in the
House of Commons, and pass their Bill by Ordinance in the House of Peers, in
which no more than seven Lords did concur to the Sentence; but being sentenced
howsoever, by the malice of the Presbyterians both Scots and English, he was
brought to act the last part of his Tragedy on the 10th of January, as shall be
told at large in another place. This could presage no good success to the
following Treaty. For though Covenants sometimes may be writ in blood; yet I
find no such way for commencing Treaties. And to say truth, the King's
Commissioners soon found what they were to trust to. For having condescended to
accompany the Commissioners from the Houses of Parliament, and to be present at
a Sermon preached by one of their Chaplains, on the first day of the meeting
they found what little hopes they had of a good conclusion. The Preacher's Name
was Love, a Welsh-man, and one of the most fiery Presbyters in all the Pack: In
whose Sermon there were many passages very scandalous to His Majesty's Person,
and derogatory to His Honor; stirring up the people against the Treaty, and
incensing them against the King's Commissioners; telling them, That they came
with hearts full of Blood; and that there was as great a distance betwixt the
Treaty and Peace, as there was between Heaven and Hell. Of this the Oxon Lords
complained, but could obtain no reparation for the King or themselves; though
afterward Cromwell paid the debt, and brought him to the Scaffold when he least
looked for it.

44. But notwithstanding these presages of no good success, the King's
Commissioners begin the long-wisht-for Treaty, which is reduced to these three
Heads, viz. Concernments of the Church, The Power of the Militia, and the War
of Ireland. In reference to the first (for of the other two I shall take no
notice) His Majesty was pleased to condescend to these particulars; that is to
say, 1. That freedom be left to all persons whatsoever in matters of Ceremony;
and that all the penalties of the Laws and Canons which enjoin those
Ceremonies, be suspended. 2. That the Bishops should exercise no act of
Jurisdiction or Ordination, without the consent and counsel of the Presbyters,
who shall be chosen by the Clergy of each Diocese, out of the gravest and most
learned men amongst themselves. 3. That the Bishop shall be constantly resident
in his Diocese, except he be required to attend His Majesty; and shall preach
every Sunday in some Church or other, within the Diocese, if he be not hindered
either by old age or sickness. 4. That Ordination shall be public, and in
solemn manner; and none to be admitted into Holy Orders, but such as are well
qualified and approved of by the Rural Presbyters. 5. That an improvement be
made of all such Vicaridges as belonged to Bishops, Deans, and Chapters; the
said improvement to be made out of Impropriations, and confirmed by Parliament.
6. That from thenceforth no man should hold two Churches with Cure of Souls.
And, 7. That One hundred thousand pound should be forthwith raised out of the
Lands belonging to the Bishops and Cathedral Churches, toward the satisfaction
of the Public Debts. An Offer was also made, for regulating the Jurisdiction
of Ecclesiastical Courts, in Causes Testamentary, Decimal, and Matrimonial; for
rectifying some Abuses in the exercise of Excommunication; for moderating the
excessive Fees of the Bishops Officers, and ordering their Visitations to the
best advantage of the Church; and all this to be done by consent of Parliament.

45. His Majesty also offered them the Militia for the space of three years;
which might afford them time enough to settle the Affairs of the Kingdom, had
they been so pleased; and to associate the Houses with Him in the War of
Ireland; but so, as not to be excluded from His Care of that People. But these
Proposals did not satisfy the Puritan English, much less the Presbyterian
Scots, who were joined in that Treaty. They were resolved upon the abolition of
Episcopacy, both Root and Branch; of having the Militia for Seven years
absolutely, and afterward to be disposed of as the King and the Houses could
agree: and finally, of exercising such an unlimited power in the War of
Ireland, that the King should neither be able to grant a Cessation, or to make
a Peace, or to show mercy unto any of that people on their due submission. And
from the rigor of these terms, they were not to be drawn by the King's
Commissioners; which rendered the whole Treaty fruitless, and frustrated the
expectation of all Loyal Subjects, who languished under the calamity of this
woeful War. For as the Treaty cooled, so the War grew hotter; managed for the
most part by the same Hands, but by different Heads: Concerning which, we are
to know, That not long after the beginning of this everlasting Parliament, the
Puritan Faction became subdivided into Presbyterians and Independents. And at
the first, the Presbyterians carried all before them both in Camp and Council.
But growing jealous at the last of the Earl of Essex, whose late miscarriage in
the West was looked on as a Plot to betray his Army; they suffered him to be
wormed out of his Commission, and gave the chief Command of all to Sir Thomas
Fairfax; with whose good Services and Affections they were well acquainted. To
him they joined Lieutenant General Oliver Cromwell, who from a private Captain
had obtained to be Lieutenant to the Earl of Manchester in the associated
Counties, as they commonly called them; and having done good Service in the
Battle of Marston-moor, was thought the fittest man to conduct their Forces.
And on the other side, the Earl of Brentford (but better known by the Name of
General Ruthuen) who had commanded the King's Army since the Fight at Edg-hill,
was outed of his Place by a Court-Contrivement, and that Command conferred upon
Prince Rupert, the King's Sisters Son, not long before made Duke of Cumberland,
and Earl of Holderness.

46. By these new Generals, the Fortune of the War, and consequently the Fate
of the Kingdom which depended on it, came to be decided. And at the first, the
King seemed to have much the better by the taking of Leicester; though
afterward it turned to his disadvantage: For many of the Soldiers being loaded
with the Spoil of the place, withdrew themselves for the disposing of their
Booty, and came not back unto the Army, till it was too late. News also came,
that Fairfax with his Army had laid siege to Oxon, which moved the King to
return back as far as Daventry, there to expect the re-assembling of his
scattered Companies. Which happening as Fairfax had desired, he marched hastily
after him, with an intent to give him Battle on the first opportunity: In which
he was confirmed by two great Advantages; first, by the seasonable coming of
Cromwell with a fresh Body of Horse, which reached him not until the Evening
before the fight: and secondly, by the intercepting of some Letters sent from
General Goring, in which His Majesty was advised to decline all occasion of
Battle, till he could come up to him with his Western Forces. This hastened the
Design of fighting in the adverse Party, who fall upon the King's Army in the
Fields near Naisby, (till that time an obscure Village) in Northamptonshire: on
Saturday the 19th of June, the Battles joined; and at first His Majesty had the
better of it, and might have had so at the last, if Prince Rupert having routed
one Wing of the Enemy's Horse, had not been so intent upon the chase of the
Flying-Enemy, that he left his Foot open to the other Wing. Who pressing hotly
on them, put them to an absolute Rout, and made themselves Masters of his Camp,
Carriage, and Cannon; and amongst other things of His Majesty's Cabinet: In
which they found many of his Letters, most of them written to the Queen; which
afterward were published by Command of the Houses, to their great dishonor.
For whereas the Athenians on the like success, had intercepted a Packet of
Letters from Philip King of Macedon, their most bitter Enemy, unto several
Friends, they met with one amongst the rest to the Queen Olympias; the rest
being all broke open before the Council, that they might be advertised of the
Enemy's purposes, the Letter to the Queen was returned untouched; the whole
Senate thinking it a shameful and dishonest act to pry into the Conjugal
Secrets betwixt Man and Wife. A Modesty in which those of Athens stand as much
commended by Hilladius Bisantinus, an ancient Writer, as the chief Leading-men
of the Houses of Parliament, are like to stand condemned for want of it, in
succeeding Stories.

47. But to proceed, this miserable Blow was followed by the surrendry of
Bristol, the storming of Bridgwater, the surprise of Hereford, and at the end
of Winter, with the loss of Chester. During which time the King moved up and
down with a Running-Army, but with such ill Fortune as most commonly attends a
declining-side. In which distress he comes to his old Winter Quarters, not out
of hope of bringing his Affairs to a better condition before the opening of the
Spring. From Oxon he sends diverse Messages to the Houses of Parliament,
desiring that He might be suffered to return to Westminster, and offering for
their security the whole Power of the Kingdom, the Navy, Castles, Forts, and
Armies, to be enjoyed by them in such manner, and for so long time, as they had
formerly desired. But finding nothing from them but neglect and scorn, His
Messages despised, and His Person vilified, He made an offer of Himself to
Fairfax, who refused also. Tired with repulse upon repulse, and having lost the
small remainder of His Forces near Stow on the Would; He puts Himself, in the
beginning of May, into the hands of the Scots Commissioners, residing then at
Southwell in the County of Nottingham, a Mannor-House belonging to the Sea of
York. For the Scots having mastered the Northern parts, in the year 1644, spent
the next year in harrasing the Country, even as far as Hereford; which they
besieged for a time, and perhaps had carried it, if they had not been called
back by the Letters of some special Friends, to take care of Scotland, then
almost reduced to the King's obedience, by the Noble Marquess of Montross. On
which Advertisement they depart from Hereford, face Worcester, and so marched
Northward: From whence they presently dispatch Col. David Leshly, with Six
thousand Horse; and with their Foot employed themselves in the Siege of Newark;
which brought down their Commissioners to Southwell, before remembered. From
thence the King is hurried in post-haste to the Town of Newcastle, which they
looked on as their strongest Hold. And being now desirous to make eeven with
their Masters, to receive the wages of their Iniquity, and being desirous to
get home in safety with that Spoil and Plunder which they had gotten in their
marching and re-marching betwixt Tweed and Hereford, they pressed the King to
fling up all the Towns and Castles which remained in His Power, or else they
durst not promise to continue Him under their Protection.

48. This Turn seemed strange unto the King. Who had not put Himself into the
Power of the Scots, had He not been assured beforehand by the French
Ambassador, of more courteous usage; to whom the Scots Commissioners had
engaged themselves, not only to receive His Person, but all those also which
repaired unto Him into their protection, as the King signified by His Letters
to the Marquess of Ormond. But having got Him into their Power, they forget
those Promises, and bring Him under the necessity of writing to the Marquesses
of Montross and Ormond to discharge their Soldiers; and to His Governors of
Towns in England, to give up their Garrisons. Amongst which, Oxford the then
Regal City, was the most considerable, surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax upon
Midsommerday. And by the Articles of that Surrendry, the Duke of York was put
into the Power of the Houses of Parliament; together with the Great Seal, the
Signet, and the Privy Seal, all which were most despitefully broken in the
House of Peers, as formerly the Dutch had broke the Seals of the King of Spain,
when they had cast off all Fidelity and Allegiance to him, and put themselves
into the Form of a Commonwealth. But then to make him some amends, they give
him some faint hopes of suffering him to bestow a visit on his Realm of
Scotland, (his ancient and native Kingdom, as he commonly called it) there to
expect the bettering of his Condition in the changes of time. But the Scots
hearing of his purpose, and having long ago cast off the yoke of subjection,
voted against his coming, in a full Assembly; so that we may affirm of him, as
the Scripture does of our Savior Christ, viz. He came unto his own, and his
own received him not, John cap. 1.2. The like resolution was taken also by the
Commissioners of that Nation, and the chief Leaders of their Army, who had
contracted with the two Houses of Parliament, and for the sum of Two hundred
thousand pounds in ready money, sold and betrayed him into the hands of his
Enemies, as certainly they would have done the Lord Christ himself for half the
money, if he had bowed down the Heavens, and came down to visit them. Being
delivered over unto such Commissioners as were sent by the Houses to receive
him* he was by them conducted on the third of February, to his House of
Holdenby, not far from the good Town of Northampton; where he was kept so
close, that none of his Domestic Servants, no not so much as his own Chaplains
were suffered to have any access unto him. And there we leave him for the
present; but long he shall not be permitted to continue there, as shall be
shown hereafter in due place and time.

49. Such being the issue of the War, let us next look upon the Presbyterians
in the acts of Peace; in which they threatened more destruction to the Church,
than the War it self. As soon as they had settled the strict keeping of the
Lord's-day-Sabbath, suppressed the public Liturgy, and imposed the Directory,
they gave command to their Divines of the Assembly, to set themselves upon the
making a new Confession. The Nine and thirty Articles of the Church of England,
were either thought to have too much of the ancient Fathers, or too little of
Calvin, and therefore fit to be reviewed, or else laid aside. And at the first,
their Journey-men began with a Review, and fitted Fourteen of the Articles to
their own conceptions; but in the end, despairing of the like success in all
the rest, they gave over that impertinent labor, and found it a more easy
task to conceive a new, than to accommodate the old Confession to their private
Fancies. And in this new Confession, they establish the Morality of their
Lord's-day-Sabbath, declare the Pope to be the Antichrist, the Son of
Perdition, and the Man of Sin. And therein also interweave the Calvinian
Rigours, in reference to the absolute Decree of Predestination, Grace,
Free Will, etc. But knowing that they served such Masters as were resolved to
part with no one Branch of their own Authority, they attribute a Power to the
Civil Magistrate, not only of calling Synods and Church Assemblies, but also of
being present at them, and to provide that whatsoever is therein contracted, be
done agreebly to the Mind and Will of God. But as to the matter of
Church Government, the Divine Right of their Presbyteries, the setting of
Christ upon his Throne, the Parity or Imparity of Ministers in the Church of
Christ, not a word delivered. Their mighty Masters were not then resolved upon
those particulars; and it was fit the Holy Ghost should stay their leisure, and
not inspire their Journey-men with any other Instruction than what was sent
them from the Houses.

50. But this Confession, though imperfect, and performed by halves, was
offered in the way of an Humble Advice to the Lords and Commons; that by the
omnipotency of an Ordinance it might pass for current, and be received for the
established Doctrine of the Church of England. The like was done also in the
tendry of their Larger Catechism, which seems to be nothing in a manner but the
setting out of their Confession in another dress, and putting it into the form
of Questions and Answers, that so it might appear to be somewhat else than
indeed it was. But being somewhat of the largest to be taught in Schools, and
somewhat of the hardest to be learned by Children, it was brought afterward
into an Epitome, commonly called The lesser Catechism, and by the Authors
recommended to the use of the Church, as far more Orthodox than Nowel's, more
clear than that contained in the Common Prayer Book, and not inferior to the
Palatine or Genevian Forms. But in all three, they held forth such a Doctrine
touching God's Decrees, that they gave occasion of reviving the old Blastian
Heresy, in making God to be the Author of Sin. Which Doctrine being new
published in a Pamphlet, entitled, Comfort for Believers in their Sins and
Troubles, gave such a hot Alarm to all the Calvinists in the new Assembly, that
they procured it to be burnt by the hands of the Hangman. But first, they
thought it necessary to prepare the way to that execution, by publishing in
print their detestation of that abominable and blasphemous Opinion, That God
has a hand in, and is the Author of the sinfulness of his people, as the Title
tells us. So that now Calvin's Followers may sleep supinely without regard to
the reproaches of uncivil men, who had upbraided them with maintaining such
blasphemous Doctrine. The Reverend Divines of the Assembly have absolved them
from it, and showed their Detestation of it; and who dares charge it on them
for the time to come?

51. But these things possibly were acted as they were Calvinians, and perhaps
Sabbatarians also, and no more than so. And therefore we must next see what
they do on the score of Presbytery, for setting up whereof, they had took the
Covenant, called in the Scots, and more insisted on the abolition of the
Episcopal Function, than any other of the Propositions which more concern them.
To this they made their way in those Demands which they sent to Oxon, the
Ordinance for Ordination of Ministers, and their advancing of the Directory in
the fall of the Liturgy. They had also voted down the Calling of Bishops, in
the House of Commons, on September. 8. 1642; and caused the passing of that Vote
to be solemnized with Bells and Bonfires in the streets of London, as if the
whole City was as much concerned in it, as some Factious Citizens. But knowing
that little was to be effected by the Propositions, and much less by their
Votes, they put them both into a Bill, which past the House of Peers on the
third of February, some two days after they had tendered their Proposals to the
King at Oxon. And by that Bill it was desired to be Enacted, That from the
Fifth of November, (the day designed for the blowing up the Parliament by the
Gun-powder-Traytors) which should be in the year of our Lord 1643, there should
be no Archbishops, Bishops, Commissaries, etc. (with all their Train recited in
the Oxon Article, Numb. 21.) in the Church of England: That from thenceforth
the Name, Title, and Function of Archbishops, Bishops, Chancellors. etc. or
likewise the having, using, or exercising any Jurisdiction, Office, and
Authority, by reason or color of any such Name, Dignity, or Function, in the
Realm of England* should utterly and for ever cease. And that the King might
yield the sooner to the Alteration, they tempt him to it with a Clause therein
contained, for putting him into the actual possession of all the Castles,
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, belonging to the said
Archbishops, or Bishops, or to any of them. And for the Lands of Deans* and
Chapters, the Brethren had a hope to parcel them amongst themselves, under the
color of encouraging and maintaining of a Preaching-Ministry; some sorry
pittance being allowed to the old Proprietaries, and some short Pension during
life to the several Bishops.

52. Such was the tenor of the Bill; which found no better entertainment than
their Propositions. So that despairing of obtaining the King's consent to
advance Presbytery, they resolved to do it of themselves, but not till they had
broken the King's Forces at the Battle of Naisby: For on the nineteenth of
August then next following, they publish Directions in the name of the Lords
and Commons, (after advice with their Divines of the Assembly) for the choosing
of RVLING-ELDERS in all the Congregations, and in the Classical Assemblies, for
the Cities of London and Westminster, and the several Counties of the Kingdom,
in order to the speedy settling of Presbyterial Government. Amongst which, no
small care was taken for making twelve Classes of the Ministers of London only;
and after, for dividing each particular County into several Classes, with
reference to the largeness and extent thereof. Which Orders and Directions,
were after seconded by the Ordinance of October the twentieth; containing
certain Rules for the suspension of scandalous and ignorant persons from the
holy Supper, and giving power to certain persons therein named, to sit as
Judges and Tryers, as well concerning the Election, as the Integrity and
Ability of all such men as are elected Elders within any of the Twelve Classes
of the Province of London. It is not to be thought, but that the
London-Elderships made sufficient haste to put themselves into the actual
possession of their new Authority. But in the Country, most men were so cold
and backward, that the Lower House was fain to quicken them with some fresh
Resolves; by which it was required, on the twentieth of February, That choice
be forthwith made of Elders, thoroughout the Kingdom, according to such former
Directions as had past both Houses; and that all Classes and Parochial
Congregations, should be thereby authorized effectually to proceed therein. And
that the Church might be supplied with able Ministers in all times succeeding,
the Power of Ordination, formerly restrained to certain persons residing in and
about the City of London, (according to the Ordinance of the second of October,
1644.) is now communicated to the Ministers of each several Classes, as men
most like to know the wants of the Parish-Churches under their Authority.

53. But here it is to be observed, that in the settling of the Presbyterian
Government in the Realm of England, as the Presbyteries were to be subordinate
to the Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies of the Church, so were
they all to be subordinate to the Power of the Parliament, as appears plainly
by the Ordinance of the fourteenth of March; which makes it quite another thing
from the Scottish Presbyteries, and other Assemblies of that Kirk, which held
themselves to be supreme, and unaccountable in their actings* without respect
unto the King, the Parliament, and the Courts of Justice. But the truth is,
that as the English generally were not willing to receive that yoke; so neither
did the Houses really intend to impose it on them, though for a while, to hold
fair quarter with the Scots, they seemed forward in it. And this appears
sufficiently by a Declaration of the House of Commons, published on the
seventeenth of April, 1646; in which they signify, That they were not able to
consent to the granting of an Arbitrary and unlimited Power and Jurisdiction to
near Ten thousand Iudicatories to be erected in the Kingdom, which could not be
consistent with the Fundamental Laws and Government of it, and which by
necessary consequence did exclude the Parliament from having any thing to do in
that Jurisdiction. On such a doubtful bottom did Presbytery stand, till the
King had put himself into the Power of the Scots, and that the Scots had posted
him in all haste to the Town of Newcastle. Which caused the Lords and Commons
no less hastily to speed their Ordinance of the fifth of June, For the present
settling of the Presbyterial Government, without further delay, as in the Title
is expressed. And though it was declared in the end of that Ordinance, That it
was to be in force for three years only, except the Houses should think fit to
continue it longer; yet were the London-Ministers so intent upon them, that
they resolve to live no longer in suspense, but to proceed courageously in the
execution of those several Powers which both by Votes and Ordinances were
entrusted to them. And to make known to all the World what they meant to do,
they published a Paper with this Title, that is to say, Certain Considerations
and Cautions agreed upon by the Ministers of London and Westminster, and within
the Lines of Communication. June the nineteenth, 1646. According to which they
resolve to put the Presbyterial Government into execution, upon the Ordinances
of Parliament before published.

54. In which conjuncture it was thought expedient by the Houses of Parliament,
to send Commissioners to Newcastle, and by them to present such Propositions to
his Sacred Majesty, as they conceived to be agreeable to his present condition.
In the second of which it was desired, That according to the laudable Example
of his Royal Father, of happy memory, he would be pleased to swear and sign the
Solemn League and Covenant, and cause it to be taken by Acts of Parliament in
all his Kingdoms and Estates. And in the third it was proposed, That a Bill
should pass for the utter abolishing and taking away of Archbishops, Bishops,
Chancellors, Commissaries, Deans, etc. as they occur before in the Oxon
Articles, Number. 21. That the Assembly of Divines, and Reformation of Religion,
according to the said Covenant, should be forthwith settled and confirmed by Act
of Parliament; and that such unity and uniformity between the Churches of both
Kingdoms, should in like manner be confirmed by Act of Parliament, as by the
said Covenant was required, after Advice first had with the Divines of the said
Assembly. It was required also in the said Propositions, That he should utterly
divest himself of all power to protect his people, by putting the Militia into
the hands of the Houses; and that he should betray the greatest part of the
Lords and Gentry which had adhered unto him in the course of the War, to a
certain ruin; some of which were to be excluded from all hope of Pardon, as to
the saving of their Lives; others to forfeit their Estates, and to lose their
Liberties; the Clergy to remain under sequestration; the Lawyers of both sorts
to be disabled from the use of their Callings. Demands of such unreasonable and
horrid nature, as would have rendered him inglorious and contemptible both at
home and abroad, if they had been granted.

55. These Propositions were presented to him on the eleventh day of July, at
Newcastle, by the Earls of Pembroke and Suffolk, of the House of Peers; Earl,
Hipisly, Robinson, and Goodwin, from the House of Commons: Of whom his Majesty
demanded, Whether they came empowered to treat with him, or not? And when they
answered, That they had no Authority so to do: He presently replied, That then
the Houses might as well have sent their Propositions by an honest Trumpeter,
and so parted with them for the present. His Majesty had spent the greatest
part of his time since he came to Newcastle, in managing a dispute about
Church Government with Mr. Alexander Henderson, the most considerable Champion
for Presbytery in the Kirk of Scotland. Henderson was possessed of all advantages
of Books and Helps, which might enable him to carry on such a Disputation. But
His Majesty had the better Cause, and the stronger Arguments. Furnished with
which, (though destitute of all other Helps than what he had within himself) he
pressed his Adversary so hard, and gave such satisfactory Answers unto all his
Cavils, that he remained Master of the Field, as may sufficiently appear by the
Printed Papers. And it was credibly reported, that Henderson was so confounded
with grief and shame, that he fell into a desparate sickness, which in fine
brought him to his Grave; professing, as some say, that he dyed a Convert; and
frequently extolling those great Abilities which, when it was too late, he had
found in his Majesty. Of the particular passages of this Disputation, the
English Commissioners had received a full Information; and therefore purposely
declined all discourse with his Majesty, by which the merit of their
Propositions might be called in question. All that they did, was to insist upon
the craving of a positive Answer, that so they might return unto those that
sent them; and such an Answer they shall have, as will little please them.

56. For though his Fortunes were brought so low, that it was not thought safe
for him to deny them any thing; yet he demurred upon the granting of such
points as neither in Honor nor in Conscience could be yielded to them. Amongst
which, those Demands which concerned Religion, and the abolishing of the
ancient Government of the Church by Archbishops and Bishops, may very justly
be supposed to be none of the least. But this delay being taken by the Houses
for a plain denial, and wanting money to corrupt the unfaithful Scots, who
could not otherwise be tempted to betray their Sovereign; they past an
Ordinance for abolishing the Episcopal Government, and settling their Lands upon
Trustees for the use of the State. Which Ordinance being past on the ninth of
October, was to this effect; that is to say, That for the better raising of
moneys for the just and necessary Debts of the Kingdom, in which the same has
been drawn by a War mainly promoted in favor of Archbishops and Bishops, and
other their Adherents and Dependents; it was ordained by the Authority of the
Lords and Commons, That the Name, Title, Style, and Dignity of Archbishop of
Canterbury, Archbishop of York, Bishop of Winchester, and Bishop of Durham,
and all other Bishops or Bishoprics within the Kingdom, should from and after
the fifth of September, 1646, then last past, be wholly abolished or taken
away; and that all persons should from thenceforth be disabled to hold that
Place, Function, or Style, within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, or the Town of Berwick; or exercise any Jurisdiction or Authority
^hereunto formerly belonging, by virtue of any Letters Patents from the Crown,
or any other Authority whatsoever; any Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding, As for their Lands, they were not to be vested now in the
Kings possession, as had been formerly intended; but to be put into the power
of some Trustees which are therein named, to be disposed of to such uses,
intents, and purposes, as the two Houses should appoint.

57. Amongst which uses, none appeared so visible, even to vulgar eyes, as the
raising of huge Sums of Money to content the Scots, who from a Remedy were
looked on as the Sickness of the Commonwealth. The Scots Demands amounted to
Five hundred thousand pounds of English money, which they offered to make good
on a just account; but were content for quietness sake to take Two hundred
thousand pounds in full satisfaction. And yet they could not have that neither,
unless they would betray the King to the power of his Enemies. At first they
stood on terms of Honor; and the Lord Chancellor Lowdon ranted to some tune
(as may be seen in diverse of his Printed Speeches) concerning the indelible
Character of Disgrace and Infamy which must be for ever imprinted on them, if
they yielded to it. But in the end, the Presbyterians on both sides did so play
their parts, that the sinful Contract was concluded, by which the King was to
be put into the hands of such Commissioners as the two Houses should appoint to
receive his Person. The Scots to have One hundred thousand pounds in ready
money, and the Public Faith (which the Houses very prodigally pawned upon all
occasions) to secure the other. According unto which Agreement his Majesty is
sold by his own Subjects, and betrayed by his Servants; by so much wiser (as
they thought) than the Traitor Judas, by how much they had made a better
Market, and raised the price of the Commodity which they were to sell. And
being thus sold, he is delivered for the use of those that bought him, into the
custody of the Earl of Pembroke, (who must be one in all their Errands) the
Earl of Denbigh, and the Lord Mountague of Boughton, with twice as many Members
of the Lower House; with whom he takes his Journey toward Holdenby, before
remembered, on the third of February. And there so closely watched and guarded,
that none of his own Servants are permitted to repair unto him. Marshal and
Caril, two great sticklers in behalf of Presbytery, (but such as after warped
to the Independents) are by the Houses nominated to attend as Chaplains. But he
refused to hear them in their Prayers or Preachings, unless they would
officiate by the public Liturgy, and bind themselves unto the Rules of the
Church of England. Which not being able to obtain, he moves the Houses by his
Message of the 17th of that Month, to have two Chaplains of his own. Which most
unchristianly and most barbarously they denied to grant him.

58. Having reduced him to this straight, they press him once again with their
Propositions; which being the very same which was sent to Newcastle, could not
in probability receive any other Answer. This made them keep a harder hand upon
him, than they did before; presuming, that they might be able to extort those
Concessions from him by the severity and solitude of his restraint, when their
Persuasions were too weak, and their Arguments not strong enough to induce him
to it. But, Great God! How fallacious are the thoughts of men? How wretchedly
do we betray our selves to those sinful hopes which never shall be answerable
to our expectation? The Presbyterians had battered down Episcopacy by the force
of an Ordinance, outed the greatest part of the Regular Clergy, of their Cures
and Benefices; advanced their new Form of Government, by the Votes of the
Houses, and got the King into their power, to make sure work of it. But when
they thought themselves secure, they were most unsafe. For being in the height
of all their Glories and Projectments, one Ioice, a Cornet of the Army, comes
thither with a Party of Horse, removes his Guards, and takes him with them to
their Headquarters, which were then at Woburn, a Town upon the North-west Road
in the County of Bedford: Followed, not long after, by such Lords and others as
were commanded by the Houses to attend upon him. Who not being very acceptable
to the principal Officers, were within very few weeks discharged of that
Service. By means whereof, the Presbyterians lost all those great advantages
which they had fancied to themselves, and shall be better husbanded to the use
of their Adversaries, though it succeeded worse to his Majesty's person, than
possibly it might have done, if they had suffered him to remain at Holdenby,
where the Houses fixed him.

59. This great turn happened on the fourth of June, Anno 1647, before he had
remained but four Months in the Power of the Houses. Who having brought the
War to the end desired, possessed themselves of the King's Person, and dismissed
the Scots, resolved upon disbanding a great part of the Army, that they might
thereby ease the people of some part of their burdens. But some great Officers
of the Army had their Projects and Designs apart, and did not think it
consonant to common prudence, that they should either spend their blood, or
consume their strength, in raising others to that Power, which being acquired
by themselves, might far more easily be retained, than it had been gotten. Upon
these grounds they are resolved against disbanding, stand on their Guards, and
draw together toward London, contrary to the Will and express Commandment of
their former Masters, by whom they were required to keep at a greater distance.
The Officers thereupon impeach some Members of the Lower House; and knowing of
what great Consequence it might be unto them to get the King into their Power,
a Plot is laid to bring him into their Headquarters without noise and trouble;
which was accordingly effected, as before is said. Thus have the Presbyterians
of both Nations, embroiled the Kingdom first in Tumults, and afterward in a
calamitous and destructive War. In which the Sword was suffered to range at
liberty, without distinction of Age, Sex, or Quality. More goodly Houses
plundered and burnt down to the ground, more Churches sacrilegiously profaned
and spoiled, more Blood poured out like Water within four years space, than had
been done in the long course of Civil-Warrs between York and Lancaster. With
all which Spoil and public Ruin, they purchased nothing to themselves but
shame and infamy; as may be shown by taking a brief view of their true
condition before and after they put the State into these Confusions.

60. And first, the Scots not long before their breaking out against their
King, had in the Court two Lords High Stewards, and two Grooms of the Stool,
successively one after another. And at their taking up of Arms, they had a
Master of the Horse, a Captain of the Guard, a Keeper of the Privy Purse, seven
Grooms of eight in his Majesty's Bedchamber, and an equal number at the least
of Gentlemen-Ushers, Quarter-waiters, Cup-bearers, Carvers, Sewers, and other
Officers, attending daily at the Table. I speak not here of those who had
places in the Stables, or below the Stairs; or of the Servants of those Lords
and Gentlemen who either lived about the Court, or had Offices in it. All which
together, make up so considerable a number, that the Cour might well be called
an Academy of the Scots Nation; in which so many of all sorts had their
Breeding, Maintenance, and Preferment. Abroad, they had a Lieutenant of the
Tower, a Fortress of most consequence in all the Kingdom; and a Master-Gunner
of the Navy; an Office of as great a Trust as the other: and more of those
Monopolies, Suits, and Patents, which were conceived to be most grievous to the
Subjects, than all the English of the Court. In the Church they had two
Deanries, diverse Prebendaries, and so many Ecclesiastical Benefices, as
equalled all the Revenues of the Kirk of Scotland. All which they had lost,
like Aesop's Dog, catching after a shadow. And yet by catching at that shadow,
they lost all those Advantages which before they had both in Court and
Country; and that not only for the present, but in all probability for the
time to come. Such losers were the Scots by this brutish bargain; but whether
out of pure zeal to the Holy Discipline, or their great love to filthy lucre,
or the perverseness of their nature, or the rebellious humor of the Nation, or
of all together, let them judge that can.

61. If then the Scots became such losers by the bargain, as most sure they
did; as sure it is that their dear Brethren in the Cause of Presbytery, the
Puritans or Presbyterians in the Realm of England, got as little by it. The
English Puritans laid their heads and hands together to embroil the Realm, out
of a confidence, that having alienated the greatest part of the Tribes from the
House of David, they might advance the Golden Calves of their Presbyteries, in
Dan and Bethel, and all other places whatsoever within the Land. And for the
maintenance thereof, they had devoured (in conceit) all Chapter-Lands, and
parcelled them amongst themselves into Augmentations. But no sooner had they
driven this Bargain, but a Vote passed for selling those Lands toward the
payment of the Debts of the Commonwealth. Nor have they lived to see their dear
Presbytery settled, or their Lay Elders entertained in any one Parish of the
Kingdom. For the advancement whereof, the Scots were first encouraged to begin
at home, and afterward to pursue their Work by invading in England. Nor fared
it better with those great Achitophels of the popular Party, who labored in
the raising of a new Commonwealth, out of the Ruins of a Glorious and Ancient
Monarchy. To which end they employed the Presbyterians, as the fittest
Instruments for drawing the people to their side, and preaching up the piety of
their Intentions. Which Plot they had been carrying on from the first coming of
this King to the Crown of England, till they had got His Sacred Person into
their possession. Which made them a fit parallel to those Husbandmen in St.
Matthew's Gospel, ( Matt. 21.38.) who said amongst themselves, This is the
Heir, come let us kill him, and let us seize on his Inheritance. A Commonwealth
which they had founded, and so modelled in their brains, that neither Sir
Thomas Moor's Vtopia, nor the Lord Verulam's new Atlantis, nor Plato's
Platform, nor any of the old Idea's, were equal to it. The Honors and Offices
whereof, they had distributed amongst themselves, and their own dependence. But
having brought the King (though, as it chanced, by other hands) to the End they
aimed, and being intent on nothing more than the dividing of that rich Prey
amongst themselves, gratifying one another with huge sums of Money, and growing
fat on the Revenues of the Crown, and the Lands of the Church, and guarded as
they thought by invincible Armies, they were upon a sudden scattered like the
dust before the wind, turned out of all, and pulickly exposed to contempt and
scorn. All which was done so easily, with so little noise, that the loss of
that exorbitant Power did not cost so much as a broken Head, or a bloody Nose;
in purchasing whereof, they had wasted so many Millions of Treasure, and more
than One hundred thousand Lives.

Thus have we seen the dangerous Doctrines and Positions, the secret Plots and
open Practices; the Sacriledges, Spoils, and Rapins; the Tumults, Murders, and
Seditions; the horrid Treasons and Rebellions, which have been raised by the
Presbyterians in most parts of Christendom, for the time of One hundred years,
and upwards. Which having seen, we shall conclude this History in the words of
that Censure which by the Doctors of the Sorbonne was once passed on the
Jesuits; that is to say, Videtur haec Societas in negotio fidei periculosa,
pacis Ecclesiae perturbativa, Religionis rectae eversiva; and magis ad
destructionem quam ad aedificationem.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Thomas Basset, at
the George in Fleetstreet, near Cliffords-Inn.
Folio's.
1. COsmography, in four Books: containing the Chorography and History of the
whole World, and all the principal Kingdoms and Provinces, Seas and Isles
thereof. By P. Heylin: Printed 1669, in Columns, much better than any of the
former Editions. Price 20 s. 2. Ecclesia Restaurata: or, the History of the
Reformation of the Church of England; containing the beginning, progress, and
successes of it; the Counsels by which it was conducted; the Rules of Piety and
Prudence upon which it was founded; the several steps by which it was promoted
or retarded, in the change of times, from the first preparations to it by King
Henry the 8th, until the legal settling and establishment of it under Queen
Elizabeth: together with the intermixture of such Civil Actions, and Affairs of
State, as either were co-incident with it, or related to it. By P. Heylin. The
second Edition* 3. The Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holstein's
Ambassadors, into Muscovy, Tartary, and Persia; begun in the year 1633, and
finished in 1639; containing a complete History of those Countries. Whereunto
are added the Travels of Mandelso, from Persia into the East Indies; begun in
1638, and finished in 1640. The whole, illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and
Figures. Written originally by Adam Olearius, Secretary to the Embassy. The
second Edition corrected. Englished by I Davies of Kidwelly. Price bound 18 s.
4. An Historical Display of the Romish State, Court, Interest, Policies, etc.
and the mighty influence of the Jesuits in that Church, and many other
Christian States, not hitherto extant. Being a full Account of all the
Transactions both in France and at Rome, concerning the five famous
Propositions controverted between the Iansenists and the Molinists, from the
beginning of that Affair, till the Pope's Decision. Written originally by Mons.
de St. Amor, Doctor of Sorbonne. Englished by G. Havirs. Price bound 14. s. 5.
The Complete Body of the Art Military, in three Books: being perfect Directions
for the right ordering and framing of an Army both of Horse and Foot. Together
with all the manner of Fortifications, and the Art of Gunnery. By Rich. Elton,
Lieutenant Colonel. Price bound 8 s.

