CHRIST DISPLAYED, AS THE Choicest Gift, and Best Master: From Ioh. 4.10. Ioh.
13.13.


Being some of the last Sermons Preached by that faithful and industrious
Servant of Jesus Christ* Mr. NATHANEEL HEYWOOD,

Sometime Minister of the Gospel at Ormeschurch in Lancashire.

1 Cor. 2.2, For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and hlm crucified.

Salvian de Gubern. Dei, Lib. 4. In id penitus deducta res est, ut sicut de
Paganis Barbaris prius diximus, Christi nomen non videatur jam Sacramentum esse
sed sermo. Nam in tantum apud plurimos nomen hoc parvi penditur, ut nunquam
minus cogitent quippiam facere, quam cum se jurant per Christum esse facturos.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers-Chappel, 1679.

To the Worshipful HENRY HOGHTON, Esquire And the Lady STANLEY, His Virtuous
Consort.
Worthy SIR, MADAM,
I Presume to affix your Venerable Names in the Frontispiece of this Treatise,
not upon my own account, or upon any such interest I can challenge in your
Worships, being much unknown to you; but as acting the part of the deceased
Author, who had upon great reason conceived a very high estimation of you, as I
doubt not but your respects to him were reciprocal, being grounded both upon
long acquaintance and experience of each other, his discourse of you with
grateful acknowledgments of your multiplied kindness to his person and family
in my hearing, and his affectionate prayers for you, were clear testimonies
that you were engraven upon his heart; and if his unparalled modesty had
permitted him to have committed any thing to the Press, doubtless his cordial
affection would have issued it self in such an Epistolary inscription. But
since I am necessitated to supply his place in handing these Discourses to the
World, I prostrate this exposed Orphan at your feet, and question not your
candid reception, and resolute protection of what was the genuine product of
his mind and mouth, which I will confidently assure you these Treatises are,
both for matter, method, words, without the least addition, substraction, or
alteration, being taken out of his own notes as he preached them, writ at large
with his own hand.

The matter of these Sermons is of greatest moment and importance; fundamental
truths they are [of the gift of God in our blessed Redeemer, and Christ's
Lordship and Soveraignty] which are truths of the first magnitude, most
necessary, like wool and corn, the staple-commodities of this Kingdom; like
bread and salt that must be set upon the Table; like ground-Cells upon which
lies the weight of the fabric; these are comprehensive and extensive truths;
without this gift sinners had not been pardoned, accepted; without this
Lordship souls would wander and rebel; the former brings us into favor with
God, the latter conquers rebellious wills, subdues enemies, regulates Saints,
and crowns them with glory. The manner of handling these subjects is plain,
exact, nervous, and very pathetical, which took great impression on the hearers
when first delivered with the lively voice of that fair spokesman for Christ,
whose heart was much taken with this lovely and beloved Lord, and took great
delight to recommend him to poor sinners. which he did with great advantage and
success, whereby he became a spiritual father of many children, whom he begot
in the bonds of the Gospel. Indeed he excelled others in other subjects, but in
this he excelled himself, especially in this swan-like song, which savours of
Heaven, and seems to be calculated for the height of Sion, to be sung by that
heavenly host in the praises of our dear Redeemer.

But neither do these weighty subjects, nor the lively colors wherein they are
set off, need my recommendation; nor yet the Authors gifts, graces, industry,
fidelity, and other imitable properties, well known to you and all that were
acquainted with him, need at all be mentioned by me, at least at this season,
his singular accomplishments and conversation shine too bright to be darkened
by any black-mouthed Momus; as his soul and body are beyond the reach of Satan
and Sorrow, so his name is above any just censures and calumnies.

I make bold to put these Posthumous works into your hands; may your Worships
in the first place reap the benefit, and by your experiments thereof in your
souls, and conformity thereto in your lives, encourage others to come and see
how good our Lord Jesus is; this is a lovely Song of one that could play well
on an instrument; may your hearts echo to this Gospel-tune; here is solid food
well cookt, rendered delectable with the sweet sauce of acceptable words; may
your stomachs be keen and sharp, and nourisht by it to eternal life. These are
goads and nails fastened by this master of assemblies (now rewarded by his
Master) given out by one shepherd; may Gods Spirit fasten them as a nail in a
sure place upon many consciences; I have then attained my ends in this
undertaking; may God be thereby glorified, and souls edified, we have enough.
The Lord bless you both, and make you rich blessings to your Country in your
public, domestical and personal station and relation. The Lord drop down this
choice gift into your laps and hearts, that you may give up your selves to him
again as his bored, devoted servants for ever. God Almighty, that has been the
stay of your Youth, be also the staff of your old age, and maintain you as
choice instruments of his glory in the land of the living, and in a good old
age conduct you through the valley of the shadow of death, into the land of
life; so prays

Your Worships humble Servant in our Dearest Lord, O. H.
Febr. 1. 1678/9.
To the CHRISTIAN READER, especially the Inhabitants of the Town and Parish of
Ormeschurch, and the places adjacent, Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
My dearly beloved in our dearest Lord,
IT is an astonishing Providence that in such a day of Epidemical sinning,
general fears of approaching Judgments, and great necessity in most places, God
should thus weaken our strength, undermine the fabric, by cutting off so many
faithful Shepherds in so short a space, therein seeming as if he would make a
way to his wrath. But as your dark parts have more need of such faithful
Watchmen; so you are most emptied, God having of late renewed his witnesses
against you, and broken you with breach upon breach; before your eyes were
fully wiped for one loss, another follows at the heels, like Job's messengers,
bringing the sad tidings of the death of another gracious Minister, and this
last is not the least, under which you lie bleeding. It is true, on his account
that is gone, you have no reason to lament, God has put a blessed end to his
torturing pains of body, perplexing thoughts of heart, and indefatigable
labors in the Ministry, and crowned him with glory; the sharper was his
passage, the sweeter is his present repose; he finds himself abundantly
rewarded. God made great use of him here, and has now taken him home to
himself. His afflictions, temptations, oppositions, were above the ordinary
rate, which as they assimilated him to his Master, so they promoted his greater
usefulness here, and fittednes for heaven; the lintel-stones and pillars of the
new Jerusalem, suffer more knocks of Gods hammer and tool, than the common
side-wall stones; God wearied him out of this world, and made heaven welcome;
wish him not here again, but labor to improve this dreadful breach, by
remembering his Doctrine, imitating his exemplary practice; and understanding
Gods design in this so amazing stroke, search out that Achan that has troubled
your camp; lay to heart sin, reform your lives, live up to the Doctrines you
have been taught; and do these in particular which are here presented to your
view, and I am confident will be acceptable to you, though wanting the
warming-accent of his lively voice, which was full of sparkling spirits; you
must see his face, hear his voice no more in your solemn assemblies; but yet
this Elijah as he mounted up to heaven in a chariot of fire, dropped down this
paper-mantle amongst us, which by the spirit of grace concurring, may divide
the swelling-waves of Jordan; I mean, separate betwixt precious souls and those
abominations which at this day overflow all banks and bounds. Oh that Gods
Spirit may by these conduits convey spiritual life and marrow into your souls,
that you may live, though Ministers die; they die civilly, naturally, may you
live spiritually, eternally. This servant of God spent himself as a candle to
give you light; if ever it might be said of a mortal man, as of our Savior,
The zeal of thy house has eaten me up, it may be said so of this choice
servant of God, who spent and was spent for souls; who counted not his life
dear unto him, that he might finish his course with joy; in labors more
abundant. But I purposely wave what concerns his person at present, leaving a
rough draught of his smooth life to a fitter season.

All I shall add is, to give a brief account of these ensuing Treatises: As to
the printing of them, though Solomon caution his Son against making and reading
many Books, Eccles. 12.12. yet that only sounds a retreat to luxuriant wits in
a scribbling age, as to writing upon some subjects, or for vain glory, but does
not simply condemn writing Books, which has been the key of discipline, an
Herald of the Gospel, and a notable mean to propagate true Religion. As for
these discourses upon common subjects, I picked them out of a vast bundle of
variety of excellent discourses, upon such accounts as these.

1. Because I do not remember any such full Treatises upon these heads. 2. Yet
they are needful and useful, pleasant and profitable. 3. They are handed out in
a taking-method and manner. 4. His heart was much carried out in preaching
Christ to sinners, he professed most delight in it; these Sermons then are the
lively idea of his Gospel spirit. 5. God made them savoury and delectable in
their first verbal delivery, and why not upon a second review? 6. This servant
of God is likely to preach no more, but hereby being dead he yet speaks 7.
The importunity of such friends as deserved to be gratified, extorted this
labor of love to the souls of sinners; nor shall it repent us to expose it
naked to the worlds censures, so it may by Gods blessing profit any.
For Treatises themselves, though carried on by way of similitude and
resemblance, yet are not therefore to be despised or rejected; the Prophets
used similitudes, Lumen supernum nunquam desendit sine indumento. -- Rab. Cup.
in Synt. Apost. p. 177, 178.
Christ preached much in Parables, and this way sweetly instills Truths with
delight and clearness into the mind and affection; so that Cyprian's caution be
well regarded, that they be not stretched too far: He instanceth in leaven; I
may instance in this gift of God: Jesus Christ is not so a gift, but that he is
also a Lord, not to be ruled by us, but to rule us: To us a Son is given, Isa.
9.6. but how? that yet the government might be upon his shoulder. As he is the
Lords Christ, so he is Christ the Lord, who will rule where he rests, and reign
where ever he is received; he will be Lord as well as Life; a Master as well as
a Treasure; he will sway his righteous scepter over us, as well as vouchsafe
his glorious benefits to us; he expects we should be his servants as well as
his friends; we must be the Lords Nethinims, given to God; yea by our selves,
as we expect this blessed Donative from God; he that will not be ruled by his
golden scepter, shall be crushed by his iron rod. And as Jesus Christ is a
gift, so he is food, bread of life, heavenly manna; yet this must not be
stretched too far; for in this he is contrary to ordinary corporal food, for
though he feed souls, he turns them (not they him) into his holy, heavenly
nature. Christ as the gift of God is the matter of this feast; Christ as Lord
is the master and maker of this feast. All this must be understood suitable to
the majesty of the Son of God, and according to the nature of Metaphors;
otherwise says Cyprian, If they were the same, they were not examples, but the
things rather which they illustrate. But all these similitudes fall infinitely
short of the perfection of him who is above finite excellencies, [Nec
similitudinem substantiae in facturis suis habere potest ille, qui factor est
omnium.] All I shall add further on this account is that caution of his in a
like case, [Et jam hoc loco mundior auditus requiritur and purior sensus,] Let
your senses be raised to spiritual objects.

Having hinted a few words concerning the Author and Treatises, give me leave,
having this fair opportunity, to be speak the once constant attenders upon this
good man's Ministry, and those are either sinners or Saints.

As for unconverted sinners that attended such powerful awakening preaching,
and have sitten out these loud calls, and pathetical entreaties, and rational
Interrogatories, Perswasives, Expostulations; I may now say, Lord have mercy
upon you, your case is miserable; has your Minister killed himself to save
your souls, and yet will you not be saved? have you worn him to the stumps, and
quenched his natural light with your spiritual deadness? Have you stifled all
those convictions you have had under his Ministry? And have you not reason to
fear that Gods Spirit will strive with you no more? Where will you find such
another upright Nathaneel, such a rouzing Boanerges, such a melting Barnabas?
Shall he that studied, traveled, sweat, wept, sighed, and suffered, be brought
in as a testimony against you? He was mighty in prayer; were you stupid when he
wrestled with God for you, and was loath to be put off without a soul at a
Sermon? Did you look about you as persons unconcerned in Prayer, Sermons, and
compassionate workings of his soul for you? God knows, and you shall know,
there has been a Prophet amongst you; he has washed his hands from the guilt
of your blood by faithful warnings, your blood be upon your own heads: yea, may
not his blood come to be upon your heads? Yea, may not the guilt of the blood
of the Son of God be required at your hands? And have you worn out man? are you
not content to weary men, but will you weary out God also? Shall Christ weep
over you as over Jerusalem, and say as Luke 19.42. If thou had known, even
thou at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now
they are hid from thine eyes. Though you cannot hear your former Minister's
living voice, yet I send you one summons more to your eyes in his own words; if
this will not prevail, expect to hear another manner of message from the great
Jehovah, Cut them down, for they cumber the ground; bind them hand and foot,
and cast them into the fire.

1. Is there not yet some ignorant souls among you, that have not the knowledge
of God, Christ, Gospel mysteries? And if you know not this gift of God, no
wonder you slight it; if you know not the worth of this jewel, or your need of
it, you cannot esteem or desire it; a blind man cannot distinguish colors,
swallows many a gnat, knows not whither he goes. God complains, His people are
destroyed for lack of knowledge, Hos. 4 6. Solomon says, Without it the heart
is not good, Prove. 19.2. The Apostle says, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. And the Prophet says, He will have no mercy on
a people that have no understanding, Isa. 27.11. Alas! the whole soul is
misguided with this blind guide; the will is perverted affections ranging,
conscience dictates amiss, for its a witness but to what it knows; and thy
clock cannot go if the weights be taken off. God Almighty pity you! it is a
shameful thing to be ignorant, but it is damnning to be wilfully ignorant, yea
it will aggravate damnation, 1 Cor. 15.34. Oh now at last ply your work, read,
pray, confer, meditate: One would think the poor prisoner should take pains to
learn to read, that knows he must be hanged if he cannot read his neck-verse;
but if you be negligent, God may seal you up in darkness, and say, if any be
ignorant, let him be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14.38.

2. Is any among you an hypocrite, that makes a fair show in the flesh, that
paint your outsides with a goodly garnish of common gifts, and outside duties,
that have owned your godly Minister living, and honor his memorial now dead,
but have not obeyed from the heart the Doctrine which he delivered, or have not
been delivered into the form of Gospel-doctrine; that are one thing before
others in meetings, another thing alone and in your families; that can down
with some common acts of religiousness, but slight self-denying,
flesh-displeasing duties; totally unacquainted with heart-work and mortifying
special lusts, yea rather use duties as a cloak to cover sin, than spiritual
armor to fight against it? Alas, how many is there that were baptized in
infancy, join with Christians as with a party or faction, slide into a
profession, that never came in by the door of regeneration, and so deceive
themselves and others. Ministers judge charitably of Professors, know not men's
hearts; and though they express their jealousy, and so give faithful cautions,
yet encourage good beginnings, and hopeful shows in such an evil day as this
is, but may be mistaken; for who would judge him an enemy that marches after
Christ in duties, wears his colors, learneth his postures, has got the word,
keeps his rank, converseth with Saints in a religious habit and language? yet
such may be hypocrites, and prove apostates, witness Judas, Simon Magus, Demas,
Himeneus, Philetus, etc. Oh Sirs, as you love your souls, see to the truth of
grace, the root of the matter; be as good or better than you seem; the
heart-searching God knows your home-behaviour, and sees how your principles are
stated; and as you would see Gods face and meet your godly Minister with
comfort, be sincere and single-spirited.

3. Are any amongst you worldlings, addicting your selves to pursue and dote
upon the profits of the world? That spend most of your time in lading your
selves with thick clay, and panting after the dust of the earth? are these
things satisfactory? Have you ever weighed them in the balance of rectified
reason? did you never hear of better things? Did you ever hear that riches made
men happy? Have you not seen riches take wings and leave the possessor? Or have
you not seen the rich die as well as poor, and leave their wealth behind them?
Alas! the world was never true to any that trusted to it? It Is a sad thing to
see men almost pressed to death, still call for more weight; to see persons
full of drink greedy of more, and complaining they die for thirst: Oh but says
Christ, I am the bread of life* he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he
that believes in me shall never thirst, Ioh. 6.35. The enjoyment of Christ
quenches worldly thirst; the Lord awake your spirits to see how vast a
distance there is betwixt earth and heaven; and stir up your spirits to a
proportionable care about soul-concernments.

4. Is there a slothful, careless, or discouraged soul among you, that loves
his ease better than life, that will not take the pains to be saved, or that is
not resolved for heaven, but in suspense, as halting b^twixt two opinions;
could have a months mind after Christ were it not for the inconveniences that
attend him, difficulties in Religion discourage them, and having much sense
which bears sway, distrust prevails, and shouts faith to the heart, so that the
poor soul falls stat at Satan's feet, grows listless to duty; as one who sees
the Well dry, breaks or throws away his pitcher; some are ready to say as
those, Jer. 2.25. when God says, With hold thy foot from being unshod, [ i. e.
do not by putting off thy shoos address thy self to a slothful or an adulterous
bed] and thy throat from thirst, [ i. e. forbear thy sinful thirst and desires
after idols and vanities] but thou said, there is no hope, [it's to no
purpose, past cure, past care] I have loved strangers, and after them will I
go, [you may save a labor, I am too far gone to turn now, God has cast me
off, I am desperate, and may as well take my fill of ease and sensual
pleasures, for this is all the heaven I am like to have.] This is a dreadful
case, and such sinners surely understand not what it is to be damned, and have
not learned Christ's readiness to pardon and accept penitent sinners. That was a
wretched answer that that blasphemous Arrian made (executed at Norwich in Queen
Elizabeth's days) to such as urged him to repent, that Christ might pardon him;
desperately replied, And is that God of yours so merciful indeed as to pardon
so readily those that blaspheme him, then I renounce and defy him, [horresa
referens.] Oh that ever such an hellish word should ever be belched out of the
black mouth of a living man! but is not this the language of some men's hearts
and lives? do not some say it is to no purpose to turn, God has given me up,
and it cannot be helped, I am like to go to hell, and I will be damned for
somewhat. Oh horrible! that sinners should so desperately throw away their
precious immortal souls! and seek to murder Christ as man, by sinning* as God,
by despairing. Alas, that ever sinners should so kick and spurn at the warm
bowels of love, or despise the riches of his goodness, or sin though grace
abound! but men abuse grace, on both hands turning grace into lasciviousness by
presumption and despair; but the Sun hardens clay, and brings forth a stinking
smell from a dirty dunghill; Justice will be glorified upon those that would
not honor Christ and grace by believing.

But God forbid, my Brethren, that you should split on either of these
dangerous rocks, or run your souls upon the sands of sloth or sensuality. Oh
shall not the calls of God, the death of Christ, the entreaties of your
Minister, checks of your own conscience, nothing avail? for Gods sake, for
Christ's sake, for your own souls sakes, look after a title to blessed Jesus
here so lively described, you cannot be damned at so cheap a rate as others; a
Gospel-hell is hotter than a Law-hell; a seeming Christian shall sink lower
than an ignorant heathen; a lifting up to heaven in privileges, makes the fall
lower in torments. But you will say, God forbid, we would gladly have Christ, and
hope we have him, and pardon by him; I say, Amen, would to God it were so; but
be not deceived, many that pretend to take him, mistake him, and so miss of
him; it is not a conceit, but receipt of Christ that will advantage you; the
shadow does not shelter except you be under it, the plaster cures not unless
applied; the physic works not unless taken; Christ is of none effect to you
without faith, faith will do you no good, except it be unfeigned, faith is not
right if it divide Christ, Christ is divided if not taken as Lord as well as
Savior, God is resolved not to parcel out his Son by piecemeal, as men sell
wares in their shops, cut off what every one likes and no more; so he would
have customers more than a good many, one would have Christ as Priest to
pardon, not as King to govern; they judge him a troublesome guest, cumbersome
wares, if indeed he will be master, and rob them of their lusts, and rule them
by his laws, saying, We will not have this man to rule over us; the great
controversy has been in Nations, Churches, hearts, whether or no Jesus must
be sole Lord and Master; God and Grace are for Christ's pre-eminence; God has
set his Son upon his holy hill; Grace sets the Crown upon his head; Satan and
lust contradict it. The Devil, says Luther, hates that word more than any in
the Bible, Psalm. 110.1. (...) i e. Sit thou on my right hand; and a corrupt
heart takes his part, but his arrows shall be sharp in the hearts of the Kings
enemies, he will rule in the midst of them to conversion or confusion of them.
Oh be you Virgin-followers of the Lamb, accept of him, give up your selves to
him, and you shall find him what is here reported of him, the choicest gift and
best Master.

As for you into whose sanctified souls God has dropped this rich and rare gift,
had I time and room I might say much for counsel and comfort to these
consecrated ones.

You, you, above others have reason to adore free grace, that gave you such a
Minister who laid open the riches of Grace before you, who threapt kindness
upon you, and was loath to leave you with a denial; free grace came with the key
of Spirit and Word, and opened your hearts as he did the heart of Lidia, and
took possession of you for the King of Glory. Oh who or what were you, that the
highest Majesty would stand so long knocking, and saying, Open to me, my
sister, my love! Cant. 5.3, 4, 5. And when you snorted in your beds, or gave
him a churlish answer, he put his hand by the hole of the door, and caused your
bowels to mo^^ after him, yea he left behind sweet smelling myrrh upon the
handles of the lock, which caused you to run after him with lovesick motions
till you found and enjoyed him. And Oh how sweet was the enjoyment of so dear a
friend! Let their money perish with them (said that noble Marquess Galeasius)
that esteem all the riches in the world worth more than one hours communion
with Jesus Christ. I shall not anticipate the work of this ensuing Discourse,
yet give me leave to propound these few branches of counsel as a supplement to
it.

1. Be not mistaken in your title to this gift; many are: mistakes are easy
and dangerous, thousands of souls are like the man at Athens that laid ciaim to
every Merchants Ship that came to shore; the main lies in making good your
title; he that boasts of a false gift, is like clouds and winds without rain,
Ptov. 25.14. a groundless vapor; what are you better for others imagining, or
your own conceiting that Christ is yours, if it be not found so at the day of
trial? your disappointment will but aggravate your torment: God prevent it; do
you seek to prevent it by a speedy impartial search, and calling in aid from
heaven to discover your state, and know the worst in time. And as you may think
you have a title to Christ when you have not; so on the contrary, you may (at
least in a temptation) think you have no title to Christ, and yet he may be
yours; your friend whom you seek may be in the house, coming in at the back
door, when you expect him at the fore door; you have him by faith, though you
feel him not in sense.

2. Be most jealous of your selves when you have found most sensible incomes of
his grace; Satan like a Pirate envies and makes most at a richly laden Ship;
Cheats strike in with a young heir, when he has newly received his rents; you
are never in more danger than after your sweetest enlargements; watch and pray,
believe and watch, let your hand be on your purse, and your eye on the thief;
he will look you in the face like an angel of light, and rob you; when a white
devil allures you, he is worse than a black devil that affrights you; as one
says, I love a rumbling raging devil, comparatively, he can do us least hurt
when we suspect him most; a calm at Sea does more mischief than a storm; a
lethargy of security is more dangerous than a fever of soul-trouble. Take heed
to your selves that you lose not what you have wrought, but that you receive a
full reward; let this gift of God make you aspire after the highest enjoyment
of God in eternal life, which is also the gift of God.

3. Live upon and live up to this blessed gift of God; improve Jesus Christ.
The height of true Christian perfection, is a full view of this lovely Jesus, a
conformity to him, and deriving all influences from him; there is fresh springs
in him, new unheard of treasures, an unknown-land of grace and delights in him;
set your cistern under the cock, put the mouth of faith to the full breasts of
Gospel-promises made in Jesus Christ. Pray much, give God no rest; tell God
there is enough in his Son of that you want; in him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. why should you want, when there is enough laid up
for you? why should you be afraid to ask when all is of free-gift! God is more
willing to give than you are to receive; it eases his heart, as it were, to
give of the riches of his grace to sinners King James gave to Sir Henry Rich
(after Earl of Holland) 3000 l. at once, who had wished for so much money; You
think (says the King) now you have a great purchase, but I am more delighted
to think how much I have pleasur'd you in giving, than you are in receiving.
Gods gifts finding room and welcome in your hearts, is infinite content to an
open-handed giver; but you must neither slight nor trifle away his gifts; you
live all of begging, beggars must not be wasters, (Nemo prodiger qui mendicat)
own God in all, give him the glory. When thou have thy best Suit on, remember
who bought it, made it, put it on, keeps it on: what have thou that is not
received? thank thy good Master for so bountiful an alms.

4. Admire free grace in this great gift: I have heard of a gracious Christian
that lying down in his bed, and rising up, had this in his mind and mouth,
Thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift. Jesus Christ is such a gift as never
came out of the hands of God, and was never received by the hands of man; a
gift that consecrates all other gifts, as the altar sanctified the gift laid
thereon; all Gods gifts to us without this, would in some sort be giftless
gifts, crumbs cast to dogs, as Luther called the Turkish Empire; without which
all our persons and performances are no better than dung in Gods account, yea
in Saints esteem, as so many ciphers without a figure; yea, without Christ we
our selves had been dead and damn*d wretches. Christ is the darling of Heaven,
the delight of Saints, the object of Angels admiration: If Heaven and earth
were consolidated into one massy Pearl it would not be as the dust on the
balance to blessed Jesus; cast in all the holy Angels and rational souls, they
would all be but trifles compared with this Lamb of God. He is the best part of
heaven, all heaven, more than heaven; the King makes the Court, his presence
makes heaven, which would be a black nothing, a Tohu, and Bohu, an hell without
his company. Oh that real Saints were transported with admiration of Gods love
in giving Christ, and Christ's love in giving himself for and to them! this will
be their work for ever; begin it here, and cry out with the Martyr in the
flames, None but Christ, none but Christ. Be content to be burnt in this
heavenly Sun, so you may more fully see and admire him. Long to see his blessed
face upon his Throne, though you could not see his face in the flesh. Live to
him here, that you may live with him hereafter. Since he is given to you, give
your selves back to him. Come and see, make strange discoveries; the nearer you
approach to him, the better you will like him. We are dim-sighted, and unaffected
here, but perfect faculties, and an endless eternity will complete our praises
of Him. Thy best is reserved till the last. Read and live, and learn what
Christ is; but die and learn better; sight will make you perfect Scholars.
Whither this Christ-admiring friend is gone, whither I pray God bring your
immortal souls, with

Your Souls real friend in Christian Offices, O. H.

Joh. 4.10. Jesus answered and said unto her, if thou knew the gift of God,
and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked
of him, and he would have given thee living water.
THE first thing that God created in the world was Light, Genesis 1.3. and the
first work of God in the renovation or new Creation of lost man, is to create
light in the heart of such as dwell in the region of darkness, and sit in the
shadow of death. The natural man is darkness, and knows not the things of the
Spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned. And ( Ignoti nulla
cupido) what we know not, we do not, we cannot desire; one great reason then
why men submit not themselves to the government and ways of Christ, is because
their minds are not enlightened thoroughly, and in a manner suitably to the nature
and worth thereof; so long as they feel no necessity of Christ, see no beauty
or excellency in him, they keep themselves at a distance from him and their own
happiness. Hagar was near the Well, but her eyes were not opened, and therefore
she made not toward it. So this Woman to whom Christ spoke in the Text, was
near the well of living water, the fountain of all grace and comfort, yet her
eyes were shut, and she knew it not, of which Christ does admonish her in these
words, If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee,
etc. They are the words of our blessed Savior to the Samaritan woman at
Jacob's Well near the City Sychar, and part of that conference he had with her
in his Disciples absence.

In this Chapter you have a relation of Christ's Journey from Judea by Samaria
to Galilee, together with the occasion thereof, (...) many observable passages
in the way. I shall only and but lightly touch upon those that concern this
Woman in whose person is exemplified that saying of the Prophet Isa. 65.1 I am
sought of them that asked not for me, I am found of them that sought me not* I
said behold me, behold me, to a Nation that was not called by my name. The
story is this; Our Savior Christ leaving Judea, retires to Galilee; now the
way to Galilee lay through Samaria; as he went, there fell out an extraordinary
thing, or as Calvin calls it, a happy chance: for coming to Syc^ar, which place
(though its name be no where else mentioned in Scripture) is commonly thought
to be Sichem, situated on the side of mount Gerizzim, the inhabitants whereof
were murdered by Simeon and Levi. Jerome (who thinks that it is corruptly read
Sychar for Sichem) says in his time it was called Neapolis. Here was a noted
Well of springing-water, which did bear Jacob's name; now Christ coming hither
in the heat of the day about the sixth hour, i. e. at noon; he was weary, and
sat on the Well as one weary, or representing the gesture of a tired man,
without seeming to stay there to any other purpose, though in the secret of his
Providence he had an intent to convert the people of that place; at the same
time comes a Samaritan woman to draw water, a Samaritan by Nation and Religion;
Jesus asked her water to drink, as to refresh himself in his weariness and
thirst, so also to give occasion of discourse for the Salvation of her and many
others. Thus he that was rich and Lord of all, became so poor in the days of
his flesh, as to ask a cup of cold water, and that of a stranger, and one that
denies him with scorn and disdain. The woman answers him readily and roughly,
How is it that thou being a Jew ask water of me which am a Samaritan? (and
the reason is annexed either by the woman or Evangelist) for the Jews have no
dealings with the Samaritans. He does not mean no commerce at all (for the
Disciples were gone to buy meat) but not to ask or receive courtesies. These
Samaritans were a mixture of Pagan Nations, who being brought thither by the
King of Assyria, (2 King 17.24.) after the captivity of the Israelites, had
built themselves a Temple on Mount Gerizzim, and together with some Apostate
Jews had there established a false Worship in imitation of that at Jerusalem;
therefore they were excommunicated by the Jews, who accounted them wicked and
profane: Likewise the Samaritans thought themselves polluted if they touched a
Jew, so they mutually hated and despised each other. Christ in the Text is not
moved to anger with these terms of hostility; but proceeds to preach the Grace
of God, and power of his Spirit, If thou knew the gift of God, etc. The
woman still persists in contradicting him, and first charge him with
promising more than he was able to perform, The well is deep, and thou have
nothing to draw with; for the Jews and Samaritans held it a pollution to use
each others vessels.

2. She accuses him of arrogance because he preferred himself before the
Patriarch Jacob; This Well sufficed him and his family, and who make thou thy
self to be? what better water speak thou of? but Christ still bears with
her. O what contradictions of sinners did he endure! how long is it ere Christ
can make men willing to embrace Gospel-offers and terms of mercy! He proves
himself to be greater than Jacob, by showing the difference between this
Mystical and Spiritual water springing and refreshing to eternity (which Jacob
could not give) and that which Jacob gave his Sons, which could only quench a
present thirst. Still the woman proceeds in her scoffing and opprobrious
expressions, (O how hard is it to believe their word of whose authority we are
not well persuaded) Give me this water, says she ironically, or floutingly,
q.d thou make great brags, but I see nothing; if thou can do any thing, let
me see it indeed. Questionless the woman knew well enough that Christ speaks of
spiritual water; but because she despised him, she esteemed all his promises as
good as nothing. It Is high time Christ should now bid go call her husband,
having born with her perverse answers all this while; he now smites her with
the sense of her own sin, and his divine Majesty, before whom she had deported
her self so securely and audaciously; so are confident sinners to be wounded
that they may be healed, and that the only way to deal with such as are
obstinate and dally with heavenly things, is to convince them thoroughly, and to
awake them from their security and carelessness in so great an interest as their
own salvation: She knew that she lived in sin, yet her conscience could not
awake till a Divine hand seemed to touch the wounds thereof: Here also the
tender mercy of Christ is to be observed; he said not, Go thou Adultress and
call thy partner in sin, thy pretended husband, that you may hear your dooms;
(as 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.) but he mildly styles him husband whom he knew to be an
adulterer, that she might neither presume any longer to contest with the
searcher of hearts, nor despair of his mercy, whose lenity in reproving spoke
him merciful to cure and amend, not busy and malicious to find fault and
accuse. Hereupon she gave him some more reverence, calling him a Prophet, and
he fully reveals himself to her, to the conversion of her and many other
Samaritans.

In this verse we have Christ's mild and gracious answer to the woman's
irreverent and uncivil denial of his small request of a little water to drink;
wherein observe, 1. The Preface, Jesus answered and said. 2. The Answer it
self; in which is first a Supposition, If thou knew, etc.


2. A Deduction therefrom, Thou would have asked, etc. (...).

The gift of God] what is meant by this gift? some think he means this of the
Spirit which was to be given, Ioh. 7.37. others the Grace of God offered by
Christ, or the opportunity of Salvation tendered by Christ to this woman; so
the Evangelical call and grace is called (...), Ephesians. 2.8 (as Grotius
observes) and then the sense is, If thou did but understand how great the
benefit of this occasion is which God freely put into thine hands, thou
would be so far from denying me that water, that thou would ask of me,
etc.

But most and best Expositors take it to be meant of Christ himself, both
because the Article shows it to be some eminent or excellent gift. He says not
indefinitely (...) donum, nor in the Plural number (...) dona, but (...), donum
hoc vel illud, that gift Christ as given to the world, Ioh. 3.16. and offered
to this woman by the Father, and also that which follows seems to be exegetical
of this, If thou knew the gift of God and who it is, etc. [(...)] expositio
ejus quod praecedit, [ and quis quantisque etc.] i. e. Filius Dei, Salvator
Mundi, Grotius. I read these two members (says Calvin) if thou did know, and
who it is, so distinctly, that the latter is as it were an interpretation of
the former; and he adds, the sense will be more plain, if instead of the
copulative conjunction [ and] you put the expositive particle, [ Namely] thus,
if thou did know the gift of God, namely, who it is that talks with thee;
for this was a singular benefit of God, to have Christ present, who brought
with him everlasting life. And hence we learn that we do then know who Christ
is, when we understand what the Father has given us in him, and what good
things he himself offers to us.

(...), Water in several places has different significations: Here and in the
Apocalypst (says Grotius) I doubt not but that it signifies the Evangelical
Doctrine, as it contains those things which are necessary and sufficient to
obtain eternal life. And many of the Fathers differ not much from this, who
take it to mean the water of Baptism, as it is a solemn profession of that
Doctrine; Piscator and others take it to be meant of the holy Spirit, as
appears by the 14 verse. A well of water springing up to eternal life, Joh.
7.39. So Cyril says it signifies [(...),] a quickening gift of the Spirit. But
with Hammond I conceive it denotes the Grace of God exhibited in Christ. So
Theophylact, [(...),] the grace of the holy Spirit. And Calvin, all the whole
Grace of renovation, aqua viva, not metonymically, as quickening water, but
metaphorically (says Piscator) because it is ever springing, never failing, not
like standing or dead water.

One general Doctrine arises from the whole Text, as it stands related to the
Context: That Jesus Christ is meek and gracious, slow to anger, and full of
compassion, bearing with the ignorance and folly, perverseness, and resistance
of them he intends to save.

How often did this woman provoke him? how long did she withstand him? what
feminine artifices does she use to elude, breaking jests, making captious
fallacies, as one disposed to slight and jeer whatever he spoke, etc. yet he
would take no denial from her, but presented his gracious design, as one that
heard not. O the unutterable treasure of Grace in Christ which all her
provocations could not overcome! In all this discourse we may read our
stiffness and stubbornness, Christ's gentleness and goodness.

1. Doct. Christ is the gift of God.

2. Doct. One great reason why men refuse Christ and their own salvation, is
because they know him not. Ignorance is the cause of rejecting Christ and his
Grace; this keeps souls from him; Christ and holiness have no enemies but the
ignorant; did men know what Christ is, and what the love of God was in giving
him, they must have iron-hearts indeed if they could despise and resist him. If
thou knew, etc.

3 Doct. The blessed Son of God made himself very poor, stooped exceeding low
for the good of sinners: And who it is that says unto thee, give me to drink;
He was Lord of Heaven and Earth, the world was his, and the fullness thereof,
the fowls of the mountains, the beasts of the forest, and the cattle upon a
thousand hills, yet he begs a little cold water of a poor woman to quench his
thirst! O astonishing condescension! deep humiliation! Blessed Jesus whither
did thy love to sinners carry thee!

4. Doct. Knowledge in the mind makes way for a spontaneous motion of the will
and affections; the understanding is to the will, as the needle to the thread.
If thou knew, thou would. When the understanding is enlightened with
eye salve, and has clear apprehensions of Christ, as transcendently excellent,
then the Will puts forth it self in its strongest desires after him; as the eye
transmits the beauty it beholds to the heart, so when there is an assent to the
things revealed of Christ in the Word, when we do with open face behold as in a
glass the glory of the Lord in the Gospel, then we are ready to accept of him
and his Grace with suitable affections; this is plain in the connection in the
Text, and from the latter sweet connection, Thou would have asked, I would
have given, etc.

5. Doct. If we can but rightly ask, Christ will readily give; ask and have, is
the language of the Gospel. The Grace of God is free, but it must be begged: He
will be inquired of, and sought unto, for that he intends and promises to give;
though this woman was a Samaritan, yet he would not deny her living water had
she desired it of him. We must be touched with the knowledge and sense of our
maladies and poverty, before we will seek the remedy. Therefore the Lord
inviteth not the drunken but the dry; not the full but the hungry, that they
may eat and drink. To what end should Christ be sent unto us with the fullness
of the spirit, unless we were empty? and it is not enough to feel our wants, so
as to see our need of help from another, unless the hope of present or near
help be added thereunto; because if we only see and feel our wants, we should
do nothing else but groan under our miseries, and pine away with sorrow; but
this is true and profitable knowledge of the Grace of God, when we know that the
same is offered to us in Christ, and that it is reached unto us by his hand,
and so our hearts are inflamed with vehement propassions and desires after it.

6. Doct. Grace is the gift of Christ, he is the fountain whence this water
flows: I would have given thee living water. Christ gives grace to them that
ask it of him: as we should ask spiritual blessings ardently and importunately,
so he gives them most freely and liberally, Ioh. 6.27.

7. Doct. True Grace never fails; those that once have it, shall never lose it;
whoever drinks of this water of life which Christ gives, shall never perish.
It Is (...), denoting the perpetuity, everlastingness of it. Grace is sure, and
the privileges of it are sure; this is the advantage of spiritual comforts,
that they do not only satisfy our desires, but secure us against our fears:
Once in Christ, and for ever preserved in Christ. This certainty of Grace, the
comfort of a Christian is not respectu rei, but Dei. One of the Fathers brings
in the flesh, saying, Ego deficiam, I will surely fail and miscarry; and the
world, Ego decipiam, I will entice and deceive them; and Satan, Ego eripiam, I
will snatch and carry them away: But God says, Ego custodiam, I will keep
them: there lies our safety and security, he has said, I will never leave them
nor forsake them.

1. Doct. Christ is the gift of God. Christ in a peculiar and eminent manner is
termed Gods gift. It is the common mode and fashion of great persons, to give
rich and magnificent gifts suitable to their state and quality, regarding more
what becomes them to give, than their petitioners to ask or receive. The great
Alexander could tell his suitors (whom he had more astonished than relieved
with his bounty and favor) That though the thing might be too great for them
to receive, yet it was not too great for Alexander to give. If dust and as^es
can speak and think at this rate, O how large is the heart of God! The great
and glorious God out of his infinitely overflow^ing love and unsearchable
riches of Grace, has conferred upon poor lost self destroying, undeserving,
and ill deserving mankind, such a gift so transcendently superlatively
excellent and wonderful, that if God the Lord should create an
understanding-faculty of man or Angel millions of degrees more apprehensive and
vigorous than if all the men and Angels that are or possibly might be created,
were contemperated in one, yet could not their understanding so see the
incomparable worth and superexcellent beauty of this gift, but that there would
remain unseen treasures of loveliness, and oceans of excellencies never known,
to the amazement and admiration of all creatures to all eternity: Nay, it
implys an eternal contradiction that the Creatures should see to the bottom of
the Creator, or that which is finite fathom that which is infinite.

This gift is promised in the Old, and those Promises are fulfilled in the New
Testament: Hear what the Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 9.6. Unto us a child is
born, a son is given. A Child born in respect of his Humanity* a Son given in
respect of his Deity; and both as already done in regard of Gods purpose, and
the infallible certainty of his promise, which is as sure as if it were already
done; and in regard of the fruits and benefits thereof to men, though it was to
be accomplished above 700 years after; and in the fullness of time God sent his
Son actually given both to us and for us, to effect our Salvation, Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believed on him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

All I purpose to do in the prosecution of this Doctrine, is to show the
excellency of this gift, and then make Application. A great attempt indeed, and
far above the utmost reach of a finite capacity! for who can declare his
generation? what pen though dipped in the river of life that flows under the
Sanctuary; what tongue, though shaped out of all the Angels in Heaven, and
watered with the milk and wine of that good land, can sufficiently express the
glory and excellency of this heart-ravishing flower of Angels, this living Ark
of heaven, the song of Angels and glorified Saints, the joy and glory of that
new land, the crown and garland of his Fathers delight, the sweetness of the
garden of God, the wonder of wonders for eternity to Angels and men; that fair
tree of life, the branches whereof cannot for the narrowness of the place have
room to grow within the huge and capacious borders of the Heaven of heavens!
How impossible is it therefore to contain him in the narrow compass of the
words or thoughts of any mortal creature! I cannot better express what he is,
than by telling you I cannot express him. Yet something I shall endeavor to
speak of his inexpressible worth under the notion of a Gift in these
particulars. Christ and Heaven cannot be praised Hyperbolically. No danger of
excess, speak I as much, think you as much as we can of Christ.

1. Christ is a most free gift; we use to say what is freer than gift? I may
well add, What gift freer than Christ? whether we respect the giver, or look on
the receiver, it is easy to judge that this gift is absolutely free and
undeserved. In relation to God; it is beyond all doubt, that there was nothing
in man that might move God to give him Christ; no worthiness in man, no profit
by man, nothing but loathsomness. The promise of Christ coming in the flesh,
was an absolute unconditional promise. Hence it is said Christ is not only sent,
delivered, etc but given; not paid nor sold, he is not returned to us by way of
payment, for who has given ought that he should be repayed; neither is he sold
to us in consideration of ought to be paid by us; for what can we return to God
that is not his own already? Romans 11.35, 36. 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12, 13, 14. If
Jacob could say, He was not worthy of the least of all his mercies, Genesis 32.10
Who can pretend to be worthy of this greatest? but Christ is given, freely
bestowed of his mere grace and bounty, without respect of ought in us that
might invite or induce him thereunto, Romans 5.6, 8, 10. Tit. 3.5. without any
expectation of ought from us that might be beneficial to himself. Can a man be
profitable unto God? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that a man is
righteous? Is it any gain to him that we make our ways perfect? Job 2^.23. and
35.5, 8. No, our goodness cannot extend it self unto God, Psalm. 16.2. Look on
man, and what is there to be found in him but sin and misery! He is not only
without strength, and so despicable, cannot help himself; but ungodly also, and
so loathsome, deserving no help from others. What is man that God was thus
mindful of him! a poor, naked, indigent, helpless and wretched creature! and
all this woe and misery is brought upon him by his own choice and act! he is not
only miserable but wicked; a rebel as well as a beggar; not only cast out into
the open field to the loathing of his person, but found in the field of war
treacherously fighting against his Lord and Maker. Man was in a state of
darkness, slavery, rebellion, poverty, pain, ignominy, banishment, nakedness,
filthiness, deformity, sickness, death, perdition, every thing that is naught
and miserable; all the woes in the world, were they a thousand times greater,
are but a faint representation of the miseries of man by nature.

Now if a gift may be free when bestowed on a friend, how much more when given
to an enemy? why, God gave us his Son to reconcile us to himself, when we were
not only strangers from him, but enemies to him, Col. 1.21. O the riches of his
mere mercy and grace! Is not that gift free that is bestowed on sinners,
strangers, enemies? Ephesians. 2.12, 13, 14* God never did, nor never will sell his
Grace, his Son, to any; none can have Christ but those that come empty; a full
hand can hold nothing.

Fix your thoughts on the terms expressed in that Evangelical Proclamation,
Isa. 55.1. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has
no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money, and
without price.

2. Christ is a most full gift, He is full of Grace and truth, Joh. 1.14. Col.
1.29. It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell; he fills all
in all. There is in this gift of God a fullness of sufficiency, and a fullness of
redundancy; enough for himself, and to fill all persons, all things; there is
enough in Christ for every soul, and for the supply of every want; whatever the
heart of man can want or wish is to be had in Christ. That Is a very full
expression, Col. 2.9. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.
Fullness in the abstract; he is not full only, but Fullness it self; fullness not
of the cistern but of the fountain, Gods fullness; fullness of the Godhead, not
in shadows, types, representations, as Gods presence filled the Temple, Camp,
Mount; but bodily, that is essentialiter, presentialiter, potentialiter; in
regard of essence, presence and power; the expression is yet more Emphatical,
fullness dwells in Christ, not sometimes but always there: there is a fulness in
the Sea, but it is ebbing and flowing; a fullness of the Moon, but it is growing
and decreasing; a fullness in the creature, but it is going and coming, up and
down; but in Christ is not only, but dwells fullness; yea in Christ dwells all
fullness; there was a fullness of beauty in Absalom, but not a fullness of truth
and sincerity; a fullness of wisdom in Solomon, but not of constancy and
stedfastness; he gave his heart to pleasure and folly. A fullness of Policy in
Achitophel, but not of holiness and faithfulness to his Prince; yea it proved
fullness of folly to hang himself. A fullness of strength in Sampson, but not of
faith and courage of mind* he was strong in body, but soft and impotent in
mind, and was overcome by a woman. There Is Ahiatus and some emptiness in every
creature; yea, an Angels fullness sits neighbor to pure nothing. But in Christ
is all fullness. The Ark or holy Chest in the Tabernacle did typifie Christ in
whom God has treasured up all perfection of wisdom, grace, power, goodness and
mercy; for by this fullness beza understands the accumulation or heaping up of
all divine gifts in a most copious and plentiful manner, which the Schoolmen
call habitual grace distinct from the grace of union. God gives not the Spirit
by measure unto him; He anointed him with the oil of gladness above his
fellows. But this ri^h treasure is not hid, this full ark not locked up, for
from the fullness overflowing in Christ, all Believers receive their sufficiency
and fullness, Ioh. 2.16 Of his fullness we all receive, and grace for grace; that
is grace answerable to every communicable grace in Christ. If there be light in
the Sun, the air cannot be dark; if there be sap in the stock the branches
cannot be dry. If there be fullness in the fountain the streams cannot be empty.
Therefore the Apostle prays, Ephesians. 3 19, That they might be filled with all the
fullness of God; that is, the Divine fullness which is diffusive and
communicable; that Christ (in whom dwells all fullness) may dwell in their
hearts by faith, that they may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is
the bread^h, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ,
which passes knowledge, and might receive abundance of grace, and that his
grace may more than over abound toward them.

3. Christ is a most ^ind gift, a gift of love; there is a wonderful and
astonishing Philanthropy, kindness and love of God toward man appearing in his
giving Christ, Tit. 3.5. It is not the gift many times, but the love and good
will of the giver that makes it excellent in the eye of the receiver.

Now Christ is a most excellent incomparable gift, flowing out of a bottomless
boundless fountain of pure and dear love, Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten son, etc. He so loved, that is, so admirable was
his love, that it cannot be expressed, nay it far exceeds our highest
conceptions. Gods love was herein as himself, infinite, incomprehensible and
everlasting; in the womb of this love Christ was conceived, and thence brought
forth. When God made the world, he intended to give an evidence of his Power in
ordering and governing all Creatures (even the most ungovernable): He manifests
his infinite Wisdom, he appointed the Lake of fire and brimstone to declare the
severity of his Justice; but he gave his Son to be by his own death the
Redeemer of lost sinners; and herein his purpose was to demonstrate to the
world the transcendency of his love. This is the highest expression and fullest
demonstration of his love to the Creature, not only that ever was, but that
ever can be; for in this love God only acts to the uttermost; he never showed
so much of his Power, Wisdom and Wrath, but he could have showed more. But he
has no greater instance of his love than Christ, to give such a Son for such
sinners! O the superlative, matchless, unlimited love and grace of God,
transcending the reach of the highest finite capacity! He had done exceeding
well for man as he made him at first, for he put him into a very good estate,
stamped his own Image upon him, made him above all other Creatures to be his
favorite; but he foolishly sinned and fell, and lost all his happiness. Well,
what did God now do, did he let man alone, shut up his bowels against him, fall
upon him with his utmost wrath? Did he say, Nay since it is thus, let him even
rise as he has fallen; since he would be so foolish as for a trifle to break
with me, let him die and rot, and perish for ever, I Will do no more for him,
etc. O no! not such a word or thought did pass from the gracious God toward
his miserable Creature. But will he pardon him without satisfaction? no, sin
shall be punished, but the punishment shall be laid on his Son; O the height of
Justice! and so the sinner shall be acquitted; O the depth of mercy! There is
more of mercy in pardoning this way, than in absolute pardoning. Mere pardon
and salvation it self had not so much of mercy and love in them, as what was in
giving Christ. It Is more for a King to put his Son in the Traitors stead, and
take the Malefactors chains and suffer, than just to pardon, etc. God might
have redeemed us another way, but he could not show so much love another way.

God gives many rich gifts and royal favors to his people, together with
Christ, as so many tokens and pledges of his love: But herein is the very top
and zenith of love, the greatest evidence imaginable of Gods bounty and
goodness. God commends his love toward us (as unparalled) in that when we
were sinners Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. Herein he lays open and naked to us
the tenderest bowels of mercy and love; infinite goodness here makes free love
swell without it self, like a boundless River impatient of its banks; it is a
love that could not flow within its own channel; O! the boundless breadth, the
bottomless depth of the love of God in Christ! a Sea of love is nothing, it
has a bottom; a Heaven of love is nothing, it has a brim; but infinite love
has no bounds, it is unfathomable, unsearchable, and incomprehensible.

4. Christ is a most rich gift; in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge; Col. 2.3. he is the pearl in the field(...)ine of pure gold, and
therefore he cour(...) poor Church of Laodicea to buy of him tried gold that
she may be rich, Rev. 3.18. He is the inexhausted fountain of all those streams
of blessedness that flow forth all the Creation over; the eternal Spring and
Wellhead of all those fresh Seas and Oceans, of all the swelling-tides and
bottomless depths of unutterable riches of grace and love to all his elect. He
must needs be rich, who sets up and enriches so many thousand Bankrupts, that
had not only wasted their goods, but sold themselves into slavery and bondage;
he pays their ransoms, buys out their liberty, and purchases Crowns and
Kingdoms for them. It would beggar all the Angels in Heaven to pay down the
ransom of one soul, yea to purchase the pardon of one sin: The redemption of
the soul is precious, the soul of the meanest man alive, is of more worth than
a world, as he himself tells us, who went to the price of souls: What then
shall we think of Christ who saves so many millions of souls? Hence in
Scripture, the richest things on earth are made use of, to shadow out the
riches of Christ. Under the title of wisdom, he says, Prove. 8.18, 19, Riches
and honor are with me, yea, durable riches and righteousness. My fruit is
better than gold, and my revenue than choice silver. And Prove. 3.16, Length of
days are in her right hand: and in her left hand riches and honor. Eternity
has the honor of her right hand; riches are the left hand blessings of
wisdom. The riches of Christ are not ordinary things, not perishing riches, but
unsearchable and inexhaustible, Ephesians. 3.8. There are unsearchable riches of
Christ, (...), not to be traced out, never to be drawn dry. Though all true
believers have all their debts paid, and are all maintained and advanced by his
riches, and at his cost and charges; yet there is no lessening of this
treasure, that is never the emptier: Sumit unus, sumunt mill, quantum isti
tantum illi, neque sumptus absumitur: One believer draws water of life, and a
supply of all needful blessings out of this Well of Salvation, and a Thousand
gracious souls do the like, and the One draws as much as the Thousand, yet the
Well is never drawn dry. As the Apostle Paul speaks of his over-abundant grace,
confesses he was dipped in a sea of mercy. One Paul obtained as much grace, even
so whole and complete a ransom without diminishing, as would have saved a
world. Grace reigns, (...), Christ is rich, and Lord of all.

5. Christ is a most precious gift, He is more precious than rubies; and all
the things that thou can desire are not to be compared unto him. Imagine what
you will, name what you can, and it is unworthy to stand in comparison with
Christ, who is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon him; and happy is
every one that retains him, Prove. 3.15, 18. It Is too true, there are not a
few that set light by Christ, and can see no beauty or comeliness in him that
they should desire him; but to them that believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7.
The wise Merchant understood his worth, which made him sell all that he had
with joy, with a very good will; so far from sticking and wavering, so far from
changing his mind, that he persists in his resolution with a cheerful heart,
that he might purchase this Pearl of great price, Mat. 13.44. The Apostle Paul
was at one with himself, Yea doubtless, I count all things but loss and dung,
(...), Dogs-meat, that I may win Christ, Phil. 3.8. Let burning, hanging, all
torments befall me, tantumodo ut Christum nansciscar, so I may get Christ,
says Ignatius.

Could we give you a particular view and account (but that is impossible) of
every excellency, and all the high perfections that are in Christ, you would
find him precious in all the parts of his Mediatorship, in his person, in his
natures, in his offices, in all his gifts and graces. Look on him as Mediator,
and there he shines forth most gloriously, and appears to be the most peerless
and precious thing in the world; as Prophet, he is most precious. Enoch, Noah,
Moses, Elisha, David, etc. were excellent and precious men in their times, but
were types of Christ; he as far excels them, as the substance does the shadow:
He is Prophet, (...), by way of eminency and exellency above all other
Prophets; they spoke to the ear, he to the heart; they searched out the mind of
God, he came out of his bosom, and says, Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom, I
am understanding, Prove. 8.14.

So as Priest he is most precious; this office is the most excellent part of
his mediation; he could never have opened our eyes as Prophet, nor ruled our
hearts as King, had he not died for us: O, the death and blood of Christ this
Lamb of God! how precious! of what infinite value! The death of a Man is more
precious than of a Beast, of a King than of many Men; of Christ more than a
thousand Kings. Thousands of Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil had been
nothing to the price Christ paid. See in the Hebrews how far Christ's Priesthood
excels all that went before him: He alone is an everlasting Priest, offering
but once, sufficient for all, gone to Heaven, etc. and he is Sacrifice, Priest,
Temple, Altar, and all in one; (...): Never was there on earth a King so
precious as Christ, though all good Kings are precious, he is over all, King of
kings and Lord of lords; his kingdom spiritual over all hearts, consciences,
over all nations, ages, all sorts and ranks of men, from generation to
generation; he is head and King alone, without either Colleague in the largeness
of his dominions, or Regent in his minority, or Viceroy in his absence.

How precious is grace! one dram of it better than all the treasures in the
world. Now he is the fountain of it, full of grace and truth; so Truths,
Ordinances; so Comforts, Promises, all that belongs unto him, very precious.

6. Christ is a most pleasant gift: Nothing more desirable and amiable than
Christ to sinners. Excellency is the attractive of desire, beauty draws the
eye, that affects the heart; and delight following love, makes very delightful.
Now Christ is altogether lovely, Totus ipse and in universum delectabilis and
desiderabilis, all throughout from top to toe desirable and delightful, the
chief among Ten thousand, matchless and incomparable. To say nothing of his
bodily features, though Historians report Christ to be very beautiful as man:
As God, he is the perfection of beauty; it is true, beauty is not formally in
God, yet it is in him eminently and by way of Analogy; for if beauty be good,
and a desirable perfection in the creature, it must needs be in the infinite
God, as the perfection of the effect is in the cause. If Roses and Lillies be
fair, he must be fair that created them: but in another kind, if the Sun, Moon
and Stars be beautiful, the lovely Lord that made them must contain their
beauty in the highest measure; beauty in God is the amiableness and loveliness
of his nature, and all his infinite perfections; as this pleasantness offers it
self to his own understanding, and the understanding of men and Angels. So that
as bodily beauty satisfies the eye* and so acts on the heart to win love: So
the Truth of the Lords nature, and all his Attributes offered to the
understanding and mind, drawing from them admiration and love, is the beauty of
God. The Prophet speaks of it with admiration, How great is thy beauty! Zech.
9.17. David makes it his one thing, that he may behold it, Psalm. 27.4. David
desires no other life, but to stand beside God, and behold with the eye of his
mind and faith, God in his Nature and Attributes, as he reveals himself to the
creature. Now this beauty of God shines forth to us in Christ, 2 Cor. 4.7, who
is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express character of his
person, Heb. 1.3. When Moses was to behold God, he was hid in the Rock while
his glory passed by, and that Rock was Christ. You sometimes see beauty that
ravishes the heart of the beholder in the children of men; O! but Christ is
fairer than the Sons of men, Psalm. 45.2, on which place Austin thus descants.
To us Believers the heavenly Bridegroom seems to be most fair every way; fair
in Heaven, fair on Earth, fair in the Womb, fair in the Cradle, fair in his
Miracles, fair in his Doctrine, fair in his Stripes, fair on the Cross, fair in
his very Grave.

To make up a beauty is required, 1. A good complexion, fairness in colors: So
Christ is pure white and red, Cant. 5.10, white in his Divine Nature, which was
the brightness of his Fathers substance; Red in his humanity, being of the same
substance with the first Adam, who was made of Red Earth; White in his
holiness, Red in his blood and sufferings; White in his own immaculate
innocence and purity, Red by the imputation of our sins, which are like scarlet
and Crimson; White in his goodness and free grace to humble sinners, but Red
and bloody in his severity to his enemies that will not that he reign over
them: His effigies was so beautiful, that no Painter could ever draw him,
because of that, (...), Divine luster and grace that shone in him; His
countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedar, Cant. 5.15. and 1.16, the
Spouse cries out wondering, Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea pleasant:
that is lovely and amiable. 2. As he is fair in Coulors, so he is comely in
proportion and integrity of parts: If a person have never so good colors, yet
if any part be wanting, or be not an agreement of parts in regard of quantity,
situation and stature, it is no beauty, but an error of nature. But Christ is
beautiful for features: for infiniteness and sweetness of order and proportion
is so spread over his nature and attributes, that nothing can be added to him,
nothing taken from him. He is the fullness of the godhead, the perfection of
beauty, Cant. 5.10, to the end: His head is as most fine gold, his locks bushy
and black as a raven, his eyes as the eyes of doves, his cheeks as a bed of
spices, his lips like lillies, etc. O what a pleasant harmony, and specious
consent of parts is here! yea, he is altogether lovely -- Here she breaks off
her praises in a general Elogy, which no words can express enough, q. d. Alas!
what is this I have spoken! I am too barren and empty of language, I know not
what to call him; but do you that hear me imagine or name any thing that is
most desirable, most worthy to be loved, longed for, and admired, and that is
he; he is the desire of all Nations.


This pleasant and delightful gift is set forth in Scripture by something that
pleases all the inward senses. Here Is beauty to delight the eye, O! how blessed
are they who see the King in his beauty!

Here Is Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia, sweet perfumes to the spiritual smell, Psalm.
45.8. He is a bundle of myrrh, Cant. 1.13. His voice is most sweet and pleasant
to the ear, Cant. 2.8. The voice of my beloved; so taken with the sweetne^s of
it that she speaks in broken language. His lips like lillies dropping sweet
smelling myrrh, Cant. 5.13. How sweet is he to the taste, Cant. 2.3! I sat
down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste;
of an excellent relish; wine, milk, honey, fatted calf, etc. are but shadows
of this. He Is a delicate Banquet. The kisses of his mouth and hidden manna are
most delectable to the spiritual touch, Cant. 1.2. The sense and experience of
his mercy, the assurance of his love, the sealing of his Spirit, O how sw^et to
a thirsty soul! O taste and see that the Lord is gracious and transcendently
amiable and pleasant: as Mr. Rutherford. Suppose all the corns of sand in all
the earth and shores, all the flowers, herbs, leaves, and twigs of trees since
the creation, all the drops of dew and rain that the clouds send down, all the
stars in heaven, all the joints, hairs, and drops of blood of all men that have
been, are or shall be, were all rational creatures, and had the wisdom and
tongues of Angels to speak of the beauty and loveliness of Christ, they would
in all their expressions stay millions of miles on this side Christ and his
excellency.

7. Christ is a most useful gift. In this respect he is the one thing needful;
and were there no other excellency in him, this were enough to commend him to
us, he is so useful that we cannot be without him. Though a gift were never so
rich, pleasant, and precious in it self, yet if the excellency in it may not be
made use of, and it be not good and fit for us, it is not much valued. But this
gift of God is so admirable good for our use, that he seems to be fitted and
dressed, and made all for our use; in regard of his Mediatorship, that office
is wholly for us and our benefit. He was born, lived, died, rose again, sits on
Gods right hand as Advocate, and comes to judgment for our sakes and for our
good. He is God and Man, Prophet, Priest, and King. A Savior, a Redeemer, a
Surety, an Advocate, a Mediator, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, etc.
all for use to us lost and perishing sinners. He is a jewel indeed, but not
locked up in heaven to be made use of by none. Christ is shadowed forth in
Scripture by Head, Vine, Milk, Water, etc. now what more necessary and useful
to men than these? Who could reconcile us to God when we were enemies, but
Christ in his blood? Romans 5.10. Who could justify us in the sight of God, when
we were sinners, but Christ by his righteousness? Romans 3.26. Who could repair
the Image of God in us, and restore the life of Grace when we were dead, but
Christ by his Spirit? How could we ever put off the old man, and put on the
new, die to sin, and live unto God, were it not for Christ's death and
resurrection? Had not he sanctified himself for our sakes, we had never been
holy; had he not born the punishment we deserved, we had never been happy: was
not he given, that whosoever believed on him might not perish, but have
everlasting life?

Tell me, you that think Christ is a person that may be well spared, etc. who
could ever have opened the eyes of the blind, the ears of the deaf, or healed a
wounded spirit? Who could have bound up a broken heart, opened the
Prison-dores, broken off the chains of bondage, and proclaimed liberty to the
captives? Who could have satisfied infinite justice, born the weight of Gods
Wrath, removed the curse of the Law, made reconciliation for iniquity, and
brought in everlasting righteousness? certainly none but Christ.

8. Christ is a most gainful gift. He is absolute and universal gain; Christ is
the most profitable gift to the soul that can be enjoyed, yea that can be
imagined; nothing more commodious, nothing more enriching than Christ is to
them that have him. There is no man rich without Christ, neither is there any
poor that have him; a man without Christ is a beggarly bankrupt; but one that
has Christ is a wealthy King: He that has Christ, has all; he that has not
him, has nothing. Christ is not gain as worldly things are profitable in
relation to their ends, as wealth is good to supply want, food to maintain
life, clothes to keep off cold air, a bed to rest weary limbs; but Christ is a
rich and inestimable treasure to the soul, without reference to any further end
than himself; he is to be desired even for himself, his merchandise is better
than silver, and his gain than fine gold, Prove. 3.14. Man knows not the price
of wisdom, of this wisdom, Prove. 8.18. It cannot be valued with the gold of
Ophir, with the precious Onyx and Sapphire; there is no talking nor bidding in
this Market, so precious is this cornerstone. No mention shall be made of
corral, or of pearls, for the price of wisdom is above rubies: The topaz of
Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be valued with pure gold, etc.
Job 28.18, 19. What the Apostle says of godliness, is very true of Christ, he
is profitable for all things, and he is gainful at all times, and to all
persons, both for soul and body, for the life that now is, and the life that is
to come, and for ever. The salvation of the soul, is better than the gaining of
a whole world; What is a man profited if he gain the world and lose his soul?
How much more gain then is he by whom a world of souls are saved!

9. Christ is a most suitable gift. He suits all persons, and all conditions,
whether a man be poor or rich, young or old, noble or ignoble, learned or
unlearned, bond or free, high or low; the richest have need of him, as well as
the poorest, and the meanest may have him as well as the greatest; be in what
condition or relation soever, he is suitable to all. And O! how suitable is
Christ to the lost condition of all men by nature! man is an enemy to God,
Christ is the Peacemaker; he is a Captive, Christ is a Redeemer; he is lost,
Christ a Savior; he is sick, Christ a Physician; he is dead, Christ gives
life; he is poor, Christ gives riches; he is weak, Christ is strength; he is
guilty, Christ has righteousness; he is filthy, Christ has blood to wash him
in; he is naked, Christ has a Garment to cloth him; he is hungry, Christ is
the Bread of Life; he is thirsty, Christ gives living waters. O! how suitable,
how acceptable is Christ to poor sinners! He that has Christ may say, here is
strength to support me, Wisdom to direct me, Power to protect me, Gold to
enrich me, Cordial to comfort me, and Fullness to supply all my wants: He is
made all things to all men, eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, and a Father
to the poor. Christ is for every turn, and fitted for every condition; be it
what it will or can, he has a sufficiency relative and suitable to it; there is
no disease but this Physician can cure it; no Case but this Counselor can
resolve it; no Enemy but this Champion can conquer; no difficulty but this
mighty Savior can overcome.

10. Christ is a most seasonable gift. Every thing is beautiful in its season:
all other things have their several seasons; as food is good, but it is when a
man is hungry; so clothes when a man is naked, Physic when a man is not well;
Music when a man is merry: now Christ is never out of season. A gift bestowed
in the nick of time is most valued; Bis dat, qui cito dat, it is a double favor
when done in time: the right timing of things, is a high point of practical
wisdom, and puts a beauty and value upon all things. Now considering the state
of man (as lapsed) Christ was the most seasonable gift that ever the world
heard of. This is set forth in the Parable, Luke 10.30, A certain man went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him, wounded
him, and left him half dead, etc. The man that traveled was our first Parent
Adam, the Thieves were the Devils, who deprived him of all, wounded him, and
left him not half, but wholly dead: the Priest and Levite came by and looked
on, but passed away, neither would nor could help him; but the good Samaritan
(so esteemed by the Jews) Christ he comes, had compassion on him, went to him,
bound up his wounds with his own soft hands, poured in Wine and Oil, and
brought him to an Inn, and took care for him that he should want nothing
toward his recovery; takes the whole charge of it to himself. What can be
imagined more seasonable, than for such a compassionate Physician to come by,
look on and undertake when a man lies bleeding and dying in the high way?
Ezekiel 16, beginning, does excellently express the seasonableness of his
coming to us; Christ is sent to us, when we are at an utter loss, can neither
help our selves, nor all the world do us any good, give the least relief: When
he comes into the world, it is said, Heb. 10.5. Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, In burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou had no pleasure:
all the world was at a loss to please God; What shall man do, and whither will
he fly for help? Then, even then, said I, lo I come (in the volume of thy book
it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. Christ comes in the very nick of
time, when all mankind was ready to perish, that goodly tribe of the Creation
was almost utterly lost; I looked and there was none to help, then my own arm
brought salvation, Isa. 63.5. The year of my Redeemed is come, now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation: So when a poor convinced sinner is
at a loss, and knows not what to do, cries, I am cut off for my part, my hope
and my strength is perished, etc. even despairs of help from all other, then
comes Christ, then arises the Sun of Righteousness with healing in his wings;
in the thickest darkness day breaks forth; when the Bricks are doubled, then
comes Moses: In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

11. Christ is a most satisfying gift. He that creates the heart, can fill and
satisfy it: in worldly things the more a man enjoys, the more he desires. If
God heap temporal gifts on men till there be no room for more, give them never
so many left hand blessings, still man's heart is like the grave, that never
says it is enough; or the daughters of the Horsleech unsatisfiedly crying,
Give, give. But there is this excellency in this gift, that he that has
received it, has enough; and no wonder, for he has all. Esau says, I have
enough, my Brother; and Jacob said, I have enough, Genesis 33.9, 11. Interpreters
observe, that word which Esau uses (translated enough, signifies much) and the
word for Jacob's enough, signifies all. Esau had much, but Jacob had all. And
the reason he renders is, because God has dealt graciously with me, Habet
omnia qui habet habentem omnia, in Christ is a full store house, and
wellspring of comforts to make up whatever defects are in other things. The
Sun can make day without the Stars; such as have Christ can say (as 2 Cor.
6.10.) We are, as poor, yet rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all things:
in respect of the world we are poor and contemptible; but in respect of our
incomes, and havings in Christ, we are rich and honorable, 1 Cor. 3.22. All
things are yours, whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, things present and things to come, all are yours, for Christ is yours,
and ye are Christ's. O this sweetens every relation, this suffices in every
condition, Ioh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; which must not be understood of feeling the necessity; but
of falling into the entire privation of Gods grace; not as spoken against
desire, but against dryness; or rather it is exclusive (not of desires after
more of Christ, but) of all inordinate desires after all other things: As
Bernard says, Nihil ita temperat si^im avaritiae, sicut nomen Jesus; nothing
quenches the thirst of covetousness, ambition, etc. but the name of Jesus;
superbiae tumprem sedat; nihil ita libidinis flammam extinguit, Isa. 49.10.
They shall not hunger nor thirst; for he that has mercy on them, shall lead
them: even by the springs of water shall he guide them. Psalm. 36.8, They shall
be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou shall make them
drink of the rivers of thy pleasures, for with thee is the fountain of life, in
thy light shall we see light. He that has Christ, that can say, my beloved is
mine, and I am his, may contentedly want all other comforts; he has enough
besides. He has that (...), that abundant plenty, which observed, will not
suffer him to envy the most prosperous sinner: he may answer Satan when he
offers worldly glory and preferments, as that woman did the Prophet, I live
among mine own people, I have enough. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not
want; the Lord is my portion, and I will rest in him. He can look on earthly
Paradises with a disdainful eye and scornful countenance, and trample under
foot with a holy contempt, all sublunary fading vanities* Christ in his eye,
his glorious excellency, ravishing beauty, and inexplicable delightfulness,
does infinitely transcend the utmost height of all earthly felicities, and it
lasts for ever.

12. Christ is a most lasting gift; yea, he is everlasting. This is the flower,
top and bound of all the forementioned Excellencies, without which they would
be scattered and lost. He is a most free, full and kind gift; a most rich,
precious, and lovely gift; most necessary, useful and gainful gift; most
suitable, seasonable, and satisfying. Add this one more, and it compleats all,
He is unchangeable, the same for ever.

They that once have him, shall never lose him; none shall ever be able to
pluck them out of his hands, nor him out of their hearts; the union and
propriety is inseparable, and insuperable; other things (like flowers) decay
and wither in our hands, and the excellency that is in them goes away, but
Christ is always fresh and precious, and always ours. 'Twas a just complaint
that was made long ago against the Heathen gods, O faciles dare summa deos,
eademque tueri difficiles; they could give their favorites great gifts, but
they could not maintain them in the possession of them. So it is not with our
God; his gifts and gratuities are (...), without repentance; and in this
respect Believers are in a better state now than Adam in innocence, he had
excellent gifts of knowledge, grace, and inherent righteousness, but was not
confirmed in them, but being left to the mutability of his own will, chose the
evil, refused and lost the good, and fell from his own happiness: But now
Christ is confirmed upon them that believe in him; he shall lose none that are
given to him; nor shall they lose him to whom he is given; once theirs, and for
ever theirs; while he keeps them, they shall keep him; and while they are his,
he is theirs, that is so long as God is God, for ever and ever.

Use. This Doctrine (Christ is Gods gift) if fully improved in Application,
would afford many excellent Uses, but I shall (for brevities sake) comprise all
in one.

An Use of Instruction or Exhortation, Is Christ the gift of God? it may serve
to instruct and exhort us: 1. To receive. 2. To keep this gift. 3. Make use of
it. 4. Be thankful for. 5. Be faithful in him, walk worthy of him.


1. Let us be persuaded to receive and embrace this transcendently excellent
gift. O that we may be enticed and allured by what has been said of the
incomparable worth of this gift of God, to a hearty reception and particular
application of it to our selves; we can hardly see an excellent person, but we
are wishing him for our friend and companion; nor hear of a precious Jewel, or
fair estate, but we are secretly coveting it were ours; and can we hear of him
who is Excellency it self, originally, the spring and standard of all
excellency in others, whose name alone is excellent, and not wish, O that it
were mine? O that this blessed Christ were my friend, my father, my head, my
husband, my lot, my portion? Who will give me to drink of this Well of water
springing up to eternal life; this fountain of living waters, this pure river
that flows from the Throne, from the heart of God. Can thou hear so much
(though infinitely short) of his worth, and not desire him? Do thou indeed
believe that all this is true, and yet thy soul not hunger and thirst after
him? Are these faithful sayings, and is not he worthy of all acceptance? Is it
possible for a rational creature to hear of such a bottomless treasure, of such
a boundless pleasure, and not covet the enjoyment of it? O man! where are thy
wits? What Is become of thy reason? Art thou a man or a bruit? If thou knew
the gift of God, and what it is that is offered thee, thou would scorn the
highest honors, the sweetest pleasures, the greatest riches, yea trample upon
all the Crowns and Kingdoms of this world for it. It Is an inestimable privilege
that thou art a creature capable of so vast a happiness; it is the astonishing
wonder of Heaven and Earth, that God would give a Son, such a Son to be thy
Savior! what could he give more or better? and it is a special favor that the
Gospel has been sent to thee, to reveal this great mystery, to offer this
excellent gift to thee; and now when it is tendered, will thou refuse it? Will thou neglect and undervalue Christ? or will thou not rather give it all humble
and thankful acceptance? Reflect upon those twelve incomparable properties and
characters of this gift, methinks though I have spoken but little, yet I have
said enough to one that will let his reason judge, to draw out thy most vehement
desires after this gift. Yet I will add these Considerations more.

1. Consider who it is that offers this gift to thee. Christ is the gift of
God, in a peculiar and eminent manner so; therefore were there no other reason,
thou must take it.

The worth, greatness and excellency of the Donor, is an argument to move us to
take the gift; we regard not so much what it is, as from whom it is: If thy
Father or thy Prince offer a gift to thee, would thou, durst thou deny it?
If thy dearest Friend should send thee a token, would thou slight it? Now
look on the best of men, in all his Excellencies in himself, relations to thee,
and thy dependence on him; consider in him all that faithfulness, goodness,
greatness, or any thing else that would most move thee to take a gift from his
hands; and there is infinitely more cause to accept this gift at the hands of
God. The great and glorious God, the King of kings, Lord of lords, and God of
gods, the blessed Majesty of Heaven, the first Cause, the original Being,
self-sufficient, all-sufficient, absolutely, perfect, incapable of any
addition, or diminution, humbles himself to offer this gift to thee. It Is the
high and lofty One that inhabits Eternity, to whom millions of ages are but as
one day; who is boundless in his Being, Omnipotent in his Power, unsearchable
in his Wisdom, unconceivable in his Grace, and infinite in all his Perfections.
He who dwells in that light inaccessible, before whom the Angels the highest of
Creatures vail their faces; to whom the whole Creation is nothing, less than
nothing, and vanity. This God is he that made thee and all things of nothing;
supports all things, influences all things, and is all things, and infinitely
more than all things. He is the God in whose hands thy life is, and who is
acquainted with all thy ways; who is of infinite holiness, and perfectly hates
all wickedness; of unlimited power, able to avenge himself on thee every
moment, and turn thy soul and body into Hell. Of infinite justice, a jealous
God, who will by no means clear the guilty; against whom thou have sinned and
been an offense and provocation to him all thy days, and is thine enemy
according to strict justice; it is he whose favor is life, and whose frown is
death and hell, etc.

The height of a person that bestows a favor, and the meanness and
unworthiness of the object on whom it is bestowed, as it does exceedingly
advance and heighten the Grace and goodness of him that does it; so it mightily
aggravates the sin and danger of him that despises and refuses it. See that
ye refuse not him that speaks from heaven, for if they escaped not, etc. Heb.
12.25.

O what infinite grace and goodness is it for this great God to take so much
notice of man, and do so much for him! What admirable, wonderful condescension
is it, for the most High, the God of Heaven and Earth, that God whom the Heaven
of Heavens cannot contain, to manifest such respect to vile polluted dust and
ashes, yea to them that are rebels and traitors against his Majesty, and
thereby worthy of hell, as once to offer his blessed only begotten Son to us as
a Savior: Well may we with David be amazed at it, and cry with admiration,
Psalm. 8.14. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth, who
have set thy glory above the heavens. And adds, What is man that thou art
mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him? That so glorious a
Lord should mind poor, silly, weak, frail, dying man, sinful, filthy, polluted,
wretched, miserable man, could not but affect his heart with admiration and
astonishment! If a friend or neighbor, thy equal, do offer thee a kindness
(though but small) how ill does he take it, if thou accept it not! O what
horrid indignity do thou offer to God, what dishonor is it to all his
Attributes if thou refuse this transcendent gift!

2. Consider what it is that is offered to thee, when this gift of God Jesus
Christ is offered to thee. To explain this fully would require the tongue, nay
exceed the skill of an Angel; none can tell what Christ is, but Christ himself;
all those particulars I mentioned, speak somewhat of him, but not the thousand
thousandth part of that excellency that is in him. This let me tell thee, when
Christ is offered to thee, the greatest good that ever was, that ever will be,
that ever can be, is offered thee. There never was, nor can be the like offered
thee; it is the best gift that ever was received or given in the world; more
than Heaven and Earth, more than the whole world, more than millions of worlds
is offered thee. He who is offered to thee, is the Well of Salvation, the Lord
of Life, the Author of all Consolation; an Hive of sweetness, a Paradise of
pleasure, an Heaven of joy. He is the richest grace, the dearest love, the
surest friend, the highest honor, the vastest treasure, the exactest beauty,
the chiefest good, the fullest felicity. He is a comprehensive and universal
good, not one but all good, riches, honors, pleasures, friends, relations,
health, life, earth, heaven, the world, the other world, all the good of both
worlds, and infinitely more. He is so needful a good, that thou art undone
without him; that is the misery of hell, yea the very hell of hell. He is so
plentiful a good, that thou art perfectly happy in him, thou need no more;
he is the Heaven of heavens; he is the only suitable satisfying good, which
suits the nature and fits and fills the desires of the rational creature; he
can enlarge and suit all thy faculties, answer and relieve all thy necessities,
fill up all the capacities of thy heaven-born soul. He is an everlasting good,
who will stay with thee, and stand by thee, when all other good things shall
fail thee. Will thou not now say, Lord whom have I in heaven but thee, and
there is none on earth that I desire in comparison of thee? I Am sure he is such
a gift as thou would have if thou knew what thou do; as thou should have
if thou understood thy self, and answeredst the ends of the Gospel; as thou
must have, if thou be not eternally miserable. O what do thou think of having
this gift as thine own? sure by this time, thy heart may melt into
astonishment, and thy bowels be moved within thee; and thy soul cry with the
Martyr in the flames, None but Christ, none but Christ: Well, what say thou
to him? is not Christ worthy to be accepted and embraced? Is it not worth the
while to have him for thine own? Whatever thou think now, when death shall
close thy eyes, thou will be of this mind when thy soul stands quivering on thy
lips, ready to take its flight into the unknown regions of the other world;
when Devils will be waiting to seize upon it, (as soon as ever it leaves the
body) to hale it to the unquenchable flames of Hell; when thy friends,
relations, shall be weeping and wailing by thee, but unable to afford thy dying
body the least cordial, or thy departing soul the least comfort: Ah, what will thou do in such an hour which is hasting on thee! Without Christ, on whom will thou call, to whom will thou flee? where will thou rest or hide thy self from
the wrath of the Lamb of God? Believe it, though thou may live without him,
thou can not die without him, without infinite horror and confusion. Is it
not thy greatest concern to have him for thine, to whom thou must stand or fall
for ever? from whose mouth thy sentence of eternal absolution or condemnation
must come? and who shall judge thee to thine unchangeable state of life or
death, of salvation or damnation; though thou may think thou can do well
enough without him at this day, having what heart can wish in the world, yet
what will thou do at that day when the world shall be on a flame, if Christ be
not thine?

Once more; let me entreat thee to answer, Art thou willing or not to have this
gift? What say thou, can thou find in thine heart to deprive thy precious
soul of such an inestimable treasure, and to leave it naked in the other world,
to the cruelty of Devils, and the dreadful curses of the Law, and intolerable
wrath of God?

3. Consider on what terms thou may have this gift for thine; thou may
possibly think that so boundless and bottomless a treasure must cost thee very
dear, and the price must be exceeding great of a pearl so matchless and
incomparable; much will be expected from me, and I shall never be able to
compass this gift. But know (sinner) to thy comfort, all that God requires of
thee, is only to accept Christ heartily and thankfully; can thou desire any
thing cheaper? would thou desire him, to fall lower in his terms? Nay, is it
possible to do so, and make thee happy? How can he be thine, unless thou
receive him for thine? that is a poor favor, a vile gift, that is not worth
acceptance; what more reasonable, take him for thine, and he shall be thine?
can thou both deny him and enjoy him? refuse the gift, and have it too? Our
emptiness is the best plea, and self-denial our best price; thou give more
for thy bread, thy clothes, thy house, and for the needful comforts that are
for the support of thy frail body, than thou need to give for this great and
glorious Christ; thou payest money for them, but thou may have him without
money, and without price. One would think that the equity of the condition
should both amaze thee and allure thee; God does not ^ell, but give his Son; he
knows thou have nothing, and he would only have thee to know that too, and be
humbled under the sense of thy spiritual poverty; thou may lose a gift by
offering to buy it, Thy money perish with thee, etc. It Is said indeed, Isa.
55.1. Come buy, etc. for the word is used here improperly, for to get, attain,
receive, procure, furnish your selves, etc. So Prove. 3.8. and elsewhere;
something must indeed be done by those that partake of Christ, they must come
and accept of him. And something parted with, but of no valuable consideration
in gain to God; and what would be prejudicial to us and inconsistent with
having this gift. But God requires not of thee things impossible; he does not
say, If thou will remove mountains, dry up oceans, stop the course of nature,
create worlds, and Christ shall be thine; as great, as good as he is, he does
not say, If thou satisfy my justice, answer the demands of my Law, merit my
love and favor, then shall he be thine: No, he himself has done all this for
thee; all that he desires is, that thou would receive him that has done so.

Neither does he require any thing of thee that is barbarous and cruel, as the
Heathen Deities did of their worshippers; he says not, if thou will lance and
mangle thy body as Baal's Priests did; or if thou will go barefoot in sackcloth
long and tedious Pilgrimages as the Papists do: If you will offer your Children
in the fire, and give the fruit of your bodies for the sin of your souls, as
some did; then he is yours. Nor does he require of thee chargeable and costly,
as to offer the best and chiefest of thy flock in sacrifice to him; nor as he
once did of the young man, to sell all that thou have and give it to the poor:
Nor as Idolaters, lay down such a part of thy estate for thy pardon. But he
only requires that thou first thirst, and then buy; be sensible of thy want,
and poverty, and nothingness, and then open an empty hand and take Christ as
thy Savior and Lord; and will thou not do it? Can thou deny him and thy poor
soul so reasonable, so equitable a request? as the Servant said to Naaman, If
the prophet had commanded thee some great thing, would thou not have done
it? how much more then, when he only says, wash and be clean? So say I to
thee, If God had commanded the greatest things imaginable, would thou not to
thy power have done them, that thou may enjoy the blessed Son of God for
thine? How much more then, when he only says, Take Jesus Christ as thy Lord
and Savior, prize and love him as thy Savior, obey and honor him as thy
Lord, and he shall be thine for ever? do but as much for him, as the covetous
man does for his wealth, as the ambitious man for his honor, as the voluptuous
man for his belly; they give their highest esteem, their choicest affections,
and their greatest service, to that which they take for their God, their chief
good: And surely Christ is more worthy hereof, and will requite thee best for
them.

4. Consider how God offers this gift to thee; his manner of dealing with thee
in this is wonderful; he offers Christ most really, means what he speaks, and
most tenderly and affectionately: He not only offers Christ to thee, but
invites thee to him; what can thou desire more in a gift or benefit, than to
have it heartily offered, and be invited to take it? He offers Christ without
grudging, falsehood, or equivocation; with an open heart, that he may show how
willing and cordial he is to part with this gift. He invites us to take him,
Rev. 22.17, Let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will let him take the
water of life freely* Nay, he shouts and calls aloud, Isa. 55.1, Ho every one
that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy
and eat, yea come buy wine and milk, without money, and without price. Had he
once tendered Christ, it had been infinite mercy; but to entreat us to accept
him, to persuade and move us, as one that would not be denied, that is
admirable. 2 Cor. 5.20, We are ambassadors for Christ; as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. And
he commands us to receive Christ his Son, and makes this the chief, and (as it
were) the only thing he requires of us, 1 Ioh. 3.23; and inforceth his just
command with most severe threatenings, Heb. 12.25, See that ye refuse not him
that speaks; for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth,
much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from
heaven. Sometimes he expostulateth with men, Wherefore do you spend your money
for that which is not bread? Isa. 55.2, and adds protestations of his loathness
that any soul should perish, Why will you dye? anger is not in me: why should
the flame consume the stubble? what could I do more? what iniquity have ye
found in me, etc? He complains and laments most sadly, when men neglect and
slight this offered gift, Why will ye not come to me, that ye may have life? He
came to his own and they received him not, John 1.11. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Matt. 23.37. Yea, with very
vehement passions he bewails and weeps over them that pity not themselves, Luke
19.42, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong to thy peace, etc. Those tears and mournings over Jerusalem for
her hard heart and contempt, have been, and are still over thee. He upbraids
men with nothing so much as this, and threatens no such woes in all the
Scripture, as against such as refuse Christ, Matt. 11.20, Woe unto thee
Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, etc. Jer. 13.17, Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem,
will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? He is never so angry with
any, as with them that despise this love, and refuse this offer, Luke 14.21.
Matt. 22.7. He was very wroth when the invited guests would not come. So Mat.
21.40, with those Husbandmen that took his Son and killed him; and those
Citizens ( Luke 19.27.) that would not have him reign over them, are destroyed
as enemies. And when all this will do no good, men will not be persuaded nor
allured, but hang off and keep at a distance; he goes away (as it were
troubled) and wishing it had been better. He swears and pawns his life on it,
that he would not have them perish, has no pleasure in their destruction, Ezekiel.
33.11. O that they had hearkened to my commandments, then had their peace been
as a river, and their righteousness as the waves of the sea. Isa. 48.18 Psalm.
81.11. But my people would not hearken to my voice, Israel would none of me. O
that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways, I would
soon have subdued their enemies, I would have fed them with the finest of the
wheat, with honey out of the rock would I have satisfied them. O the
compassionate pangs of Gods bowels of infinite mercy toward poor sinners! O
quam stupenda pieatas! quam mira Dei dignatio! quem regare debuimus, ut nos
recipere dignaretur: ab ipso rogamur, ut ad eum venire dignemur.

It were (one would think) enough to prevail with us to accept this gift with
joy and thankfulness to consider how incomparably excellent the gift it self
is. -- But God adds unspeakable benefits with him to draw us to this
acceptance; as life and favor with God, Prove. 8.35. Whosoever finds me, finds
life, and obtains favor of the Lord. Recovery of Gods image, freedom from
bondage, communion with God, liberty of will, pardon of sin, power against sin,
deliverance from Satan, peace and joy, adoption of Sons, Ioh. 1.12. acceptance
of persons and services, audience of prayers, a sanctified use of comforts and
crosses, victory over death, assurance of heaven, the fair inheritance of all
things, fullness of joy and happiness, pleasures for evermore.

5. Consider, why God offers Christ unto thee; for what end is he thus
sollicitous about thine acceptance of this gift; do not mistake me, nor deceive
thy self by thinking that because God out of his infinite pity to his miserable
creatures, is instant and urgent with them to accept of Christ, therefore he
has any need of thee, or seeks his own happiness therein. I tell thee, if
thou had no more need of Christ than he has of thee, thou may let him
alone. No, it is purely for thy good, for thy real and eternal good that he
offers his Son to thee. He needs thy service no more than he does the service
of the Damned, or of the Devils; and he knows how to make use of thee for his
own glory as he does of them, if thou foolishly reject this offer of his Son to
save thee. Had he a work to do, he needs not thy help; he might have made
nobler creatures than the present race of mankind to glorify his Grace, and
execute his will, and have left thee and all Adam's posterity to glorify his
Justice. Thy righteousness will not help him, Job 22.2, 3. Nor thy wickedness
hurt him, Job 35.2. He expects no gain by thee, looks for no requital; he
offers this gift to thee, not that he may be blessed by thee, but that he may
be bountiful to thee; it is thy good, not his own that he looks at: The felicity
of accepting is thine own, and the misery of neglecting is thine own. Prove
9.12, If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self; but if thou scornest,
thou alone shall bear it. Men call Customers to them, and press them with many
arguments and entreaties to buy, that they may enrich themselves by their
Customers; but God calls men to buy of him, not to enrich himself (he is as
rich, and perfect, and happy as he can be) but to enrich themselves. I counsel
thee (says Christ to his lukewarm Church) ^ev. 3.18, to buy of me gold tried
in the fire (Why? that he might get ^omething by him and enrich himself? No)
that thou may be rich, that thou, not I may be rich. Now Brethren ponder it
seriously, it is wholly for your own good, that you may escape wrath and death,
that you may attain Heaven and life, that God is pleased once more to offer
Christ to you. He gives his Son to this end, that you may be saved, to bring
you into the state of Sons, and into a right to Heaven and Glory. Had he given
Christ only to rule over you with his Scepter of righteousness, it would have
been an excellent gift, and no small privilege to be Subjects to such a Prince,
especially for such as were bondslaves of Satan by nature; but he gives Christ
to save and redeem us. Something, yea very much of God is in the Creation, much
of God in his common providence; but most of all, yea whole God in the
redemption of man. If a Physician should come to us who would heal us of all
our diseases (suppose we were an Hospital of unsound persons) would he not be
most acceptable to us? What more acceptable to a poor man than wealth? or a
naked man than clothes? or to an hungry man than bread? a slave than freedom?
all this and infinitely more is Christ to us. Now all that is required of us in
order to the obtaining of all these benefits, is to believe in Christ; and what
is believing, but receiving Christ, as he is offered to us in the Gospel? John
1.12. What is thy mind now about this offer? what do thou resolve on? will thou have Christ this Gift of God, or not? Is there any thing unreasonable in
his demands? any thing defective in this offer, or in the gift? is not Christ
fair, or good enough? is he not rich and honorable enough? is there any want
of love or loveliness in Christ for thee? What has been said of him, will
silence all these and the like objections. What can thou say? is it an
indifferent matter whether thou take this or not? does not thy eternal felicity
depend on thine acceptance of him? what say thou? shall Christ be thy Lord,
or the Devil? One of these will reign over thee. Consider what thou do, thy
Soul is immortal, and must either take God, and Christ, and Heaven to be thy
portion for ever; or Hell, and Death, and Wrath, and Devils for thy portion for
ever: one of these two is the portion of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam. If
thou will still prefer the world before Christ, and love the creature above
Christ, and please thy flesh more than Christ, (...) thou go without him;
and however thou may shift in this world, yet when once thou appearest in
another world, God will rain fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, and
this will be the portion of thy cup, Psalm. 11 6. But if now thou acceptest o^
this gift of God, Jesus Christ, when all thy friends shall leave thee, and
dearest relations forsake thee, yea, when thy flesh and thy heart shall fail
thee, Christ will be the strength of thy heart, and thy portion for ever. Well,
consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding, that thou may know
when thou art well offered, and be wise on this side the other world.

I know not what other answer you can rationally make to all that has been
said, to persuade your acceptance of this gift of God, but that either you have
it already, or desire to know how you may make it your own; I shall therefore,
to prevent mistakes in the one, and to give assistance to the other, first
direct you to try your selves, whether Christ be yours or not, and then how to
attain propriety in this excellent gift, whereby you may be happy to all
eternity.

Let this be your most serious inquiry, whether you have indeed received this
gift of God or not. Is Christ yours? can you truly say with the Spouse ( Cant.
2.16.) My beloved is mine, and I am his? If you can but once say, and speak
true, I am my beloveds (as Cant. 6.3) you may with the same breath conclude, my
beloved is mine. Have you ever made a full, entire, affectionate, deliberate
and unreserved resignation of your selves unto him? have you given up your
heart, head and hands, all you are, all you have, unto Jesus Christ, and that
constantly? Then he is wholly yours. For God never gave his Son to any, but
such gave themselves to the Lord, and are new creatures, and sound believers.
But more particularly: 1. If you have received this gift of God, you do very
highly esteem of him, and prefer him above all other things in the world. To
them that believe, Christ is precious, they have a good opinion of his worth
and excellency, have him in greatest honor and estimation, as Hinsius says
the word (...) signifies. He that loves Father or Mother, or any Relation, or
Riches or Pleasures more than Christ, is not worthy of him, cannot be his
Disciple. Do you truly in judgment and affections, account it your chief
happiness to enjoy the Lord Jesus Christ? is he the chiefest of Ten thousand in
your eyes, altogether lovely? Can you say with David, Psalm. 16.5, The Lord is
my portion? or with him, Psalm. 73.25, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there
is none on earth I desire beside thee, or in competition with thee? So that
whatever temptations to the contrary you meet with, you do in your settled
prevailing judgment, prefer Christ before all, and count all loss and dung in
comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, making him the end of
your desires and endeavors, putting the world and all other things behind him
in your esteem and pursuit, and thinking no labor, nor losses, nor sufferings
too great for Christ. 2. Are you willing to receive Christ as Lord as well as
Savior? submit to him as King, as well as accept of him as Redeemer? and come
not only for ease and rest, but to take his yoke upon you, and become his
Servants? Is Christ your Lord and Master to guide and govern your hearts, and
thoughts, and lives, by his Laws and Statutes? and is it your ordinary purpose,
desire, and endeavor to obey him, even when he commands the hardest duties,
and those which most cross the desire and interest of the flesh, and it is your
sorrow when you break your resolutions herein? then Christ is yours: But if you
are only content to be saved by him from Hell when you dye, in the mean time,
he shall command you no further than will stand with your credit, or pleasure,
or worldly estate and ends, and did never heartily consent that he should rule
over you, nor resign up your souls and bodies to be governed and disposed by
him, nor took his Word for a Law and Rule of your thoughts and actions; but if
he would give you leave, you had rather live after the world and flesh, than
after the Word and Spirit: he is not yet yours: though you may in words call
him Lord and Master, yet in your works you deny him. He is his Friend and
Disciple that keeps his commandments, John 15.7, 14, but they that would not
hearken to his voice, would none of him, he gave them up to their own hearts
lusts, Psalm. 8.11. 3. Have you received the Spirit of Christ? The Apostle makes
the former and this, characters of such as have received Christ. 1 John 3.24,
He that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and Christ in him; hereby we
know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has given us. Well then, do
ye obey the Laws of Christ, and walk in his ways, conform to his example, and
live the life of Jesus? He that does not thus, may say, he abides in Christ;
but he does but say so; it is not so in truth and reallity. 1 John 2.6, He that
says he abides in Christ, ought to walk as he walked. Further, Let me ask you
the question the Apostle asked the Disciples at Ephesus, Acts. 19.2, Whether
have you received the Holy Ghost? If God have given Christ to you, Christ has
given you his holy Spirit; For if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is
none of his, Romans 8.9. 1 John 4.13, Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he
in us, because he has given us of his spirit: The Spirit, not as residing in
Christ, but as given to us, is an evidence that we have received Christ. Well
then, let every one of you be now inquisitive, and put such interrogatories as
these to himself, Have I the Spirit? is he given to me? does he dwell in my
soul? have I the spirit of illumination and revelation, Ephesians. 1.17? Do I see
such things as I never saw before, as the inexpressible vileness and
loathsomness of sin, the greatest beauty in holiness, etc.? Have I the spirit
of life in Christ Jesus, to quicken me and raise me up from the dead? Romans 8.2.
2 Cor. 3.6. Have I felt the spirit of conviction, to convince me of sin,
righteousness and judgment, John 16.8? The spirit of grace and supplication,
stirring up to, and assisting in that heavenly duty of Prayer, Zech. 12.10? The
spirit of holiness to sanctify me, 1 Pet. 1.2, to mortify my sins and
corruptions, Romans 8.13, and work up my heart to all holy obedience, Ezekiel.
36.27? Am I renewed in the spirit of my mind? is Gods Image repaired in me? am
I transformed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the
Lord? Am I growing in grace, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord? Do I
walk in all Gods Ways and Statutes freely, regularly, constantly? Am I willing
to sacrifice an Isaac, a Benjamin, an Absalom, a Delilah, Herodias, and hew,
with Samuel, delicate Agag in pieces? or with David keep my self from mine own
iniquity? Is the old man dead? the flesh with all its cursed retinue mortified?
do I detest and loath every sin, in thought word and deed, and that not so much
for its effects, as for its nature; and hate it rather as Hell, than for Hell?
Enquire what do you find of these high and gracious operations o^ the spirit in
your selves; he is always an active working Spirit, is he so in you, Does he
raise your hearts to heavenly things, and draw forth your souls to Christ? O
deal faithfully with your own souls; let the search be deep and through, go to
the bottom of your deceitful h^arts, bring things to an issue, be sure that you
be not mistaken. 4. If Christ be received, there will be a more earnest intent,
desire and breathing of soul after him; he that has once tasted the sweetness
of his grace, and seen the splendour of his beauty, will be so far from being
satisfied, that he will still more and more thirst after him; the more
excellency the soul apprehends in him, the more vehement and restless are his
desires toward him. Thus it was with the Spouse, Cant. 2.3, 4, 5, ^he had a
glance of him, and cries out, As the Apple Tree among the trees of the wood, so
is my beloved among the sons. Here the Spouse seems to be strongly moved with
affection, and before her beloved had well ended his speech, breaks out into an
affectionate Elogy of him, which she is not able to express, but conquered with
her own passion, she sits down and breathes for comfort: I sat down under his
shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste: Here the soul
receives and applys Christ with sweet relish to her palate, and comfort to her
heart: He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love:
she still tastes more of the riches of his Grace; and what was the effect of
this? did she surfeit with eating his fruit and banqueting? no, she is more
ravished with desire, Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am
sick of love: I am wounded, nay slain (as some Interpreters) with love: which
by the sweet vehemence and insatiability of it, makes the heart to burn and
weep, groan and sigh; to forget all, and drive away all but him, on whom alone
she fixes, and would rest, but cannot center till she enjoy him in glory; till
then she is sick and weary, and lives not in her self, but in him in whom her
life is hid. As Plato defines love, an ardour or flame of a soul dead in its
own body, and living in another. One thus writes to his friend, I have for the
present a sick life, much pain and lovesickness for Christ. O what would I give
to have a bed made to my wearied soul, in his bosom! O when shall we meet? O
how long is it to the dawning of the marriage-day? O sweet Lord Jesus take wide
steps: O my beloved come leaping over the mountains of separation: O that he
would fold the heavens together like an old cloak, and shovel time and days out
of the way, and come away.

Well, have you pain, and sick-nights for Christ? do your thoughts continually
run on him? and would you do any thing for compassing of him, and abstain from
any thing that would cross thy desires to enjoy him, content to go through any
difficulties and discouragements, to bear reproach, losses for him, and can
not live without him? then he is thine.

But if you can sit down contented without him, grow strange and keep at
distance many days, weeks and years together, and yet quiet and merry: If you
can live without his presence and never miss it* not a smile from his face, not
a look of love from you to him, and yet no trouble follows; can make a shift
with the carnal contentments to supply his room; can bear his absence, and feel
no want of him, it is an ill sign, you either never received him at all, or are
in a dead condition.

5. Do ^e smell and savor of Christ wherever you come, and endeavor to draw
others to him? have your words and carriage been such as to give testimony to
others of your love and propriety to Christ? He that has received this gift
may be known by the smell and fragrancy he sends forth out of the heart into
every part of man, thoughts, words, works, are all gracious and savoury;
there is the savor of Christ; or of the knowledge of Christ manifested in every
place, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. alluding to the Ointment of the Priests, and the sweet
incense they offered; Christ faith, I am the rose of Sharon, Cant. 2.1. Now if
withering roses put in a box can perfume the clothes that lie in it, and cast a
sweet and delicate smell, how much more must their words and lives be sweet and
fragant who carry about with them Jesus Christ, Whose garments smell of my^rh,
aloes, and cassia, Psalm. 45.8.


Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, reports of Polycarpus, that when he
was to be sacrificed unto the Lord by fire, by the hands of most bloody
Persecutors, as he was standing in the midst of the fire, all resplendent, like
shining burnisht gold, his body did send forth such an odoriferous and sweet
favor as they of Smyrna received it in an Epistle) as if he had been perfumed
with incense, or some other fragrant and aromatical essence. Now though every
ordinary Christians body do not yield such a miraculous odor, yet you may read
as much in effect of a most gracious perfume, with which the precious souls of
all Christ's believing members, (his mystical Spouse) do send forth in a most
sweet and pleasant manner. Cant. 3.6. Who is this that comes out of the
wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with
all the powders of the merchants? i. e. sweetened with all the most fragrant and
sweet smelling Graces of the Spirit of Christ, who is the merchant here spoken
of. O how desirous is every one that has received this gift and tasted that
the Lord is gracious, to communicate him unto others! As it is the nature and
property of grace and goodness, to be diffusive and communicative of it self*
so would every true believer impart Christ to his friends and neighbors, and
even travels over them till Christ be formed in them too. If you have this
talent, this pearl of great price, you will be far from laying it up in a
napkin, or locking it up in a cabinet, but be much in commending him to others;
it is their delight to be speaking of the beauties, excellencies and perfections
of their beloved: as the Spouse whose whole language is all love, and her heart
is so full, that her lips overflow with the mention of the Excellencies of
Christ, My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, etc. This
is my friend, and this is my beloved, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, Cant 5.19.

The Samaritan woman, no sooner had Christ discovered himself in plain terms to
her, saying, I that speak unto thee am he; that is the Messiah: but the first
thing that we hear of her, ver. 28. she leaves her water-pot, and water, for
which she came, she neglects her civil business, forgets her natural wants, and
runs into the City and calls the people of the place, Come and see a man that
told me all things that ever I did, is not this the Christ? Such is the
excellency of heavenly treasures, (ever most diffusive of themselves) if one
find them, there is no rest until he communicate the same to others: If one
find any secular treasure, he will carefully conceal it, because the more
communicate therein, the less must every sharer have, (as the three men
traveling toward Jerusalem, etc.) But the more by thee are brought to Christ,
the more thou have of his Divine riches; she says not, go out and see a man,
but come and see; the seed of this knowledge cannot lie dead in the heart, Psalm.
116.10. I believed, therefore have I spoken. It Is like the Widows oil,
increases by pouring out. They have but a doubtful share in Christ, who
pretending to send others to him, will not go themselves; nor does she take
upon her to define or teach, she only leads them to hear Christ, content to
peswade, to see what she had found. So John, Andrew and Philip, how ready to
tell others of Christ, Ioh. 1.29, 41, 45* Paul being one enlightened himself,
with the saving knowledge of Christ, had great heaviness and continual sorrow in
his heart, and could wish himself accursed from Christ for his brethren and
kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans 9.1. So he that has tasted the sweetness
of Christ will not rest, but will be wisely upon all occasions relating the
love-passages betwixt Christ and him, and telling his neighbors and friends
the Excellencies of Christ, and what he feels: O come and hear, I will declare
what God has done for my soul, Psalm. 66.16.

2. What shall we do to make Christ our own? this appropriation and application
of the gift of God, is a very great thing: what can be so desirable as this,
what so worthy of your study and endeavors as to have Christ with all his
benefits? O that you would be persuaded with greatest diligence and
faithfulness to seek this privilege! Give no sleep to your eyes, nor slumber to
your eyelids till you have made sure of this gift. As ever you desire a solid
foundation to build upon for exemption from misery, and enjoyment of comfort;
the happiness and safety of your future state depends upon your present
application of Christ.

1. Believe, get and act faith; let it be your main care and endeavor to be
believers; for let me tell you, in the very first moment of believing you will
actually be partakers of Christ; Christ is in the soul as soon as ever faith is
in it, this is the most precious and excellent grace that is receptive of
Christ; the hand whereby we take him, as he is offered and held forth unto us
in the Gospel. Some define faith a most affectionate accepting of Christ as
Savior and Lord: It is (say others) a saving-grace wrought in the heart of a
sinner by the Spirit and Word of God, whereby he being convinced of his sin and
misery, and of the disability in himself, and all other creatures to recover
him out of his lost condition, not only assents to the truth of the promise of
the Gospel, but receives and rests upon Christ and his Righteousness therein
held forth for pardon of sin, and for the accepting and accounting of his
person righteous in the sight of God for salvation. I Am sure the Scripture
makes this to be our accepting of Christ, 1 Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed on him might not
perish, etc. 1 John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them he gave power to
become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. We come to him
and feed on him by faith, Ioh. 6.35. And he dwells in our hearts by faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. The Woman consenting to take the man for her Husband, upon that
the Matrimonial union follows, he is hers, and she his; so the sinner
consenting to the receiving and obeying of Christ (which is one main act of
faith upon which he is made his): This is one of faiths royal excellencies,
nothing puts a greater worth and glory upon it than this great effect. Well
then, see that you make sure of it; put forth this hand of faith and take
Christ* are ye without it in the sad state of unbelief? you have no share in,
nor can make no claim to this gift so long as it is thus with you; you must be
put into another state, and become true believers, then 'twill be well. But do
not content your selves with a Dogmatical, Historical faith, an easy common
presumptuous false faith, which is in the generality of men: Be sincere and
sound believers, flatter not your selves with an idle inoperative faith; have
such a faith as purifies the heart, works by love, overcomes the world; you
must heartily close with whole Christ, according to the Gospel-offer; let your
trust, relyance, confidence for pardon, life and salvation, be grounded upon
him, and him only. You must cast your selves upon his alone merits, renouncing
every thing in your selves; holding forth the two hands of faith, with the one
to lay hold on Christ, and with the other to resign up your selves to Christ.
You must be thoroughly convinced of sin and misery, that you have undone and
destroyed your selves, and in the sense of nakedness, wretchedness and
perishing, see an absolute necessity of Christ, that unless he justify you,
you must ^e condemned; unless he save you, you must burn in hell for ever; and
so cry give me Christ or else I die: and have restless importunate desires of
the soul toward him, as a condemned man for pardon, a hungry man for meat: O
that Christ were mine, Oh that I might enjoy him! I cannot live without him. I
know not whether Christ will own me, and smile on me or no; I know not whether
Christ will come to me, and bestow himself on so mean and vile a creature? But
I Will go out to him; I Will venture all, if I perish, I perish, my desire is
toward him; and I Will cast my self and all upon him, and with tears and cries
say, Lord I believe, help my unbelief.

2. Pray go unto God for this gift, for it is his; you can never deserve,
therefore beg it, and ask grace to receive and apply it. No man comes unto the
Son, except the Father which has sent him, draw him, John 6.44. All things are
of God, 2 Cor. 5 18. Creating is his work, Ephesians. 2 10. Go then and lie and wait
at the throne of Grace, and earnestly entreat God to give Ch^^st to thee, and
make him thine; though thou have no promise to urge God with, yet put him in
remembrance, how he has said in ^cripture, that he has no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but rather that he should turn a^^ live: Tell him that
thou art a sinner, yet God commends his love, in that Christ dyed for men while
they were yet sinners: He came to reconcile even ememies, to give gi^ts even to
the rebellious: His business was to seek and save lost Sheep, of whom thou art
one; tell him you have no whither to go but unto him; be earnest and
importunate, and then wait: though he hide his face, and answer not, yet
continue praying and knocking at the gate of mercy; cry aloud, Lord give me
Christ, O give me Christ, or else I dye and perish: Good Lord what ever thou
deniest me, deny me not Christ. Lord upon my bended knees, I ask him of thee; O
shut not out my Prayer; if I have not Christ I am undone. Remember his carriage
toward the woman of Canaan, Matt. 15.26, he puts her off, either no answer, or
that which was worse than none; yet her importunity in crying still, Lord help
me, at last prevailed, and she got a gracious and comfortable answer, obtained
what she asked and more: remember for your encouragement, you are calling on
him that is calling on you; and seeking him that first loves and seeks you. Pray
for faith, even that also is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Christ is the author
and finisher of faith, Heb. 12.2. Fall down before the throne of Grace, before
and after the hearing of the word, and beg earnestly of God, that as he has
given you hands to take your meat, so he would also give you the hand of Faith,
wherewith to apprehend Jesus Christ: pray and wait.

3 That you may the better do thus, and be enabled to believe and pray, attend
diligently the Word and Ordinances, which are the ordinary means to convey this
gift to the Children of men. It Is by these golden pipes that golden oil is
carried to men, Zech. 4.12. The Word must be read, heard, and meditated on,
Ioh. 6.44, 45. It Is by hearing the Father, and learning of him, that we come to
Christ; it is not without his drawing, but he draws by these means. The
Scriptures do testify of him, and by them we may come to the knowledge of him;
and if we know him, we shall desire him: and if so, we shall have him, as in
the Text.

The Word (I say) Read or Preached, but especially the latter; for he has
said, Matt. 18.20, Where two or three are come together in my name, there am I
in the midst of them: q. d. If you want me, and would know where to find me,
study both the Law and Gospel, that is the Schoolmaster to show you the need
of him, to shake the Soul out of security, and to humble you through
convictions. And this is that whereby he offers himself to you expressly, calls
and invites you to him, Come to me poor weary sinners, etc. He is veiled in the
Law, revealed in the Gospel; there held forth in Types, here in Truth; in all,
Christ is the substance to be found in every page; frequent therefore his
Ordinances, they are his Gallery, where he loves to walk; and here, if any
where, you may find him, or hear of him; enquire in the way he has appointed.
So the Spouse, Cant. 1.7, Tell me, O thou, whom my soul loves, where thou
feedest, where thou make thy flocks to rest at noon; for why should I be as
one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions? Christ presently and
lovingly answers, If thou know not (O thou fairest among women) go thy way
forth ( q. d. up and rise, and get out, sit not still, lamenting and crying,
Lord, Lord, but go out of your selves) by the footsteps of the flock, and feed
thy kids besides the shepherds tents. Qui Christum sine ecclesia quaerit,
errare and fatigari potest, in venire non potest, says Bed. you may seek long
enough, etc.

Cant. 6. begin. The Daughters of Jerusalem hearing so much of the worth,
beauty and excellency of Christ, had an earnest desire to seek him with the
Spouse, therefore enquire whither is thy beloved gone, (O thou fairest among
women) whither is thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee.
This repetition argues both the vehemence of their affections, and their
expedition; no excuses nor delays can be admitted in this case.

If any that hear me be of this mind, having heard so much of Christ's worth;
observe the answer of the Spouse, My beloved is gone down into his garden, to
the bed of spices, to feed in the garden, and to gather lillies. His Garden is
the Church, there attend his motions.

4. Believe, and Pray, and attend Ordinances, with an empty hand and hungry
soul; let go and be stripped of your selves and all other things, that you may
receive Christ, thus the Apostle did, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9, 10, quit all interest in
your selves, all dependence on the creature, break your league with sin,
renounce your own righteousness, account all things dung and loss that you may
gain Christ; leave all for him, prefer him above all the world, consent to his
covenant, say you will have him on any terms, and he is yours; unless you deny
your selves, you cannot accept this gift, the world, and the things of it: Sin,
and the flesh, and your own righteousness, is that self that must be denied.

1. You must deny and relinquish the world, and all carnal relations; What will
it profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? If the
heart be divided between Christ and the world, there will be always a
disproportion, the world will have most, and Christ least. Do not overvalue or
love the wealth of the world; the young man bid fair at Christ, but stuck at
this Say with that Marquess Galeacius Cariac. tempted by a Jesuit with a
mighty sum of Money; Let their Money perish with them, that esteem all the gold
in the world worth one days communion with Jesus Christ. Or Christ will say, if
you set so much by the world, take it and see what it can do for you; if you
can spare me better than your wealth, you shall be without me. He that loves
houses or lands, yea, father or mother, more than me, is not worthy of me,
Matt. 10.37, 38. Luke ^4.26, If any man come after me, and hates not father
and mother, wife and children, brethren and sisters, yea, his own life, cannot
be my desciple: which is not to be understood simply (as if the service of
Christ required the violation of the Laws of God and Nature) but comparatively,
as Jerome, If my Father should be weeping on his knees before me, and my Mother
hanging on my nee^ behind me, and all my Brethren and Kinsfolks howl on every
side, I would despise all, and throw them off, to go to Christ when he calls
me. If any think this would not consist with natural affection, hear what
Kilian the Dutch Schoolmaster and Martyr said, If the whole world were Gold,
and mine to dispose of, I would give it to live with my Wife and Children
(though in Prison), yet my Soul and Christ are dearer to me than all. Psalm.
45.10, Forget thy own people, and thy fathers house, etc.

2. Sin must be denied and forsaken: Christ and Belial, purity and corruption,
can have no fellowship: Depart from all iniquity, Jesus Christ and one allowed
lust cannot lodge together in the same Soul. He that prefers any lust before
Christ, deserves to go without him; but he that with indignation parts with his
sins shall have the Pearl of price in their room.

3. you must deny your own righteousness; this is the hardest part of
self-denial, yet necessary, Christ came not to call the righteous but sinners;
the whole need not the Physician but the sick; there must be sense of sin,
guilt, shame and nakedness, as Noah's Dove. So long as the prodigal could make
any shift to live, he returned not; or the woman with the blood issue had any
thing to spend, she came not to Christ; like the man cast from an high Tower,
and stuck to the Mulberry-tree, and escaped. A wounded man hasts to the
Chyrurgeon, sick to the Physician, the man pursued by the avenger of blood, to
the City of refuge; so a poor Soul, broken with the insupportable burden of his
sin, wrath of God, curse of the Law, will be willing, with a witness, to cast
it self into the opened arms, and inviting embracements of Jesus Christ
bleeding on the Cross, tendered in the Gospel, and so made his for ever; you
must sell all that you have, and thus buy the Pearl.

5. Do all this presently, speedily; defer it not till to morrow; now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation, Seek you the Lord while he may be
found, Isa. 55.6. While he offers himself in the ministry of his Word, while he
says seek ye my face, let your heart answer, thy face do I seek. To day if ye
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; to day, after so long a time, Heb.
4.7. If you will do it at all, do it betimes, before the day of grace, and time
of repentance be expired, and the door of mercy be shut. As the Jewish Rabbi
said of repentance, Do it to day, because thou know not thou shall live till
to morrow. You know not that ever this gift shall be offered again, this may be
the last time to thee; your life may be gone, and then actum est -- or means
removed, or judicial hardness inflicted, according to that dreadful threat,
Matt. 13.14, Hearing, ye shall hear, and not understand, etc. no judgment so
terrible on this side Hell; or he swear in his wrath, you shall not enter into
his rest; God forbids his people to feed on those twilight birds, the Bats,
signifying prolongers of repentance, who think to flutter confusedly about
Christ in the evening of their withered years, and dream of a devout retirement
in old age. Now Christ stands at the door and knocks, the spirit strives, but
the time is coming when many shall call and knock, and it shall not be opened,
Prove. 1.24.

I shall add a word of admonition and serious warning, to them who have not
yet, nor are now resolved to accept this incomparable gift of God; and that in
the words of the Apostle, See that ye refuse not him that speaks from heav^n,
Heb. 12.25, yea that came down from Heaven to seek and save your lost souls.
Now that Christ is freely offered to you by the Gospel, if you set at naught
his counsel, and make light of his invitations, and receive the Grace of God in
vain, it had been better for you, that you had never been born, or never heard
the Gospel. Now that God has proclaimed terms of peace, and showed himself so
unwilling that ye should perish, that he gave his only begotten Son for you,
and to you, and exacted nothing from you but acceptance, that ye might have in
him eternal life: If you still refuse this gift, and reject this counsel,
remaining under unbelief, it does exceedingly aggravate your sin and judgment,
it makes your sin above measure sinful; your sin is inexcusable, your
condemnation unavoidable; and your punishment will be intolerable. Consider
what you do, and be wise before it be too late; you exceedingly dishonor God,
undervalue Christ, gratify Satan, Sin most inexcusably, and undo your selves
utterly.

1. If you do not receive and improve this gift when offered in the Gospel, you
do exceedingly dishonor God; What greater reproach is there amongst men, than
to refuse a gift offered freely out of love, without any ground, motive, or
occasion, from the party that is to have it? or deny to accept of an invitation
to a great feast, or fair estate, if entreated and solicited to take it? It Is a
sour unmannerliness, and saucy proud presumption, to prescribe on what terms
they will have, or when they will not be beholding to their superiors. It Is a
great dishonor to God, that vile sinful dust and ashes, will not accept of his
gracious offer of his Son. If a King should come to a Prisoner condemned by the
Law to death, and lying in Chains, and offer to set him free, or put his Son in
his stead, etc. but he so loves his bondage, and hugs his chains that he will
not be delivered. You cast dishonor upon all the glo^ious Attributes of God,

His Truth; He that receives Christ, gives as much glory to the Truth of God as
possibly he can; he sets to his seal that God is true, John 3.33. But he that
receives not this gift, believes not God, and so makes him (who is truth it
self) a liar, because he believes not the record which God gave of his Son, 1
Ioh. 5.10. O what horrid indignity is this to the most faithful God!

His Mercy, wherein he delights, which as it is above all his works; so this of
bestowing Christ on men is above all his mercies. It is no less than spurning
at bowels of mercy, Romans 2.4, and despising of riches of goodness.

His Power; It Is a sad diminution of the glory of his Power and Sovereignty; as
if he could not do what he has promised, if we accept his offers: or what he
has threatened if we refuse it. Abraham on the contrary, was strong in faith,
giving glory to God, being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was
able to perform, Romans 4.20.

His Wisdom; It Is a rejecting the counsel of Heaven, and contemning that
unconceivable depth of wisdom, that contrived a way for Mercy and Justice to
meet, that his Glory might be advanced, and sinning and perishing man might be
saved.

His Justice, How great is the affront that sinners offer to his Justice, that
sinners go on to provoke him with their unbelief and wickedness; and as it were
dare him to punish them.

In a word, his Infallibleness and Unchangeableness are called in question:
when his gracious promises are not believed and embraced, men judge him a person
not fit to be credited: The giving of the lie is accounted the greatest injury
and disgrace amongst men; but especially this is a great injury to God, because
he stands more upon his word than upon any other part of his name, Psalm. 138.2.
He has magnified his word above all his name. And we have more experience of
God making good his word, than in any other thing. Thus not receiving Christ
does rob God of his declarative glory, it rifles his cabinet, and takes away
his chiefest jewel, even that glory which he says he will not give unto
another.

2. You do very unworthily slight and undervalue Jesus Christ. When a gift is
offered, if you deny to accept it, you not only dishonor him that offers it,
but you disparage the gift it self, you disesteem it as not worthy your
acceptance; and is Jesus Christ so worthless and inconsiderable a gift, as that
thou will not take him at the hands of God? O horrible ingratitude! Be ye
astonished O ye heavens, for my people have committed two evils, (ah these two
are thousands and millions) they have forsaken me the fountain of living
waters, etc. Is it not the voice of Christ in the Gospel, Who will have me? Who
will receive me? and is it not the Gospel-quarrel, Ye will not come to me that
ye may have life, Joh. 5.40. It Is the greatest folly to set so low a rate on
Christ, for he is the sum and substance, marrow and worth of the whole word,
and all the works of God, the most excellent glory of all persons and things in
the world.

1. Survey the Word of God from end to end, and you shall find that there is
nothing of excellency but what is derived from, or reduced unto Christ; he is
called by one verbum abbreviatum, the contracted Word, into which all words are
reduced, as the rivers into the Sea; from this word they came, unto this word
they tend, and within this word they are all contained. It Is observed by
Jerome, that the sum of all knowledge is Divinity, the sum of all Divinity is
the Scripture; for that is sufficient to make the man of God perfect, 2 Timothy
3.16, 17 and every Christian wise unto Salvation. The sum of the Scripture is
the Gospel, for that is the power of God for the salvation of them that
believe, Romans 1.16. and the sum of the Gospel is Christ. For these things ( i.
e. the Gospel) were written that you might believe, that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God, and that in believing you might have eternal life, Joh. 20.31.

If you consider the Old Testament, it is nothing else but the vail, shadow and
promise of Christ; observe all the Types, the Tree of Life, the Ark of Noah,
the Ladder of Jacob, the Mercy-seat, the brazen Serpent, and all such Mystical
Types and Typical figures we read of, what are they else but Christ? take away
the substance, and what is the shadow? And not only so, but even all the men of
note, Noah, Isaac, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Sampson, David, Solomon,
Kings, Priests, Prophets, Titles of Dignity, Names of Honor, or whatever else
was ascribed to them, to express their Dignity and Sovereignty, they were only
used ^o express those transcendent Excellencies which these personal Types did
adumbrate, and appear most properly to belong unto this Prince of Peace.

2. So for the New Testament, he is almost expressed, but always intended and
implied in every chapter, verse, line, and word thereof: Take away Christ out
of the Gospel, and there remains nothing but empty words: Take Christ out of
the History, and it is but a mere Fable; and remove him from the Doctrine
thereof, and it falls to the ground, being without a foundation. Take Christ
out of the Precepts, and they are not of force, or a yoke too heavy for us to
bear. Take him out of the Promises and they are not Yea and Amen. The Promises
without Christ, are Wells sealed up, bones without marrow. In the Epistles, if
Christ be absent, there is no Grace, Mercy, or Peace.

2. He is the prime and marrow of all things as well as of words, as Austin
tells us, having gone through all Creatures, and enquired of them for God, each
one of them did answer, I am not he. Sed per ipsum sum, quem quaeris in me, but
I have my being from him, whom thou seek in me. So if we view the whole
Creatition, and note the particular excellencies of every Creature, we should
find that all these are derived from Christ; he is the pearl of the word and of
the world. Is there any thing praiseworthy and excellent (even in our
estimation) which we may not find Christ comprehend the same eminently in
himself as the virtue and perfection of the effect is in the cause. If riches
be desirable and excellent, Christ is rich and Lord of all, in him are
unsearchable riches, treasures of wisdom and knowledge. If you talk of honors,
as riches so honors are his. We behold his glory as of the only begotten Son
of God. When man was at first created, he was created with honor and glory,
Psalm. 8.5. but Christ is better than man in his primitive purity and original
splendor, not men only but Angels also worship him, Heb. 1.6. Philip. 2.9. God
has highly exalted him; he says not (...), God has highted him, but has
(...), over-highted or super-exalted him, and has given him (...), a name
above all names, that is real honor above all names, all expressions, and
above all thoughts, and above all excellencies, not only in this world, but in
the world to come. O how excellent is his name in all the earth, Psalm. 8.1.

If there be any worth in pleasures, as many conceive, here then is an object
altogether lovely and delightful; here is beauty to delight the eye, sweetest
music in his voice to ravish the ear, and that which pleases all the senses of
the inward man.

Another esteemed excellency is Wisdom, which Solomon says exceeds folly, as
far as light exceeds darkness, Eccles 2.13. Now herein does the excellency of
Christ chiefly appear, for he was filled with wisdom, Luke 2.40. In him were
hid treasures of wisdom, Col. 2.3. He is the Wisdom of God, and says, Counsel
is mine, and sound wisdom, I am understanding.

In a word; there is one excellency more, and but one in this world, far
transcending all these, that is, Grace, for that makes a man excellent, Psalm.
16.2, The righteous is more excellent, more honorable than his neighbor,
Prove. 12.26. and procures a name better than of sons and daughters, even an
everlasting name that cannot be cut off, Isa. 56.5. But the grace of any
Christian, is but as the drop to the Ocean, in regard of the grace of Christ,
who is full of grace and truth, John 1.14. Grace is poured into his lips, Psalm.
45.2. yea such uncreated grace has no one.

Christ is better than health, than wealth, than peace, than pleasure, than
wisdom or grace: Christ made ours by his Fathers gift and goodness, has all
the sweetness, comfort, and happiness of all these in him, and infinitely more,
All these are but streams that lead us to the fountain, but beams that guide
our eyes to that Father of lights, to that Son of righteousness, God
reconciled, God incarnate.

3. Christ is the first and chiefest of all persons which raises him one degree
higher in his superlative excellency. It Is reported of Apelles, that at his
drawing of his rare pictures of Venus (among the Heathens styled the Goddess of
beauty) that he assembled together the most beautiful Women of the Island of
Coos, comprehending in that his own work, their divided perfections: so to
conclude this Encomium of Christ, I shall collect the Eminencies of all things,
and persons, and beings, and show that he is the chiefest of all chieftains,
the choicest of all choice persons, in Heaven and Earth, God, Angels, and Men;
of gods so called, he is the chiefest, nay he stands alone, he is the only true
and wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17. Of Angels he is the chief, the Angel of the Lords
substantial presence, Isa. 63.9. he is the Archangel, 1 These. 4.16. the Prince
an^ Head of those glorious spirits, Col. 2.10. the head of all principalities
and powers: Of men, he is the prince and choicest, the chiefest of ten
thousand, the standard bearer among the armies of Angels and men, the choice of
the flock, the flower, the rose, the glory of all the children of men, yea, he
contains all their excellencies; whereof some had one excellency, some another,
he has all. Abraham was excellent in his faith, Moses in his choice, Job in
his patience, David in his sincerity, having a heart like Gods heart; but
Christ has all eminency of grace in one; some are gods, but must dye like men:
Christ is the Prince of life that never dies; some are wise, but he is wisdom
it self; some are strong, but he is most mighty; some are fair, but Christ is
fairer than the Sons of men.

Among relations he is the chief, among shepherds, he is the chief shepherd of
our souls, 1 Pet. 5.4. the good shepherd, John 10.11. Among Sons, he is the
first-begotten Son, Heb. 1.6. the firstborn of every creature, Col. 1.15. the
firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8 29. still he has the pre-eminence.

Among Prophets, Priest and Kings, he is the most excellent, and far transcends
all others; he is in every respect absolutely perfect; and a superlatively
excellent Savior, so that there is none such, no Savior besides him; this is
the person whom you undervalue and make light of.

3. By refusing this gift of God, you do exceedingly gratify Satan, the great
enemy of your souls. If a man had conference with the Prince of Darkness, and
should make this motion to him, wherein he might most serve and gratify him; I
am confident it would be his only wish to such a soul, above any thing in the
world, that he would keep at distance from Christ, neither come near Him, nor
his Ordinances, have nothing to do with him. Now will any be so stupid as to
gratify his greatest adversary to his own unspeakable prejudice? Is it not
horrible indignity to Christ, monstrous cruelty to the soul to refuse Christ,
who has done and suffered so much for him, and to be led by Satan captive and
blindfold into misery? to slight Christ's sweet invitations; and yield to Satan's
malicious temptations? Satan is that strong man that has power over all men in
nature, he keeps his goods in peace in the palace of our hearts, and there
sports himself in carrying on the design of the souls ruin; sometimes by
policy, sometimes by force, he keeps possession, Luke 11.21, 22. And wherein
can a man more designedly gratify Satan, further his wicked designs, and
establish his kingdom, yea enlarge his dominion, than by siding with him
against Christ, who besieges the soul with Ordinances and Providence? for
Satan knows well enough, that Christ's rise will be his fall; Christ's scepter
will be his destruction; that when Christ a stronger than he comes, he will
overcome him, and take from him all his armor wherein he trusted, pull down
his strong holds, divide the spoils, and deliver poor captive man out of prison
and slavery. O then do not so much gratify Satan.

4. If you refuse Jesus Christ offered in the Gospel, you are guilty of the
greatest sin and folly that can be. Though for most part, men think not so of
it, and accordingly lay it not to heart, yet it is the greatest sin, the sin of
sins, and in some sort the only sin of the world. Men commonly think murder,
adultery, theft, drunkenness to be very heinous sins, and so indeed they be,
but unbelief far worse; for it is the mother of these, and all other evils.
Take all the sins that ever were committed against any of Gods just laws, and
none is like to this, no greater sin can be laid to ones charge than to refuse
wilfully, and trample under foot the Son of God. Christ promises to send his
Spirit, the Comforter into the world, and he shall convince the world of sin,
because they believe not on him, Joh. 16.9. he means this sin alone (says
Austin) as if not believing in the Son of God were the only sin: Indeed it is
the main and master-sin. O beloved, little do you think, who daily sit under
the Ministry, unwrought on by the Word of God, what a grievous and fearful sin
you commit, and dreadful guilt you carry home with you, in neglecting from day
to day so great Salvation, in forsaking your own mercy, and in judging your
selves unworthy of everlasting life, when Jesus Christ this most precious gift
is offered to you, by choosing rather to cleave to a lust, than to Christ
blessed for ever; and rather to wallow in the mire and mud of earthly riches
and swinish pleasures, than to receive this most pleasant and excellent gift;
rather to cast away your time in idleness, pride, worldliness and sensuality,
than in seeking after this transcendent favor; rather make choice of a life
made up of drunkenness, whoredoms, railing at godliness.

The greatness of this sin appears in this, that it is most directly and
diametrically opposite to the most fundamental Doctrine and command of the
Gospel; the primary and principal command of Christ, is to believe in Jesus
Christ, 1 Ioh. 3.23. When the Jailer being sadly convinced, cried out to the
Apostles, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? they answered him, Act. 16.31*
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved: Not to believe, is
accounted by God notorious disobedience, and horrid gain saying, Romans 10. ult.
In the Law, God strictly requires obedience to his just precepts, Do this and
live; by doing these things thou shall save thy self from hell; but no man
living being able to purchase Heaven at this rate, by Christ he takes off this
yoke, so that if they will but believe on his Son, they shall not be condemned
by the Law: and thus he treats men: Since thou can not fully obey my Law, nor
satisfy my Justice, I Will give thee my Son, who shall do all for thee, through
whose perfect obedience thy imperfections may be remitted and healed, only thou
must believe in him; and if thou will do but this one thing for thy soul, all
thy sins shall be pardoned, thou shall be received into favor, adopted for my
Son; and in thy obedience to the rest of my commands, I Will accept the will for
the deed; though thou can not perform such perfect obedience as thou
should, yet if thou labor to do what thou can, I Will help thee with
strength from Heaven, bear with unallowed infirmities, etc.

It Is a sin against light and much knowledge, a sin against love and special
mercies, it binds all a man's other sins upon him, it puts and keeps him under
the guilt of all his sins: Infidelitate manente maneat peccatum omne; he that
lives in unbelief dies in his sins; it makes a man's actions though moral, and
spiritual, be sinful, be a man never so holy and devout, do or suffer never so
much, none of these, nor all, nor whatever can be named or imagined, God will
not be pleased with them; for without faith it is impossible to please God; yea,
it is a sin that defiles all a man's outward enjoyments, and temporal good
things. To them that are unbelieving, nothing is pure, wife, children, house:
In a word, it is the height and perfection of madness to refuse Christ; Quis
nisi mentis inops, etc. Heaven and earth may be astonished, Angels and all
Creatures may justly stand amazed at this prodigious sottishness, and monstrous
madness.

5. If you refuse Christ, you utterly undo your own souls for ever; if ye miss
of this gift, ye must expect nothing but misery here, and eternal damnation
hereafter: For there is no name under heaven, by which you can be saved.
Whatever your formalities be, how fair soever ye carry in the eye of the world,
let your profession be never so plausible, it is Christ alone that can save you.
If you will accept of the Lord Jesus Christ, you are in the suburbs of Heaven,
there is but a thin wall between you and the land of Praises, ye are within an
hours sailing of the shore of the new Canaan; when death digs a little hole in
the wall, and takes down the sails, you have no more to do, but set your foot
down in the fairest of created Paradises; but if you will not accept of Christ,
let me tell you the truth, you are in the suburbs of Hell, there is but the
cutting of a small thread, and you have your portion with hypocrites and
unbelievers.

1. By refusing Christ, you do no less than put and fix your selves in the
state of condemnation. Let not this be accounted as a harsh censure of my own
head, for it is the Scipture, Ioh. 3.18. He that believes on him, is not
condemned: but he that believes not, is condemned already: and the reason this
sentence is past upon such, is because they believe not on the only begotten
Son of God, and the wrath of God abides on them, Ioh. 3.36. We are all lost in
Adam, and if it be the office of Christ to save them that are lost, they do
worthily abide in death who refuse him and his Salvation.

2. This sin of refusing Christ, this very sin will e're long bring you
actually into the place of condemnation, whence there is no return. What shall
we be damned? No, far be it from me to pronounce the sentence of condemnation
upon the worst of men; but this you may be assured of, that if you live and die
without Christ, your portion will be in utter and everlasting darkness, 2 These.
2.12. That they all might be damned that believed not the truth, etc. Jesus
Christ will be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9.
and take your lot with them, Rev. 21.8. The unbelieving shall have their
portion in the lake of fire and brimstone, the very worst place in Hell, Luke
12.48.

To say nothing of Temporal Judgments, answer me this question, Isa. 33.14. Who
among you can dwell with everlasting burnings?

The time will come, when you shall remember what the Minister said, O how fain
would he have had me to escape these torments, how earnestly did he entreat me!
With what love and tender compassion did he beseech me! how did his bowels earn
over me! yet I did but make a jest of it, and hardened my heart against all!
how glad would he have been after all his studies, prayers, and pains, if he
could have persuaded me cordially to accept Christ, he would have thought
himself well recompensed for all his labors, he would have laid his hands
under my feet, and have fallen down on his knees to beg of me obedience to his
message; and all the entreaties of Ministers are the entreatings of God. O how
long did he wait! how freely did he offer! how lovingly did he invite! how
importunately did he solicit! how long did Christ stand knocking at my door,
crying, open to me, sinner: why sinner, are thy lusts and pleasures better than
me? is earth better than heaven? why then do thou delay or deny? will thou
not be made clean, when shall it once be? O that thou would hearken to my
voice, and obey my Gospel! O that they were wise! As one that is loath to take
a denial, would not be repulsed. O how would he have gathered thee, and thou
would not! shall the God of heaven and earth follow thee in vain from one
place to another? Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die? I would not have you
perish. If you go on with your refusal of Christ, you may expect that the
hellish gnawing of conscience for this one sin, will hold scales with all the
united horror of all the rest; you will then cry out, O fools and idiots that
we were, when we refused so excellent a gift, so blessed a Savior! we could
then see no beauty in him, nor comeliness wherefore we should desire him; but
now how fair and glorious is he, whom we see upon the white Throne! how
desirable is his Sacred Majesty! O how amiable is his countenance! how does he
shine with incomparable splendour, above the brightness of ten thousand Suns?
What wrong have we done our own souls, that we have deprived of so beautiful
and delightful an object, as this most sweet and glorious Savior? If now we
had time and leave to make our choice, we would prefer the enjoyment of him,
(whom we once contemned) before ten thousand worlds. But alas we cannot, the
term of mercy is expired, and the time of justice, wrath, and vengeance, so
much spoken of by our faithful Pastors, is now come, and now we must be judged
to the easeless, endless, and ^emediless torments of the infernal pit. And all
our pleasures and delights are gone; O that we had never been born; O that we
had been so happy as our horses or swine, which die but once, and fell no more
pain for ever; whereas we must be ever dying, and never free from pain and
misery. Woe, woe, woe unto us, that ever we were born to see this day, and to die
this death, and to live this life, which will be a never dying death. We that
accounted such an one a precise fool, for his care to receive and improve this
gift of God, shall groan out this sad complaint, in the anguish of our spirits:
This was he whom we had sometimes in derision, and a Proverb of reproach; we
fools counted his life madness, and his end to be without honor: now he is
numbered among the Children of God, and his lot is among the Saints. Therefore
we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness has not
shined upon us; and as for the way of the Lord we have not known it. What has
pride profited us? or what good have riches with our vanity brought us? all
these things are passed by as a shadow, and as a Post that hasts away. O with
what infinite horror and restless anguish, will this conceit rent the heart in
pieces, and gnaw up the conscience, when he considers in hell, that he has
lost heaven for a lust, and Christ for a mere shadow! whereas he might at every
Sermon, had even the Son of God his own for the very taking, and with him for
ever unspeakable joy and glory; yet then neglecting so great Salvation, must
now be crying out therefore against himself, as the most raging Bedlam that
ever breathed, lie down in unquenchable flames, without remedy, ease or end.

Whereas all those that now accept of Christ, shall while they live, when they
die, and for ever cry out with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 9.15. Thanks be to God for
his unspeakable gift.

2. Second Branch of Instruction and Exhortation, Such as have received this
gift of God must make it their care and business to retain and keep him. Buy
the truth but sell it not, Prove. 23.23. Remember how thou have received, and
hold fast, Rev. 3.3. This was the exemplary wisdom and care of the Church,
Cant. 3.4. I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into
my mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me. She came by
him hardly, and therefore she will not part with him lightly; it cost her dear
to find him, she sought him up and down with tears and pains, and returns with
many a non inventus, yet at last got him with much hazard and danger, much loss
and suffering, and therefore having found him whom her soul loved, she would by
no means part with him, nor leave him for the greatest advantages in the world;
she knew well that nothing under heaven could countervail the loss of him,
nothing in this wide universe, though never so lovely and desirable, could be
equivalent to such a jewel, all the treasures upon earth could not bear
proportion to him, nor make reparation for the loss of him. I know the true
Believer shall never lose Christ, because Christ will never suffer him to be
lost; but he may do that which may tend to the losing of him, though through
grace he shall not be actually lo^t; and he may do that which may deprive him
utterly of the sense, evidence and comfort of this gift, though his propriety
in it remain firm and sure. It Is true, a Saint shall never be left so to
himself, or his sin, as that sin shall bereave him of his jewel, his Christ,
but may and often does steal away the key of his cabinet, his evidence and
assurance, Cant. 5.5, 6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn
himself and was gone. Thus you see Christ sometimes withdraws himself from them
that dearly love and earnestly desire him; for as he is said (when pleased, to
gratify his people with his grace and assistance, strength and deliverance) to
come out of heaven his dwelling place, Isa 26. ult. and 64.1. So he is said to
return thither, when he forbears to put forth and exercise his grace, and to
show his mercy and loving kindness to them, Hos. 5. ult. Isa. 18.4. he is said
to hide his face in regard of his special grace and love, and in regard of
intercourse and communion with his Church, not totally, but in part; not
finally and for ever, but for a moment; a small moment, he shortens his hand in
his wonted operations, and cease to be so intimate and familiar with his
servants, and seems to be a stranger to them and their condition, and this he
does for diverse good reasons and considerations.

1. Christ leaves them sometimes, because they will not open to him, when he
knocks at the door of their hearts, either they are not at leisure, or busied
about other matters and employments, or are too much settled upon their lees;
sloth and security has seized upon them, Cant. 5.2, 3, 4.

2. He does it for trial, that he may make an experiment of his Churches love
to him, and faithfulness in his service; to see whether his people can abide to
be without him, or will serve and follow him, frowning as well as smileing. As
a Father may leave his dear Child, and stand behind the door, to see what it
will do: So God exercised Job, David, Heman, Asaph, and others; the Wife is
tried in the long absence of her Husband.

3. To raise and quicken them more to love and desire him; for though the
absence of fuel does diminish the fire, yet commonly the absence of Lovers does
increase and heighten love, and makes it more impatient and restless, Cant.
5.8. This made the Spouse sick of love, and her soul failed, she could not bear
it. Isa. 26.9, With my soul have I desired thee in the night.

4. To cure formality in believers, and to remove all trusting to, resting in,
or relying on any thing besides himself, and that the soul may not be satisfied
with any thing below himself: As a Father sometimes lets go his hold, that the
Child may see his dependence upon him.

The Children of Israel were exceedingly formalized in their Devotion, they
only looked at the external Sacrifices, but did not frame their doings to turn
unto God, Hos. 5 6. Therefore he takes this course with them, They shall go
with their flocks, and with their herds to seek the Lord, but they shall not
find him: He has withdrawn himself from them, i. e. they shall go after their
accustomed manner of sacrifices; but God hides himself, because he will bring
them off their formality and security. So if we trust in outward Ordinances,
and lay too much stress upon them, the time may come when we shall use them,
and seek God in them, and not find him, because of formality.

5. That he may teach them to live by faith, not to be too much dejected, but
believe that he is near to them, but behind the Wall, Cant. 2.8, 9. He is kept
off from the soul by the wall of sense and carnal reason, that the soul may
improve his faith in looking over this wall, as Job did, Job 19.25, 26, I know
that my redeemer lives, etc. Isa. 50.10, He will come and will not tarry.

6* That his presence may be more esteemed and valued when re-injoyed; there is
often a remisness and abatement in love to Christ, but when he is lost and
found again, we shall watch better over our selves, and set a higher price on
him than before: we have need sometimes to be taught the worth of mercies by
the want of them (post frigora dulcior ignis) when we know what it is to want
his presence, we learn to esteem it. ( Post tempestatem dulcior securitas) How
sweet is a calm after a storm! Christ's favorable Aspect, is more sweet and
acceptable when the sunshine thereof begins to break forth again, after some
black and bitter tempest of desertion. Now since there is some danger of losing
Christ in these respects, we had need look to our selves, and do all we can to
retain him with us for our help: I shall lay down some motives, and then
directions, as in the first branch.

1. To persuade us to this, I shall use no other arguments or motives, but only
to tell you what Christ is to the soul, and so it may see what it deprives it
self of by losing him.

1. Keep him, for he is thy life; Whosoever finds him, finds life, Prove. 8.35,
and 3.18, She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and happy is
every one that retains her; speaking of wisdom, under which notion Christ is
commended to us. So Prove. 4.13. Take fast hold of instruction, let her not go,
keep her, for she is thy life. He says, I am thy life, and the length of thy
days, with him is the fountain of life; he is the only wellspring of life, and
all blessedness. How sweet is life! skin for skin, and all that a man has will
he give for his life, he will part with any thing, every thing rather than life.
When many of Christ's followers forsook, and walked no more with him; Will ye
also forsake me, said he to his Apostles? Peter answered for himself and the
rest, Lord, whither shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life, Joh.
6.68. q. d. Lord if we leave thee, we leave our life and all our comfort, we
forsake our own mercy, and judge our selves unworthy of everlasting life; had we
no other reason, it is motive enough to stay with thee and keep close with thee,
to consider that our lives are hid in thee, eternal life, and consequently all
that is dear to us, the quintessence of all happiness is with thee.

2. Keep him for he is thy light; how sad and miserable is it to walk in
darkness? if you let Christ go, you eclipse your own light; it is night when
Christ is gone, who is the only Sun of Righteousness, his life is the light of
men, Ioh. 14.5, 9. he says of himself, Ioh. 8.12. I am the light of the world,
he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life, that lights men to heaven, to eternal light and life.

In the dark thou art in danger of mistaking thy friend for thy foe, and thy
foe for thy friend. Job took God for his enemy in his dark and dismal state,
and Satan may transform himself into an Angel of light, and woefully deceive
thee.

Besides, he that walks in darkness is in danger of two evils: 1. Of falling
into sin, into some dirty distemper, lust, or other; if a man walks in darkness
without a guide, he knows not whether he goes, Ioh. 12.35. he is apt to stumble
and fall. 2. Of declining into error, no better way to escape wandering into
ways of error, and bypath of Heresy, than to keep close to Christ, holding
fast the head, Col 2.19. O then keep Christ.

3. He is thy rock and refuge, all thy safety is in him, the Lord is a sun and
a shield, Psalm. 84. and will thou in the open field in the midst of thy mortal
enemies, strip thy self of thy best armor, and leave thy self naked and
exposed, by letting go Christ, who is thy buckler and defense, Whose name is a
strong tower, unto which the righteous flee and are safe?

O do not part with thy Shield whatever comes, that was it Soldiers in old time
stuck to above all, and would lose their life rather than it. When Satan, the
Flesh and the World, set upon thee, all armed foes, will thou not take unto
thee, and keep this armor of God? Psalm. 27.5, In the time of trouble he shall
hide thee in his Pavilion, and in the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide
thee; he shall set thee up upon a Rock: enter into this Rock, and hide thy self
in the clefts of this Rock, he will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is
stayed on him, because he trusts in him; the Lord Jehovah is the Rock of
ages, Isa. 26.3, 4.

4. He is thy strength, the sap and principle of activity and fruitfulness;
without him thou can bear no fruit, do nothing* Ioh. 15.4, 5, For as the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye,
except ye abide in me, and I in you: Without me you can do nothing that is
spiritually good and acceptable to God. I am like a green fir tree, from me is
thy fruit found, Hos. 14.8. While Christ is in the Soul, it is exceeding
active, vigorous and nimble, kept above sloth and sluggishness; but when he
withdraws himself, how dull and unactive is the soul, and barren, unprofitable!
it is Winter with it. He is thy strength, how weak and poor is the soul without
Christ! the smallest corruption i^ too hard for, and will over wrestle the
strongest Christians without Christ; he is the strength of Israel, 1 Samuel
15.29. We are without strength, Romans 5.6, but in the Lord have I righteousness
and strength, Isa. 45.^4. Christ is the strength of his heart, and his portion
for ever, Psalm. 73.25 and therefore he should say with the Psalmist, Whom have
I in heaven but thee, etc. Will you that have such great work to do, so heavy
burdens to bear, let go your strength?

5. He is thy glory and excellency; the beauty of a Christian is in Christ; he
defaceth and debaseth himself, if he let go Christ. Isa. 60.19, The Lord shall
be unto thee an everlasting light; and thy God, thy glory. When a man's glory is
gone, what remains? he has nothing but what he is ashamed of. Prove. 4.7, 8, 9,
Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom; and withal thy getting,
get understanding. Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee; love her, and
she shall keep thee; exalt her, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring
thee to honor when thou do embrace her, she shall give to thine head an
ornament of grace: A crown of glory she shall deliver to thee. So that when
Christ is gone, the Crown of our head is fallen; he is our garment, not only
for ornament but use, Romans 13. ult. Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Isa. 61.10,
he is a garment of salvation, and robe of righteousness.

6. He is thy meat, thy food, therefore keep him, Ioh. 6.35, 51, I am the bread
of life, he that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me
shall never thirst. A body may be better without meat, than a sensible
sanctified soul without Christ. A dead body may be long enough without, but a
living body cannot endure long without sustenance: if thou be a living Soul, O
never part with thy meat, but eat that which is good, and let thy soul delight
it self in fatness. No sooner does a man cease from feeding, but he immediately
declines and dies. If you could imagine a Believer broken off from Christ, and
drawing no nourishment from him for one moment, what a withering dying person
would he be? O Si^s, the life, strength, fruitfulness, and comfort, yea, your
all is in Christ, and secured by your holding him; if that fail all would fail.

7. He is thy heat; as the Sun is for the heat, as well as for the light of the
world: What a cold frozen world would it be were it not for the Sun? what a
cold season does its further distance from us cause in our Horizon? but the
nearer the Sun is to us, the greater the heat, as in Summer: if thy soul have
not Christ to warm thee, thou will be starved to death. If two lie together,
then they have heat; but how can one be warm alone, Eccles. 4. -- 11? How can
thy soul be warm, if Christ be departed from thee? O what a chilling coldness
comes on the Soul, when Christ goes away! what aguish fits and starving
coldness seizes on the whole Soul, and every grace, when this Sun draws in its
beams and influences! at the best there will be a Laodicean lukewarmness.

8. Christ is thy health, and one that understands himself, will let go any
thing rather than health; for that is the marrow and sweetness of all other
comforts of life. Wisdom is health or medicine to all flesh, Prove. 4.22, and
3.8, it shall be health to thy Navel, and marrow to thy Bones. It is the
watering, moistness, and fatness of the Soul; Christ is as necessary for health
to the Soul that is sick and wounded, as Medicine for the sick, and a Plaster
for the wounded body; the Soul cannot be sound without him. So long as you
preserve him, you will be strong and sound; strong to do, and strong to suffer;
but if yo^ lose him, you will be no better than Sampson, when his strength was
departed from him, Judge. 16.19. What is cutting off the hair to divulsion and
separation from your head?

9. He is thy heritage; so the Church accounted him, Lam. 3.24, The Lord is my
portion says my soul: not only her tongue, but her very heart takes him and
speaks him her heritage; and David, The Lord is my portion, and my inheritance.
The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage,
Psalm. 16.5, 6 Say with Naboth, God forbid that I should give away the
inheritance of my Fathers. That was only for life, this is everlasting; a never
fading, ever-flourishing inheritance: that subject to many hazards, fire,
inundation, robbery, blasting, and many casualties, yea, to utter loss, as the
end declared; but this is above all such danger and detriment. O be not so
foolish and sottish, as to part with this for all the world.

10. He is thy happiness; keep him for thy chief good: that that can alone give
contentment to thy immortal Soul, is bound up in him. Happy is every one that
retains him, Prove. 3.18. O terque quaterque beati, etc. Infinitely and for
ever blessed, that receive and retain Jesus Christ, Prove. 8. ult. Prove. 3.3.
Happy is the man that finds wisdom; he is thy all, and will thou part with
all at once? Thou art like to have a sad time of it; when Christ goes, farewell
joy, and peace, and comfort, and all that is good.

2. For direction, 1 st. In what manner,

2 d. By what means, may the Soul keep Christ.

First, For the manner of holding and keeping this gift: 1. He must be kept in
our Heads; though that is not enough: a full and distinct understanding of him
is well; but a knowledge, a mere notion in the brain, of Christ, is but a sorry
keeping; you must provide Christ a better place to lodge in, or he will not
tarry with you. Must Christ be in the head, when Sin and Satan is in the heart?
If Christ have no room in thee but the head, he is indeed no where. 2. In our
Mouths; we must confess with the mouth, yet that neither is sufficient; it is
too open a room, and leaking a vessel to hold this gift in; to speak and talk
of Christ, and take his blessed name into our lips, when our hearts are far
from him, and lives deny him, is but a poor keeping of Christ; if there be
nothing left of Christ but what hangs on the lips, he is indeed departed
already. 3. Keep him we must in our Houses and Societies; woe unto that place
when Christ departs from them, when he removes his Candlesticks out of their
place, and takes away his holy Ordinances; but alas! to have Christ in public
ordinances, and not in our hearts, will not serve the turn. 4. We must keep him
in our Hearts; not in the hall of the senses, but in the closet of the heart;
let him dwell and reign in our understanding, will, affections and memory;
think on him continually, love him dearly, delight in him at all times. As
Artemesia did ever carry in her mind her dear deceased Husband Mauseolus,
mingling her very drink with his ashes; so let us bear Christ about with us in
the vessels of our hearts, mingling our meat, drink, words and works with his
sweetest remembrance: So the Spouse did, Cant. 3.4. I would not let him go,
until I had brought him into my mothers house; and the chamber of her that
conceived me. Which place according to the consent of best Expositors, is to be
understood, either of the Church of God, in her public Congregations, which is
the Mother of us all; or else of the sanctified Heart and Conscience, which is
the dewlling place of Christ, of which he has said, Here will I rest, and I
will dwell in the heart of the contrite, Isa. 57.15, and there we should lay
him up by Faith: If the head be for the world, yet let Christ have the heart.
5. Keep him, not only by way of a holy and perpetual recordation of him in our
minds and hearts; but also by a constant and continued care, and unwearied
diligence, to preserve and enjoy the comfortableness and feeling of his
gracious presence in your own Souls; imitating herein the fair Spouse, who when
she had found him, would by no means let him go; but compelled him by a
grateful violence to stay with her: this was one end why he hid himself for
some time from her. Prius non inveniendus quaeritur, ut post inventus strictius
teneatur. Thus Jacob held him by force, and wrestled hard for his blessing, and
would not let him go till he had blessed him; but when he had obtained that, he
suffered him to depart: but we should never leave him, no not when he has
blessed us, as prizing him more than any thing he can bestow. Nolo
benedictionem tuam sed te, so must we prize more his person, than his blessings.


2. The way and means to keep him:

1. Leave all for him, retire from the world to enjoy him; say of all other
things, when thou have found Jesus of Nazareth, let these go their way. Make
him a bed in thy Soul whereon he may rest, that is, sweet-thoughts and
meditations on him, and compl^cency in him; Cant. 3.7, Behold his bed, which is
Solomon's. Solomoni ergo (vel Christo) lectulum facimus (says Gregory) cum a
mundi solicitudinibus omnino cessamus, dum in solo deciderio Christi libenter
pausamus, eique ut nobiscum pauset, cor ab omni terrena cupiditate mundamus.
The beauty and riches of every member of the Church, is resembled to the wealth
and splendour of Solomon's Bed, wherein Christ rests in his love: Be careful to
keep your thoughts (amongst all worldly affairs) free for Christ. Religion (and
so Christ) loves to lie in clean Sheets. Go to them that want Christ's gracious
presence, consult their experiences, and they will tell you, that their worldly
affairs have so distracted their thoughts, that Christ is not there; and as
their worldly cares and riches increased upon them, the further distance has
Christ been from them. Some, while poor and low in the world, have felt much
more of the sweetness of communion with Christ, than when they grew richer and
full of cares. O! who would not be content to take less of the world, that they
might have more of Christ.

2. Never leave him, take heed of withdrawing from Christ, stick close to him,
keep him company, and he will stay with you. As you do with a friend whose stay
you desire, so deal with Christ; be much in his company, in prayer, reading,
hearing, meditating, and all holy duties* be ambitious of more intimate
communion with him; daily increase sweet acquaintance, and humble familiarity
with Christ.

1. Be willing to be much with Christ in Prayer, talking and conferring with
him, as freely, frequently, and familiarly, as the Bride with her Bridegroom,
Cant. 5.1, I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, says Christ; q. d.
It was thy hearty desire, O my dear Spouse, that I should come into this
pleasant Garden; for thou said, Let my beloved come into his garden, (Cant.
4.16.) and now lo here I am, to answer the longing expectation of thy blessed
Soul, which does even pant and thirst after me, who am the health of thy
countenance, and thy God, Psalm. 42.11. My company thou do affect, I see it is
most sweet and pleasant to thee, and my company thou shall have, here I am to
be with thee as thou did pray and desire; I come to eat thy pleasant fruits,
and bring with me the inexpressible comforts of my Spirit, do thou eat and
drink; Yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.

2. Be willing to be with him in reading much and often in the book of God,
where thou may find this precious pearl as in a field; what else (says the
Prince of Anhalt) is the whole Scripture, but the swadling-clothes of the child
Jesus? the Apostle, Col. 3.16. right well terms the word of God the word of
Christ, because he is the matter of the whole, and the contents of all the
Bible; shadowed in the Law, and showed in the Gospel, Vnam vocem habent duo
Testamenta; the word of the Lord contains nothing but the word, which is the
Lord. Austin. How vainly do men look for immediate inspirations, when ordinary
means is afforded; and others forbid the reading of the Scriptures, and call
Pictures and Images Lay men's books?

3. Be willing to be with him in the Communion of Saints, Who are a garden
enclosed, Cant. 4.12. in which Christ does show himself most graciously by
their savoury speeches, and holy conversations, emblematizing and representing
in a proportionable degree that most admirable ravishing fairness and
pleasantness that is in Christ himself! let these then be the excellent ones of
the earth, in whom is all your delight, Psalm. 16.3. Attend his Ordinances,
which are the conduits to convey Christ to us; though others pretend to be
above them, yet keep ye under them if ye would keep Christ; to put the pitcher
above the rock is not the way to take water. O let your fellowship be with the
Father and with the Son.

3. Shake off sloth, ease and security; indulge not your selves, love not your
carnal ease, be not drunken with the pleasures of the flesh, nor surfeit with
the profits of the world, nor intoxicated with pomp and honors; set not your
affections on things below, let not down your watch, be not secure nor
high-minded, Romans 3.3. Cant. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. you have there Christ knocking at
the door of her heart, with importunity, and tender vehemence; for admission,
and he moves and solicites, Open my sister, my spouse, etc. every word an
argument, a talent weight of love; and does Christ, call and knock, and beg at
the door of our souls to enter? O what vile ingratitude is it to shut him out!
Does he solicit and entreat so many ways by his Word and Ordinances, Rod, and
admonitions, and motions of his Spirit, what inexcusable obstinate madness is
it to drive him away? Is any thing so worthy to be harbored there as he? and
is it not an imcomparable honor that he should vouchsafe to come under our
roof? She aggravates her fault because of his importunity. But observe her idle
excuses and vain frivolous pretenses for not opening to him, verse. 3. I have
put off my coat, how shall I put it on? What absurd and sluggish inconveniences
does she plead? making that her apology which should be her shame, in casting
off those garments of holiness, and spiritual duties which should ever adorn
her; and growing weary of her nuptial robes, which she should ever wear: And
the other is like unto it, I have washed my feet how shall I defile them? This
is spoken after the manner of those hot Countries where they used to wash
constantly before they composed themselves to a settled rest, or before they sat
down to eat. By this custom the Church would excuse her somnolency and
negligence, as if there were trouble or danger in rising up to entertain him:
Sad shifts! A Christian should endure more for Christ than a little cold, or
unseasonable diligence. One spark of Hell will burn up all these cloaks and
fair pretenses.

In the fourth verse Christ proceeds further, since knocking would not serve,
outward means and moral arguments will not prevail, he works inwardly and
effectually, by the powerful visitations and motions of the Spirit, which is
called the finger, Mat. 12.28. compared with Luke 11.20. Then her bowels were
moved in her, or for him. Here Is the great effect of spiritual visits of
Christ, and the close and lively workings of his Spirit in the heart; then she
arose and her hand^ dropped with myrrh; active and vigorous endeavors should
accompany inward motives and suggestions of grace; the feet should make haste,
and the hands be diligent and operative, for this is to oil the lock, and make
the soul dextrous and prompt to all duties of holiness.

Verse. 6. You have the effect of her sloth: I opened to my beloved, but my
beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone: or he was gone, he was gone; which
duplication is more passionate, and denotes the expedition and certainty of his
absence, for which she is much troubled, and like a sad widow, wrings her
hands, and cries out he is gone, etc. my soul failed when he spoke, or melted,
or went out of me, for his words which he had used to me; I was exanimated and
astonished. O take heed of sloth.

4. Hold fast the word of truth, keep the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience, and then you keep Christ. Take heed therefore of all Opinions that
are opposite and destructive to the truths of Christ, he will not lodge where
his truth is thrust out by errors. What was it that brought ruin to the
ancient Churches of Greece, but this? they gave way to fond opinions, some to
Jewish fables, some to the Doctrine o^ Balaam, and of Devils* and of the
Nicholaitans, as you read in the second or third Chapter of Revelation, and
Ecclesiastical History. Preserve every truth of Christ according to its moment
and weight; the dust of Gold is precious; it is dangerous to be careless in the
lesser truths: Better heaven and earth should be blended together (says
Luther) than one dust of Gods Truth should perish. If you hearken to Satan and
Seducers, this will be a little one, and that shall be a little one, till you
have little'd away all the principles of faith. Count not those small things
(as the men of the world do) for which the children of God have ventured their
all. Martyrs were not so prodigal of their lives, but they knew what they did
when they durst not give place for a moment. O beware of error, if you would
keep Christ; let men be in the eyes of the world, in righteousness Saints, in
holiness Angels, in zeal like Christ himself: If damnable errors be the ground
of their Catechisms, and their opinions be heretical, they cannot keep Christ
amongst them, receive and retain his faithful Ministers and Ambassadors: He
that receives them receives me, and he that despises them despises me,
says Christ, Mat. 10.40 Luke 10.16. Will Christ stay where his servants are
despised and contemned? no, the Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from such,
Mat. 22.43. he takes it as done to himself, Mat. 25.40.

5. Be humble and fruitful, these may well be joined together; for humble souls
like the low valleys watered with the dew of Grace, are most fruitful; he knows
the proud afar off, and resists the proud, but he gives grace to the humble,
and dwells in such souls. Barrenness under Ordinances provokes him to leave
men, as the barren fig tree, Luke 13*6, 7, 8, 9. If it will not bear fruit
after it has been dressed and watered, Christ gives over to plead for its
standing, and removes his presence from it. He delights to walk in a fruitful
garden, Cant. 4. ult. Awake O Northwind, and come thou South, blow upon my
garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth. Let my beloved come into his
garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.

Impart him to others, that is the way to have him; would you have Christ to
stay with you, walk about with him, take him abroad, never come into any
company but leave something of Christ there; while you seek to shut him up in
your selves, you lose him. Say with the Spouse, Cant. 7.10, 11, 12. Come my
beloved, let us go forth into the fields, let us lodge in the villages, etc.

Let your minds and mouths be seasoned with sweet and holy conceptions, and
expressions of him, to the glory of God, and edification of others; then will
Christ walk with you, as he did with those that were communing together of good
things, Luke 24.15. Not bitter in censuring others, not wasting your time in
idle discourses, but use gracious speeches, and savoury communications. In a
word, commit all to him in a way of well doing, and he will not leave his
charge; employ him, and while he has any thing to do for you, he will not
leave his work. Improve and make use of him, and he will abide with you. Beware
of committing (and approving thy self) in the least sin, or the least
compliance with it; say not as Lot of Zoar, Is it not a little one? Sin
approved is that very Delilah that cuts off the locks, and makes the Believer a
prey to every Philistine. Sin is that which separates between us and our God,
the great make-bait between heaven and earth, Isa. 59.2. Sin is that which will
soon grieve away the holy Spirit by which you are sealed to the day of
Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30 O do not sin willingly and knowingly against God, and
do not abate in your constant and fervent performance of duty, for these things
strike at the union betwixt Christ and you, at the untying of the knot which
God has made so fast; and if it should once come to that, what would become of
you? No sooner is the branch broken off the root, but it immediately withers
and dies; For as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in
the Vine, no more can ye except you abide in me. He that abides in me and I in
him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me (...), separated from
me, ye can do nothing. You had need to use all holy means, whereby you may keep
Christ's special presence with your souls; many evils will flow in upon that
soul that lets go Christ, Psalm. 71.11. God has forsaken him, prosecute and
take him; Satan will sift you, sin will foil you, afflictions be too heavy for
you, and you are sure to have worse company when he goes, and you will be apt
to depart from him. Christ is that to thee, that thy soul cannot be without,
thy light, life, health, happiness, thine all. Hell is heaven with Christ, and
heaven is hell without him. Mallem present Christo esse in inferno, quam
absente Christo in coelo, said Luther.

Third Branch of Exhortation, is to make use of this Gift of God. O improve him
to the uttermost; it is not enough to have Christ, unless you use him. Not
enough to have a Well of Salvation, but we must draw water and drink it too, if
we intend a benefit by it, Isa. 12.3. so we must be always drawing, and
drinking, and deriving good from Christ, as the branch makes the best of the
root, and draws from it, as though it would exhaust all its life and virtue. O
that we could carry it so to Christ, even to draw from him, as though we would
draw him dry, if such a thing were possible. We have a saying in Philosophy,
The nearer any thing comes to the first cause, the more abundantly does it
receive from it; as the nearer any thing is to the Sun, the more it
participates of its light and heat. Now you Believers are nigh unto Christ. (
In whom all fullness dwells, Col. 1.19.) You are even in him, and he in you. O
what supplys of Grace should you be fetching from him, upon all occasions! Why
do you not live under more constant, more free and full derivations from him?
why should ye want, or what should you want, who are not only at the fountain,
but in it? It Is not enough for Christians to have faith by which to live, but
they must live by the faith which they have, Gal. 2.20. i. e. They must by
faith draw continual supplys of Grace, comfort and strength from Christ. 'Twas
the looking to the Brazen Serpent that cured them them that were stung; it is
drinking of water that quenches the thirst, and eating the meat that satisfies
the hungry. You then that have received Christ, and do keep him, make use and
improvement of him; for though some gifts are only for laying up and looking
at; yet this is both the excellency of Gods gift, and an encouragement to you
for the performance of this duty; that he is for use, yea all for use and
benefit to us. The great end for which he was given to us, is that we should
make use of him for our own good; God gave his Son to all Believers, that they
by applying him, might have life thorough him, 1 Ioh. 4.9. Ioh. 3.16. As Christ
is a public person, which both adds much to the excellency of this gift, and
gives great encouragement to us to make use of him; It shows his excellency:
Heaven is an excellent thing because public, for it is observed, there is
nothing in heaven, (that is the seat and element of happiness) but it is common
to all, of public use and enjoyment. The inhabitants of that glorious place,
the glorified Saints and Angels, all see the face of him that sits on the
Throne; they all drink of the water of life; all have access to eat of the
apples of the tree of life; there is no forbidden fruit in heaven; all have the
blessing of the immediate presence of the Lamb, and there is neither need of
Sun nor Moon, nor light of candle to any; all equally enjoy Eternity; there is
one lease and term-day to the lowest inhabitant of glory, as to the highest,
and that is Eternity. There is common to all one City, the streets whereof are
transparent gold; that the poorest inhabitants of a place do all walk on
streets of gold of Ophir, is a great commendation of a City. It Is common to
them all, that they shall never sigh, never be sad, never be sick, never be
old, never die; all feel the smell of the fairest rose that ever men or Angels
heard of, or can imagine; the flower, the glory, the joy of Heaven, the Lord
Jesus Christ. All walk in white, and can sin no more; all have eternal life,
fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore. So Christ is a public gift; all
that truly believe may receive him, may keep him, may use him; though there be
many thousands of souls that are receiving from Christ, yet he is full enough
to supply thy wants: though millions of souls employ him in the world, yet he
is at leisure to do thy work too, if thou employ him. All his offices and
benefits are for thy use most properly, he is made, ordained, appointed and
fitted unto us of God, Wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1
Cor. 1.30. Is not a Redeemer of use for captives, a Savior for sinners, a
Priest for offenders, a Prophet for the ignorant, a King to deliver such as are
in bondage, and to conquer and subdue oppressors? What is a Physician for, but
for sick persons? Look on Christ in all his undertakings from first to last, he
is for use: As particularly, 1. Wherefore did Christ empty himself and come
into the world, was it not for sinners, and will such cast him off and pass him
by as useless* Did he rent the heavens, and come down to the earth on purpose
to seek and save lost sinners, Luke 19.20. and 1 Timothy 1.15. and will ye no^ now
make use of him? 2. Wherefore was he made a Sacrifice, and laid down his life,
and spilt his most precious blood, was it not for us? Messiah was to be cut
off, but not for himself, not for Angels, but for us; and did God give his Son
to die for no use and purpose? is not he the good shepherd that gives his life
for his sheep, that they may have life, and have it more abundantly, Ioh.
10.10. He died that by his death he might reconcile us to God, when we were
enemies, Romans 5.10. His blood was* spilt to justify us, Romans 5.9. He was
delivered for our offenses, Romans 4.25. He paid a ransom for us, and made
satisfaction to divine justice in our nature and stead. He gave himself for his
Church, (Ephesians. 5.25, 26.) that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water, by his word, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, that it might be holy and without blemish.
He died that he might kill sin, which would be our death, and crucify the old
man, and to establish a new Covenant, and open a way to Heaven; and shall all
this be in vain? did Christ die as a fool dies? 3. Wherefore did he rise again
from the dead? (was it not for our use and benefit?) Romans 4.25. He rose again
for our justification; that is, God did declare by raising him from the dead,
that he has accepted the death of his Son as of a sufficient ran^ome for our
sins; and he being our true pledge and surety, therefore having satisfied for us
by his death, and returning again to life, gives us a clear evidence and firm
argument, that God was fully reconciled, and life purchased for us; which
assurance we could not have had if Christ our pledge had remained under the
power of death; and shall not we make use of Christ's Resurrection to confirm
our faith, that God is satisfied for us? He rose again that he might quicken us
to a new life, and shall we lie dead rather than improve? 4. What was the end
of Christ's Ascension? was not that also for us, and our use and benefit, that
then he might lead captivity captive, and give gifts to men, Ephesians. 4.8. either
passively, that Christ might take away from Satan, death and hell, and all
their captives, and make them his happy captives; and shall such a Redemption
be refused? Or actively, that he might captivate the world, flesh, devil, death
and hell, which in several kinds had captivated mankind, and shall not we make
use of him, for conquering such enemies? He ascended that he might give his
Spirit, and confer the gifts of the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.16, 17. and that he
might prepare a place for us: And shall these great benefits be neglected? 5.
Once more: Wherefore is he an Advocate, but to plead for us, when we dare not,
cannot come to speak for our selves? What a strange piece of folly were it for
a man that has a friend in the Court who is appointed purposely to plead his
cause, or present his petition, and yet he make no use of him, when the success
of his business concerns his whole estate or life? when we have sinned and
offended God, we have Christ our advocate with the Father to interpose betwixt
the blow of Justice and our guilty souls, and shall this privilege be
neglected? 1 Ioh. 2.1. If we want any thing that God has laid up for us, he is
ready to make intercession for us, who cannot be denied, Heb 7.25. He must
perfume all our Sacrifices, or they are not accepted; offer up all our Prayers,
or they are not answered. What need had we then to make use of him? It is only
by the blood of Christ that we have boldness or liberty to enter into the holy
of holies, Heb. 10.19. And by him is a new and living way consecrated for us
that we may draw near with true hearts and full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.20,
22. And none can come unto the Father but by him. O then make use of this only
name and way, and be often walking in it to God, and his Throne of Grace.


Object. O but I am a wretched sinner, a worthless worm and captive, what have
I to do with such a precious Savior, with so glorious a Lord?

Answ. But pray tell me, wherefore is Christ a Savior? is he not for sinners?
Wherefore is he a Redeemer? is it that he should lie by God as useless? was he
not a Redeemer for Captives? Has not God fitted and dressed Christ (as I may
so speak) for sinners use and advantage? what if all the world should say so,
Christ should be a Savior and save none? a Redeemer and ransom none at all?
an Advocate and plead for none? for all are sinners, all are captives, all are
at enmity with God naturally. We have the more need to use him because such.

Now for Direction how we must make use of Christ: 1. As for the manner. 2. The
particular cases wherein; 1. How or in what manner we may safely and
comfortably make use of Christ.


1. Labor by all means to be acquainted with your spiritual condition; know
the state of your souls; otherwise how can thou make use of Christ suitably?
As suppose thou have a blind eye, or hard heart, how can thou make use of
Christ to open the one, or break the other, as thou ought, if thou know it
not? as the Apostle says in another case, 1 Cor. 11.26. Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat, etc. So here, examine whether thou have received
Christ, whether he be thine, before thou make use of him; does Christ belong to
thee, or not? how can thou without trembling think of him or approach to him,
when thou know not whether he will condemn or acquit thee in judgment? nor
whether he be fet for thy rising, or thy fall? whether he be the cornerstone
and foundation of thy happiness, or a stone of stumbling, to break thee, and
grind thee to powder? Luke 2.34. Mat. 21.44. Take heed of usurping that which
belongs not to thee; do not ignorantly and presumptuously conceit thy self to
improve Christ, before thou have received him; try thy state to the bottom;
hands off, profane impenitent unbelievers, unreformed sinners.

2. Get a due sense of thy necessity and want of Christ; learn to look upon thy
self as altogether insufficient as of thy self to do any thing: What man is
most likely to make use of Christ, what soul is in nearest capacity to improve
him, but he that knows he has nothing, can do nothing without him? Will a man
make use of a Physician that thinks he is not sick? Will any entreat his
neighbors hand to help him to do or lift that which he is persuaded he has
strength enough to do himself? So if thou have any work to do, as suppose to
resist Satan, subdue a corruption, and presumest thou can do it thy self;
thou art incapable of making use of Christ: as a King to suppress rebels, will
not call in foreign aid, etc. So think not your selves to have any sufficiency
to do any thing that is good, 2 Cor. 3.5. Empty your selves of
self-conceitedness; say not with Laodicea, I am rich, and increased with goods;
but know what Christ says, Ioh. 15.5. Non ait, fine me parum, potestis facere,
sed nihil. Aust. Not but little, but just nothing; you cannot think, or speak,
nor act in the least measure agreeable to Gods perfect will, but by Christ:
unbottom your selves wholly, cast away self-confidence, that you may be fit for
the Lord Jesus Christ, who fills the hungry with good things, and sends the
rich away empty, Luke 1.53.

3. Apply Christ to thy self in particular by faith, believing and being verily
persuaded that Christ is able and willing to do for thee^ what thou need,
and what thou desire in all thy exigencies; trust him with thy work and
business; and cast thy self upon him as thou would do on a trusty, able, and
faithful friend: as we are to receive Christ by faith, so by faith we make use
of him; as we apply him for our justification, so we improve him for
continuance of it, and for our Sanctification and Salvation.

1. Thus the servants of God have done and prospered; they applied Christ in
their several needs and exigencies, as Job, David, Thomas and Paul.

2. Thus the Scriptures direct, and persuade us to appropriate Christ to our
needing souls, so we are bid to put on Christ, Romans 13.14. Taste and see that
he is gracious, Psalm. 34.8.

3. Thus Christ himself invites us to apply and improve him: Come eat of my
bread, and drink of my wine which I have mingled, Prove. 9.5. Come partake of
those good things my Father would have me to communicate unto you. Isa. 55.1.
Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, etc. Joh. 7.37. If any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. By these and such like
passages in Scripture, you see what warrant you have to apply Christ, and
persuade your selves, that if you make use of him, he will do for you that
which shall be for your good. Christ's call gives you a warrant to go to him,
that you may possess these privileges in Christ without intrusion or
usurpation, this is that you have to show to Conscience, you do not presume:
Why do thou, vile wretch, go to Christ for such a blessing? how durst thou
that art a sinner look him in the face? lay hold on Christ? make use of Christ?
why? I was invited and called. If it should be asked of the guests that came in
a wedding garment, Friends, how durst ye come hither and approach the
Presence Chamber of the Kings Son? they might answer, We were bidden to the
Wedding, Mat. 22.10, 12. The Scripture does not call us by name, thou John and
Thomas, though the offer be propounded generally, yet when God by his messenger
speaks directly to my case, and I am included, here is a dish for my hungry
soul, intended for me.

2. For particular cases, wherein this gift may be very useful, as a Jesus to
save us from our sins, Matt. 1.21.

1. It is a tried and effectual antidote against sin, that is the greatest evil
in the world. Now improve Christ against the guilt, the stain, the temptation,
the bondage, and the remainder of sin.

1. Against the guilt of sin; would thou have pardon, make use of Christ,
who has shed his blood to satisfy infinite Justice, and purcha^e pardon and
remission of thy sins, if thou believe in him, 1 Pet. 2.24, 25. He has born
them on his body on the Cross, Therefore, as the Apostle, 1 Ioh. 2.12, these
things I write unto you, that ye sin not; and if any man sin, we have an
advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is a propitiation for
our sins, and not for ours only, but the sins of the whole world. If thou have
sinned against God, and guilt pleads against thee, and thou have nothing to
plead for thy self, thou may go to this Advocate, who will intercede for
thee, by virtue of his merits; and so thou may escape the Judgment of God
denounced against thee, Ezekiel. 18 4, The soul that sins it shall dye. O apply
the blood of Christ, and sprinkle that upon thy Conscience, that thy sins may
be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord, he will heal thy bleeding wounds, and drown the cry of thy sins.

2. Against the stain of sin, to purge and cleanse thee; Do thou find thy
Soul stained with original and actual pollutions, so that thou cryest out, I am
unclean, I am unclean, I was born in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me; and innumerable evils committed by me, do leave a macula, or stain
upon me? O then, fly to Christ, who is a fountain set open to wash from sin and
from uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. Who is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins
of the world, John 1.29. Christ was without spot, knew no sin, was born holy,
that he might cover the impurity of thy conception. Has sin like a poison or
leprosy spread over thy whole Soul, and all thy actions are impure, so that
there is no soundness in thee, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores?
Improve Christ in this case, who will wash thee in his blood, Rev. 1.5, bind up
thy wounds, and make thee partaker of the Divine nature; as 2 Pet. 1.4. Though
thy sins be as scarlet, he will make thee white as snow. If the blood of bulls
and goats, sprinkling the unclean, sanctified to the purifying of the flesh;
how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit,
offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works, to
serve the living Lord, Heb. 9.13, 14? O then, look unto Christ and be healed,
tell him (as he did) Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. No Soap, nor
Nitre can purge it: the general deluge swept away sinners, but could not wash
away one sin.

3. Against the bondage of sin; every one is by nature a bondslave to
corruption: Now Christ was sent to Preach, as well as purchase deliverance for
captives, and to open the Prison to them that are bound, Isa. 61.1, 2. If a
number of men were taken captives by the Turks, and made Gally-^laves; suppose
some rich Merchant should lay down a vast sum of Money to purchase their
liberty; or a great Prince make way by the Sword for their escape, or give some
Prisoners in exchange for them; and should this dear-bought liberty be
proclaimed to all in general, That whoever will apply themselves to him, should
be free from bondage; How deservedly may those lie and dye in Chains, that will
not accept and make use of those easy terms? If thou cry out, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me, etc? Christ alone, that Son will make you
free, Ioh. 8.32, 33, 34. It Is not a feigned, or fancied, but a real liberty,
free indeed.

4. Against the danger of sin; Art thou afraid of such a corruption? art thou
annoyed with such a temptation, and ready to say, ah, I shall one day perish by
the hand of such a sin? Then to prevent falling into sin, and antidote thee
against the solicitations of it, with Paul run to Christ, and beseech the Lord
once and again, till thou have that answer, My grace is sufficient for thee, 2
Cor. 12.8, 9. When sin comes as a Potiphars Wife, and offers thee deadly Poison
in a golden Cup, let Faith answer, I would consent, but that I am a Christian;
how can I do this great wickedness and sin against my Christ? I cannot gratify
this or that lust, but I must be disloyal to my Lord Christ. When ever
temptations assault, and an host incamp against thee, have to the Captain of
thy Salvation, as David, at What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee, Psalm.
56.3.

5. Against the whole body of sin, make use of Christ, who came to destroy the
works of the Devil: Would thou have sin mortified and killed, and the old man
crucified, nail him to the Cross of Christ, that by virtue of his death, sin
may receive its deaths wound; no corruptions can stand before Christ's Cross.
Romans 6.8, Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body
of sin might be destroyed.

1. Art thou troubled and molested with passion, and transported with anger?
nothing so effectual to subdue and bridle that short madness, as Christ. Nihil
ita irae impetum cohibet, sicut Jesus: It Is the property of contraries to expel
one another. Christ is meekness and love.

2. Does Pride, that detestable sin, swell thee? art thou proud of wealth,
honor, gifts, friends, etc? Nihil ita superbiae tumorem, sedat sicut Jesus, he
is humble and lowly, Mat. 11.29.

3. Or that diabolical sin of envy? Christ can cure thee of that rotten vice:
Nihil ita livoris culmas; sanat sicut Jesus: Who ever showed more opposition to
it than Christ, who prayed that his Servants might have the same glory with
him, Ioh. 17.22.

4. Or that idolatrous heathenish sin of Covetousness? Christ alone can quench
the insatiable thirst after worldly things. Ioh. 4.14, Whoever drinks of this
water shall never thirst. Nil ita temperat sitim avaritiae sicut Jesus* Thou will trample the Moon under thy feet, and scorn to love this poor
dunghil-world, or be fond of these beautiful vanities, and fairfac'd nothings.

Lastly, Do thou feel in thy Soul the scorching heat of Concupiscence, and
know not how to rid thy self of it? Go to Christ, who will quickly quench
that flame: Nihil ita extinguit libidinis flammam, sicut Jesus. Christ's blood
is an excellent antidote against lust, and will quench, and not curb only, that
inflammation. So we might add many more instances for our mortification, etc.

2. As a Physician to cure all Diseases; Christ, the gift of God, is a most
excellent and sovereign Remedy for all diseases and spiritual indispositions;
whatever the Soul ails, go to Christ, and he can and will help.

1. For darkness and blindness; none better than Christ. Do the eyes of thy
mind wax dim and dark, that thou can not (so well as formerly) see the
soulness of sin, the fairness of Christ, the beauty of holiness? O make use of
Christ, who can open blind eyes, and clear the sight, and make you see that
plainly, that others can scarce perceive. He can illuminate the mind, anoint
the eye with eye salve, Rev. 3.18, that thou may see how naked and wretched
thou art; dispel all darkness, and show thee the light of life, John 8.12, and
12.46. If any walk in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of
the Lord, and stay himself upon his God, Isa. 50.10.

2. Deadness; Christ is an effectual remedy against deadness and lifelesness of
spirit: Whither should we go but unto him who has the words of eternal life?
Thou have fallen among Thieves, and they have bereaved thee of all, yea, of
life it self; why Christ is that good Samaritan, which puts Wine and Oil into
thy wounded Soul, Luke 10.30, he complains that ye will not come unto him, that
ye may have life; he is called our life, Col. 3.4. O derive life and strength
from him.

3. Hardness; Art thou infected with that sore disease of hardness of heart, so
that thou can not mourn for sin, nor art scarce sensible of the great burden
of sin and misery, nor lay to heart the evils of the times, but thy heart is a
Rock, or an Adamant? O go to Christ, who can, and will take away the heart of
stone, and give thee a heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19, and 36.26. In him this
gracious promise is, and ever shall be, yea, and Amen. Soak thy heart thoroughly
in this promise, and set before thine eyes a crucified bleeding Savior. Hence
that saying of Bernard, Cui fons forte sicul es lanynam invocat Iesum, non
fluxit uberius. What hardness of heart could ever stand before Jesus Christ? or
what Soul ever went to Christ, and came away with a hard heart, and was not
melted as wax before the Sun? If Christ do but strike upon the heart, though it
were a Rock, he can make it gush out with a torrent of brinish tears.

4. Barrenness; Thou complainest of unfruitfulness, thou receivest much and
returnest little, thou art dry and unprofitable; make use of Christ in this
case; the water is not more effectual to make fruitful the barren ground, than
the dew of Christ's Grace, to fructify a barren heart; I the Lord can turn a
barren wilderness into a fruitful garden, Isa. 51.3. He has promised to make
the Wilderness like Eden, and the Desert like the Garden of the Lord. He has
said, Isa. 35.1, 2, 6, 7, That the desert shall blossom as the rose, yea it
shall blossom abundantly; for in the wilderness shall water break out, and
streams in the desert, and the parched ground shall become a pool, and the
thirsty land springs of water. Go to Christ for the fulfilling of those great
and precious promises; say, Cant. 4. ult. Lord send out thy spirit, to breathe
upon my Soul, to blow upon my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out,
etc. Christ says, Except ye abide in me, and I in you, ye cannot bear fruit.
Under the term abiding, is employed, making use of Christ, drawing sap and
nourishment from him, Ioh. 15.4, 5.

5. Despondency; when thou art disquieted with melancholy, Psalm. 27.13,
doubting and distrustful thoughts arising from the weakness of Grace, power of
Corruption, and malice of Satan; have recourse to Christ, who has an
incomparable faculty of dispelling all these perplexed and pensive conceits
that do torture thy mind: He himself suffered, and was tempted, was a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with grief, and therefore is able to succor us in all
our temptations and troubles, Heb. 2.18, and 4.15, 16. Now if a man be in any
trouble in outward estate or body, what will he do in such a case? He will go
and consult with one that has been in the like condition. Do thus, make use of
Christ for help, who has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Heb.
13.5; which words of his, being spoken home to the heart of a distrustful,
perplexed person, by his own Spirit, must needs be of refreshing virtue, and
reviving power, as that light will ever spring up out of darkness, and scatter
those mists that darken the mind and disturb our peace: it is he that forgiveth
all thy sins, and heals all thy diseases, Psalm. 103.3.

3. Improve this gift of God, as a sweet and forcible attractive and help to
draw your hearts to the performance of all those duties that are required of
you; and to assist in the exercise of those graces that are to be found in you.

As 1. Faith; In the want or weakness of Faith, make use of Christ, who must
needs be very helpful; for he is the author and finisher of your faith, Heb.
12.2, he is infinitely able to begin, increase, and perfect your faith, so as
that it can have no other virtue or power, but such as is derived only from
him. It Is he by whom we believe in God, who raised him from the dead; his own
Disciples finding their faith infirm and weak, did repair to him for more
strength, and for a larger measure of it, acknowledging him to be able, and
themselves impotent and unable to do it, saying, Luke 17.5, Lord increase our
faith.

2. Repentance; Does any lie and groan under the guilt and burden of
impenitency? O let him address himself to Christ in this sad case, who came
into the world to call sinners to repentance; not as we in the Ministry, to
call outwardly, but to call with an effectual voice, and to cause to repent,
Mat. 11.13. God not only gave him to the world to be a Savior, but has
exalted him to be a Prince, to give repentance and remission of sins, Act.
5.31. If thy heart be secure and senseless, go to Christ who will freely give
(not sell) and work in thee godly sorrow, that leads to repentance unto
salvation, not to be repented of. That repentance you frame in your selves,
will miserably deceive you; so that Austin said, that repentance does drown
more than sin, when you think you can sufficiently do it your selves; whereas
Christ alone does give true and acceptable repentance.

3. Love; Christ is the best teacher of Love that ever the world had; who
taught it, not only by his words, but by his blood, by his life, and by his
death. Would thou learn to love? Go to Christ; if thou can not learn it of
him, thou can never learn it. Love is the greatest commander of love, and the
most effectual argument that can insuperably constrain us to it; and none ever
loved at the rate and measure that Christ has loved; to stand by such a fire,
is the way for a congealed heart to melt, and the coldest affections to grow
warm. A lively Faith still holding Christ the glass of infinite love and
goodness, before our faces, is the greatest lesson in the art of love. A
believing view of the nature, undertaking, love, obedience, doctrine, example,
sufferings, intercession, and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, must needs inflame
believers hearts with an answerable degree of love: O steep that stiff and
hardened heart in the blood of Christ, and it will melt, and it will change thy
unkind, unthankful heart, in the very nature of love, to come over with Thomas,
and by the passage of his wounds, wind thy self into his heart.

4. Obedience, both active and passive, to which Christ is both an incomparable
motive, and admirable pattern: He fulfilled all righteousness, and became
obedient to the death of the Cross; Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, was his
resolution when he came into the world; and not my will, but thine be done,
when he went out of it. He has said, he will write his Laws in your hearts,
and cause you to walk in his statutes, and give you one heart and one way, that
ye may serve him for ever, Ezekiel. 36.27. Christ's obedience is thine, walking in
Christ; all the acts of it are exerted and performed in the strength of Christ.

5. Prayer; would you know how to pray, as to have your Prayer accepted and
answered? let Christ be made use of, who is the alone Mediator, that by the
vail of his flesh, has made a new and living way into the holy place; and sits
at Gods right hand making request for you: So that by him, you may have free
access with boldness to the throne of grace, Heb. 10.19, 20. Have you a friend
in the Court, that will plead your cause, and speak a good word to the King,
and will you not make use of him? O Let us come boldly to the throne of grace,
Heb. 4.16. In Christ we have access, Ephesians. 2.18, and 3.14. Romans 8.34. 1 Ioh.
5.4. Ioh. 14.13. If ye ask any thing in my name, I will do it; in time of the
Law, if any sinned, he was to go to the High Priest, who was to mediate and
intercede for him to God. So now we must come to Christ, who mediates, and
makes intercession for us; though we have transgressed, he has suffered;
though we be unworthy, yet he is worthy; if we and our suit be commended by one
of so great worth, and such interest in the Father, can we doubt of success? --
He will give us also his spirit, to help our infirmities, and teach us what to
pray for as we ought, and lead us by the hand unto God, and enable us to cry,
Abba, Father.

4. Improve Christ, as the purchaser and conveyer of all blessings and benefits
to your Souls, which they stand in need of; are you empty and hungry, come to
him for food; are you naked, come to him for clothes; are you weak, come to him
for strength; if wavering, for stedfastness; if weary, for rest.

1. Let the poor, needy and hungry Soul come to Christ, and not lay out its
money for that which is not bread; but hearken unto him, eat that which is
good, and let your soul delight it self in fastness, Isa. 55.2, 3. He alone
will feed and fill the Soul, and satiate it with his goodness; He will make a
feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of
marrow, of wines on the lees well refined, Isa. 25.6. O labor to ^ake in his
sweetest consolations fresh every morning; the Soul cannot live without some
comfort or other, if it finds no such sweetness in Christ it will look for it
elsewhere; and if it taste nothing in his ways to keep it up, it will go down to
earthly delights for relief.

2. Let the wretched, naked Soul, make use of Christ, and not sow together
Fig Leaves, as Adam, Genesis 3.7. Never think to patch together a deal of filthy
rags to cover thy uncleanness and nakedness, Isa. 64.6. But if thou know that
thou art naked, then buy of Christ white raiment that thou may be clothed,
and the shame of thy nakedness do not appear, Rev. 3.18. Christ's righteousness
is a long white robe to cover thy nakedness, see Ezekiel 16. begin. the Soul
according to its nativity is naked and filthy; but Christ spreads his skirt
over it, and puts on excellent ornaments, he will take away thy filthy
garments, and cloathe thee with change of raiment, Zech. 3. begin.

3 Let the weak improve Christ for strength, who will perfect his strength in
their weakness; so that thou may say with the Apostle, When I am weak, then I
am strong, 2 Cor. 12.9. And by his strength, I can do all things, Phil. 4.13.
Trust not in your own strength, but rely upon the power of Christ in all your
performances; art thou to grapple with some strong corruption or temptation,
and desire to overcome it? have thou some weighty and difficult duty to
perform? make trial of Christ, and thou shall find that he gives power to the
faint, and to them that have no might, Isa. 40.29.

4. Let the wavering make use of him for stability and fixedness; Art thou
afraid of Apostasy in these backsliding times, go to Christ to stablish thee, 1
These. 3.13, That he establish your hearts, unblameable in holiness before God,
even our father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his saints.
He is a Rock, if thou build on him, thou shall never be moved, Matt. 16.10. God
stablisheth your Souls in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.21. If you can get rooted and built
up in him, and established by him in the faith, you need not fear (though you
must beware) of being spoiled through Philosophy and vain deceit, Col. 2.7, 8.
Do you fear falling away from the Grace or Truth of God? then make special use
of Christ, who is able to establish you, and keep you from falling, and present
you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, Jude 24.

5. Let the weary Soul come to Christ, and he shall find rest; make use of this
gift of God, which is far more suitable to a wandering sin-sick soul, than the
softest bed to the wearied body: what was prophesied by Lamech concerning his
Son Noah, is completely fulfilled in Christ, whereof Noah was a type, Genesis
5.29. He called his son Noah, rest, (for says he) this same shall comfort us
concerning our work and toil of our hands. Think often on that soul-refreshing
promise, Matt. 11 28, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest; take my yoke upon you, etc. Come poor restless, easeless,
and dejected souls, let others weary themselves in seeking riches and
reputation in the world, to you I faithfully promise rest, which is the thing
you want. Fecisti nos domine propter te, and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec
veniat ad te.

5. Improve this gift of God as a standing cordial against those failings and
despondencies of spirit, and make use of it in the midst of those sad thoughts
and mi^givings of heart you may be under through fear of wrath, terrors of
conscience, and shrinking apprehensions of death and judgment.

1. Is God angry, does he begin to thunder, and write bitter things against
thee? and his waves and billows go over you, so that your moisture is dried up,
and you almost overwhelmed with the fierceness of his wrath? Now let faith
recollect it self and say, Well, Christ is mine, in whose wounds is room enough
to hold, and in whose heart is readiness enough to receive all that fly unto
him; true indeed, there is a terrible storm of justice gathering over my head,
and ready to fall upon me, but my Christ is my shelter, an hiding place from
the wind, and a covert from the tempest, Isa. 32.2. A flood of vengeance is
coming, but I am got into the Ark; destruction near, but Christ is my Passover,
my little Sanctuary, able and willing to save to the uttermost with all kinds
and degrees of Salvation, Heb. 7.25. He has trodden the wine press alone, and
of the people there was none with him, Isa. 63.3. O then enter into this rock,
for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, till the indignation be
over-past. When God is angry with thy soul, take Christ in thine arms and come
to him.

2. Art thou grown strange to him, and alienated thy self from him by sin? none
is so proper and necessary to be made use of as Christ in this case, who is the
peacemaker between God and man; who has not only made peace between those,
but so ratified and confirmed it, that nothing shall be ever able to dissolve
it. God reconciles the world to himself by Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19. not only them
that were strangers, but even enemies, Col. 1.21. Those that are afar of, are
made nigh by the blood of Christ; he has broken down the partition wall, and
slain the enmity, Ephesians. 2 16, 17, 18. If thou have some dear friend who
bestows a gift on thee, in token of his dear love and respect to thee, and
there should be afterward some disagreeing and falling out betwixt you,
would thou show this gift a pledge of league and amity? etc. thus hold up
Christ to God.

3. Or though it be not thus, yet thou want the sense and feeling of his
love, and art comfortless in the want of it; O then make use of Christ in this
case, who is able to make all Consolations abound, and fill thy soul with joy
and peace in believing: He has said, Ioh. 14.18. I will not leave you
comfortless; Tristatur aliquis nostrum, veniat in cor Jesus. Is any man sad
(says Bernard) let that sweetest name Jesus come into his heart, and so he
shall have that peace and comfort that the world cannot give, neither can the
world take it away from him. Christ is a most sovereign Cordial, apply and use
him, and your joy will be full.

4. Or art thou terrified in Conscience, and groaning under the insupportable
burden of a wounded spirit? art thou affrighted with accusing and condemning
thoughts? O go to Christ, who as he can make peace in the Court of Heaven, so
he can create peace in thy heart, and still the cries of Conscience, and make a
calm there also; though the waves roar, and the winds blow, etc. thy soul shall
have peace in him which passes all understanding, Col. 1.20. And will say, in
me ye shall have peace, be of good cheer, let not your hearts be troubled;
though your hearts ache and tremble, yet he is greater tha^ your hearts, who is
nigh to justify you, Isa. ^^.8 so that you may triumph with the Apostle, Who
is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, Romans 8.34. Expect no peace in
laying aside Christ.

5. Are you afraid of death and judgment to come? in this case also make use of
Christ. It Is reported by Cassander that in ancient times, sick and weak dying
persons were directed and accustomed to make use of Christ at that time
especially, interposing him betwixt them and Gods Judgment; saying these words,
Lord we put thee the death of our Lord Jesus Christ betwixt us and thy
judgment. But what need we look into Historians, the Scriptures show what
languishing souls and drooping spirits must do, Psalm. 23.4, 5. Though I walk in
the valley of the shadow of death, yet I will fear no evil, etc. Christ has
destroyed him that had the power of death, Heb. 2.4. taken out the venom and
malignity of it; Death lost its sting in Christ's side: And now O death where is
thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15.55, 57. Or fear thou
judgment, look to Christ and thou shall not die the second death, but he will
raise thee up at the last day, Ioh 6.49, 50. Having Christ, thou may stand in
judgment, and lift up thy head with joy, for it is the day of thy Redemption,
then the redeemed of the Lord shall return with joy everlasting; and you shall
appear with him in glory.

4. Fourth Branch of Exhortation, Be ^ery thankful for him; yea let your whole
soul go out in thankfulness; be ever praising and magnifying God for his
unspeakable mercy in Christ, your Sacrifice, your Redeemer, your Savior; often
call upon your sluggish hearts, and say, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all
that is within me bless his holy name, Psalm. 103.1. and 116.12. What shall I
render to the Lord for this the greatest of all his benefits?

O be thankful, not in a common, ordinary, formal manner, but in the most
lively, enlarged and raised manner that is possible; where the mercy is high
and great, the thankfulness must bear some proportion to it. O let your
apprehensions be widened, to conceive the vastness of this mercy, that your
affections may be more enlarged to praise God for it; O how shall we get our
hearts affected with it! what thankfulness can be enough for such a gift!
should not the whole soul be summoned in to give its most united acknowledgment
of so signal a mercy? for God to give his only begotten Son to be a Savior for
sinners! Here Is the wonder of wonders! God never did the like before, and he will
never do the like again; and blessed be his name, there is no need he should.
It would have been admirable mercy if God would have sent some other person
upon this Errand to redeem and save undone sinners. If send he will, why did he
not send an Angel, (or body of Angels) to try their skill, and see what they
could do? Nay, why did he not send an Angel (as once he did) with a flaming
sword in his hand to keep off sinners from the Tree of Life? O this did not
comport with his gracious designs (though it did too well with the creatures
merit) therefore he would not do it; no his own Son shall be pitched upon, he is
the person whom God will send. Surely here was love, great love, great to the
degree of infiniteness. Millions of Angels were nothing to one Son, to one such
Son, his firstborn, his only begotten Son, the Son of his love, who lay in his
bosom, had been his delight from everlasting. O astonishing mercy! O admirable
goodness and condescension! how may we cry out here, Lord what is man that thou
art thus mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou make this account of
him! Psalm. 8.4. and 144.3. or as Job 7.17. What is man that thou should
magnify him, and that thou should set thine heart upon him! Here was God so
loving, so as can never be expressed, never be comprehended, Ioh 3.16. God so
loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed on
him might not perish, but have everlasting life.

The Heavens and the Earth were once called upon to be filled with
astonishment, because of the ingratitude of a sinful people, Isa. 1.2. May not
now Heaven and Earth, Angels and men, all creatures whatsoever, be called upon
to be filled with astonishment because of the stupendous love of God! O
Christians! what influence has this upon your dull and sluggish hearts? what
are you made of, that you are no more (in the sense of it) drawn out in
blessing, loving, admiring and adoring of God? Pray, if there be any holy
ingenuity in you, take some pains with your selves, that you may be much more
affected with it, and give not over, till you have such thoughts and affections
(upon Gods giving his Son) raised in you as may in some measure answer to those
thoughts and affections which you shall have about it, when you shall be in
Heaven. The Angels never reaped that advantage that we do, yet they were at
praising-work as soon as ever Christ was born, Luke 2.13, 14. A multitude of
the heavenly host was praising God, saying, Glory to God in the highest, on
earth peace, and good will toward men

Good Zachary so soon as his mouth was opened, begun his Prophecy, with Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his people, Luke 1.68,
69. And old Simeon ended his life with praise and blessing God, Luke 1.19. It Is
the duty of all Christians in every thing to give thanks, 1 These. 5.18. because
this is the will of God in Christ, much more should every soul give thanks, for
Christ the top of all blessings, the flower of all enjoyments; think much of
this threefold cord of obligation to praise: 1. When a gift is free: 2. When it
is great. 3. When special* thanks is most due: for though a man receive a
benefit from another, yet if he have in any measure deserved it before, or it
be in lieu of something to be done after, it abates the thankfulness: But
though it be free, yet if it be not much worth, that lessens thanks; but if it
be a thing of worth, yet if it be commonly to be had, or given to all, this
will take off somewhat of the edg of thankfulness. But now,

1. Christ is an absolutely free gift, not only undeserved, but undesired and
expected: kindness by the rules of friendship and love, in the heathens
judgment, does challenge either recompense if we deal with our matches, or
acknowledgment where the distance is great, and the greater this, the greater
that: Now betwixt God and us the distance is infinite, and if it were possible
our love and thankfulness should fill up that distance, and extend it self to
infiniteness. Let Angels and men adore and praise God for this gift to eternity
in Heaven, yet they must be ashamed and blush at the imagination of merit. The
dignity and worth of this gift must lay an infinite (though sinless) debt for
ever on all the Citizens of Glory, whether home-born, and natives of the
Country, as elect Angels, or adopted strangers, as glorified Saints. Christ is
the flower, glory, and crown of free Grace.

2 The gift is of unspeakable worth and excellency, than which none could ever
be greater, none better, the only begotten Son, God blessed for evermore, the
brightness of his Fathers Glory; coequal and co-essential with the Father;
there could be no addition at all made to his Glory; he was so high he could
not be higher, so great, so good, etc. He is better than wealth or health, than
peace or life.

3. There Is distinguishing favor in bestowing Christ on thee, and not on
others; that which is common to all, will never leave such an impression of
wonder and praise; but when it comes to me and us, that makes deepest
impression. The passing by of my Father and Mother, my Brother, my Sister,
Husband or Wife, Neighbor or Friend, and taking me, is a most endearing
favor. Two lie in the same womb, sit in the same seat, hear the same Sermon,
and one is taken and another left, Psalm. 147.12, 19, 20. Praise the Lord, O
Jerusalem, praise thy God, O Zion. Among many other grounds and reasons, that is
one in the 19. verse, He shows his w^rd unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments to Israel, he has not dealt so with any Nation. Here he speaks not
of the measure (as if others had the same grace revealed in nature, but in
inferior degrees) for he says, as for his judgments they have not known them;
and being full of it, he concludes, Praise ye the Lord: Christ esteems this
the flower of Grace, and blesses his Father for it, Mat. 11.25. I thank thee,
O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. To consider, that of all
England, all Europe, all Adam's posterity, that ever were masters of a living
soul, the Lord passed by so many thousands and millions, and the lot of free
grace fell upon me, precisely by name, and not on many besides, no less
eligible than I was: O how should it ravish our hearts into admiration and
praise. Blessed are your eyes, for they see such things that many Kings and
Prophets have desired to see and have not seen them, Luke 10.23. O what
thoughts will ye have of this mercy in Heaven when you shall have your souls
laden with a massy weight of glory, and thousands of souls spitting out
blasphemies on the Majesty of Heaven, out of the sense of the torment of the
gnawing-worm that never dies; and you consider the soul of Judas might have
been in my souls stead, and my soul in the same place of torment that he is now
in. O the unsearchable riches of the free grace of God in Christ! How should we
now sing that new Song that properly belongs to all redeemed ones, Rev. 14.3.
and to say with a loud voice, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and power be
unto him that sits on the Throne for ever and ever, Rev. 5.8. ad finem: and
Rev 7.12. O how should we extol and show forth his praises, had we as many
tongues as members, or joints, or hairs; were our whole body turned into that
one member, yet should we not be able for this high and glorious mercy,
sufficiently to celebrate the praises of the most high God.

5. Fifth and last Branch of Exhortation, Be fruitful in Christ: True
thankfulness improves the gift to the Donors honor. A friend gives me a token,
I Will receive it for his sake; a jewel, I Will keep it for his sake; a Book, I Will
use it for his sake; a Ring, I Will wear it for his sake; that is, so as may best
express my love, and report his goodness. Were we truly thankful to our God, we
would use and improve this gift for his sake, to his glory. O let it be our
chief care to improve this transcendently excellent gift, to his glory who gave
it. Let me press this Exhortation on ^ou in the words of the Apostle, Col. 2.6.
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. It is
not enough to have or to know that we have received Christ, but we are to see
that we walk in him, or according to him. It Is not sufficient for us to take
Jesus Christ, this gift of God, offered in the Gospel, but our deportment and
carriage must be such as becomes them that have received so great a favor.
Christ was the greatest Legacy that ever was bequeathed to poor creatures, and
he and his benefits that come with him, is matter of greatest weight and
concernment that ever God be-trusted in the hands of dust and ashes; the most
rich* glorious and perfect gift, that ever came out of the hands of God.
Wherefore let us gird up the loins of our mind, and be sober, and hope to the
end, for the grace that is to be brought unto us at the revelation of Jesus
Christ, as obedient children: Not fashioning our selves according to the former
lusts in our ignorance, but as he that has called us is holy, so let us be
holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15. O what manner of
persons should we be in all holy conversation and godliness!

It is most reasonable that we should walk in Christ, as we have received him,
both from the rules of ingenuity, fidelity and equity.

1. It is a rule of an ingenuous man, that nothing be done to the prejudice of
him from whom we receive nothing but the fairest expressions of favor and
kindness. God deals with his people in sweet expressions and carriages of
condescending love, bounty, and good will; all his ways are mercy and
faithfulness; his with drawings, or whatever God does to his people, it is for
their good: Now for any man to walk contrary to God, that still goes on to
discover more of the riches of his grace to him, is to requite evil for good, a
piece of great disingenuity: there is not only rebellion and disobedience, but
wickedness in it.

2. It Is a rule of fidelity: whatever is given to a man to be disposed of upon
such and such things, and for such ends, should be carefully employed and laid
out upon such things, and for such ends, according to the will of the giver. A
man may certainly dispose of his own as he pleases. Now Christ was not given to
us to live as we list, or to walk in the vanity of our minds as other Gentiles,
Ephesians. 4.17. Those that have received Christ, and do not walk worthy of him, do
not improve him for mortifying the old man, and putting on the new man, and for
holiness of heart and life, they go against the will of him that has bestow^d
th^s gift upon them.

3. It Is a rule and principle of equity: whatsoever we have received from
another to occupy, we should return it with all possible advantage: being
entrusted in another business, an ingenious and just man will labor to
advantage him in whose business he is employed, as much if not more than his
own. If we receive this special gift and grace of God, and instead of walking
answerably we dishonor him by walking contrary to the grace we have received,
where is justice and ingenuity in this deportment? As if a servant be employed
in his Masters business, he is to use his utmost skill, and strength, and put
to his utmost endeavors to perform his duty exactly. So we are servants, and
whatever we do, is our duty, L^k. 17.10. the stock we have received from
another, must be faithfully returned to the owner with advantage, Mat. 25.27. A
servant is not to mind his own advantage, and profit, but his masters; the end
why you perform duties, and frequent Ordinances, must not be merely to be free
from guilt and horror, and to escape Judgment and H^ll, that is but as a
servant that works indeed, and does his masters business for his own ends; but
you must eat and drink, work and trade, pray and hear, and all that you do, for
God and his glory.

For directions, how we must walk in Christ: You must walk in Christ as you
have received him 1. You received Christ as one that has taken upon him your
nature, and sanctified it, Ioh. 17.19. and in this respect you should walk in
him, as those that are sanctified, Ephesians. 4 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. But ye have not
so learned Christ, etc. 1 These. 4.4. As you have received of us how you ought
to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and more; for this is the
will of God, even your sanctification, that every one of you should know how to
possess his vessel in sanctification and honor. 2. As one that mediates and
intercedes for you at the Throne of Grace; and ye should be sure to walk in
him, come to God in this new and living way, that your persons and services may
be accepted, and prayers answered. 3. As one to whom you have resigned up your
selves as your King and Lord, ruler and governor, that has the sole ordering
and disposing of you and all your affairs and ways; and in this respect, you
should yield obedience and subjection to his commands, and give up your selves
wholly to him. 4. As one that is your Savior, who is your strength and safety
against all enemies and evils; whose design and undertaking is to deliver you
from the evil of sin, Satan and the world; in all your fears, dangers,
temptations, then you must fly unto him; and rely upon him; when he has
restored liberty to you captives and slaves, you must walk in this liberty, and
make use of it (not to sin) but to serve him freely, without fear and without
distraction. 5. As a guide and leader to show you the way of life and
happiness; and it is nothing but reason you should follow him, and walk as he
walked. In a word, he is your life and your all, and so you should live (not to
your selves) but to him and his praise, and glorify him in soul and body which
are his; that since he died for all* it is very reasonable that they which
believe should not live henceforth to themselves, but to him that died for
them. Romans 6.22, ^3. Being made free from sin, and become servants unto God, ye
have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. For the wages of
sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.


CHRIST The Best MASTER.
Joh. 13.13. Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. (...).
VOS me vocantes, dicitis magister a^ domine and been dicitis sum en^m. (...),
per enallagen, as Mark 15.34. (...), quod ponitur, Mat. 27.46. (...), these are
put (...), (as Grammarians speak) the Nominative for the Vocative case, Vel est
mutata forma orationis ut hoc dicatur vos compellando me utimur his vocibus
magister and dominus. Unless we read it with Epiphanius, (...). So Erasmus
translates it, Magistrum and dominum; for says he, it is not usual nor proper
to call any thus, unless he be present, and they speak to him; but now Christ's
Disciples did call him so when he was absent, as Ioh. 21.7. This (says Beza)
is confessed; but here the word (...), (which may be rendered saintatis, vel
vocantes me appellatis) being here used, it may be understood of the common
speech wherewith they spoke to Christ when present. The Syriack word, Rabban
and Maran, (as in Maranatha, the Lord comes, 1 Cor. 16.22.) sounds something
more Sacred and Divine, than ordinarily (...), and (...) signifies a teacher
of Letters, Manners, or any Art, in relation whereunto they were called
Disciples, or Learners: (...) dicitur, qui pollet authoritate cui jus est
pre^^cribendi eras. It properly signifies one that has authority, rule or
dominion; being a word of relation also. It is in the writing of the Apostles
simply and absolutely ascribed to Christ (says Zanchy) a thousand times* It is
used civiliter, as when we call an Honorable person, or one that has
servants, Lord. And Theologically, when this appellation is given to the one
true God; answering the Hebrew name of God, Jehovah, which sets forth the
absolute power and sovereignty of God over all the Creatures.

These are the words of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ to his Disciples,
wherein he begins to give them the sense and exposition of that his strange and
wonderful condescension of washing his Disciples feet, whereof you have the
History in the precedent verses. He does now at large declare to what end, and
renders the reason why he washed his Disciples feet; this done, partly to show
his admirable love to them, ( verse. 1.) and to give them an example of humility
and love one to another; and partly to intimate that he only cleanieth us from
our sins, 1 Ioh. 1.7 There was in this his action a teaching mystery, which
they knew not, till they were further instructed; they yet perceived not that
it was not so much material for them to have clean feet, as to be cleansed by
the blood of Christ, and have true humility and love one to another. Here he
takes up an argument from their own mouths to show what they ought to do in
imitation of him, except they will contradict themselves, and in actions
dissent from their own words of common use: If I your Lord and Master have
frooped so low as to wash your feet, ye ought also to wash one another feet,
ye ought to be ready and willing to serve one another in love, (...) is put for
(...), much more ought ye, seeing you are not (as ye confess) Lords over one
another, but fellow servants, equally bound in mutual duty. Verily, verily, I
say unto you, the servant is not greater than his lord; and argument a majore
from the greater to the less. If Christ who excels all, do so admirably
abase himself, how may it even shame thee? verse. 15. I have given you an
example, that you should do as I have done; we must follow rationem exempli,
magis quam individuum actum; the moral reason of the example, rather than do
the individual act; that is, we must after Christ's example, be ready to perform
the meanest and lowest offices of love one to another.

Doct. Christ is a Christians Lord and Master, and every Christian is Christ's
servant: Christ and a Christian stand in relation one to another as Lord and
servant. There is a relation between Christ and Believers, as betwixt Master
and servants. Though Christ says to the Apostles, Ioh. 15.5. Henceforth I call
you not servants but friends. The meaning is not that he calls them not
servants at all, but not mere servants, they being more than servants, having
such acquaintance with his counsels as his friends; for he presently, verse. 20.
bids them remember that the servant is not greater than his Lord, Mat. 23.8.
One is your Master even Christ, and all ye are brethren; and verse. 10. the
Apostles called themselves the servants of Jesus Christ, Romans 1.1. 1 Cor. 4.1.
Phil. 1.1. He is called our Master and we his servants; because he is our
Rector, expleno dominio, with absolute propriety, and does not give us Laws to
obey while we do our own work, but gives us his work to do, and Laws for the
right doing of it; and it is a service under his eye, and in dependence on him
for our daily provisions, as servants on their Lord. He has work for us to do
in the world, and the performance of it he will require. He bids his Sons go
work to day in my Vineyard, Mat. 21.28. and expects that they do his will,
ver. 31. His servants are as Husbandmen, to whom he entrusteth his Vineyard,
that he may receive the fruit, ver. 33, 34, 41, 43. Faithful servants shall be
made rulers over his Household, Mat 24.45, 46. Christ delivers his Talents to
his servants to improve, and will require an account of the improvement at his
coming, Mat 25.14.

1. Christ is a Christians Lord and Master. 2. Christians are his servants.
For the first, concerning Christ's Lordship, enquire what it is.

2. How it is. 3. Where it is.

1. What it is* observe that Christ as God-man, has a threefold Lordship, as
he is God he has the same glory and dominion with the Father: and as God-man,
Mediator, there is a dominion that results from his Office, and this is thus
distinguished:

1. Christ has a more general dominion, or Lordship over all men, yea over all
creatures: He is over all, God blessed for ever. Romans 9 5. Jesus Christ he is
Lord of all, Acts 10.36. He is King of Nations Sovereign Lord to rule and judge
them, Ioh. 3.35. the Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his
hand, Mat. 28.18. all power is given to me in Heaven and in Earth. God has put
all things under his feet, Ephesians. 1.22. This Lordship is or seems to be tha^
Reign spoken of, 1 Cor. 15.25* 28. for he must reign, till he has put all
enemies under his feet; and when all things shall be subdued unto him, then
shall the son also himself be subject to him that put all things under him,
that God may be all in all* This Oeconomical Kingdom or Lordship is exercised
over all, whether good or bad, whether willing or unwilling to serve him,
whether knowing or unknowingly; and it is manifested by the Acts, 1. Of
restraining all creatures from crossing or hindering his will and works, which
he is determined shall be; when he ascended up on high he led captivity
captive, Ephesians. 4.8. Satan, sin, death, Hell, and whatever opposed him, in his
state of humiliation ( captivity put for captives) a multitude of captives:
((...)) Christ has the keys of Hell and Death, Rev. 1.18 i. e. power to
deliver to, or keep from Hell and the Grave, and he is the worlds master, Ioh
16 33. be of good cheer I have overcome the world, it is but a conquered Enemy,
let the waves roar, the Lord reingeth, Psalm. 93.1, and 72.9. his enemies shall
lick the dust, he rules in the midst of his enemies. 2. His Lordship is
manifested in guiding and swaying them to his will and end, Psalm. 68.30, Rebuke
the company of spearmen, the multitude of bulls, with the calves of the people,
till every one submit himself with pieces of silver. Captains, and Companies of
greatest might, rage, and cruelty are bridled and tamed, made to stoop and pay
tribute to him; Kings of Isles shall bring presents; Kings of Sheba and Seba
shall offer gifts; yea all ^ings shall fall down before him, all nations shall
serve him; for he shall deliver the needy when he cries: the poor and him that
has no helper, Psalm. 72.10, 11, 12. He has dominion over the greatest Kings*
is Lord of Lords, to make them fulfill his pleasure, and serve his end, either
in favor or correction to his Saints, or in punishment to others. 3. In
judging and passing sentence on all at the last; He is Lord both of living and
dead, and all shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ: as it is written,
As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall
confess to God, Romans 14.9, 10, 11.


2. He has a special Lordship over his visible Church; as he is heir of all
things, and head of all creatures, and at the last day Judge of all men; so he
is King and Lord of his Church, which owns this one Lord, Ephesians. 4.5. Both theirs
and ours, Lord of all Churches, 1 Cor 1.2. He is the head of the body the
Church, in all things, or among all, having the pre-eminence: the government is
upon his shoulders, Isa. 9.6. He is chiefly a Lord because of his heritage the
Church, wherein he rules.

1. As a King or Magistrate in a Commonwealth; and so he is said to have the
throne of his father David, and shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever,
and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1.32, 33. and Nathaniel gives
him this salutation, John 1.49. Rabbi, thou art the son of God, thou art the
King of Israel, (...), the word here used is (...) one who has rule or
dominion. This is used sometimes civiliter, in some respect and general
signification, is attributed to the creature, and so we call him to whom
reverence and honor is due, ('it is a word of relation) or who has servants,
Lord; but most properly it is used Theologice, when this appellation is given
to the only true God, answering the name of God Jehovah, (which the Seventy
usually translate this word) and sets forth the absolute power and
sovereignty of God over all the creatures, and therefore he is called (...) the
one or only Lord, 1 Cor. 8 6. Ephesians. 4.5. The Hebrew word Adonai springing from
a word that signifies a base or pillar which sustains any thing, and the Greek
word (...) quasi (...), borrowed from building, whereunto a Commonwealth is
compared, whereof the King is said to be the foundation: So King, contracted
from the Saxon word, Coning or Dyning, signifying power and skill; and so Lord
from Laford (a Saxon word) a sustainer; dominus in its strict and simple sense,
is one that has a jus disponedi possidendi and utendi, a right of having (or
possessing) disposing, and using, i. e. that is, full and sole owner or
proprietor: sometimes it is taken more largely, as comprehending both propriety
and rule; and sometime more improperly, for government or command it self: but
amongst Lawyers it is taken properly and strictly for an owner. Yet here (not
excluding the other) it is taken for one, qui pollit authoritate cui jus est
prescribendi, one that has authority and governs by Law, which is an
authoritative constitution, de debito officii, praemii and poenae, the
signification of the will of a governor making the subjects duty, and
determining of rewards to the obedient, and punishments to the disobedient.

2. As a Master or teacher (...), preceptor or magister, one that teaches
letters or manners; and the latter word ( magister) is more general, and
declares some pre-eminence or dignity, as that Mat. 19.16. good master* etc.
Christ is the infallible guide and teacher of his Church. He knows his Fathers
will, and there is neither ignorance, nor negligence, nor ambition or deceit in
him, to cause him to conceal the mind of God; he teaches all things needful to
be known in order to our attaining eternal life; this is his office and work,
therefore the title of disciples is most commonly given to believers; much of
Religion does consist in Learning of him as his disciples.

3. As a master of a family, Mat. 10.24, 25. the disciple is not above his
master, nor the servant above his Lord; it is enough that the disciple be as
his master, and the servant as his Lord. If they have called the master of the
house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his hou^^old, (...),
Mar. 13.34. For the son of man is as a man taking a far Journey, who left his
house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work: watch ye
therefore (for ye know not when the master of the house comes, at even, or at
midnight, or at the Cock crowing, or in the morning) Mat. 20.1. the Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which went out early in the
morning to hire laborers into his vineyard, etc. Hence he is often called
(...) a word betokening a private right to rule, such as is exercised in the
guiding and governing of a Family, and most properly signifies, a master,
ruler, or governor over servants who are bound to him. This Lordship is
declared by these Acts: 1. By calling and gathering them by his word, Isa.
55.45. Behold I have given him for a witness, a leader and commander to the
people: Behold thou shall call a Nation, whom thou know not, and Nations
that knew not thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for
the holy one of Israel, for he has glorified thee. These are the words of God
the Father, concerning the Messiah (of whom the Jewish Doctors themselves
expound this place) whom he appoints and ordains to be a teacher and testifier
of his will, a leader, or a ruler, or a Prince and Commander not to Israel
alone, but also to the Gentiles; to call a Nation by an external calling, and
the Ministry of the Gospel, bestowed sometimes upon Cities, Kingdoms,
Commonwealths, etc. Mat. 20.1. thus he hires laborers into his vineyard, a
calling according to means, common to the elect and reprobate, ver. 16. Many
are called, but few chosen. 2. Giving Laws to them to direct and oblige them to
obedience, Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, (or
statute-maker) the Lord is our King, he will save us: as a sovereign to protect
his subjects that continue loyal to him, and live according to his laws. The
Apostles were publishers of his laws. 1 These. 4.2. For ye know what
commandments we gave you, by the Lord Jesus Christ; I command, yet not I, but
the Lord. 1 Cor. 7.10, and 9, 14. Even so has Christ ordained, that they that
Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, Gal. 6.2. So fulfill the Law of
Christ, that is, of loving one another: none but Christ can give Laws, and
there are none of Christ's servants, but receive Laws from him. 3. Appointing
order, power, offices, and officers, among them, whom he has called to the
profession of the Go^pel, He gives authority to some for edification, not to
destruction, 2 Cor. 20.8. and 13, 10. According to the power which the Lord
has given to edification, and not to destruction, Mark 13 34. as a man taking
a far Journey, gave authority to his servants, (...) the charge of his
domestical affairs; he appoints officers, sets every one in his place, and
furnishes him with gifts suitable to his place, and cuts out every one his task
or work Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended, or assumed this Lordship, he gave gifts to
men: He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and
Teachers. 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers, etc. He appoints Ministers to be
stewards, to distribute to every one in his family their due proportion, by way
of feeding and governing, and they are all accountable to this Lord. 4.
Prescribing administrations for their food, physic, and all necessaries, 1
Cor. 12.5. There are differences of adminstrations, but the same Lord, ((...))
diversities or distinctions of ministries, Ecclesiastical functions, for the
use and benefit of his house, that none of his servants may want what is good
and fit for them; he appoints stewards and rulers over his household, to give
every one their meat in due season, Mat. 24.45, and overseers to feed the
Church of God, and to take care of his Flock, which he purchased with his own
blood, Act. 20.28. to preach the Word, and dispense the Sacraments. Mat. 18.17,
Tell it unto the Church; that is, the governing and ruling Church, which was
invested with the power of binding and loosing, says Cameron, ver 18, and the
subject of the power of jurisdiction, to whom belong the censures of
excomunication, absolution* 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. By the power of the Lord Jesus
Christ, etc. 5. Conferring gifts and temporal mercies and deliverances upon
them, Ephesians. 4.7. To every one is given grace, according to the measure of the
gift of Christ, gratia gratis data, gifts for edifying the Church. 6.
Correcting them in this life for their miscarriages. Judgment commonly begins
at the house of God. He judges them in this world, that they may not be
condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32. Rev. 3.19. As many as I love, I rebuke
and chasten* be zealous therefore and repent* Rev. 2.16. Repent, or I will come
unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. Ver.
22. Behold I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her,
into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds: He suffers the world
to do that which he will not endure in his own Family; His servants will never
be faithful to him, nor find him faithful to them, if he did not sometimes
chastise them. 7. Calling them to account in the end, and rewarding and
punishing according to their works. Mat. 25.19. After a long-time the Lord of
those servants comes, and reckons with them, and gives them their hire (that
had been laborers in the Vineyard) Mat. 20.8. All must stand before the
judgment seat of Christ, Romans 14.10. 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in the
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. He has sundry
sorts of servants, some that are only titular and complemental, call him Lord
and Master, but are unprofitable; wearing his badge, but refusing his work;
profess him, but in works deny him; using the name of the Lord, but
transgressing the rule of their Lord; the reward of these, is to be cast into
utter darkness, Mat. 25.30. His faithful servants shall be rewarded with his
presence, who served him in his absence, and shall enter into the joy of their
Lord.


3. Christ has yet a more special Lordship over true believers, living members
of his body, that are justified and sanctified servants to him in their hearts,
Romans 14.18. He that in these things, (that is, righteousness, peace, and joy)
serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men, that have the
kingdom of Christ within them, Luke 17.22. The weapons of this kingdom are not
carnal, but spiritual and mighty; and so his conquest of them, 2 Cor. 10.4. The
former were members of the Church, these are the members of Christ, and this
Lordship is exercised and put forth by his.

1. Drawing them in by effectual calling, making them willing in the day of his
power, Psalm. 110.3. as he is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give them
repentance and remission of sins, Acts 5.31. putting his Laws into their minds,
and writing them upon their hearts, Heb. 8.10. This calling by his word, and
effectual operation of his spirit, does bring them not only into the visible,
but into the invisible Church, uniting them to Christ the head, as well as
tying them to the members; and whereby grace is not only offered but conferred;
is a calling in a saving manner, according to his purpose, the immediate
consequence of the election of his grace.

2. Suppressing in them whatever is opposite to his rule, and overcoming all
enmity to his will: manifesting and magnifying his grace and strength in their
infirmities, and making his power to rest upon them, 2 Cor. 12.9. and 10.4, 5.
Pulling down of strong holds, and casting down reasonings and imaginations, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; not only
curbing, but curing their nature, and changing the whole man.

3. Qualifying them for his service, and enabling them to do his work, making
them ready to do his will. A^ people prepared for the Lord, Luke 1.17. making
them vessels unto honor, purged and sanctified, meet for their masters use,
and prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. If he find employment, he will
give endowments too; if an errand, a tongue; if a word, an hand; if a burden, a
back, I can do all things through Christ which strength^neth me, says Paul,
Phil. 4.13. as the Apostle labored according to his working which works in
him mightily, Col. 1.29. So carrying them on in his ways with renewed strength,
they walk and are not weary, they run and faint not. ^sa. 40.28, 29, 30, 31.

4. Giving them freedom to, and in his work: he makes them free, John 8.32.
Free from sin, that they become his servants, Romans 6.18. from the guilt, power
and bondage of sin.

1. By releasing their debts, pardoning their sins, Acts 5.31. it is an Act of
Christ's Lordship and Princedom to remit and forgive sins.

2. By loosing their bonds, and breaking the snares and fetters of them. He
proclaims liberty to captives, and opening of prison to them that are bound,
Isa. 61.1, 2. Rom 8.2. The Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made
me free from the Law of sin and death.

3. Removing the spirit of bondage, and restoring peace and joy to the soul: He
gives them peace with him, John 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give
unto you, not as the world gives give I unto you. Let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be afraid: and Job. 16.33. He gives them a free
spirit, an enlarged heart, a sound mind, the spirit of power and love, 2 Timothy
1.7

5. He shows his Lordship toward his peculiar people, in maintaining them in
his service, and suppl^ing them in all their wants: From this Head (wherein
dwells all fullness) all the body by joints and bands having nourishment
ministered, increases with the increase of God, Col 2.19. The Lord is their
shepherd, they shall not want, Psalm. 23.1, and 84.11. Verily his household shall
be fed, they shall want no good thing; He gives them all things pertaining to
life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.4, Even of outward necessaries they shall have
what they want, if not what they would.

6. In defending them against, and upholding them in all temptations and
troubles. He tells them in all their dangers and straits, my grace is
sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. He will keep them in all their ways; surely
then, in all his work; safety evermore accompanies duty. His Servants are
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. They are
preserved in Christ Jesus, Jude 2. and are never unsafe, but when they leave
working, or with Jonah run away from their Master* Micah 5.4, He shall stand
and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the name of the Lord
his God, and they shall abide. There is no security but in Christ's family;
never are his servants in danger, but when they go out of it: and he takes care
of the seed and posterity of his Servants, Psalm. 69.36.

7. At last abundantly rewarding and dignifying them; In doing his work there
is great reward; That happiness which Christ gives his Servants in this life,
is unspeakable, their work seems to have more of wages than of work in it: but
in the next life their joy will be so great, as that it cannot so well be said
to enter into them, as they to enter into it, Mat. 25.51, Well done good and
faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. The joy of their
Lord, whose bosom is the hive and center of all goodness, and that in which all
the scattered parcels of blessedness are bundled up. R^v. 22.12, Behold, I come
quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be. Their services are all Booked; he who formerly gave them abilities
for to work, will now give them a recompense for working; their work, though
never so great, is but small to their wages; nor is the weight of their labors
comparable to that of their Crown, and put in all their heavy sufferings too.
Rev. 2.10, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

2. How is this threefold Lordship exercised?

1. By what means? 2. For what end? 3. In what manner or order?
1 st. By what means does he exercise this Lordship?

1. By his hand of providence, concourse, and cooperation in the creature*
that Providence Christ speaks of in John 5.17, 19, 22, My father works
hitherto, and I work: For what things soever he does, these also does the son
likewise. (...), which Nazianzen well interprets ((...)) i. e. nor for the
similitude of those things they do, but in respect of the same power and
authority of both; the Son does not imitate, but co- operate; he works not
like, but the same work that the Father does. ( Quod operatur filius opus
patris est) Hill. Whatsoever the Father does, the Son does, because they are one
God, have one will, power, and working; for the Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment unto the Son; the Father judges not alone, because he
judges by the Son: The word judging here, signifies full power to rule, in
Heaven and Earth, 1 Cor. 8.6, There is one God the father, of whom are all
things, and we in him, or for him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him. By, here notes not the instrumental, but the principal
cause; the Prepositions of and by, are not so to be taken, that we make two
Causes, seeing they have but one Nature, though they be distinct persons, and
the Father and Son work together; but by these ( of and by) the Apost^e
differenceth their order and manner of working, Col 1.17, He is before all
things, and by him all things consist.

2. By his Word and Spirit, in common works and gifts. Psalm. 110*2, The Lord
shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine
enemies. The Lord, i. e. God the Father, (^ho had said, sit thou on my right
hand, i. e. receive chief power and authority from me, and exercise
jurisdiction over al^) shall send forth the Rod of thy power, i. e. thy
powerful and mighty Rod, or the Rod and Scepter whereby thou declarest thy
power and might; ^he means specially the Preaching of the Word, which is the
Power of God to Salvation, and is able to cast down strong holds, and every
high thing. Be thou Ruler, by thy word and spirit, notwithstanding all the
resistance of thine enemies, 1 Pet. 3.19, By which also he went and preached to
the spirits in prison; by the power and manifestation of his spirit.

3. By his Word and Spirit, in saving works and effects. His Word works
eff^ctually in all them that believe, 1 These. 2.13, and the Spirit of Truth,
the Comforter which he promises to send, John 14.16, 18, and 16.14, He shall
receive of mine, and shall show it unto on.

2. The end or use of this threefold Lordship, why or for which he exercises it.

1. For his Fathers and his own glory, John 13.31, Now is the son of man
glorified, and God is glorified in him: i e He shall be glorified in the
admirable work of man's redemp^ion; for death to overcome death, is, (...),
great glory, and shows him to be the Lord of life, Col. 1.16, all things were
created, and do consist, as well for him as by him, that he might have the
pre-eminence and glory, as the firstborn of every creature, or heir of all
things. 2^ For the salvation of his chosen, that he may give unto them eternal
life, John 17.2. Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may
also glorify thee; as thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life, to as many as thou have given him. 3. For the overthrow of
all adverse power to these ends: whatever opposes the glory of God, and
happiness of believers, his Lordship is exercised for the ruin and destruction
of it. 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up
the kingdom to God, even the father, when he shall have put down all rule, and
all authority, and power, For he must reign till he put all enemies under his
feet. Psalm. 2.9, He has set his King on his holy hill of Zion, and gives him
the Heathen for his inheritance; and then adds concerning his enemies, that
rage and take counsel against him, Thou shall break them with a rod of iron,
thou shall dash them in pieces like a potters vessel; and shall perish from the
way utterly and irrecoverably, when his wrath is kindled against them, because
they will not kiss the Son in token of subjection to his Lordship, nor have
this man to reign over them. Matt. 24.50, 51, The Lord of that servant shall
come in a day when he looked not for him; and in an hour that he is not ware
of: And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
3. In what manner and order he that is a stranger to the Gospel, to whom the
sound of it never came, is under the first. He that professes Christ is under
the first and second. A true believer is under all these three Lordships.

1. Under the first as a man. 2. Under the second as a member of the Church. 3.
Under the third, as a member of Christ.
The more general Lordship is conducing to the promoting of the special
Lordship; and then both to the advancing of the more special, Ephesians. 1.22, 23,
And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things
to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all.
He is over all things supreme and absolute; but the Churches Head, from whom
they receive all manner of inf^^^nce. He has a special and peculiar respect to
it, Rev. 3.9. Behold, I will make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say
they are Jews and are not, but do lie; behold I will make them to come and
worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee.

This great Lord has a rod of iron to rule the Nations, and a golden Scepter
to guide the Church; in the first the attribute manifested is Power, in the
other Grace; in the world he rules by his Providence, in the Church by his
Testimonies: Psalm. 93.1. The Lord reigns, he is clothed with Majesty. verse.
2. Thy Throne is established of old, thou art from everlasting: The Lord on
high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea than the mighty waves of
the Sea. Thy testimonies are very sure: Holiness bebecomes thy house (O Lord)
for ever.

3. Whence has Christ this Lordship? He is in this Office: 1. By Creation, By
him were all things created, Col. 1.16. Ioh. 1.3. Now absolute propriety
resulteth immediately from Creation; it is not possible that there should be a
more full and certain title than Creation. He that gives men and all the world
their Being, and that of nothing, of no prae-existent Matter, nor by any
coordinate con-cause, must needs be absolute owner of all, without the least
limitation; and then he has the (jus regendi) by immediate resultancy from his
absolute propriety, supposing the nature of the Creature (to be a rational free
agent) and the perfection of the Creator alone, which so qualify one to be a
subject, and the other to be the Governor, that they are as it were the
remotum fundamentum relationis: He that gave man his being, must needs be his
rightful Governor and Lord, as the Apostle makes it an argument, 1 Cor. 8.6.
To us there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him, and by him all things consist. He continues thy being and well being, and
all the means thereto. He upholdeth all things by the word of his power, Heb.
1.3. 2. By his Fathers advancement and appointment. God has set him at his own
right hand, in the heavenly places, far above all Principality and Power, and
Might and Dominion, and every name that is named not only in this world, but in
that which is to come, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. Phil. 2.9. Wherefore God has highly
exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. Act. 2.36. Therefore let all the house
of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus both Lord and
Christ. A^t. 5.36 Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. God has
given him power over all flesh; by his designation he has right and
prerogative of the firstborn to be Lord of all* 3. By his own purchase: He has
bought us with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. A dear purchase, where the price was his
precious blood, his own life. Romans 14.9. For this end Christ both died, and
rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. We read
in the Law, of servants bought with money, ((...)), and it is but reason, he
that has paid a valuable consideration for a man's service, should have it: Now
Christ has bought us not with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with
his own precious blood, 1 Pet. 1.16, 19. So that we are not our own, but his
only that has bought us, and paid for us, to glorify him: He is our Lord and
Master, pleno jure.


Secondly, The other Proposition in the Doctrine, though not expressed in the
Text, yet necessarily implied, the relations being mutual, ( relativa sunt
simul natura.) That Christians are Christ's servants, not as instruments to
execute his Decree; So Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 27.6. but they that out of a sense
of his love resign themselves to do his will.

1. In what respects: 2. Whence it is: 3. What an advancement it is to be his
servants.

1. In what respect they are his servants? Ans. In these seven.

1. To worship and serve him, Psalm. 45.11. He is thy Lord, and worship thou
him. A servant must attend and wait on his Master, and so the true Christian on
Christ, 1 Cor. 7.35. That ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction. Col.
3.24. For ye serve the Lord Christ. Service to Christ is the duty and business
of every Christian, by showing reverence to his person, and yiedling obedience
to his commands.

1. Christ is to be worshipped with Divine honor; it is the will of God that
all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, Ioh. 5.35. Rev.
5.12. The glorious Angels do it, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing. And verse. 13. Every Creature is heard to say, Blessing, honor,
glory, and power, be unto him that siteeth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever. We must worship him with inward and outward veneration; the
first consists in the trust, fear, reverence and adoration of the heart, the
latter in attendance upon, and due observance of Gospel institutions, as
Prayer, hearing the Word, reverent use of the Sacraments.

It Is a known story that of Amphilochius to the Emperor Theodosius; he had
petitioned the Emperor to be severe against the Arrians, to discountenance and
suppress them, because in their opinions they did disparage the Son of God; but
could not prevail: Whereupon he made use of this device, coming one day into
the Emperors presence, and of Arcadius his Son, (who ruled jointly with his
Father) he made his humble obeisance to the Emperor himself, and showed him
all reverence, but passed by his Son, showing him no respect at all, the
Emperor was much offended, sharply reproves Amphilochius for this affront to
his Son; whereupon the good man vindicates his carriage, plainly telling the
Emperor, he had given reverence enough to his Son; and now the Emperor was
more incensed, commands him with great indignation to be thrust out of his
Presence; which while some were doing, Amphilochius turns himself to the
Emperor and said, O Emperor, thou being but a man, can not bear the
contempt or disparagement of thy Son, how do thou think the great God can
bear the contempt of his Son, which the Arrians do cast upon him? The Emperor
was much affected with this, begged the Bishops pardon, commended his ingenuity;
and did that now, which he had refused to do before.

2. With obedience to all his Laws and Commands, Mat. 17.5. This is my beloved
Son, hear ye him. This hearing of Christ is obeying of him in all his holy Laws
and Institutions; and so it is q. d. Here Is a person whom I own for my Son, whom
I have made your Lord, and have set him as my King on my holy hill, into whose
hands I have put all power, on whose shoulders I have laid the government,
therefore I charge you to hear him, and to yield all obedience and subjection
to him: Obedience is the chief badg and character of a servant, Romans 6.16. His
servants ye are to whom ye obey. Ephesians. 6.5. Servants be obedient to your
masters. There can be no better proof of service than obedience, and therefore
the people said, Josh. 24.24. The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice
will we obey. So Abraham the servant of the Lord, when he was called to go out
of his own Country, obeyed; yea, in that greatest trial of obedience, that ever
we read any mere man to be put unto, being commanded to sacrifice his only Son,
he never stumbled upon the bare signification of his pleasure: without
disputing or debating the matter, we must give both active and passive
obedience.

3. This reverence and obedience will produce in Christ's servants (and they are
dispositions well becoming servants) a fear to offend, and desire to please
their Lord; a deliberate apprehension of some worthiness in another more than
in a man's self, is ever accompanied with a fear to displease, and care to
please the person reverenced, Mal. 1.6. If I be a Master, where is my fear?
Serve the Lord with fear, Psalm. 2.11. Heb. 12.28. From which a care to please
cannot be severed; Servants are to be obedient and to please their Masters or
Lord in all things, Tit. 2.9 So must Christ's servants study to walk worthy of
him unto all well-pleasing, not much regarding what offense others take at him,
so long as his master accepts his service.

2. To go by Christ's warrant, and take his word for his rule in all his
actions, Mar. 13.34. He gives to every servant his work, and he is to receive
commission from him for it, as the Porter to watch, etc. what the master bids
or forbids is to be observed: If he say go, as the Centurions servant, he is to
go; or do this, it must be done; a servant may not do what he pleases, but must
wait his masters pleasure, Psalm. 123.2. As the eyes of the servants look unto
the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her
mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon
us. A servant is not sui juris, his own master, to guide his actions, but must
subject his own will to the will of another, whether it be in something to be
done, or something to be suffered; our right serving of Christ is, when it is
done according to his own direction, both for the matter and manner of his
service. It Is a maxim in nature, every master is to be served according as
himself commands; and if the servant prescribe to his master how he will serve
him, he becomes his own, yea his Master's master. In the Civil Law a servant is
said to be ((...)) such a one as sustains no person, but is a dependent and
adjunct to his master, to accomodate his will to the will of his master.
Socrates could see this, and say, If there be a God he must be worshipped, and
if he be worshipped it must be according to his own will, or else we do not
worship him at all. Will worship is a service that is so far from bringing us to
Heaven, that it will beguile us of Heaven.

3. To account and use all he has and is, as not his own, but his masters; all
a Christian is, is Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.13. And ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. As he is, so all he has is his masters talent, or goods, to be kept for
him, and employed to his profit, 1 Pet. 1.10. As every man has received the
gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God. Mat. 25.14. He delivers unto them his goods, of which
they are to make account to him at his coming, they are not proprietarii, but
depositarii; not treasurers, but stewards of his gifts; and must hear, read
depositum, he must be served with his own, and that entirely without dividing;
for we are not in part, but wholly his; no man can have any propriety in
himself, or in any other creature, but what is derived from this absolute Lord,
and stands in full subordination to his propriety; and as we are not our own,
so nothing is properly our own which we possess; for no man can have more title
to any thing else than to himself; nor may we dispose of any thing we have in
any way, but to serve the will and interest of this absolute Lord.

4. To follow his Master in his ways. Christians must walk as his servants, not
where and how they list, but as their Master pleases, Ioh. 12.26. If any man
serve me, let him follow me. Ye call me Lord and Master, (says Christ in the
Text); and then verse. 14, 15. If I th^n your Lord and Master have washed your
feet, ye ought then to wash one another feet; for I have given you an example,
that ye should do as I have done unto you. If our Lord have forgiven us our
debts, much more should we forgive our fellow servants, Mat. 18.32. Christ
says to his servants as Gideon to his Soldiers, Judge. 7. What ye have seen me
do, that do you. Follow me, compri^eth in it the sum of Christianity, the whole
duty of man: He that says, he abides in Christ, ought himself also to walk as
he walked, 1 John 2.6. Moses was a faithful servant in all his house, for he
made all things according to the Pattern showed him in the Mount. The examples
of Christ are either active or passive, in both he is to be imitated in doing
and suffering his Fathers will; and in the manner of both, as Christ said to
the Lawyer concerning the good Samaritan, Go thou and do likewise; so see
thou not Christ's obedience to his Parents, bounty in giving, love in forgiving,
diligence in his calling, meekness and humility in his carriage; contempt of
the world, zeal for Gods glory, holiness in his life, and unprovoked patience
in his sufferings; and his whole life Exemplary, from his Cradle to his Grave?
go thou and do likewise, else thou art not his servant; yea, can be no
Christian: for this is the substance of Christian Religion, the end of the
Gospel, and the character of one that shall inherit Glory: As when two walk
together, a man cannot tell whom the servant follows till they part; so when
Christ and our lusts, or our interests command contrary things, then it puts us
to the trial, whether we be his servants or not? we must not only follow him in
the easy and pleasant ways of obedience, but such as cross our lusts and
interests: we must do in reality what the Lawyer said in compliment, Master, I
will follow thee whithersoever thou go. Revel. 14.14. The Angels are Gods
Ministers that do his pleasure, Psalm. 103.21. A servant has no will of his
own, but has given up his liberty to the directions and commands of others;
hence Christ's servants do earnestly desire and study to know what his will and
pleasure is, and do it. The Masters will is motive enough, 1 These. 4.3. and
5.18. 1 Pet. 2.15. This his will, if God will have it so, if Christ will have
it so, it is enough to a faithful servant; the very signification of his will
carries with it reason enough to enforce the practice of it. We are not to
trade for our selves, and to drive on our own designs of credit and advantage;
we are servants and employed for our masters use. A man that sets up of
himself, is to trade for himself; but all that a servant does, should be for
his masters honor and profit; we are entrusted with talents of Gifts, Graces,
Estates, etc. now after some time the Lord will come and reckon with us, and
see what we have done for his honor, what good we have done in our places; how
we have employed our gifts, improved our interests; whether we have beaten, or
helped our fellow servants; whether our talent has been hid in a napkin, or
laid out for the good of souls, and the glory of our Lord and Master.

5. To participate with him in his estate, both good and bad. Ioh. 12.26. If
any man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall my servant be.
If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. But the world will dishonor
and reproach the servant as they have done the Master, Mat. 10.24, 25. The
Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant is not above his Lord. It is
enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the servant as his Lord:
If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they
call them of his household? Servants must be contented to bear his Cross, whose
privilege it shall be to wear his Crown; and should be satisfied with their
allowance. The proper work of a servant is to wait and stay his masters
pleasure for any comfort. He that is but a servant in the house, must not think
to command whatsoever the house affords at his own pleasure, (that is the
masters prerogative alone), but must content himself with what his master is
content to allow him, and take his portion of meat, drink, livery, lodging, and
every other thing, at the direction and appointment of his master; neither may
the servant of Christ look to be his own carver in any thing, nor may he murmur
against his master, with that ungracious servant in the Parable, Mat. 25.24.
complaining of his hardness and austerity, if his allowance in some things fall
short of his desire; having food and raiment, be it never so little, never so
course, he should be content with it, nay though he want either or both, he
should be content without it, as grace and long experience had taught that
faithful servant of Christ, Phil. 4.11, I have learned in whatsoever state I
am, therewith to be content. Pro. 30.8, Feed me with my allowance.

6. To submit to his correction. A beaten servant must not strike again, nor
word it with his master; ('it is chaff that flies in the face of him that fannes
it) must take it patiently, if he be buffeted undeservedly or without fault.
How much more ought Christians to accept the punishment of their iniquity, when
this gracious master shall think fit to exercise a little severity toward
them, especially since he never strikes them but for their fault (such is his
justice); nor (such is his mercy) but for their good? he chides not, because he
loves it, but because they need it, and because he loves them, Rev. 3.19.
Servants must bear what they would not, as well as forbear what they would.

7. To expect wages from him. Knowing (says the Apostle) that of the Lord ye
shall receive the reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ, Col.
3.24. The true Christian believes, that his Lord is the rewarder of all that
diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. And is content to refer all to him, knowing
that though the vailes be uncertain, yet standing-wages are set and certain,
great is their reward in Heaven; there is a reward in the very work, but he
will bestow a further recompense hereafter; the Hypocrite looks for his reward
here, and sells his service to Christ, works for present wages, but the sincere
servant of Christ submits all to Christ. As we should not serve him for, so he
will not be served without wages, even such as will weigh down all our work and
all our woes, Mat. 6.5. (...).

2. Wherein they are Christ's servants; or how it comes to pass.

1. By redemption, servus a servando, Aust. or serv^s, quasi bello servatus. He
that by right of war might justly be put to death, and yet was saved alive, was
called servant; and he that delivered him was called his Lord. So when we were,
mancipia peccati and diaboli, the Devils captives, and slaves of sin, in which
condition if we had lived and died after a hard and toilsome service in the
mean time, our wages in the end should have been eternal death; Christ by his
death, has conquered sin and Satan, and freed us from that wretched thraldom,
to this end, that being delivered out of the hands of all our enemies, we might
serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, before him, all the days
of our life, Luke 1.74, 75* Thus the Israelites were delivered from Egypt, the
house of bondage, to serve God. Hence the Preface to the ten commandments; and
David confesses, Psalm. 116.16, I am thy servant, I am thy servant, thou have
loosed my bonds. If a man had brought another out of Captivity, or he had sold
himself, all his strength or service belonged to the buyer: Christ has bought
us from the worst slavery, and with the greatest price; no thraldom so bad as
bondage to sin, no prison so black as Hell; and certainly Christ's blood is
better than any money; not to serve him then, is to defraud him of his
purchase; no bondage so great as ours, no price so great as Christ's, and
therefore no service so great as that which we owe.

2. By the fathers donation or delivery up of them. John 17.6, I have
manifested thy name unto the men whom thou gave me out of the world: thine
they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy word. God has made
us, and not we our selves, and so has absolute right to us, and dominion over
us; has given us unto Christ that we should serve him, as well as be saved by
him, Isa. 44.21, Remember, O Jacob, thou art my servant, I have formed thee,
thou art my servant O Israel: they are given him for a Possession, Psalm. 2.8.

3. By voluntary resignation, and surrendering of themselves to him. They have
given themselves to the Lord that are real Christians, 2. Cor. 8.5. It Is by
their own consent and contract, Romans 6.13. Yield up your selves unto God, etc.
Christ loves to have his right and title established. By our own consent we
take Christ for our Lord and Master, and give up our selves to him, that we may
be no longer at our own dispose; and therefore it is not only robbery, but
treachery and breach of Covenant, to seek our selves in any thing; and this
resignation must be made out of a sense of Christ's love to us in his death and
sufferings, 2 Cor. 5.15, Christ died, that they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who died for them. We enter upon
other services out of hopes, but we enter upon Christ's service out of
thankfulness: 'Twas our own voluntary Act, by Marriage-Covenant, we take him
for our Lord, our Husband, Guide, Governor and Protector; and as Sarah obeyed
Abraham and called him Lord, so we Christ: we have bound our selves by solemn
vow and promise to be and continue Christ's faithful servants unto the end of
our lives; now the word is gone out of our lips, we may not alter it; nor after
we have made a vow, enquire what we have to do. He has the best right to our
best services, by this threefold title, and a threefold cord is not easily
broken; our tongues are not our own, to speak what we please, nor our hearts to
think what we please, nor our hands to do what we list. By virtue of these and
many more titles, we are another, and are bound to live and Act for him,
according to his will, and for his glory.

3. What a Lord and Master Christ is: The Scriptures give us these Characters
or Properties of Him.

1. He is the most absolute and supreme Lord. His style is King of kings, and
Lord of lords; he has no superior or co-partner with him in his dominion and
government; all other Power and Lordship is dependent, and derivative, and
subordinate.

1. All Power is from him; as, 1. Civil, Prove. 8.15, By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree Justice. 2. Ecclesiastical, 2 Cor. 10.8. That power which the
Apostle had was derived from Christ; For though I should boast something more
of the Authority which the Lord has given us for Edification and not for
Destruction. 3. Inward and spiritual. Mar. 16.20. They preached every where,
the Lord working with them: the opening of the eyes of the blind, quickening
the dead, turning them from darkness to light, were the effects of his power:
not the parts or piety of the Preacher, but his grace and spirit did the work.
Lastly, extraordinary and miraculous power, whereby they confirmed the word;
signs and wonders were wrought in his name and by his power. When the lame man
was healed, and the Apostle examined by what power, or by what name they had
done it? Peter answered, Acts 4.10, Be it known unto you all, that by the name
of Jesus of Nazareth this man does stand before you whole.

2. As all power is derived from him, and dependent on him; so it is to be used
and obeyed in subordination to him.

1. For him, as the authority of Magistrates, Parents, 1 Pet. 2.13, Submit to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
supreme. Ephesians. 6.1, Children obey your parents in the Lord: so wives to
husbands, servants to masters, Col. 3.18.

2. According to him, Acts. 5 29, the Apostle answered, We ought to obey God
rather than men.

3. All other Lords are responsible to him, for the use and abuse of that
authority, and those gifts they received from him; and are therefore punishable
by him.

2 dly. He is an universal Lord, Lord of all.

1. In regard of persons, he is over all, Romans 9.5. He rules over all nations,
persons, hearts; all other Masters and Lords are inferior to him; Ephesians. 6.9,
And ye masters, do the same things to them (that is your Servants) forbearing
threatening: knowing that your master also is in heaven, neither is there
respect of persons with him.

2. In regard of matters and acts, outward, inward, Godward, manward, civil,
spiritual, all come under his cognizance, Ephesians. 6.5, 6. Col. 3.23, Romans 14.18,
in all these things we are to serve Christ,

3. In regard of places; the three kingdoms of Heaven, Earth and Hell, have no
other Lord but Christ: Angels and glorified Saints in Heaven, Saints, Sinners,
and every creature on Earth, the damned and Devils in Hell, are all his
subjects.

3 dly. He is a spiritual Lord, for the manner of his rule and government; John
18.36, My kingdom is not of this world: not from hence. Not that he governs not
in Heaven and Earth, for though his kingdom be not of this world, Rex tamen est
in hoc mundo, Bern. when Pilate had openly declared whose accusation it was,
Jesus plainly tells him, that his Kingdom was not secular, but spiritual; not
of this world: So that he nothing entrenched on Caesar's right; which he says
not to avoid death, but to show that he was unjustly accused.

4. He is an eternal Lord; Of the increase of his government and peace there
shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it,
and to establish it with judgment and justice, from henceforth even for ever,
Isa 9.7, Luke 1.33. He is the King immortal, 1 Timothy 1.17. Death the King of
terrors, and terror of Kings, is subdued by this Lord; not only so as never to
touch him, but also never to hurt any of his Servants: Other Rulers, though
they be called gods and lords, yet shall dye like men; earthly Monarchs, either
by some Poison or Treason, are brought to untimely deaths, at least some
disease or other will lay their glory in the dust; but Jesus Christ is
yesterday, today, and the same for ever.

5. He is a mighty Lord, most able to do what is good for his Servant, and to
subdue all persons and things to himself, Psalm. 3.21. He can kill the Soul, and
throw both the Body and Soul into Hell; he can subdue the hearts of men, even
of the deadliest enemies, unto his love and obedience; he can protect and
shelter his Servants from all evil, and bestow all good things on them, for the
world is his and the fullness thereof: He has under his command the forces of
all creatures in Heaven and Earth, which he rules as he pleases to his own
purpose; he can at ease frustrate the harmful intentions, and noisome qualities
of the worst of them; he can turn their malice into mercy, their hatred into
love, yea can bring forth glory to himself, and profit to his Servants; not
only against, but even out of their mischievous designments, as in Daniel and
the three Children, etc.

6. He is a most just Lord; his is a Scepter of righteousness, Heb. 1.8, his
right hand is full of righteousness, The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17. In him is exact and perfect integrity and
equity, of all his counsels, words and actions; and there is no unrighteousness
in him. His will is the rule and standard of justice, and whatever he commands
is most equal and right, because he wills and commands it.

7. He is a most glorious Lord and Master; The glory of Kings and Emperors is
but a borrowed ray, or spark from his Majesty; the glory of all the Caesar's,
etc. is but a black coal in comparison of his splendour; and when he shall
appear in his glory, the glowworms of worldly splendour and majesty shall
disappear and be extinguished; the poorest Servant he has shall then appear
with him in such glory, that the combined-excellency of Kings shall not be so
much as a shadow to it.

8. He is a most gracious Lord; he puts them upon none but safe, honorable,
and comfortable employments. He puts no more upon them than they can go
through; and lays no more upon them than they are able to bear; he knows their
mould and frame, remembers they are but dust; he is Jesus as well as Lord; a
Shepherd as well as a Master; he joins his glory and their happiness together;
he never requires brick from his people, without giving them straw; he will
either multiply grace, or diminish the temptation: his Grace is always
sufficient for them.

9. He is a wise judicious Master. A man that serves a fickle and unconstant
Master, who often changes his mind, has a hard task, and endless labor (but a
prudent man, who orders his affairs with discretion and deliberation, his
commands are but once obeyed, his work is soon done); what he does now, anon he
must undo, and so Sysiphus like, he is ever doing, and has never done; he
never knows an end of his work: But the Servant of Christ is at a good
certainty, and knows beforehand what his work must be, and what his wages; as
his Master himself is, so his Commandments are immutable and invariable,
without so much as a shadow of change, Iam. 1.17. That was a needless cavil,
and mere peevishness and selfishness in Jonah, Jonah 4.2.

10. He is a most knowing and discerning Lord. He observes the ways and works
of his Servants so narrowly, that the closest and subtillest among them cannot
deceive him; he spies them in every corner, nay, every corner of their hearts
in them; all things are open and naked before him: though now in some sort he
be absent, yet he needs no informer, he knows what every Servant does in his
absence, and will manifest every ones work to all the world: his eyes are as a
flame of fire, clearer than ten thousand suns; he takes notice of all their
services and hearts, Rev. 2.19, I know thy works, and charity, and service, and
faith, and thy patience, and thy works, and the last to be more than the first.

11. He is a pitiful and merciful Lord and Master. He has an eye as pitying as
it is piercing; he does no less observe the wants and troubles, than the ways
and works of his Servants; he is a Father as well as a Master; and As a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him, Psalm. 103.13, 14,
And spares them, as a father his son that serves him, Mal. 3.17, has more
tender bowels than a mother. Isa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking-child,
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may
forget, yet will I not forget thee. Christ is not as the slothful man thought,
a cruel and hard Master, Matt. 25.24, that looks for much work, and gives
little encouragement; but is moved with compassion toward his Servants, Matt.
18.27, he will not have his Servants complain that they serve an hard Master.

12. He is a meek and lowly Master, condescending to serve his Servants here
and hereafter.

1. Here^ Matt. 20.28, He came not to be ministered unto, but to minister. Luke
22.27, Whether is greater, he that sits at meat, or he that serves? is not
he that sits at meat? but I am among you as he that serves. He stoopt so
low as to wash his Disciples feet.

2. Hereafter; Luke 12.37, Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord, when he
comes, shall find watching: Verily I say unto you, That he shall gird himself,
and make them sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. Study, but
yet expect not to understand, either the comfort or condescension of this
promise, made to the faithful Servants of Christ; He shall gird himself, etc.
Lord (says one) did I not think that the cheer and the attendance were both
one, I should say the attendance were infinitely better than the meat. Think
what it is for Christ himself to serve at the Table; what is it but infinite
delight for the guests to have him set himself to solace them, who is infinite,
as in sweetness, so in knowledge, to make his sweetness please them. Nor will
the dignity of these Servants be less than their delight, who have Majesty it
self to serve them: certainly in Heaven there shall be as many Kings as
Subjects.

13. He is a tender and compassionate Lord; He was made like unto his brethren
in all things, sin excepted; and having suffered himself, being tempted, he is
able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. We have not an highpriest,
that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all
points tempted like as we are, yet without sin, Heb 4.15, and 5.2, Who can have
compassion on the ignorant, and them that are out of the way. He cannot only
(...), but (...), bear part in our afflictions, but bear with us in our
infirmities, being thoroughly (and not lightly) touched with the feeling of our
infirmities. He is sensible of his servants wrong, when tempted, seduced, (
Rev. 2.20, To seduce my servants) as well as fensible of their grief when
wronged and persecuted; in all their afflictions he is afflicted, and takes the
wrongs offered to his Servants as offered to himself; they that hurt them,
touch the apple of his eye: he covers with the mantle of his excusing-love,
their unavoidable in^irmities. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.

14. He is a most loving and sociable Master, who puts his Servants upon
nothing but what himself has done, or does before them; he first practiceth
what he imposes on them. He lays no yoke upon them but what he himself has
born; leads them in no way, but himself has first trodden it: He is not like
the Pharisees who bind heavy burdens upon others, but will not touch them with
one of their fingers, Matt. 23.4; but he does as Abimelech, Judge. 9.48, What ye
have seen me do, make have, and do as I have done: or as Tully reports of
Caesar, that he was never heard to say to his Soldiers, Ite illuc, but venite
huc. So Christ leads by example, his voice is follow me, Iuvat idem, qui jubet.

15. He is a good Master. As he bears part in their sufferings, and is a
fellow-sufferer; so he is not only their Lord and Master, but their helper and
fellow-worker; whatever he imposes on them, he helps and furnishes them to do
it; he puts them to no work, wherein he does not help them. Herein he goes
beyond all other Masters, who can toil and task their Servants sufficiently,
but cannot strengthen them. Christ encourages and assists them in their work;
when they grow faint and weary, he strengthens them; when doubtful, he teaches
them; when slothful, sometimes indeed he corrects them, but not to kill, but
quicken them; not to destroy them, but their sloth: when they are sick, he
pities and spares them; when old, he turns them not out of his service, but the
longer they live in it, the more they love it, yea, the more able they are to
perform it: In a word, when they dye, he neither suffers them to lie still, nor
sends them to seek another Master; for then they change not their Master for
another, but their work for a better; or rather for their wages, Psalm. 138.3.
Isa. 40* 28, 29, 30, 31. Joel. 2.29.

16. He is a most faithful Master; he keeps, secures and vindicates all his
Servants, he preserves them and provides for them, gives them all things
pertaining to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1.4, comforts them with exceeding
great and precious promises; he feeds them with his own flesh and blood, he
clothes them with his own righteousness, he directs them with his own spirit;
his Servants shall want no good thing, they shall neither pine for want, nor
surfeit with abundance; they shall never have so much, or so little, as to make
them unfit for service; Christ loves to keep them in working case. How can a
Servant of Christ want provision, when as he can make his very work meat and
drink unto him; nay, his wants meat and drink? How can they want, whose friend
has, and is all things? A Servant of Christ may be sick, persecuted, scorned,
imprisoned, but never unsafe: He may suffer evils to touch them, but he never
suffers evils to hurt them. He visits them in, and delivers them from all their
troubles: He rebukes Kings for their sakes, and protects them safely from all
enemies.

17. He is a holy and impartial Lord and Master, and takes account of all his
servants exactly and particularly. He compares himself to a King that took an
account of his servants, Mat. 18.23. Mat. 25.19. After a long time the Lord of
those servants comes and reckons with them: he will not indulg any in their
ease and sloth.

18. He is a most bountiful Lord and Master, and abundantly rewards any service
that is done to him aright, th^ugh never so little, Luke 19.17. He pays his
servants most bountifully, Well done thou good servant; because thou have been
faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities, Mat. 10.42. He
that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet* and a righteous man in the
name of a righteous man; and whosoever shall give to drink to one of these
little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, veri^y I say
unto you he shall in no wise lose his reward.

19. This Lord is the most dreadful adversary, he will sharply and severely
punish evil servants, who say in their hearts, the Lord delays his comin^, Mat.
24.48, 49, 50, 51. and 25.30. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. He that
knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his
will, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12.47. 1 These. 1.8. He will come
in flaming fire to take vengeance on his adversaries. And they shall call to
the rocks to fall on them, and to hide them from the face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.16.

20. He is a most desirable and incomparable Lord, and such a Master as the
world never knew; for he makes all his faithful servants sharers with him in
his wealth and honor. They shall enter into the joy of their Lord, Mat. 25.21.
Sit in Thrones with him, wear never-fading Crowns, and inherit his everlasting
Kingdom. They that now follow him, shall be where he is, and the same glory he
has they shall have for ever. Cadit mundus, non cadit Christianus, quia non
cadit Christus. Aust. Let the world fall, yet a Christian falls not, as long as
Christ stands. Whereas Satan chooses the subtillest he can find, and leavened
through, to do his work, and send on his errand; for he cannot make a Mercury
out of every block; he is not able to give a man understanding, wisdom and
abilities for his work, neither can he increase or improve any man's parts and
gifts; he must have instruments ready to his hand; he can but put them forward,
and tempt them; he will give such as are strong and crafty, many motives to
serve him, but he cannot furnish them with strength or craft to serve. But our
Lord Christ sometimes chooses the simplest, the meanest, the plainest men,
fishermen, to do his work; for he can give gifts to men which they have not,
and raise the parts which they have, he can make himself a Mercury, a messenger
out of any block; Christ can send a fool of his errand, and cause him to do it
wisely. He can cause the stammering tongue to speak plain, and the plainest man
to speak the highest Rhetoric; when Moses complains of a slow tongue, he can
say, I will be thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say, Exodus 4.12. If he
finds us not fit to do his business, he can make us fit. If Christ please, he
can make a man master of his trade, before or as soon as ever he is servant to
it.

Thus without the wisdom of the world, Christ overcomes the wisdom of the
world, and by the foolishness of Preaching (as men count foolishness) saves
those that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. The foolishness of God is wiser than men, i.e.
those instruments which Christ employs, how foolish soever men count them,
shall foil all the wisdom of man.

Uses of this Doctrine, That Christ is a true Believers Lord and Master.

1. Use of Information and Instruction.

1. It informs us that Christ is Lord as well as Jesus, our Sovereign as well
as our Savior. He is both Lord and Christ, Act. 2.36. And we are not only to
look at benefit by him, but service to him; and not only come to him (as
Zebedees Sons, Mar. 10.35.) saying, Master, we would that thou should do for
us whatsoever we shall desire; but with Saul, fall at his feet, saying, Lord,
what would thou have us to do? we will do for thee whatsoever thou shall
command. We should not only come to him for ease for our souls, but to take his
yoke on our necks and follow him, Mat. 11.28, 29. Men would have Christ to
redeem them, and Satan rule them; Christ to save, and sin to lord it. If it be
not the language of their tongues, yet it is of their lives with most men,
(...), We will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14. there it sticks,
the carnal mind is enmity to the Law; lust cannot endure restraint, and
therefore men most oppose Christ's Nomothetick power; and carnal hearts are
ready to say, our lips are our own, who is lord over us? to be controlled for
every word, every thought, every action, we cannot endure it. O consider,
Christ has many enemies, but they are his chief enemies that withstand his
reigning: Those mine enemies that would not that I should reign over them,
bring them hither and stay them before me. By becoming Christ's servants, we do
not cast off, but only change our yokes.

2. It Is not enough to be in the Church, and outwardly admitted and styled
Christ's servants, but we must be really his, and in heart; Christ keeps no
servants only to wear a livery cloak for security in sinning. As he is not a
titular Lord, so neither are his servants titular servants; to speak service,
and live in opposition to him; to call him master, and do the work of his
enemy; to be in the skin a Christian, and in the core a heathen; to have an
outside verbal complimental profession, and contradict it with an unholy
conversation, is no better than a renouncing of Christ. It Is no advantage to
bear the marks of Christ in our bodies, and to have no fruit of it in our
souls; this is but to clothe our selves with the leaves of the vine, without
partaking of the sap. Paganism and loose profession, shall fare alike when
Christ comes to judgment.

3. There are diverse kinds of Christ's servants, and there will be great
diversity in their end.

1. Some for honor, some for dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. as vessels in an house.
2. Some sincere and good, some evil and unprofitable, Mat. 24.46, 48. some
faithful and wise, and are found well doing; some evil and riotous, Mat. 25.21,
26. some good and faithful, some wicked, and sloathful, and unprofitable. 3.
Some Temporary, that abides not in the house for ever, some that abide there,
Ioh. 8.35. There will be great diversity found betwixt Christ's servants in the
end, betwixt those that only cry, Lord, Lord, and those that do the will of
God, Mat. 7.22, 23, and 24.47, 51. He shall make the one ruler over his goods,
the other cut him asunder, Mat. 25.21, 28, 30.
4. It may inform us what the state of a Christian is:

1. He is not his own, not sui juris, but a servant to Christ, 1 Cor. 6.19. Ye
are not your own; and 1 Cor. 7.22. He that is most free in other respects, is
Christ's servant; no man can have any propriety in himself, or power over
himself; but what is derived from this absolute Lord, and stands in full
subordination to him: Therefore it belongs to Christ to be the absolute
disposer of us and all things; he may do with his own what he pleases, and use
it to the pleasure of his own will; who would interpose, or any way hinder
Christ from the free disposal of his own? not any co-partner, for there is
none* nor we our selves, for we are wholly his, therefore it is not possible
for him to do us any wrong however he shall use us; therefore no man should
repine at his disposal of him* but all should acquiesce in his disposing will;
nor do any thing for selfish ends, which is injurious to the will or interest
of Christ. Christ has full power to do what he lift with us or ours: How far
should any of his servants be from expecting that he should give an account of
any of his actions to them? it should suffice them, that whatever befalls them,
it is from the Lord. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away; whenever he
removes any comforts: if we find our selves too ready to say to instruments, as
the owners of the Colt, What d^ ye loosing or removing it? we should be
silenced, though not with that answer which was returned by the Disciples to
them, the Lord has need of it; yet with this, he sees it needful for us, that
thus it should be; whenever he commands the hardest duties, inflicts the
smartest stripes, etc. every servant of Christ should stop their
murmuring-mouths with this, the Lord will have it thus; and as Act. 21.14, The
will of the Lord be done.

2. Neither are the good things we possess, our own; he that is not owner of
himself, is owner of nothing; all that we have is properly his, as well as we;
for no man can have more title to any thing than to himself; we have not any
thing, nor can have, which is not as much from Christ as we, so is not as much
his. Therefore we should not dispose of any thing we have, but for his interest
and ends; how careful and wary should we be in using the Creatures! all the
comforts we enjoy are the goods of this Lord; we are but stewards of them; what
we use must be used for, not against our Lord. Learning, riches, honor, are
from him, and therefore should be for him; all our enjoyments are but borrowed,
we must therefore use them well; not spot or stain, not tear and cut them by
sin, lest we be ashamed when we should return them back to the owner, and give
him an account of them, it may be with joy, and not with grief.

3. Neither may any Christian think himself Lord of the Church, or his
Brethren, 1 Pet. 5.3. Neither as being lords over Gods heritage, but being
ensamples to the flock. The word (...), dominantes, is not to be understood of
tyrannizing and bearing unlawful rule, or usurped dominion (as Bellarmine would
have it) but exercising Lordship, the same which Christ forbids the Apostles in
the same word, Mat. 20.25. as Bernard tells Pope Eugenius, Ne dictum sola
humilitate putes, non veritate vox domini est, reges gentium dominantur eis vos
autem non sic. Planum est, apostolis inter dicitur dominatus, not overruling.
It does not only forbid the abuse of their authority, or imperiously commanding
of their own inventions, instead of the Doctrine of the Gospel; or carping
Magisterially and insolently toward Gods people, (as Amet.) But the use of
that authority in the Ecclesiastical office, which it is lawful for Princes to
exercise toward their subjects, (says Beza) Omnes enim esse unius
legislatoris and domini servos, etc. Have Ministers no authority? Yes, says
he, not over the consciences of men, but only as messengers of Christ, whose is
all the power of commanding. No Church, no Council can make Laws but in Christ,
the compound and the simple word are used (one by Matthew and Mark, the other
by Luke) in the same sense; so that (...) adds no Emphasis to it; all kind of
Temporal rule is simply forbidden them.

1. No Christian can bind the conscience in internal or elicite acts, 2 Cor.
1.24. Not that we have dominion over your faith, but as helpers of your joy,
(...), ( i e. (...)), the Apostle adds this, left he should seem to have spoken
too imperiously: q. d. That I said, I therefore came not that I might spare
you; take thus, Not that I could by my own authority do any thing with
Religion, and in binding or relaxing your consciences, but that I might be Gods
Minister to comfort you, etc.

2. Nor can he command the outward imperate Acts of Conscience otherwise then
by power civil, or spiritual, from Christ, Pro. 8.15, By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree Justice. 2 Cor. 10.8. 1 These. 5.12. We beseech you Brethren,
know them who labor among you, and are over you in the Lord.

3. As a Christian no man has civil power over his Brother, or the Church, or
over men, Mat. 20.26. It shall not be so among you, that as the Gentiles
exercise authority and dominion over them.

1. As a Christian, he has no legislative, but only applicative power, or
executive in the Church; a Christian must not make Laws in his house, but keep
and execute his Laws.

2. As such, He has no coercive power over his fellow servants.

That natural or civil power that any Christian has otherways over his
Brother, is to rule under, for, and according, or like to Christ, Philemon 16.
Not now as a servant but above a servant, a brother, beloved, especially to me,
How much more to thee, both in the flesh and in the Lord? 1 Cor. 7.39. She is
at liberty to be married to whom she will, only in the Lord. Ministers are not
owners of the house, but stewards in the house, Laws are committed to us, and
must not be excogitated by us.

Only Christ can ordain laws to bind the Conscience; man's laws bind not as they
are man's, but as they are backed by Christ; nor can any but Christ so give laws
to which we should be obedient, as withal to make us obedient to the laws which
he gives. Christ only can write his laws in the heart: No man should prefer the
will or interest of the greatest mortal man or dearest friend, nor the public
interest of States, before, or plead it against the will and interest of this
great Lord.

Neither may we give nor receive ambitious or flattering titles of honor, Mat.
23 8, 9, 10, Be not ye called Masters, for one is your Lord and Master, even
Christ: we should so acknowledge a superiority among men, as to be fearful of
causing pride in them, and that they may know themselves not to be absolute
Lords, but derivatively and secundum quid. Herod became worms-meat, who but
just now was a mere idol and cried up, etc. God would not bear it.

5. It informs us therefore how consistible Christ's service is with the service
of others.

1. It dissolves not, but confirms natural and civil Lordship and subjection,
as between master and servant, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2, Let as many servants as are under
the yoke, count their own masters worthy of all honor, (but what if they be
both believers, are they not Brethren) yes; and they that have believing
masters, let them not despise them, because they are Brethren, but rather do
them service because they are believing and beloved, partakers of the same
benefit, Titus 2.9. Between Magistrate and Subject. Romans 13.1, Let every soul
be subject to the Higher Powers. 2 Pet. 3.3, Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

2. This our relation to Christ as master, regulates the service of others:
Children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right. Ephesians. 6.1. For the
Lord is the author of the authority of Fathers, and therefore we must yield
such obedience as he will have us. This (in the Lord) implies both a
commandment of Childrens obedience from the Lord, and a restriction or
limitation in those things which are not against the Lord: that they so far
obey their Parents, as they swerve not from the true worship and service of God.

3. This service of Christ excludes all absolute and unnecessary subjection to
Creatures, Luke 16.13. No man can serve two Masters. He may subordinately, but
not absolutely, for God will have the s^rvice of the whole man. 1 Cor. 7.21,
23, Art thou called being a servant? care not for it: but if thou may be
made free, use it rather. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of
men. If ye be at liberty, do not of your own accord make your selves servants,
but consecrate your selves entirely, Body and Soul, to the service of Christ;
or it ye be servants to men, that is in a state of servitude, remember still
that above and before all, ye are the servants of Christ, and therefore see ye
do nothing to the obedience of men, which is contrary to that which ye owe to
Christ; and as touching your Soul and Conscience, subject and enslave your
selves to no man living, depend absolutely upon none but Christ and his word;
all our obedience to earthly Lords must be only such as this Lord allows, and
only in the Lord; the greatest Lords in the world are but regula regulata,
Christ is the only regula regulans; they the rule, ruled; he ruling.

6. To inform us that Christians are Christ's servants yet somewhat more, or
with some special exceptions. John 15.15, Henceforth I call you not servants,
for the servant knows not what his Lord does, but I have called you friends;
for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you. They
are not only servants, but friends; they call Christ Lord and Master, he calls
them not servants but friends: not servants but freemen, yea sons, John 8.36.
The servant abides not in the house for ever: but the Son abides ever. Gal. 4
7. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son: and if a son, then ^^ heir
of God through Christ. Not a servant, that is under the ceremonies and bondage
of the Law; but a Son, having received the adoption by Christ, the eternal Son
of God, who was sent to redeem us, that he might purchase, and graciously
communicate the right of sonship, (which he has by nature) to every true
believer. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son
into your hearts, crying, Abba father. We are in such sort free, and so set at
liberty, as that we must be governed by the Spirit of Christ which reigns in
our hearts, and teaches us the true service of the Father; but this is not to
serve, but rather to enjoy true liberty, as becomes Sons and Heirs.

7. It teaches us, that all doctrines and practices are to be abhorred, which
derogate from the dignity of this our Lord and Master. 1. Doctrines, especially
the Popish, which deprave our redemption purchased by this Lord, by the
doctrine of merits; the worship due to this Lord, with the doctrine of image
and adoration, and the Saints intercession: The authority of this Lord, by the
doctrine of the Popes headship and pardoning of sins, and many such doctrines,
not only of the Papists, but of others nearer to us.

2. The practices of vile and wicked men. We should make it our business and
only Plot to promote his honor and service in the world, and endure nothing
that would eclipse and impair his glory: He who touches that, should touch the
apple of our eye; look upon his reproach as cast upon our selves, mourning for
that dishonor offered to him which we cannot redress; it is against both
Christianity and Humane ingenuity, to suffer him to be abused whom we have
undertaken to serve: This neither agrees with honesty nor honor; it is indeed
not only a sin but a shame: Hardly is any Servant so low spirited, as to think
it consistent with his credit to serve a disgraced Master* they that truly call
Christ Lord, will never endure that his glory should suffer from others, much
less from themselves.

3. Our own unsuitable practices. A servant of Christ must not be a son of
Belial; every one is under a yoke still; Christ does not give his servants
leave to sin, but liberty to serve God; Christ came not to free us from the
Law, but sin; from the service of the Devil, not from the service of God: He
came not to make the Law less strict, or sin less odious, or us less holy;
freedom from wrath and Hell is a privilege, but from duty and obedience is
none; because we are made free by Christ, we are to be more apt and ready to
discharge the duty we owe to God and man: in maxima liberate minima licentia,
a great deal of liberty by Christ, and yet the strongest engagement to service
that may be. They whose lives are full of Epicurisme, Atheism, worldliness,
it is not a pin to choose whether they be Pagans, or Christians; for acting thus
heathe^ishly, thus brutishly, they do but pollute that sacred and worthy name;
the Apostle says, I am not ((...) ut (...)) 1 Cor. 9.21. Not without the law
to God, but under the law to Christ. This leads to

Second use of reprehension: It may serve to reprove three sorts.

1. Those that endure not to hear of Christ's Lordship and commands, that will
not acknowledge this dominion of Christ, nor let him be Lord in his own house,
but do what in them lies to deprive him of that honor to which he has so good
a right. But who deny Christ's Lordship?

1. They that will not hear his voice, obey his call, accept his in^itations in
the Gospel; he inviteth them to himself, prays them to be reconciled to God
through him, entreats them to come and put themselves under his government, and
take his yoke on them, and they will not hear, but in effect say, We are Lords,
we will not come at thee? Jer. 2.31. We are well enough, and shall do well
enough without him, and what needs such care and strictness? He comes, and
waits, and knocks at their doors, but they slight him and will not open: He
prays them that they will look into their hearts, mind their Souls, consider
their eternal condition, but they quench the Spirit, smother the light, and
resist all these motions; they will not come to him, nor suffer him to come
into them, that they may have life.

2. Those that addict themselves to strong and inordinate desires of liberty,
which is the worst slavery; that will not submit to his government; quarrelling
at duties rather than performing them; thinking it a kind of happiness to be
free: and that there is no freedom but in sinning, and following the bent and
sway of their own hearts, and being Lords of their own actions; and dream of an
exemption from all kind of Law, but their own lusts; they would he above all
checks and control, and have scope and room for their own lusts. Promise
themselves liberty, 2 Pet. 2.19. Men would have it at this, to be at their own
dispose, and to be answerable to none that would call them to account, and
therefore that will not obey his laws and commands.

3. Such as in a proud contempt and obstinacy against reproof and instruction,
do cast off all respect and obedience to Christ; they cannot endure restraints,
are as bullocks unaccustomed to the yoke, Ier. 31.18. Are all for breaking
bonds and dissolving cords. Psalm. 2.4. Bursting the yoke altogether. Ier. 5.5.
They cannot endure to hear of denying their fashions, renouncing their lusts
and pleasures forsaking their vain, worldly, wanton thoughts, and ways; what
every thought, every desire, every word, must be under a Law! So much time
spent in duties, such gravity in conversation, such awe in their speeches! No
vain licentious Spirits will not be clogged and yoked thus, what a weariness is
it, Mal. 1.13. Sacrifice upon Sacrifice, such waiting upon God they cannot
endure, their spirits are impatient, and recoil with the more violence upon
reproof; and storm and vex, which argues much nonsubjection to the Lord Christ.
Hear ye and give ear, be not proud, Ier. 13.15. These are flat refusers. Luke
19.14. We will not have this man to reign over us.

Secondly, Such as name themselves Christ's servants, and are content to wear
his livery, but do not mind this state cordially, and follow it constantly.

1. Such as are ignorant concerning the object, manner and points of this
service. How shall men serve one whom they know not? He that knows not his
Landlord cannot pay his Rent; they follow the fashion of the Country, and in a
blind superstitious manner conform to the worship of the place, not considering
why, nor whom it is they serve, but offer sacrifice, as the Athenians to the
unknown God; worship an Idol rather than Christ: or as Christ tells the
Samaritans, ye worship ye know not what.

2. Fair promisers and pretenders, but slow performers; as, Mat. 21.30. When
his father bid him, go work to day in my Vineyard, he answered, I go sir, and
went not: so many whose service is like Ephraims goodness, Hosea 6.4. As a
morning cloud and early dew, it quickly vanishes, but let us take heed we do
not gloze with him, as we do one with another; nor flatter him with our lips,
when our heart is far from him; we are deceived, if we think that this Lord
will be mocked with hollow and empty promises and protestations. We live in a
wondrous complemental age, wherein scarce any other word is so ready in every
mouth, as your servant, and at your service, when all is but merely formal
without any purpose; or many times not so much as a single thought of doing any
serviceable office to those men, to whom we profess so much service. However we
are one toward another, yet with the Lord there is no dallying, it behooves us
to be real; good words and fair speeches serve not our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans
16.18.

3. Partial, hypocritical, temporary servants. Some divide between the service
of Christ and of sin, like the false mother that would have the child divided,
as Cambden reports of Redwald King of the East Saxons, the first Prince of this
Nation that was Baptized; yet in the same Church, he had one Alter for
Christian Religion, another for Heathenish. So too many are of Mungril
Religion, halting between Christ and Baal. Heteroclites in Religion, this is to
set the Ark of God and Dagon together; which God will never endure, he came not
for one half of thy heart, if Sin and Devil have the other half.

How much hypocrisy is there in men! many like the Soldiers, that bowed to
Christ, and mocked him, give their outsides to Christ, their insides to all
uncleanness; that as Luther says of Cain, give opus personae Deo, but not
personam; their cap and knee to God, but themselves to all sin and iniquity;
this is the Capital sin of this age. And then how many are but temporary, of
whom we may justly say, what Nabal did unjustly of David, there are many
servants now-adays that break away every man from his Master. Yesterday Gods
people, and to day are turned knaves. Better they had never known the way of
Righteousness, 2 Peter 2.21. A relapse makes their condition worse. He that
first served sin, and then turned to the service of Christ, and afterward
falls again to the service of sin, proclaims to all the World that he esteems
that better; O how great affront is this to Christ! John 6.66. From that time
many of his disciples went away, and walked no more with him.

3. Such are to be reproved, that lay claim to this honorable title, and yet
indeed serve other masters. There are many of whom we may say too truly, as it
is Recorded of the Samaritans. 2 Kings 17.33. They feared the Lord, and served
their own gods.

1. Some serve themselves and not Christ, ^t up themselves as Idols, and do
what seems ^ood in their own eyes; and make their will their rule, their lust
their Law. This is ((...)) self-worship, self-Idolatry, which is the greatest
and worst of all; It is the greatest curse under Heaven, for God to give a man
over to himself to live as he list, Psalm. 81.11, 12. Romans 1.26. the judgment of
the hardened Jews and blinded Gentiles. We read of one given over to the Devil
for his good, 1 Cor. 5*5, but never any given over to himself, but for his
damnation. Austin prays, libera me domine a memetipso, self is man's greatest
and most dangerous enemy; we are naturally self-destroyers; without
self-denial, no Salvation.

2. Those that serve men, not the Lord. Not that it is contrary to the service
of Christ, to be in that civil relation or subjection to men, as servants to
their Masters, etc. But as the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a
price; be not ye the servants of men. That is, (says Ambrose) subject not your
consciences to the superstitious inventious of men in Gods worship, that build
their Religion on man's bare Authority, as Papists; or be not servants to the
lusts of wicked men; such are reproved as serve men, when they run in a cross
line to Gods will. Such were the subjects of Nebuchadnezzar, that at the
command of the King, worshipped the golden image, and served the King, not the
Lord; such was Pilate, that for fear of dipleasing Caesar, delivered up Christ
to be crucified though he knew him to be innocent; such were the Nobles of
Cambyses, who having a lust to marry his own Sister; He sends for all his
Counsel, and asked them, if they had any Law in Persia, to allow him to marry
his own Sister? They answered that there was no such Law; but yet there was
another Law, that the Kings of Persia might do what they list; these Nobles
were slaves to the lust of Cambyses. O that we had not many amongst us, that
sell their Consciences, and their Religion* and their Salvation, to be Panders
to the lustful, covetous and ambitious desires of great men: menservers, and
men pleasers, are worthy of sharp reprehension, Ephesians. 6.6.

3. Such as serve not the Lord, but their own belly, Romans 16.18, Whose god is
their belly. Phil. 3.19. Love their pleasures more than God; that serve and
fulfill the lusts of the flesh; such an one that lives in pleasure, is dead
while he lives, 1 Timothy 5.6. Ye cannot make provision for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts thereof, and fulfill the will of God too, Romans 13. ult. to rot in
pleasures, makes men utterly incapable of serving the Lord, Tit. 3.3. Serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, which is the worst slavery; to walk after our own
lusts, is to seek to cherish that which Christ came to destroy; and so go about
to defeat our Redeemer, and hinder him from obtaining his purpose in our
hearts: What a Christian and yet sensual! A Christian and yet proud! A
Christian believing in Christ, a man of sorrows, and yet given to pleasures!
What a Christian and yet worldly!

4. Such as serve the world, and yet pretend to serve Christ: Christ tells you
it cannot be; Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Mat. 6.24. it is impossible to
join these together. Those that are slaves to the Naaman of iniquity, that do
not only possess money, but are possessed of money; that with Judas will sell
Christ for thirty pieces of silver; that rise early and lie down late, and eat
the bread of carefulness; that will compass Sea and land to get gain; these
make gold their God; their covetousness is justly termed Idolatry, Col. 3.5.
Alas, my Brethren, what is their in the world that it should be so much
coveted, and heaven slighted? What has the world done for its most faithful
servants? How often have we heard them complaining at last, O the world has
deceived me, and undone me; it flattered me in my prosperity, and now utterly
cast me off in my necessity? Ah, if I had served the Lord as faithfully as I
have served the world, he would not have cast me off at last, nor have left me
thus comfortless and hopeless in my depth of misery.

5. Time-servers, that change their Religion with the times, are not servants
of the Lord; their Religion is like a piece of wax, to be molded into any
frame, according as the times alter: Such as will be Superstitious if the times
be so; that will be devout or atheistical according to the times. It was the
speech of a time-server, that was said to be spoken by the King of Navarre to
Beza, That he would lanch no further into the sea of Religion, than he might be
sure to return safe in the haven. This is the right Picture of a timeserver; as
many turned Protestants in K. Edward's days, and Papists in Q. Mary's.

Lastly, Those that serve the worst Master, that is sin. It Is indeed one thing
to be a sinner, and another to be the servant of sin; that is, one that gives
himself over to the service of sin, that is bound Apprentice to sin. The
difference was great between Paul and Ahab* Paul was sold under sin, but it was
against his will; but Ahab sold himself willingly to work wickedness: How many
such servants of sin are there, as the Centurions servant served him, if sin
bid go, they go; such servants are swearers and drunkard^, that are at the
service of their oaths and cups. This is a most shameful and pernicious
service, for it is to serve the Devil, Ioh. 8.44. O that the world would
believe this, that when they serve this or that lust, they serve the Devil.
Cyprian brings in the Devil upbraiding Christ, Ostende mihi tet servos, qui
tibi, etc. Show me, if thou can, so many servants that have served thee so
diligently and willingly, as I can show that have served me. Can Satan give you
better wages, as Saul said to his followers? Can the son of Iesse make you
captains of hundreds, and captains over thousands, give you vineyard^, and
oli^^yards: etc. 1 Samuel 22.7. A^as! if sin had not put out your eyes, as the
Philistines did by Sampson, that you cannot see the vileness and cursedness of
it, you would nev^r grind in its mill; for the wages of sin is death.

3. Use of Exhortation, two Branches.

1. To all, to persuade them to esteem, choose, and embrace Christ's service. 2.
To Christ's servants, to take care to be such servants, and perform such service
as shall be found good and faithful, approved by Christ.
1. Is Christ such a Lord as you have heard? then let every one of us be
prevailed with to take him for our Lord, and give up our selves to him, and
become his servants this day; we must either resign up our selves to this
excellent Lord, or we cannot be true Christians, 2 Cor. 8.5. this is the
essence of Christianity, and life of Religion, and marrow of Profession. To
wear the badg and livery of Christ in external profession without this, is
nothing but a dead carcass, an empty shadow, and will turn to our greater
condemnation another day. That which will be enquired after at the great day,
is not who owned Christ as Lord in profession, but who honored Christ as Lord
by real subjection and resignation of themselves unto him: The great question
will be, Whether did Christ reign over us, and bring us under his Law and
Dominion; and upon the decision of this important question depends the
everlasting state of our souls and bodies in the next world. If you now say
unto Christ, We are Lords, we will not come at thee; depart from us, we desire
not the knowledge of thy ways; or as Pharaoh, Who is the Lord, that I should
obey him? He will say unto you at the last day, Depart from me ye cursed, I
know you not; nor will your crying, Lord, Lord, then any thing avail you. O
then let it be your resolution now to resign your selves to this gracious
Savior; take him for your Lord and Sovereign; Kiss the Son, serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. O that your hearts would once at last
say, as it is foretold of Gospel times, Isa. 44.5. I am the Lords, other Lords
have had dominion over me, but henceforth by thee only will I make mention of
thy name. Isa. 26.13, We will not say any more to the work of our hands, nor to
the lusts of our hearts, (to the world, the flesh, or to sin) ye are our gods,
for with thee (O Lord) poor lost creatures find mercy, Hos. 14.3. Whatever your
neighbors, acquaintance or kindred, let them choose whom they will serve, yet
we are resolved for our part, we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.

O my friends, what say you to this motion? what answer give you to this
invitation? is it not most reasonable and considerable? you are pressed to come
to Christ, and take his yoke, and bow the knee before him, etc. What will you
do? will every one of you give up himself to Christ, resign soul and body to
the service of this glorious Lord? Have you found or ever heard of any thing in
him that may deter you? what iniquity have you seen in him that you keep at
distance from him, and walk after vanity? Is he not worthy of your love? not
good enough to be your Master? can you bestow your selves better? employ your
selves more profitably? what sticks it at? would you take time to consider of
it, and defer your resolutions to another day? so you have done too long
already, and ventured too far by your delays: To day if you will hear his
voice, then harden not your hearts: Seek ye the Lord while he may be found,
call upon him while he is near: He now says, hearken unto me, and I will make
a covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David: Incline your ear, come
unto me: Hear, and your soul shall live: why do you spend your money for that
which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken
diligently unto me, eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it
self in fatness. Alas ye feed on husks and chaff till you return to Christ. Isa
55.2, 3, 4, 7. How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and fools
delight in folly? turn ye at my reproof: Forsake the foolish and live; and go
in the way of understanding. O that you were wise, and would understand these
things, and consider your latter end. O that there were such hearts in you,
etc. O that ye knew the things that belong unto your peace in this your day,
before they be hid from your eyes. O when shall it once be? what is your
resolution? shall Jesus Christ be your Lord and Master, or shall he not? Take
heed how you refuse him that speaks from heaven; do not (as you want Christ)
despise this loving invitation, and make light of this gracious offer, lest his
wrath be kindled in his breast, and you perish. He that has so long held forth
his Scepter of Grace, yet stands waiting for your return, yet stretches forth
his arms to embrace you, yet opens his very heart to entertain you: Hark, he
bids you come and lodge your souls in his warm bosom; yet he calls by his Word,
yet he strives by his Spirit; and follows you with checks of conscience, and
renews his mercies on you every morning; would fain draw you with cords of
love, if it would be. But it will not be always thus, his patience will not
always wait; his Spirit shall not always strive with man; the door of mercy
shall not always stand open; When once the master of the house is risen up, and
has shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; then it is too late, Luke 13.25. O come to
Christ now or never, do it this day, or you may never be invited again: Hear
now Christ bespeaks and wooes thee, sinner; Cast down thy weapons of rebellion,
surrender thy soul to me; give me thy heart, submit to my government; I will
pass by all thy former resistance, and put up all the wrongs thou have done me,
I will remember thy iniquities no more, but pass an act of everlasting oblivion
upon them; O look unto me and be ye saved.

This is my business with you (my beloved) at this time; this is mine errand to
your Souls: What answer shall I return from you to him that sent me? The great
work (you know) of us Ministers, is to persuade men to become Christ's
covenanting Servants, to consent to his Laws, and acknowledge his Lordship; our
way to win your hearts, is to tell you what he is; some little has been
spoken, but not the thousand part of the excellencies of this incomparable
Lord; O he is the chiefest of ten thous^nd, his name is wonderful: he is God
and Man in one person: he is Man, that you may not be afraid of him; God, that
he may be able to do you good: He is the Lord of lords, and King of kings; Heir
of all things, Savior of the world, etc. It Is infinite condescension of love
in him, to treat with you, or entreat your consen^ that he may be your Lord.

This being a matter of greatest importance, and knowing the terror of the
Lord, let me persuade you; for that end I entreat you, to press upon your
selves, and improve in your retirements, these considerations as motives.

1. Motive. Yield up your selves to the service of the Lord Christ, or you are
unjust, you do him open wrong. Equity and justice requires that you render to
all their due; jus cuique tribuere, is the first and most proper act of
justice; Tribute to whom tribute, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor,
Romans 13.7. It is a common principle among you, which nature teaches, that you
deal righteously with men, owe no man any thing, do no man wrong; let every one
have that which of right appertains to him: And if we may not deny unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, it is but right we should also give unto
God the things that are Gods by so many just titles. Why now, you cannot
without apparent wrong to Christ deny him your selves; you are his, and owe
your selves unto him, and all you have, and all that you can do; you are not
your own but his. I lay claim unto you in the name of Christ, and challenge
your souls and bodies to his use; Dare you deny the claim? or will any step out
and question this title? The Lord Jesus has laid challenges to you. It has
been a custom in England, on the Coronation day, as multitudes of people were
feasting in Westminster Hall, a Herald comes forth, and Champion for the King,
and proclaimed his title to the Crown; and if any questioned his title, he was
there ready to make it good.

I do now proclaim to you, that Christ is your Lord, and you are his Servants,
and challenges your service; if any question his Title, I will justify it, and
make it good, let the case come to trial, on condition that whoever is
convinced shall yield subjection: Let me ask you then, Did not he make you, and
not ye your selves, Psalm. 95.6? and does not he preserve and sustain you? and
ye are the Sheep of his pasture, Verse. 7? Did not Christ purchase you with his
own blood, 1 Pet. 1.18? Were you not the dearest purchase, and was not the
greatest price paid for you that ever the world heard of? Well, what say you to
this Title? Does not justice give every one his own? and are not you Christ's?
If there be any creature in Heaven or Earth, that can lay a better claim, or
pretend a juster Title to you than Christ, then let it have your hearts and
service; but if the Lord Jesus have the full and sole right to you, then do not
so much wrong him and your own souls, as to deny or withstand this just and
reasonable motion.

2. Give up your selves to this Lord, or you are unthankful; gratitude as well
as justice requires this at your hands. Nothing is more abhorrent to an
ingenuous spirit, than the brand of ingratitude, to be so base and unworthy as
to render evil for good; ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris, call a man
unthankful, and you call him all that is naught: abhor it as death, to be guilty
or have the name of ingratitude. Well, now, suppose a man had by some capital
crime incurred the danger of the Law, and the sentence of death were past upon
him^ should another step in and humble himself, to beg the pardon, or beggar
himself to buy the freedom for him; Must not that man be wholly his, who has
ransomed him from the Gallows? This is our case, Sin was our work, and Death
was our wages; we had sinned, and must dye for it; there was no escape from
destruction: but the Lord Jesus would not suffer us to perish, but debased
himself, came down from Heaven, gave himself for us, and suffered in our stead,
that we might live; and made himself a Servant for us* though no way bound to
us. Now judge with your selves, I appeal to your own Consciences, whether this
incomparable favor do not lay an unavoidable obligation upon us, to devote our
selves wholly to him? 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. If after Christ has stoopt so low, as
to become man, and was made under the Law, and being in the likeness of sinful
flesh, bore our infirmities and sorrows, lay under the frowns o^ his Father,
and submitted himself to the pain, shame, sting and curse of the death of the
Cross; if after all this we should neglect his Salvation, reject his
Sovereignty, Would not the Heavens blush at this unheard of ingratitude? and
the very bruits rise up in judgment against us and condemn us? The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters crib: but Israel does not know, my people does
not consider, Isa. 13. Jer. 8.7, 8.

3. Resign your selves to this blessed Lord, for he deserves you, he is worthy
of you; if you were Ten thousand times better than you are, you can never
submit your selves to a better Lord, nor serve a better Master: There is
nothing in him that can justly discourage you, nor reasonably deter you from
his service; fear not evil from the greatest good, unless it be in a way of
disobedience and rebellion. He is not a proud, rigid, imperious or cruel
Master; he will not deal with you as the treacherous Master, the World, which
fills your souls with nothing but husks and swill, and rewards all your painful
services with nothing but disappointment and misery; at the best, presents you
with a breast full of wind and vanity; and at the last with woe and vexation,
and leaves you helpless in your greatest necessities. Nor is he cruel and
tyrannical, as Satan, who fills his Servants with terror here, and hereafter
rewards them with fire and brimstone. Nor like the flesh and sin, whose work is
bad, and its wages no better; for the servant of sin, besides that he has no
fruit nor comfort of his service in the mean time, when he comes to receive his
wages at the end of his term, finds nothing but shame or death; shame if he
leave his service; if he le^ve it not, death. Romans 6.21, What fruit had ye then
in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is
death. It Is horrible, intolerable slavery, to serve Sin, Satan and the World;
but when you give up your selves to the service of Christ, you shall live to
the sollidest contentment, and real joy and honor: you cannot possibly yield
your selves to a more excellent and delightful service; His yoke is easy and
his burden light his ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his paths are
peace, Prove. 3.17. His service is freedom, and his work wages; to be Christ's
devoted servant, is not only better than liberty, but more to be desired than
sovereignty: No other Lord ever bought his Servants so dear, or fed them so
plentifully, or clad them so sumptuously, or used them so gently, or rewarded
them so bountifully. He will protect and prosper them, yea, takes pleasure in
their prosperity; he will bless them with spiritual blessings, which are the
best blessings, and lead them by his own counsel, yea carry them in his bosom,
and afterward receive them to glory.

4. Surrender your selves to this great Lord, for he desires you; yea, that you
would be his, as he has been yours, is all he desires; you cannot bestow a
better gift upon him than your selves; others may give him their goods, their
estates, etc. but he that gives Christ himself, can give no more, no better. He
desires you, not that he has any need of you, or to make advantage of you; but
that he may restore you better to your selves than he receives you: He will put
his grace into your hearts, repair his image in your minds, and make you wise
unto salvation. Seneca tells us, That among other Scholars that gave rich gifts
to their Master Socrates, -- Eschines gave himself, having nothing else to
give; His Master answered, Upon this condition I take thee, that I may restore
thee better than I receive thee. On the same, and no worse terms (yea much
better) Christ accepts of those that tender their service un^o him; he that
gives not himself to the Lord, whatever else he gives, in his esteem is just
nothing: nothing [ in esse gratiae] in point of truth, worth, and grace. First
you must give your selves to the Lord, and then your goods to his poor, if you
would find acceptance, 2 Cor. 8 5, or as the King of Sodom said to Abraham,
Give me the persons, the souls, and take the goods to thy self.

5. Take Christ for your Lord, and own your selves for his Servants, for so you
are, whether you will or not; your consent and resignation is necessary to your
good, to ease you of your cares, and secure you from present eternal misery,
not for his title and right which is absolute and unquestionable, and he will
have you either by love or by force. He requires in the Covenant of Grace, that
he have his right by your consent, and not by constraint; that you thankfully
accept the motion, and with hearty and full consent of will resign your selves
to him as his own, even as his creatures and his ransomed ones, by a Covenant
never to be violated. But if you will not understand and acknowledge this
plenary dominion he has over you, he will not lose his right, nor lay down his
claim to you: It Is the greatest folly to rebel against this Lord, to whom at
last you must be forced to submit. Who would not choose him to be their Lord,
when (whether they will or no) he will be their Lord? Who would not desire to
be ruled and guided by his Testimonies, rather than to be suppressed and
destroyed by his Providence? We must all either bow the knee, or he will break
the back; if we will not bear his yoke, we must become his footstool. Were it
not better to take hold of his strength by Faith, than his strength should take
hold of us in displeasure and wrath? and to feel the efficacy of his grace,
than the power of his anger? The proudest Rebel shall at last cry, Lord, Lord,
but it will be too late: At length Christ will be too hard for all that rise up
against him, and will not that he should reign over them* he that will not come
to him as a friend, shall be slain by him as an enemy, Luke 19.27. every one [
Sub pedibus ejus erit, aut ad obtatus, aut victus] all must one way or other be
subject to him, either as s^rvants or slaves; either under his grace, or under
his wrath. O do not thou lift up the heel against him, to whom thou must one
day bow the knee; if thou will not now kiss the Son, thou shall shortly lick
the dust of his feet; if thou be not now in the number of his willing people,
in the day of the power of his grace; in the day of his wrath his arrows will
be in thy heart as one amongst his enemies: In a word, if thou will not stoop
to his golden Scepter, thou must be broken in pieces with his rod of iron.

6. Give up your selves to Christ, and you shall be your own and be happy; look
when and how much you resign your selves to this absolute Lord, even then, and
so much you are your own and no more; you are never your own, but when and
while you are his; what you deny him, or steal from him, you give to the Devil,
the World and the Flesh; you lie at the command of every vile lust, or black
devil, till you become his subjects: [ O quam multos habet dominos, qui unum
non habet!] O how many, how ignoble, how poor, how cruel are the Lords of that
man, who has not this one Lord!

But the way to secure your selves, and whatever is dear to you, is to give up
all to Christ. He that loses himself and his life, shall find it; and he that
labors to secure himself another way, loses all, Matt. 16.25. If you be his,
you are happy; but if you be your own, you are most miserable. Can you support,
preserve, or provide for your selves? who shall save you in the hour of
temptation and distress? know ye not yet so much of your own insufficiency, and
do ye not yet feel your selves to be such a daily burden to your selves, that
you have enough of your selves ere now, as to beg of God above all your
enemies, to save you from your selves, and to save you from being forsaken o^
God, and given up to your selves?

Remember, that none in the world has sufficient power, wisdom and goodness,
to take the full care and charge of you, but Christ; none else can save you, or
sanctify you, or keep you alive one hour; and therefore it will be your
happiness and honor, that you are his. He will use you only in safe and
honorable services, and to no worse an end than your endless happiness.

Consider a little, how unfit you are to be your own Lords, and how unable to
govern your selves; so blind and ignorant, so biased by a corrupt will, so
turbulent are your passions, so uncessant and powerful is the temptation of
your sense and appetite, that 'twere as fit for a man to be governed by a
servant, or a rider by his horse. But he is most perfectly fit to govern you
and all the world; you can desire nothing reasonably in a Lord and Governor
which is not in him: He has perfect wisdom to know what is best; perfect
goodness, and therefore will be most regardful of his subjects good, and will
put no evil into his Laws; Almighty to protect his Servants, and see to the
execution of his Laws: most just, and therefore can do no wrong; but all his
Laws and judgments are equal and impartial. He is our very end, interest and
felicity, our dearest friend and father, and therefore loves us better than we
love our selves: and therefore we have greatest reason to submit to his
Lordship, and obey him, as one that rules us to our own felicity.

7. Let him be your Lord to rule and save you, or you must needs perish
everlastingly; it is a folly to think Christ should save you, while you serve
his enemies: in vain do you expect the dignities and privileges that come by
Christ, and not submit to the duties and services that are due to Christ. He is
the author of salvation to them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. The Gospel is a
message of eternal life only to those to whom it is a rule of spiritual life;
and the true believer does not only cast himself into the arms of Christ to be
saved; but also casts himself at Christ's feet to serve him: never man had
Christ for his Savior, unless he took him for his Lord.

There is no possible escape for Christ's enemies. If they had another Lord or
Potentate that could match Christ in strength, they might fly to him, to defend
them from Christ; but Christ is the only Lord, and woe unto them that have him
for their only enemy. Can thy heart endure, or thy hands be strong in the day
when this Lord shall deal with thee? Ezekiel. 22.14. Jer. 4.13. Foolish sinner!
do thou contend with thy Maker? will thou set briars and thorns against him
in battle, as smoke contend, with the wind, the wax with the fire, the stubble
with the flame, or the snow-b^ll with the Sun? It Is hard to kick against the
pricks; there is no flying from him, but by flying to him, Isa 10 3. What will
ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from
far? To whom will ye s^^e for help? And where will ye leave your glory? Will
you call upon the rocks and mountains to fall on you, and cover you from the
wrath of the Lamb? when the great day of his wrath is, who shall be able to
abide? Rev 6 15, 16, 1^. Were it not better now to enter into the rock, and
hide your selves in the clefts of this rock? Isa. 2 10. No way to escape the
wrath of God, (one spark whereof will horn the guilty sinner to destruction)
but by kissing the Son, Psalm. 2. ult.

2. Branch of exhortation, to all them who have given up their names to Christ
and are his listed, (...) servants. Let me persuade you to (...) serve (...)
great and blessed Lord, O (...) him with greatest diligence and fervency of
spirit. (...) best Lord must have your best service: dar^ not to offer to this
Lord that which cost you nothing; the blind and ^^me are too bad for your
ordinary lords; this Lord mu^^ have your all; the whole of your created
abiliti^s^ H^ deserves and his work requires your all, he has much more
business then all the time and strength of his servants can bring about; if
every hair of your heads were an hand, you might have your hands full of work.
O let none do his work negligently; how great was his goodness, to take such
unprofitable servants as we are, into the family of his Church! what saw he in
us more than in Heathens, that he should put such an honor upon us.

I shall first instruct, and then excite you.

1. For your direction, I shall lay down, 1. Rules. 2. Means. 3. Manner of
this service.

1. Rules about Christ's service.

1. Live and act wholly to and for this your Lord, do all you do for Christ,
Phil 1.21. For to me to live is Christ. Christ is the scope and end of all his
life, Romans 14.6, 7, 8. None of us lives to himself, and no man dies to
himself. For whether we live, we live to the Lord: and whether we (...), we die
unto the Lord: whether we regard (...) or not, it must be to the Lord. Whether
we eat or not, it must be to the Lord; make him the end of your conversation,
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb 1^.7, 8. 2. In
all things seek to (...) him, 1 Cor 7.32. Care for the things that belong to
the Lord, how you may please the Lord. And labor whether present or absent, to
be accepted of him, 2 Cor. 5.9. Have none to please but Christ, and for Christ.
3. Be ever found doing his work, Mat. 24.46, Blessed is that servant, whom his
Lord when he comes shall find so doing: never cease working till you die; life
and labor must end together; he gives us no time to be idle in. 4. Go by his
rule in all your ways: let all your actions and proceedings be regulated by his
law; whatsoever ye do in word or in deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus,
Col. 3.17. As when Pharaoh had lifted up Joseph and made him ruler over the
Land of Egypt, and they cried before him, bow the knee: Pharaoh said unto
Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot in
all Egypt, Genesis 41.44. So, 5. Employ all you are, have, and can, for him. His
word is ( Luke 19.13.) Occupy till I come, all your Talents; he requires the
service of thoughts, 2 Cor. 10.5. of words, Ephesians. 4.29. of works, 1 Cor. 10.31.
of body and Spirit, 1 These. 5.23. 6. Highly esteem what ever is his, His Day,
Ordinances, Servants, Ministers, and his holy Word; let the feet of his
Ambassadors be beautiful, both for their Master and their message-sake; they
are the Servants of Christ. Our delight should be in those excellent ones who
bear the image, and wear the badge of our Lord; the world now thinks that of
all callings, this of the Ministry can best be spared: but let us not think so
basely of them who are Christ's servants, not only to do his business, but to
wait on his person, ye to represent his person, 1 Cor. 4.1. 7. Study to approve
your selves in all things to him, 2 These. 1.11, 12. Pray always that God would
count you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and the work of faith with power, that the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. In a word, let none but Christ be your end.
Serve him not to serve your own turns, but let every interest be subservient to
Christ; learn to perish, that the glory of Christ may live; make not Religion a
design; let Christ be sweet for himself; in serving him, let nothing else be
your scope, and then nothing will divert you; aim not at profit, so gain will
not allure you; nor at pleasure, so ease will not corrupt you; nor at friends,
so favor will not seduce you. Be all unto Christ, and let Christ be all unto
you. Be all or nothing.
2. Means.

1. Redemption from other opposite Masters, Luke 1.74. That he would grant unto
us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him
without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
2. Enmity in us must be subdued; all that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, strong holds pulled down, imaginations and high things cast down, and
every thought be brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor.
10.4, 5. 3. Receive instruction from him; we must be taught in this service,
and that by him we must learn Christ, Ephesians. 4.20, 21. If so be that ye have
heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus. Col. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom. Phil. 4.12, In all
things I am instructed 4. You must also be furnished by him with graces and
strength, 2 Timothy 3.17, Thoroughly furnished to all good works. And 2 Timothy 2.21,
Prepared unto every good work; and have his strength, or you can do nothing,
Ioh. 15.5. 5. Practice self-denial; If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself and take up his cross and follow me, Mat. 16 24. Either you must deny
your self, or you will deny Christ; that man that sets much by himself, will
never reckon much of a Savior. He who has not learned self denial, when
Christ and self come in competition, meet on a narrow bridge, will endeavor to
make Christ go back; he that does not account himself nothing, will soon esteem
Christ so. 6. Clear your selves from all worldly distractions; lay aside the
world as much as may be that you may attend upon the Lord without distraction,
1 Cor. 7.35. Let not this be your rule to Christ and holiness, so far as you
may without any prejudice to your worldly interests; but this, follow the world
so far only as you may without being false and unfaithful to Christ and his
service; do not say to duty, as Prayer, Hearing, Meditation, stand aside, I
have such a worldly business to look after; but rather say world stand aside.
Be sure that you are gotten clear of the world, and that Christ have the
pre-eminence in you; be not ye the worlds prisoners, but Christ's free men. 7.
Remember the last account and judgment, 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. Wherefore we labor
that whether present or absent, we may be accepted of him, for we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad. None so diligent and faithful in the service of this Lord, as those that
with Jerome have still sounding in their ears that terrible voice, Surgite
m^rtui and venite ad judicium: Our Lord is gone, but will come again to take an
account how matters have been managed during his absence; now sincce we look
for such things, what manner of persons ought we to be?
3. For manner; Christ be served in a right manner.

1. Heartily, freely, cheerfully; the heart is the marrow of the performance,
Col. 3.23. Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as to the Lord, Ephesians. 6.6 ((...),)
not with eye service as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the
will of God from the heart: Serve him in the spirit, doing service with
goodwill and gladness, making it our meat and drink to do his will, quod cor
non facit, non sit. 2. Humbly, reverently; when we have done all we can, all
those things that are commanded, say we are unprofitable servants, we have done
that which was our duty to do, Luke 17.9, 10. In bearing when he corrects,
content with our allowance, not doing what we please, but what pleases him;
coming at every call, and obeying every command, and doing it because
commanded; eying the precept in every performance; praying, hearing, giving,
because Christ bids me.

And with greatest reverence; serving with reverence and godly fear, Heb.
12.18. remembering our distance. Augustus said to one that gave him homely
entertainment, Who made you and I so familiar?

3. Solely. No man can serve two masters, Luk 16.13. Not serve them so as to
please both, scarce so as to please either; not serve sin or Satan at all, nor
man in opposition to, or competition with Christ, who keeps servants to serve
others. We must be undivided, serve him and none but him, forsake all and
follow him. 4. Faithfully, sincerely; as Moses who was faithful in all his
house, as a servant, Heb. 7.5. Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in
sincerity and truth, Josh. 24.14. q. d. If you intend to serve him, it must be
done in uprightness, or else you do not serve him at all. God abhors a
Hypocrite more than a Sodomite. 5. Fervently, zealously, diligently; fervent in
spirit (must be joined) with serving the Lord, Romans 12.11. Do all we do with
all our might; the living God must have lively service. How diligent was
Abraham's Servant in his Masters work? he would not eat bread till he had done
his errand; and when 'twas done, he stayed not on compliments. The Twelve
Tribes served God instantly day and night, Act. 26.7. Diligence is the property
of a good servant. 6. Entirely, absolutely, universally.
1. In respect of the subject, with all the faculties of the soul, and members
of the body, Romans 6.19. with all our abilities.

2. In regard of the Object, though never to irrational to flesh and blood;
this is reason enough, the unerring Lord will have it so; not pick out our
work, never examine what the service commanded is, but who commands it, with
blind obedience.

3. In all places, in private as well as in public; for he has, yea, fills
all places; if thou can find out a place where he does not see thee, there it
shall be lawful for thee (...) others; we must have respect to all his commands.

7. Constantly and perpetually; in time of prosperity as well as adversity; and
e contra; he is ever the same, and so should his servants and service be; we
can neither begin too soon, nor continue too long in Christ's service; none ever
repented of either; there must be no end of working till of living.
Faithfulness unto death has the only promise of a Crown of life, Rev. 2.10.
everlasting, Romans 14.9. This service takes in the whole man and life.

2. For Motives and Encouragements, besides what was in the Characters and
Properties of the Master, consider but what a service this is, and that will be
motive enough to embrace and lay hold on it.

1. It is a most honorable service, whether we respect the Master or the work;
it is more honor to serve Christ than to serve Emperors, nay to have Emperors
serve us; he is the better man that serves the better Master. Now he is the
best Master; it is usual with the Apostles to prefix this among other their
Honourary titles: Paul a servant of Christ, This was one of the fairest flowers
in their Garland; the meanest offices about Princes are accounted honorable.
Servire Deo regnare est, it is Royal and Kingly; a glorious Master, and glorious
fellow servants, Angels, and glorified Saints; all the ser(...) honorable, the
practice of all virtues, praying and praising, etc. Honorabilia legis, Hos.
8.12. If ever it be put to your choice either to have the greatest outward
favors, or serve Christ with disgrace, choose the latter with Moses, Heb.
11.24, 25. He refused to be called the son of Pharoahs daughter, choosing rather
to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season. Reproach and indignities for Christ are favors; chains and
prisons for Christ is a mark of honor and rich treasure.

2. Most comfortable; a service full of soul-ravishing joy; A day in his Courts
is better than a thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 84 10. It Is a type of heaven, where
is fullness of joy; it leads to communion with God, who is the God of all
consolation: O when Saints meet with God in duty, they are in a corner of
Heaven!

3. A most profitable service: we are indeed unprofitable servants, but sure we
have a very profitable service under him; they that speak against the Lord with
stout words, saying, Mal. 3.13, 14. It is in vain to serve God, and what profit
is it that we have kept his Ordinances? And Job 21.15. What is the Almighty
that we should serve him, and what profit shall we have, if we pray unto him?
speak without all truth and reason, for never any truly served the Lord who
gained not evidently by it: your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.
ult. No man ever kindled a fire on his Altar for naught. The servants of Christ
may be poor here, but this is the working time, and in their sufferings they
serve him, 1 Timothy 6.6. it is great gain.

4. It Is a necessary service, and indispensable: we are not left to our own
liberty to choose whether we will serve him or no, this is the unum necessarium,
and must be done.

1. Though the thing to be done be dangerous, Phil. 2.30. Not regarding his own
life. 2. Though it be difficult to us. 3. Though unlikely to take effect, Luke
5 5. We have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless, at
thy word I will let down the net; though men forbid and withstand us, and would
beat us off from it, Acts 5.29. We must obey God rather than Man.
5. Most easy, Mat. 11.29, 30. None other so easy.

1. In regard of the nature of this service, His Commandments are not
grievious, Ioh. 5.3. There is certainty in this employment; it is easy to the
new nature, (as the light of the Sun is delightful to those that have good
eyes) to them that love God and have the right art of serving him.

2. In regard of other services; That under the Covenant of Works, and that
under Sin and Satan.

3. It Is easy in regard of the help afforded to it: It Is easy for a Child to
lift up a great weight, when a Giant holds his hand and lifts with him: Christ
and his Spirit assist. It were not only hard, but impossible if left to our
selves in it: but, da domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis: I can do all things
through Christ which strengthens me. It Is easy to act what Christ in the
Covenant of Grace will accept, and in respect of the reward; and compared with
the service of Satan and Sin, that afford no gawdy-days.

6. It Is the greatest freedom; it not only consists with, but brings freedom:
it is the Law of liberty, Iam. 1.25. He is the Lords freeman, 1 Cor. 7.22. John
8.32, It is perfect freedom, and will free us from all other services; tot
domini, quot vitia, every lust calls for his attendance, and many times
contrary lusts at once (as when Pride bids let fly, Covetousness cries hold);
whereby the poor man is infinitely distracted between a lothness to deny
either, and the impossibility of gratifying both.

7. It Is a happy service if well done: fullness and eternity of happiness is
the reward of it. Matt. 24.46, Blessed is that servant whom his Lord finds so
doing. 1 Timothy 4.8. It Is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come. John 12.26, If any man serve
me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall my servant be: if any man
serve me, him will my father honor.

That Euge in the end, Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful over a few t^ings, I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou
into the joy of the Lord, will infinitely cheer and revive the heart of Gods
painful and faithful Servant.

Improve this for your comfort in all your distresses, and comfort your selves
with these words.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
SERMONS on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Colossians, by Mr. I.
Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwi^'s, and Dr. John
Owens Epistles Recommendatory. An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Matthew. 4.
and Peter's Sermon to Cornelius; and circumspect walking. By Dr. Tho. Tailor. A
practical Exposition on the 3d Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul to
the Corinthians, with the Godly man's choice, on Psalm 4. v. 6, 7, 8. by Anthony
Burgess. Christianographia, or a description of the multitudes and sundry sorts
of Christians in the world not subject to the Pope, by Ephesians. Pagit. Dr. Donns 4
to Sermons, being his 3 Volumes. Pareus Exposition on the Revelations. Choice
and practical Expositions on 4 select Psalms: viz. The fourth Psalm in eight
Sermons. The forty second Psalm in ten Sermons. The fifty first Psalm in twenty
Sermons. The sixty third Psalm in seven Sermons.
Forty six Sermons upon the whole eighth Chapter of the Epistle of the Apostle
Paul to the Romans. Both by Tho. Horton, D. D. late Minister of Saint Hellens.
An Analytical Exposition of Genesis, and of twenty three Chapters of Exodus, by
George Hughes, D. D.
Books 4 to.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinnock,
M. A. An Antidote against Quakerism, by Steph. Scandret. An Exposition on the
five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations thereupon, by William
Greenhil. The Gospel Covenant opened, by Pet. Bulkley. Gods holy-Mind touching
matters moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments: Also, an Exposition on the
Lords Prayer, by Edward Eston, B. D. The Fiery-Jesuit, or an
Historical-Collection of the rise, increase, doctrines and deeds of the
Jesuits, exposed to view for the sake of London. Horologiographia optica;
Dyaling, universal and particular, speculative and practical; together with a
description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method, by Sylvanus Morgan. Regim^n
sanitatis salemi, or the Regiment of Health; containing directions and
instructions for the guide and government of man's life. A seasonable Apology
for Religion, by Matthew Pool. Separation no Schism, in answer to a Sermon
preached before the Lord Mayor, by I. S. The practical Divinity of the Papist
discovered to be destructive to true Religion, and Men's souls, by I. Clarkson
An Exercitation on a question in Divinity, and Case of Conscience, viz. Whether
it be lawful for any person to act contrary to the opinion of his own
Conscience, formed from arguments that to him appears very probable, though not
necessary or demonstrative. The Creatures goodness as they came out of Gods
hand, and the good-mans mercy to the bruit-creatures, in two Sermons, by Tho.
Hodges, B. D. Certain considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst
Protestants. Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the
Script^re offers, concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion: of
Election, Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel, and Perfection. The
Saints triumph over the last enemy, in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. James
Ianeway, by Nath. Vincent. The vanity of man in his best estate, in a discourse
on Psalm 39.5. at the Funeral of the Lady Susanna Keate, by Richard Kidder, M.
A. The Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the principal errors of the Church of
Rome detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture, preached by several Ministers
of the Gospel in or near London. Four useful discourses: (1) The art of
improving a full and prospero^s condition for the glory of God; being an
appendix to the art of Contentment in three Sermons, on Philip. 4.12. (2)
Christian submission, on 1 Samuel 3.18. (3) Christ a Christians life and death is
gain, on Philip. 1.21. (4) The Gospel of peace sent to the sons of peace, in
six Sermons, on Luke 10.5, 6. by Jeremiah Buroughs. Dr. Wilds Letter of Thanks
and Poems. A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful h^nds. The Saints privilege
by dying, by Mr. S^^t. The new World; or new-reformed Church, by Doctor Homes.
The Virtuous Daughter, a Funeral-Sermon, by Mr. Brian. The Miracle of Miracles,
or Christ in our Nature: by Dr. Rich. Sibbs. The unity and essence of the
Catholic Church-visible, by Mr. Hudson. Dr. Prideaux's Fasciculus
controversiarum Theologicum. Brightman on Revelations, Canticles and Daniel.
Seamans-Companion. Canaans Calamity.
The intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or the
particular Believing soul: in several Lectures on the whole second Chap. of
Cant. by John Collins, D. D.
Large 8 vo.
Heart-Treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian with Soul-enriching-treasure of truths, graces, experiences,
and comforts. The sure mercies of David; or a second part of Heart-treasure.
Heaven or Hell here in a Good or Bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent.
Closet-prayer a Christians duty; all three by O. Heyword. A practical discourse
of Prayer; wherein is handled the nature and duty of Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet. Of
quenching the Spirit; the evil of it, in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered; by Theophilus Polwheile. The re-building of London
encouraged and improved in everal meditations: by Samuel Rolls. The sure way to
Salvation; or a Treatise of the Saints mystical Union with Christ; by Richard
Stedman. M. A. Sober, Singularity, by the same Author. Heaven taken by Storm.
The mischief of sin: both by Tho. Watson. The Child's Delight; together with an
English Grammar. Reading and Spelling made easy; both by Tho. Lie. Aesop's
Fables, with morals thereupon in English-Verse. The Young-mans Instructor and
the Old-mans Remembrancer; being an Explanation of the Assemblies Catechism.
Captives bound in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; both by Tho.
Doolittle. Eighteen Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture, by
William Whitaker. The Saints care for Church Communion; declared in sundry
Sermons, preached at St. James Dukes-place, by Zech. Crofton. The life and
death of Edmund Stanton D. D. To which is added a Treatise of
Christian-conference; and a Dialogue between a Minister and a Stranger. Sin the
Plague of plagues, or sinful sin the worst of Evils; by Ralph Venning. M. A.
Cases of Conscience practically resolved; by I. Norman. The faithfulness of God
con^idered and cleared in the great Events of his Word; or a second part of the
fulfilling of the Scripture. The immortality of the Soul explained and proved
by Scripture and Reason; to which is added Faiths-triumph over the fears of
death; by Tho. Wadsworth. A Treatise of the incomparableness of God, in his
Being, Attributes, Works, and Word; by George Swinnock, M. A. A discourse of
the original, etc. of the Cossacks. The generation of Seekers; or the right
manner of the Saints addresses to the throne of Grace, with an Exposition on
the Lords-Prayer. The administration of Cardinal Ximones. A discourse of
Family-instruction, by Owen Stockton; with directions for those that have
suffered by the Fire. An Essay to facilltate the Education of Youth, by
bringing down the rudiments of Grammar to the sense of seeing, which ought to
be improved by Syncresis; by M. Lewis of Totenham. An Artificial Vestibulum;
wherein the sense of Ianua Linguarum is contained, compiled into plain and
short sentences in English, for the great ^ase of Masters, and Expeditious
progress of Scholars, by M. Lewis. Speculum Sherlockianum, o^ a Looking glass,
in which the admirers of Mr. Sherlock, may behold the man, as to his Acuracy,
Judgment, Orthodoxy. A discourse of Sins of Omission; wherein is discovered
their Nature, Causes, and Cure; by George Swinnock. Mr. Baxter's Reformed
Pastor. His Majesty's Propriety in the British Seas vindicated. Quakerism no
Christianity; or a through-Quaker no Christian, proved by their Principles, and
confirmed by Scripture; by I. Faldo. Differences about Water Baptism no bar to
Communion; by Io. Bunian. The Dutch-dispensatory; showing the virtues,
qualities and properties of Simples; the virtue and use of Compounds; whereto
is added the Complete Herbalist. Judge Dodaridge's laws of Nobility and Peerage.
Dinglys Spiritual Fast.

Solitude improved by Divine Meditation; by Matthew. Ranew.

A Murderer punished and pardoned, or Tho. Savage his life and death; with his
Funeral sermon.
Small 8 vo.
A defense against the fear of death; by Zach. Crofton. Gods Sovereignty
displayed; by William Gearing. The godly man's Ark, or a City of Refuge in the
day of his distress, in five Sermons; with Mrs. Moors evidences for Heaven: by
Edmund Calamy. The Almost-Christian discovered, or the false-Professor tried
and cast, by M. Mead. The true bounds of Christian-freedom: or a discourse
showing the extent and restraints of Christian-liberty, by S. Bolton., D. D.
The sinfulness of Sin and fullness of Christ, in two Sermons; by Will. Bridge.

A Plea for the godly, or the Righteous man's Excellency.

The holy Eucharist, or the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. A Treatise of
Self-denial. All three by Tho. Watson. The life and death of Tho. Wilson of
Mi^dstone in Kent. The life and death of Doctor Samuel Winter. A Covert from
the Storm, or the fearful encouraged in the day of Trouble. Worthy-walking
pressed upon all that have heard the Call of the Gospel. The Spirit of Prayer.
All three by Nath. Vincent. The inseparable union between Christ and a
Believer, by Tho. Peck. A disco^rse of Excuses; setting forth the variety and
vanity of them: the sin and misery brought in by them, by John Sheffield.
Invisible reality, demonstrated in the holy life and triumphant death of Mr. I.
Ianeway. The Saints encouragement to diligence in Christ's service: both by Mr.
James Ianeway. A discourse concerning the Education of Children. Convivium
Coele^te; a plain and familiar discourse concerning the Lords Supper; both by
R. Kidder. The Saints perseverance asserted in its Positive-ground against Mr.
Ives, by Tho. Danson. A Wedding ring fit for the Finger; by Will. Secker. The
Young-mans Call and Duty; by Nich. Lockyer. An Explanation of the
shorter-Catechism of the Assembly of Divines; by Tho. Lie. The Child's Delight
with Pictures; by Tho. Lie. The life and death of Tho Hall. A Plea for the
Non-Conformists, tending to vindicate them from Schism, by a Doctor in
Divinity. The flat opposition of Popery to Scripture; by I. N. Chaplain to a
Person of Honor. The Weavers Pocketbook, or Weaving spiritualized by I. C. D.
D Two disputations of Original-sin; by Richard Baxter. The History of
Moderation. The welcome Communicant. The ready way to prevent sin; by William
Bagshaw. The Little-peace-maker, discovering foolish Pride, the Make-ba^e.
Philadelphia; or a Treatise of Brotherly-love; by Mr. Gearing. Reformation or
Ruin, being certain Sermons on Levit. 26.2^, 24. by Tho. Hotchkis. The Riches
of Grace displayed; to which is added the privilege of Passive Obedience; and
52 proposals in order to help on Heart-humiliation; by Will. Bagshaw. The
parable of the great Supper opened in 17 Sermons, by Io. Crump. A present for
Teeming-women, by I. Oliver. Nonconformity without Controversy; by Benj.
Baxter. The Christians daily Monitor; by Josh. Church. A Treatise of
Close^-prayer; by Richard Mayo. The Religious Family; by Philip Lamb. A sober
inquiry, or Christ's Reign with Saints a thousand years. A discourse of the
prodigious Abstinence of Martha Tailor. A Memento to young and old; by John
Maynard. The privilege of the Saints on Earth above those in Heaven; by William
Hook. Index biblicus multijugus, or a Table of the holy Scripture; wherein each
of its Books, Chapters, and particular matters are distinguished and
Epitomized. The day of Grace, with the conversion of a Sinner; by Nath.
Vencent. The Greek Testament in 8 vo. An easy and useful Grammar for the
learning of the French tongue, by Mr. Gosthead, Gentleman. Mr. Raworths work
and reward of a Christian. The Miners Monitor, or advice to those that are
employed about the Mines. A Protestant Catechism for little Children. A
Scripture Catechism; by Samuel Petto. A Catechism according to the Church of
England. Grotius Catechism. Brief of the Bibles-History. The Fountain sealed;
by Dr. Sibbs. Nero Tragidea. Cottons None but Christ. Cornelianum dolium. The
Christians earnest longing for Christ's appearing preached at the Funeral of Mr.
Noah Webb; by Dan. Burgess. Wilsons Catechism. Elenchus motuum nuperorum in
Anglia. Cocains Poems. Poor Robins Jes^s. Croftons Foelix S^elus; or Prospering
profaneness provoking holy conference; by Zech. Crofton. Gramaticus
Analyticus, by the same Author. Alexanders advice to his Son. Artificial
Embelishments. H. Excellency of Christ set forth. Gods Sovereignty displayed;
by Mr. William Gearing.
In small 12 s.
The duty of Parents toward their Children. A little Book for little Children.
A method and instruction for the Art of divine Meditation. All three by Tho.
White. The considerations of Drexelius on Eternity. The shadow of the Tree of
Life, by M. M. The Psalms of David newly translated: more plain, smooth and
agreeable to the Text than any heretofore. The Prisoners Prayers. Mr. Henry
Lukin's Life of Faith. Awakening Call to Sinners. C^umbs of Comfort, or the
Lord Bacons Prayer
FINIS.

