AFFAIRS OF CHURCH and STATE IN ENGLAND, During the Life and Reign OF QUEEN
MARY.

Heb. 11. 35, 36, 37. 35. Some of them were tortured, not accepting
deliverance; that they might obtain a better Resurrection.

36. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings; yea moreover of
bonds and imprisonment.

37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with
the sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented, etc.

Vell. Paterc. Lib. 2. Hujus temporis fortunam ne deflere quidem quispiam satis
digne potuit; nemo exprimere verbis potest.

Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum.

LONDON, Printed for H. Twyford, T. Dring, J. Place, and W. Palmer. Anno 1660:

The Parentage, Birth, and first Fortunes of the Princess MARY, The Eldest
Daughter of K. Henry the Eighth, before her coming to the CROWN.
With a brief Narrative of her Mother's Misfortunes, from the first Agitating
of the Divorce, till the time of her Death; and that which followed thereupon.
MARY, the eldest Daughter of King Henry the Eighth, and of Katherine his first
wife, An. 1516.
daughter of Ferdinand and Issabella Kings of Spain, was born at Greenwich on
the 18 th day of February, Anno 1516. Her Mother had before been married to
Arthur Prince of Wales, the elder Brother of King Henry; but whether bedded by
him or not, (more than as to some old Formalities of Court, on the like
occasions) was not commonly known: But he dying within few months after, King
Henry the Seventh, the father of the deceased Prince, was secretly dealt with
by the Agents of the said Ferdinand and ^ssabella, to proceed unto a second
Marriage between Henry Duke of York, his now only son, and their daughter
Katherine. To which King Henry readily condescendeth, upon diverse reasons;
partly to be assured of the assistance of the Kings of Spain, against all
practices of the French; and partly that so great a Treasure, as the Rents and
Profits of the Princesse's Jointure might not be carried out of the Kingdom, as
needs must be, if she should be married to a Prince of another Nation. This
being agreed on by the Parents of either side, Pope Julius the 2 d. is
solicited for a Dispensation: to the Grant whereof he willingly yielded,
knowing how necessary it was to the Peace of Christendom, that those Kings
should be united in the strictest Leagues of Love and Amity. Which coming to
the knowledge of the Princess Katherine, who understood her own condition
better than her father or mother, she caused those words, vel forsan co^nitam,
to be inserted into the Bull or Dispensation; and this she did for the
preventing of all such disputes as might arise about the validity of the
Marriage, in case the consummation of it should be openly known; though
afterward those words were used as the shrewdest Argument for the invalidating
of the Marriage, when it came in question. And some such thing was thought to
have prevailed with King Henry the seventh, for deferring the advancement of
Henry his second son to the Style, Title, and Dignity of Prince of Wales, that
he might first be well assued, that no child was likely to be born of the
former Marriage, to whom that Title might more properly and of right belong.

The Dispensation being thus granted, Prince Henry, being then eleven years of
age, or thereabouts, is solemnly contracted to the Princess Katherine, who
must needs have a very great stock, as well of Christian-Prudence, as of
Virgin-Modesty, to wait the growing up of a Husband being then a child, and one
of whose affection to her, when he should come to Man's estate, she had no
assurance; and so it proved in the event: For Henry had no sooner finished the
fourteenth year of his age, when, either by the compunction of conscience, the
persuasion of some that wished him well, or upon consideration of the
disproportion of age which was then between them, (the Princess being eight
years the elder) he resolved upon the breaking and annulling of the said
Contract, in which his Parents had engaged him. To which end, making his
address to Doctor Richard Fox, then Bishop of Winchester, he openly renounceth
the said Contract, not by word only, but by the subscription of his name to a
Legal Instrument, containing the effect of that Renunciation, his Resolution
never to proceed any further in it, and his Reasons for it. Which Instrument he
published in the presence of John Read, a public Notary, (the Bishop sitting
then at Richmond, as in Court or Consistory) and witnessed unto by Miles
Da^ben^y, Lord Chamberlain to King Henry the seventh, and father of Henry Earl
of Bridgwater; Sir Charles Sommerset Banneret, created afterward Earl of
Worcester; Dr. Nicolas West, after Bishop of El^; Dr. Th^mas Rowthall, after
Bishop of Durham; and Sir Henry Maini^. The Instrument it self, extant in the
History of John Speed, may be there consulted. And in pursuance of this Act, he
waived the Consummation of the Marriage from one time to another, till the
death of his father, which happened on the 22 of April, An. 1509. he being then
within two months of the age of eighteen years. But being now come unto the
Crown by the death of his father, Reason of State prevailed so far beyond that
of Conscience, that he consented to the consummation of the Marriage, which
before he had solemnly renounced, and did accordingly celebrate those unhappy
Nuptials (the cause of so much trouble both to him and others) on the second
of June, and caused her to be Crowned with him on the 24 th. of the same month.
This Marriage was blessed within the year by the birth of a son, whom the King
caused to be Christened by the name of Henry; and five years after with another,
who lived not long enough to receive his Baptism.

But Henry, 1519.
the firstborn, not living to be two months old, the King remained childlesse
till the birth of this daughter Mary, the presumptive Heir of his Dominions;
committed in her Infancy to the care and charge of the Lady Margaret, daughter
of George Duke of Clarence, and by the King (in reference to her descent from
the house of the Montacutes) advanced unto the Style and Title of Countess of
Sarisbury, An* 1513. And herein it was thought, that the Queen had a particular
aim beyond that of the King, and that she rather chose to commit her daughter
to the care of that Lady, than of any other in the Kingdom; to the end, that
some affection growing to her by any of the Countesse's sons, her daughter's
Title to the Crown might be corroborated by the Interesse of the House of
Clarence. And so far her design succeeded, that the Princess Mary always
carried such a dear affection to Reginald P^le, her second son, (best known by
the name of Cardinal Pole in the following times) that when she came unto the
Crown, she would have made choice of him for her husband before any other, if
the necessity of her affairs, and some artifices used to illude that purpose,
had not changed her mind. She had scarce lived to the third year of her age,
when she was promised in marriage to the Daulphine of France, 1519.
with a Portion of 333000 Crowns, to be paid by her Father, and as great a
Jointure to be made by the French King Francis, as ever had been made by any
King of that Country. And so far did the business seem to be acted in earnest,
that it was publicly agreed upon in the treaty for the Town of Tournay, that
the Espousals should be made within four months, by the said two Kings, in the
name of their children; in pursuance whereof, as the French King sent many rich
gifts to some leading men of the Court of England, to gain their good liking to
this League, so he sent many costly Presents to the Princess Mary, the
designed wife (if Princes could be bound by such designations) of the heir of
France.

But war beginning to break out between the French and the Spaniards, it was
thought fit by Charles the fifth, 1522.
being then Emperor of Germany, and King of Spain, to court the favor of the
English; for the obtaining whereof, his neernesse to Queen Katherine, being
sister to the Queen, his Mother, gave him no small hopes. Upon this ground he
makes a voyage into England, is royally feasted by the King* installed solemnly
Knight of the Order of the Garter, in the Castle of Windsor, and there
capitulates with the King amongst other things, to take to wife his daughter
Mary, as soon as she should come to the years of marriage; it was also then and
there agreed, that as soon as she was twelve years old, the Emperor should
send a proxy to make good the contract and espouse her per verba de praesenti
in the usual form* that in the mean time the King of England should not give
her in marriage unto any other, that a dispensation should be procured from the
Pope, at the charge of both Princes, in regard that the parties were within the
second degree of consanguinity; that within four months after the contract, the
Princess should be sent to the Emperor's Court, whether it were in Spain or
Flanders, at the sole charge of the King of England, and married within four
days after her coming thither, in the face of the Church; her portion limited
to 400000 crowns, if the King should have no issue male, but to be enlarged to
600000 crowns more, if the King should have any such issue male to succeed in
the Kingdom. A jointure of 50000 crowns per annum, to be made by the Emperor,
the one part thereof to be laid in Flanders, and the other in Spain; and
finally, that if either of the said two Princes should break off this marriage,
he should forfeit 400000 crowns to the party injured.

And now who could have thought but that the Princess Mary, 1525.
must have been this Emperor's wife, or the wife rather of any Prince, then
one that was to be begotten by this Emperor, on another woman, though in
conclusion so it happened. As long as Charles had any need of the assistance and
friendship of England, so long he seemed to go on really in the promised
marriage, and by all means must have the Princess sent over presently to be
declared Empress, and made Regent of Flanders. But when he had taken the
French King at the battle of Pavia, sacked Rome, and made the Pope his prisoner,
he then conceived himself in a condition of seeking for a wife elsewhere,
which might be presently ripe for marriage, without such a tedious expectation,
as his tarrying for the Princess Mary must needs have brought him. And
thereupon he shuts up a marriage with the Lady Issabell, Infanta of P^lugull,
and daughter to another of his Mother's ^isters. For which being questioned by
the King, he lays the blame upon the importunity of his Council, who could not
patiently permit him to remain unmarried, till the Princess Mary came to age;
and who besides had caused a scruple to be started, touching her
illegitimation, as being born by one that had been wife to his elder brother.
King Henry thereupon proceeds to a new treaty with the French, to whom his
friendship at the time of their King's captivity had been very useful; which is
by them as cheerfully excepted, as by him it had been franckly offered. She had
before been promised to the Daulphin of France, but now she is designed for the
second son, then Duke of Orleance, who afterward, by the death of his elder
brother, succeeded his father in the Crown. But whilst they were upon this
treaty, the former question touching her legitimation, was again revived by the
Bishop of Tarb^e, one of the Commissioners for the French, which though it
seemed not strong enough to dissolve the treaty which the French were willing
to conclude (as their affairs then stood) upon any conditions; yet it
occasioned many troubles in the Court of Eng^and, and almost all Christendom
besides.

For now the doubt being started a second time, 1526.
and started now by such, who could not well subsist without his friendship,
began to make a deep impression in the mind of the King, and to call ba^k such
passages to his remembrance, as otherwise would have been forgotten. He now
bethinks himself of the Protestation which he had made in the presence of
Bishop Fox before remembered, never to take the Lady Katherine for his wife;
looks on the death of his two sons, as a punishment on him for proceeding in
the marriage; and casts a fear of many inconveniences, or mischiefs rather,
which must inevitably befall this Kingdom, if he should dye, and leave no
lawful issue to enjoy the Crown. Hope of more children there was none, and
little pleasure to be taken in a conversation; which the disproportion of their
years, and a greater inequality in their dispositions, must render less
agreeable every day then other. In this perplexity of mind, he consults his
Confessor, by whom he was advised to make known his griefs to Cardinal Wolsie,
on whose judgment he relied in most other matters; which happened so directly to
the Cardinal's mind, as if he had contrived the project. The Emperor had
lately crossed him in his suit for the Popedom, and since denied him the
Archbish prick of T^ledo, with the promise whereof he had before bound him to
his side. And now the Cardinal resolves to take the opportunity of the King's
distractions, for perfecting his revenge against him. In order whereunto, as he
had drawn the King to make peace with France, and to conclude a marriage for
his daughter with the Duke of Orleance; so now he hopes to separate him from
the bed of Katherine, the Emperor's Aunt, and marry him to Madam Rhinee, the
French Queens sister, who afterward was wife to the Duke of Ferrara. About
which time the picture of Madam Margaret, the sister of King Francis, first
married to the Duke of Alanzon, was brought amongst others into Englan^, by
Thomas Bol^n, Viscount Rochford, at his return from the Fren^h Court, where he
had been Ambassador for the King of England: which first occasioned areport in
the common people, and afterwa^ds a mistake in our common Chronicles, touching
this Lady's being designed by Wolsie for a wife to his Master; whereas she was
at that time actually married to the Count of A^bret, King of Navarre in title,
and in title only.

But Rochford brought with him out of France another Piece, 1527.
which more excelled the picture of the Duchess of Alanz^n, then that
Duchess did the ordinary beauties in the Court of France; that is to say, his
daughter Anne; whom he had bred up for a time in the house of the Duchess,
which rendered her an exact mistress of the gaities and garb of the great
French Ladies. Appearing in the Court of England, she showed her self with so
many advantages above all other Ladies about the Queen, that the King easily
took notice of her. Whether more captivated by the Allurements of her beauty,
or the facetiousnesse of her behavior, it is hard to say; certain it is, that
he suffered himself to be so far transpo^ted in affection toward her, that he
could think of nothing else, but what might tend to the accomplishment of his
desires; so that the separation from the bed of Katherine, which was but coldly
followed upon case of Conscience, is now more hotly prosecuted in the heat of
Concupisc^nce. In the mean time the King advises with the Cardinal, and the
Cardinal with the most learned men in the Realm of England. By whom it was
modestly resolved, that the King had a very just ground to consult the Pope,
and to (...) lawful means for extricating himself out of those perplexities,
in which this marriage had involved him. The Pope had been beholden to the
King, for procuring his liberty, when the Imperialists held him prisoner in the
Fort of St Angel^, and was in reason bound to gratify him for so great a
benefit. But then withal, he neither was to provoke the Emperor, nor hazard
the Authority and Reputation of the Sea Apostolic, by running on the King's
errand with more ha^te then speed. He therefore goes to work like a Pope of
Rome, and entertains the King with hopes; without giving the Emperor and his
adherents, any cause of despair. A Commission is therefore granted to two
Cardinals, that is to say, Cardinal Thomas Wolsi^, Archbishop of York, and
Laurene Camp^gius, whom Henry some few years before, had made Bishop of
Sa^isbury; both beneficiaries to the King, and therefore like enough to consult
more his interest, then the Queen's contentment.

Of the erecting of a Court L^gant^ne in the Convent of the Black Friars in
1528.
London, the citing of the King and Queen to appear before them, the Kings
patheticall Oration in the bemoaning of his own misfortunes, and the Queen's
Appeal from the two Cardinals to the Pope, I shall now say nothing; leaving the
Reader for those passages to our common Annals. Suffice in this place to note,
that while the business went on favorable in the King's behalf, Wolsie was
given to understand of his desperate loves to Mistrisse Bollen, which
represented to him two ensuing mischiefs, not to be otherwise avoided, then by
slackning the course of these proceedings. For first, he saw that if the King
should be divorced definitively from his present wife, he should not be able to
draw him to accept of Madam Rhenee the French Queens sister, which was the mark
he chiefly aimed at. And secondly, he feared that Mistrisse Anne had brought so
much of the Lutheran with her, as might in time become destructive 1529.
to the Church of Rome. Of this he certifies the Pope, the Pope recals
Campegius, and revokes his Commission; leaving the King to cast about to some
new ways to effect his purpose. And at this time it happened, that Dr Thomas
Cram^er (who afterward obtained to the Sea of Canterbury) discoursing with
some of the Kings Ministers, about the intrica^enesse and perplexity of this
great affair; declared, for his opinion in it, that it were better for the King
to govern himself therein, by the judgment and determination of the
Universities beyond the seas, then to depend upon the shifts and Artifices of
the Court of Rome. Which being told unto the King, he dispatcheth Cramner unto
Rome, in the company of Rochford, now made Earl of Wil^shire, to maintain the
King's cause by disputation; and at the same time employs his agents to the
Universities of France and Italy, who being under the command of the French
King, or the power of the Pope, gave sentence in behalf of Henry, condemning
his marriage with the Lady Katherine, the Relict of his brother, to be simply
unlawful in it self, and therefore not to be made valid by a dispensation from
the Popes of Rome.

The putting the King upon this course, proved the fall of Wolsi^; who growing
every day less then other in the King's esteem, was brought within (...)
compass of a Pramunire, and thereby stripped of all his goods to an infinite
value; removed not long after unto York, and there arrested of High Treason by
the Earl of Northumberland, and committed to the custody of Sir William
Kingston, being then Lieutenant of the Tower. By whom conducted toward London,
he departed this life in the Abbey of Leicester: 1530.
his great heart not being able to endure so many indignities, as had been
lately put upon him, and having cause to fear much worse then his former
sufferings. But the removing of this Rub, did not much smooth the way to the
King's desires. The Queen's appeal unto the Pope, was the greatest difficulty,
from which since she could not be removed, it must be made unprofitable and
ineffectual, for the time to come. And thereupon a Proclamation is set forth on
the 19 of September, 1530. in these following words, viz. The King's Highness
straightly charge and commands, That no manner of person, of what estate,
degree or condition, he or they be of, do purchase, or attempt to purchase,
from the Court of Rome, or elsewhere, nor use, nor put in execution, divulge or
publish, any thing heretofore within this year passed, purchased, or to be
purchased hereafter; containing matter prejudicial to the High Authority,
Jurisdiction, and prerogative Royal of this his said Re^lm, or to the let,
hinderance, or impeachment, of his Grace's Noble, and Virtuous intended
purposes in the premises; upon pain of incurring his Highnesse's indignation,
and imprisonment, and farther punishment of their bodies, for their so doing,
at his Grace^s pleasure; to the dreadful example of all others.

This was the Prologue to the downfall of the Pope in England, seconded by the
Kings taking to himself the Title ^upream Head of the Churches of England and
Ireland, acknowledged in the Convocation, and confirmed in Parliament, and
ending finally in an Act entitled, An Act for extinguishing the authority of
the Bishops of Rome. And in all this the King did nothing but what he had
example and Authority for, at that very time; for in the year 1520 (being but
ten years before the setting forth of this Proclamation) Monseiur a' Lautreth,
Governor for the French King, in the Dukedom of Millain, taking a displeasure
against Pope Leo the tenth, deprived him of all his jurisdiction within the
Dukedom. Vt praefecto sacris Bigoranno Episcopo, omnia sine Romani Po^tificis
authoritate administrarentur. Thuan.
And that being done, he so disposed of all Ecclesiastical affairs, that the
Church there was supremely governed by the Bishop of Bigorre (a Bishop of the
Church of France), without the intermedling of the Pope at all. The like we
find to have been done by the Emperor, Charles the fifth, who being no less
displeased with Pope Clement the eighth, abolished the Papal power and
jurisdiction, out of all the Churches of his Kingdom in Spain, which though it
held but for a while (till the breach was closed) yet left he an example by it
(as my Author notes) that there was no necessity of any Pope or supreme Pastor
in the Church of Christ. Ecclesiasticam disciplinam citra Romani nominis
authoritatem posse consecrari.
And before either of these Acts or Edicts came in point of practice, the
learned Gerson, Chancellor of the University of Paris (when the Popes power was
greater far, then it was at the present) had writ and published a discourse,
entitled, De auferibilita^e Papae, touching the total abrogating of the
Papal Office. Which certainly he had never done, had the Papal Office been
found essential, and of intrinsecall concernment to the Church of Christ.
According unto which position of that learned man, the greatest Princes of
those times did look upon the Pope, and the Papal power, as an Excrescence at
the least in the body mystical, subject and fit to be pared off, as occasion
served. And if they did, or do permit him to retain any part of his former
greatness, it is permitted rather upon selfe-ends, or Reasons of state, or
otherwise to serve their turn by him as their (...) requires, then out of any
opinion of his being so necessary, that the Church cannot be well governed, or
subsist without him.

But leaving these disputes to some other place, 1531.
we must return unto the Queen. To whom some Lords are sent in the end of May,
an. 1531. declaring to her the determinations of the Universities, concerning
the pretended ^^rriage betwixt her and the King. And therewith they demanded of
her; whether, for quieting the King's conscience, and putting an end to that
debate, she would be content to refer the matter to four Bishops, and four
temporal Lords. But this she absolutely refused, saying, She was his lawful
Wife, that she would stand to her Appeal, and condescend to nothing in that
particular, but by the counsel of the Emperor, and the rest of her friends.
This answer makes the King more resolute, more open in the demonstration of his
affections to the Lady Anne Bollen, whom he makes Marchioness of Pembrook, by
his Letters Patents, 1532.
bearing date the first of September, 1532. takes her along with him to Callis
in October following, there to behold the glorious enterview betwixt him and
the French King; and finally, privately marries her within few days after his
return, the divorce being yet unsentenced betwixt him and the Queen. Not long
after which, it was thought necessary to the King, to call a Parliament,
wherein he caused an Act to pass, that no person should appeal for any cause
out of this Realm, to the Pope of Rome; but that all Appeals should be made by
the party grieved from the Commissary to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the
Archbishop, and from the Archbishop, to the King, as had been anciently
observed amongst the first Kings of the House of Normandy. It was also enacted
in the same, that all causes Eccles^aticall Cognisances, in which the King
himself was a Party, should be determined finally in the Upper-House of
Convocation, without being bound to make recourse to the Court of Rome. During
the sitting of which Parliament it is declared by Proclamation, that Queen
Katherine should no longer be called Queen, but Princess Dowager, as being the
Widow of Prince Arthur, not the Wife of King Henry.

Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, in the mean time dying, Cranmer is designed
for his Successor in that eminent dignity; which he unwillingly accepts of,
partly in regard that he was married at that time, and partly in reference to
an Oath which he was to take unto the Pope at his Consecration. But the King
was willing, for his own ends, to wink at the one, and the Pope was not in a
condition (as the case then stood) to be too peremptory in the other. So that a
Protestation being admitted, of not being otherwise bound to the Pope, than
should be found agreeable to the Word of God, and the Laws and Statu^es of the
Realm, he takes his Oath, and receives the Episcopal Consecration, the 30th.
of March, 1533. the Parliament still sitting which before we spoke of. At his
first entrance into the House of Convocation, he propounds two Questions to be
considered and disputed by the Bishops and Clergy; the first was, Whether the
marrying of a Brother's wife, carnally known, though without any issue by him,
be so prohibited by the Will and Word of God, as not to be dispensed withal by
the Pope of Rome. The second was, Whether it did appear, upon the Evidence
given in before the Cardinals, that Katherine had been carnally known by
Prince Arthur, or not. Both Questions being carried in the Affirmative, though
not without some Opposition in either House, in the first especially; it was
concluded thereupon in the Convocation, and not long after in the Parliament
also, That the King might lawfully proceed to another Marriage.

These preparations being made, the Marriage precondemned by Convocation, and
all Appeals to Rome made ineffectuall by Act of Parliament, the new Archbishop
(upon his own desire and motion, contained in his Letters of the 11th of April)
is authorized by the King, under his Sign Manual, to proceed definitively in
the Cause. Who thereupon, accompanied with the Bishops of London, Winchester,
Wells, and Lincoln, and dive^s other persons to serve as Officers in that
Court, repaired to Dunstable in the beginning of May; and having a convenient
place prepared in the form of a Consistory, they sent a Citation to the
Princess Dowager, who was then at Amptill, (a Mannor-house of the King's about
six miles off) requiring her to appear before them at the day appointed; which
day being come, and no appearance by her made, either in Person, or by Proxy,
(as they knew there would not) she is called peremptorily every day, fifteen
days together; and every day there was great poasting betwixt them and the
Court, to certify the King and Cromwell (a principal stickler in this
business) how all matters went. In one of which, from the new Archbishop,
extant in the Cottonian Library, a Resolution is signified to Cromwel^ for
coming to a final Sentence on Friday the 18 th. of that Month, but with a
vehement conjuration both to him and the King, not to div^lge so great a
secret, for fear the Princess Dowager on the hearing of it, either before, or
on the day of passing Sentence, should make her appearance in the Court: For
(says he) if the noble Lady Katherine should, upon the bruit of this matter,
either in the mouths of the Inhabitants of the Country, or by her Friends, or
Counsel, hearing of this brute, be moved, stirred, counseled, or persuaded
to appear before me, in the time, or before the time of Sentence, I should be
thereby greatly staid and let in the Process, and the King's Grace's Council
here present shall be much uncertain what shall be then further done therein.
For a great brute and voice of the people in this behalf, might perchance move
her to do the thing, which peradventure she would not if she hear little of it.
And therefore I pray you to speak as little of this matter as you may, and to
move the King's Highness so to do, for consideration above recited. But so it
happened to their wish, that the Queen, persisting constant in her Resolution of
standing to the Judgment of no other Court than the Court of Rome, vouchsafed
not to take any notice of their proceeding in the Cause. And thereupon, at the
day and time before designed, she was pronounced to be Cont^max for defect of
Appearance; and by the general consent of all the Learned men then present,
the Sentence of the Divorce was passed, and her Marriage with the King declared
void, and of none effect.

Of all these doings, as the Divorced Queen would take no notice, so by her
Officers and Attendants she was served as in her former capacity. Which coming
to the King's knowledge, he sends the Duke of Suffolk and some others in the
month of July, with certain Instructions given in Writing, to persuade her, to
submit to the Determinations of the King and State, to lay aside the Title of
Queen, to content her self with that of the Princess Dowager; and to remove
her from the Bishop of Lincoln's house at Bayden, where she then remained, to a
place called Some^sham, belonging to the Bishop and Church of Eli. To none of
which when she would hearken, an Oath is tendered to her Officers and the rest
of her Household* to serve her only in the capacity of Princess Dowager, and
not as formerly in the no^ion of a Queen of England. Which at the first was
generally refused amongst them, upon a Resolution which had been made in the
Case by Abel and Berker, her two Chaplains; that is to say, That having already
took an Oath to serve her as Queen, they could not with a good conscience take
any other. But in the end, a fear of losing their said places, but more of
falling into the King's displeasure, so prevailed upon them* that the Oath was
taken by most of them; not suffered from thenceforth to come into the Queen's
presence, (who looked upon them as the betrayers of her Cause) or to perform
any service about her Person. Some Motives, to induce her to a better
conformity, were ordered to be laid before her; none like to be more prevalent,
than that which might concern the Interest of her daughter Mary. And therefore
it was offered to her consideration, That chiefly, and above all things, she
should have regard to the Honorable, and her most dear Daughter, the Lady
Princess; from whom, in case the King's Highness (being thus enforced,
exagitated, and moved by the unkindnesse of the Dowager) might also withdraw
his Princely estimation, goodness, zeal, and affection; it would be to her no
little regret, sorrow, and extreme calamity. But the wise Queen knew well
enough, that if she stood, her Daughter could not do amiss* whereas there
could be nothing gained by such submissions, but the dishonor of the one, the
Bastardising of the other, and the ex^luding of them both from all possibility
of being restored in time to come to their first condition.

Finding small hopes of any justice to be done her in the Realm of England, and
not well able to endure so many indignities as had been daily put upon her, she
makes her complaint unto the Pope, whom she found willing to show his teeth,
though he could not bite. For presently hereupon a Bull is issued, for
accursing both the King and the Realm; the Bea^er hereof not daring to proclaim
the same in England, caused it to be set up in some public places in the Town
of Dunkirk* (one of the Haven Towns of Flanders) that so the roaring of it
might be heard on this side of the Sea* to which it was not safe to bring it.
But neither the Pope nor the Queen Dowager got any thing by this rash
adventure, which only served to exasperate the King against them, as also
against all which adheared unto them. For in the following Parliament, which
began on the 25 th. of January, and ended on the 30 th. of March, an Act was
passed, inhibiting the payment of First Fruits to the Bishop of Rome, and for
the Electing, Consecrating, and Confirming of the Archbishops and Bishops in
the Realm of England, without recourse unto the Pope, cap. 20. Another Act for
the Attaindure of Elizabeth Barton, commonly called the holy Maid of K^nt, with
many other her adhearents, for stickling in the cause of the Princess Dowager,
cap. 12. and finally, of Establishing the Succession in the Crown Imperial of
this Realm, cap. 22. In which last Act, the Sentence of the Divorce was
confirmed and ratified, the Princess Mary de^lared to be illegitimate, the
Succession of the Crown entailed on the King's Issue by Queen Anne Bollen, an
Oath prescribed for all the Subjects in maintenance of the said Statute of
Succession, and taken by the Lords and Commons at the end of that Parliament,
as generally by all the Subjects of the Kingdom within few months after. For
the refusal whereof, as also for denying the King's Supremacy, and some
suspicion of confederacy with Elizabeth Barton, Doctor John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, not many days before created Cardinal by Pope Paul the 3 d. was on
the 22 of June beheaded publicly on the Towerhill, and his head most
disgracefully fixed upon a Pole, and set on the top of the Gate on
London Bridge. And on the 6 th. of July then next following, Sir Thomas Moor,
who had succeeded Wolsie in the place of Lord Chancellor, was beheaded for the
same cause also* But I find him not accused, as I do the other, for having any
hand in the Conspiracy of El^zabeth Barton.

The Execution of which great persons, and of so many others who wished well
unto her, added so much affliction to the desolate and disconsolate Queen, that
not being able longer to bear the burden of so many miseries, she fell into a
languishing sickness; which more and more increasing on her, and finding the
near approach of death, (the only remedy now left for all her sorrows) she
dictated this ensuing Letter, which she caused to be delivered to the King by
one of her Women, wherein she laid before him these her last requests, viz.

My most dear Lord, King and Husband (for so she called him.)
THe hour of my death now approaching, I cannot choose but, out of the love I
bear you, advise you of your souls health, which you ought to prefer before all
considerations of the world, or flesh, whatsoever: For which yet you have cast
me into many calamities, and your self into many troubl^s. But I for give you
all, and pray God to do so likewise. For the rest, I commend unto you Mary our
daugh^er, beseeching you to be a good Father unto her, as I have heretofore
desired. I must en^reat you also to respect my Maids, and give them in
Marriage, which is not much, they being but three. And to all my other Servants
a yea^s pay, besides their due, lest otherwise they should be unprovided for.
Lastly, I make this Vow, That mine Eyes have desired you above a^l things.

Farewell.

Within few days after the writing of which Letter, that is to say, on the 8
th. of January then next following, she yielded her pious Soul to God at the
King's Mannor-house of Kimbolton, in the County of Hu^ting^on, and was solemnly
interred not long after in the Abbey of Peterborough. The reading of her Letter
drew some tears from the King, which could not but be much increased by the
news of her death. Moved by them both to such a measure of commiseration of her
sad condition, that he caused the greatest part of her goods (amounting to 5000
Marks) to be expended on her Funeral, and in the recompencing of such of her
servants as had best deserved it. Never so kind to her in the time of her life,
as when he had rendered her incapable of receiving a kindness.

The Princess Mary is now left wholly to her self, declared illegitimate by
her Father, deprived of the comfort of her Mother, and in a manner forsaken by
all her friends, whom the severe proceedings against Moor and Fisher had so
deterred, that few durst pay her any offices of Love or Duty. Of any
proceedings in the Match with the Duke of Orleance, we hear no more news, all
further prosecution of it being at a stand by the misfortunes of her Mother;
nor was she sought in Marriage by any other Prince in the life of her Father,
bu^ only by James the 5 th. of Scotland; but finding himself deluded in it by
King Henry, he thought it best to strengthen himself by a Match with France,
where he was first married to Madam Magdaleene, the first daughter of K.
Francis, and afterward to Mary daughter of Claude of Lorrain, Duke of Guise,
by whom he had one only daughter called Mary also. In which condition, the
poor Princess had no greater comfort than what she could gather from her
Books, in which she had been carefully instructed by Doctor John Voisie, alias
Harman, appointed her Tutor by the King; and, for his good performance in that
place of trust, advanced by him to the Sea of Exon, An. 1529. and afterward
made Lord President of Wales; which sell out better for the Tutor, than it did
for the Pupil; Who being left destitute of the counsel of so grave a Man,
began to give way more and more to her grief and passions, which brought her at
the last to such an averseness from the King, and such a manifest disaffection
to his Person and Government, that he was once upon the point of sending her
prisoner to the Tower; and had so done, if Cranmer had not interposed some
powerful reasons to dissuade him from it.

During which time of her averseness, the King sent certain of the Lords to
remove her to Hatfield; who having no authority to treat her by the name of
Princess, but only to execute the King's commands, gave her occasion thus to
signify her discontentments, My Lords (said she) as touching my removing to
Hatfield, I will obey his Grace, as my duty is, or to any other place that his
Grace will appoint me. But I protest before you, and all other that be here
present, that my conscience will in no wise suffer me to take any other than my
self for Princess, or for the King's Daughter, born in lawful Matrimony; and
that I will never wittingly or willingly say or do, whereby any person might
take occasion to think, that I agree to the contrary. Nor say I this out of any
ambition or proud mind, as God is my Judge; but that if I should do otherwise,
I should in my conscience slander the Deed of our Mother, the holy Church, and
the Pope, who is the Judge in this matter* and none other; and also should
dishonor the King my Father, the Queen my Mother, and falsely confess my self
a Bastard, which God defend that I should do, since the Pope has not so
declared it by his Sentence definitive, to whose final Judgment I submit my
self. In pursuance of which claim to the Title of Princess, together with the
Privileges and Preheminences thereunto belonging, she writes this following
Letter to the King her Father, on a like occasion.

IN most humble wise I beseech your Grace of your daily bl^ssing. Pleases it
the same to be advertised, that this morning my Chamberlain came and showed me,
that he had received a Letter from Sir William Paulet, Controller of your
House: the effect whereof was, that I should with all diligence remove unto the
Castle of Hertford. Whereupon I desired him to see the same Letter, which he
showed me; wherein was written, That the Lady Mary, the King's Daughter, should
remove to the place before-said, leaving out in the same the name of Princess,
Which when I heard, I could not a little marvail, trusting verily, that your
Grace was not privy to the same Letter, as concerning the leaving out of the
name of Princess; for as much as I doubt not in your goodness, but that your
Grace does take me for your lawful Daughter, born in true Matrimony. Wherefore
if I should agree to the contrary, I should in my conscience run into the
displeasure of God, which I hope assuredly, that your Grace would not that I so
should. And in all other things, your Grace shall have me always as humble an
obedient Daughter and Handmaid, as ever was child to the father, which my du^y
bi^doth (...) to; as knows ^ur Lord, Who have your Grace in his most holy
tui^ion, with much honor and long life, to his pleasure.

From your Manor of (...), October. 2* By your most humble Daughter* MARY
Princess.


And on these terms she stood, from the Divorce of her Mother till the
Attaindure of Queen Anne Bollen, against whom she thought it did concern her to
bear up to the highest, as she did accordingly.

But growing into better hopes by the death of the said Queen Anne, the
Annulling of the Marriage also, and the Bastardi^ing of the Princess Elizabeth
her only daughter, she began to cast about again, writes her submissive
Letters to the King her father, and humbly craves some testimonies of his love
and goodness: Which so prevailed, that the Duke of Norfolk is sent to treat
with her upon certain Instructions; so ne^essary to the knowledge of her
affairs, in this Conjuncture, that they deserve a place here, and are these
that follow.

Certain Articles and Injunctions, given by the King's Highness to his right
Trusty and right entirely beloved Cosen and Counselor, the Duke of Norfolk;
whom, with certain others in his company, His Majesty sends to the Lady Mary
his Daughter, for the Purposes ensuing.
FIrst, whereas the said Lady Mary has sundry ways, with long continuance,
showed her self so obstinate toward the King's Majesty, her Sovereign Lord and
Father, and so disobedient to his Laws, conceived and ^ade upon most just*
vertu^^s, and godly grounds, that as the wilful disobedience thereof seems a
monster in Nature; so, unless the mercy of his Highness had been most
abundantly extended unto her, by the course of his Grace's Laws, and the force
of his Justice, she end^^g^red her self so far, that it was greatly t^ his
Highnesse's regret and hearty sorrow, to see and perceive how little (...)
este^meth the same; extending to the loss of his favor, the loss of her
honor, the loss of her life, and undoub^edly to the indignation of Almighty
God. For that she neither obeys her Father and Sovereign, nor his just and
virtuous Laws aforesaid. And that of late nevertheless calling to remembrance
her transgressions and offenses in this p^rt toward God, her Father and
Sovereign Lord the King's Highness; she has writt^n to the same three su^d^y
Letters, containing a declaration of her repentance conceived for the Premises,
with such an humble and simple submission, as she appears not only to submit
her s^lfwholly, and without exception, (especially by the last Letter) to the
Laws, but also for her state and condition, to put her self only to his
Grace's mercy; nothing desiring but mercy and forgiveness for her offenses*
with a reconciliation to his Grace's favor.

Albeit his Majesty has been so ingrately handled and used by her, as is afor^
declared, that the like would enforce any private person t^ ab^ndon for ever
such an unkind and inobedient child from their grace and favor; yet, such is
his Majesty's gracious and divine nature, such is his clemency and pity, such
his merciful inclination and Princely heart, that, as he has been ever ready
to take pity and comp^ssi^n of all offenders, repentantly calling and crying
for the same; So, in case he may thoroughly parceive the same to be in the said
Lady Mary's heart, which she has put in pen and writing, his Highness
considering the imbecility of her sex* being the same is frail, inconstant,
and easy to he persuaded by simple counsel, can be right well contented to
remit unto her part of his said displeasure* And therefore has (...) this
time, for the certain knowledge of her heart and stomach, s^^t unto her his
said Cosen, with others, to demand and enquire of her certain Questions. Her
Answe^s whereunto his pleasure is they shall require, and note in writing,
which s^all thoroughly decipher, whether she be indeed the person she
pretends, or for any respect has with general words labored to cloak the
special matter, which is repugnant and contrary to that, which his Majesty
has gathered and conceived of the same.

1. And first, after their Access and Declaration of the Premises, they shall
for their first Question demand of her, Whether she does recognize and
knowledge the King's Highness for her Sovereign Lord and King, in the
Imperial Crown of this Realm of England, and will and does submit her self
unto his Highness, and to all and singu^ar the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, as becomes every true and faithful Subject to do.

2. Also, whether she will with all her power and qualities, that God has
endu'd her withal, not only obey, keep, and observe all and singular Laws and
Statutes of this Realm; but also set forth, advance, and maintain the same, to
the utmost of her power, according to her bounden duty.

3. Also, whether she will recognize, accept, take, and repute the King's
Highness to be supreme Head in Earth, under Christ, of the Church of England,
and utterly refuse the Bishop of Rome's pretended Power and Jurisdiction,
heretofore usurped in this Realm, according to the Laws and Statutes of the
same, made and ordained in the behalf of all the King's true Subjects, humbly
received, admitted, obeyed, kept, and observed: And also will and do renounce,
and utterly forsake, all manner of Remedy, Interesse, and Advantage by the said
Bishop of Rome's Laws, Process, or Jurisdiction to her in any wise
appertaining, or that hereafter may by any Title, Color, or Mean, belong,
grow, succeed or appertain, or in any case may follow or ensue.

4. And whether she will and does, of her Duty and Obedience toward God, her
Alleigance toward the King's Highness, and the Laws of this Realm, and also
of the sincere love and zeal that she bears toward the Truth, freely and
franckly recognize and knowledge, without any other respect, both by Go^'s Law
and Man's Law, the Marriage heretofore had between his Majesty and her Mother,
to be unlawful.

5. Also, Be she enquired or examined, For what cause, and by whose motion and
means she has continued and remained in her obstinacy so long; and who did
e^bold, or animate her thereto, with other circumstances thereof appertaining?

6. Also, What is the cause, that she at this present time, rather then at any
other heretofore, does submit her self?


To these six Articles, she was required to give a plain and positive answer:
Which plainly shows the doubtfulnesse and uncertainty of her present condition,
in being either forced to confess her self to be illegitimate, or running on
the last hazard of the Kings displeasure, if she should do otherwise. But
wisely considering in her self, whom she had to deal with, she thought it
safest to strike sale, and to submit her self to him, with whom it was not
lawful for her to dispute that point, if she had been able. She therefore
makes a clear acknowledgement of the four first Articles, by the subscribing of
her name; but craved leave to demur on the two last, because some persons were
concerned in them, whom she was not willing to discover. And by this means she
gained so far upon the King, that from that time forwards, he held her in the
same rank with the rest of his children; gave her her turn in the succession
of the Kingdom; assigned her portion of ten thousand pounds, to be paid at her
marriage, and in the interim, three thousand pounds per annum, for her personal
maintenance. And more then this he did not do for his daughter Elizabeth;
notwithstanding the esteem and affection which he bare to her mother; for
bring^^g whom into his bed, he had cancelled all the bonds of his former
marriage. Little or nothing more occurreth of her in the time of King Henry,
because there was little or nothing altered in the face of Religion, which
might give her any cause of public or personal dislike. But when the great
alterations happened in the time of King Edward, she then declared her self more
openly (as she might more safely) in opposition to the same: concerning which
she thus declared her self in a Letter to the Lord Protector, and the rest of
the Council, dated at Kenninghall, June 22. An. 1549.

My Lord,
I Perceive by the Letters which I late received from you, and other of the
Kings Majesty's Council, that you be all sorry to find so little conformity in
me, touching the observation of his Majesty's Laws; who am well assured I have
offended no law, unless it be a late law of your own making, which in my
conscience is not worthy the name of Law, both for the King's honors sake, and
the wealth of the Realm, and giving the occasion of an evil bruit throughout
all Christendom, besides the partiality used in the same, and (as my
conscience is very well persuaded) the offending God, which passes all the
rest. But I am well assured, that the King his Fathers Laws, were all allowed
and consented to, without compulsion, by the whole Realm, both spiritual and
temporal, and all the Executors sworn upon a book to fulfill the same, so that
it was an authorized Law. And that I have obeyed, and will do with the grace of
God, till the King's Majesty my brother, shall have sufficient years to be a
judge in this matter himself. Whereto (my Lord) I was plain with you at my last
being in the Court, declaring unto you at that time, whereunto I would stand;
and now do assure you all, that the only occasion of my stay from a tering of
mine opinion, is for two causes. One principally for my conscience; the other,
that the King my brother shall nor hereafter charge me to be one of those that
were agreeable to such alterations in his tender years. And what fruits daily
grow by such changes, since the death of the King my Father, to every
indifferent person, it well appears, both to the displeasure of God, and
unquietness of the Realm.

Notwithstanding, I assure you all, I would be as loath to see his Highness
take hurt, or that any evil should come to this his Realm, as the bes^ of you
all; and none of you have the like cause, considering how I am compelled by
nature, being his Majesty's poor and humble sister, most tenderly to love and
pray for him, and unto this his Realm (being born within the same) with all
wealth and prosperity to God's honor. And if any judge of me the contrary for
mine opinions sake, as I trust none does, I doubt not in the end, with Gods
help, to prove my self as true a natural and humble Sister, as they of the
contrary opinion with all their divices, and altering of laws, shall prove
themselves true Subjects; I pray you my Lords, and the rest of the Council, no
more to unquiet and trouble me with matters touching my conscience, wherein I
am at a full point with Gods help, whatsoever shall happen to me, intending
with his grace, to trouble you little with any worldly suits, but to bestow the
short time I think to live, in quietness; and I pray for the King's Majesty,
and all you, heartily wishing, that your proceedings may be to God's honor*
the safeguard of the King's person, and quietness of the whole Realm. And
thus, my Lords* I wish unto you, and all the rest, as well to do, as my self.


Upon such passages of this Letter, which seemed most to pinch upon them, the
Lords returned their Gloss or Comment, but such as had more in it of an
Animadversion, then an Explication. They signified withal, how well they
understood their own Authority; how sensible they were of those inconveniences,
which the example of her inconformity to the laws established, was likely to
produce amongst the rest of the subjects. No favor being otherwise to be hoped
for from them, the Emperor is moved to intercede in her behalf by his
Ambassador, then residing about the Court* Upon whose earnest solicitation,
1550.
it was declared by the King, with the consent of his Council (as appears by
their letters to her, of the 25th of December) That for his sake, and her own
also, it should be suffered and winked at, if she had the private Mass used in
her own closet for a season, until she might be better informed* but so that
none but some few of her own chamber should be present with her, and that to
all the rest of her household, the Service of the Church should be only used*
For the abuse of which indulgence, in saying Mass promiscuously (in her
absence) to her household servants, Mallet and Barkley two of her Chaplains, are
seized on, and committed prisoners, which first occasioned an exchange of
Letters betwixt her and the King, and afterward more frequently between her
and the Council; for which, consult the Acts and Mon. fol. 1213. 1214. A
proposition had been made about the surrendry of B^l^oigne, for a marriage
betwixt her and the Prince of Portugal; and the like motion made in favor of
the Duke of Brunswick, whilst the other treaty was depending. But neither of
the two succeeding to the wish of the party, a plot was laid to pass her over
into Flanders* shipping provided to transport her, some of her servants sent
before, and a commotion practiced in the County of Essex; that in the busle she
might be conveyed away without any discovery. But this plot being happily
prevented by the care and diligence of Sir John Gates, one of the Capta^ns of
the Gents a'armes (then lately ranged under the command of the Marquess of
N^rthampton) she was by him conducted much against her will, to the Lord
Chancellors house at Leezdi, from thence to Hunsdon, and at last to
Westminster. Much troubled at her coming thither* upon the apprehension* of
Sir Robert Ruchest^r, Sir Walgrave, and Sir Francis Ingl^field, servants of
special trust about her, and all suspected to be privy to the design, for
conveying her over into Flanders.

Much care was taken, and many endeavor used by the King and Council, to win
her to good conceit of the Reformation. But her interest was (...) bound up
with that of the Pope, that no persuasions could prevail with her to desert
that cause, on which her own legi^imation, and the validity of her mothers
marriage, did so much depend. As much unprofitable pains was taken by the
Emperors Agents, in laboring to procure for her, the exercise of her own
Religion; mingling some threats with their entreaties, in case so great a
Prince should be refused in so small a suit. Which when it could not be
obtained from the King, by the Lords of the Council, nor by the mediation of
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, (whom the Lords
employed to move him in it); the Emperor laid aside the prosecution of a
cause, which he perceived he could not carry. And the King slackned by degrees,
his accustomed diligence* in laboring be persuasions to work on one* who was
resolved before hand not to be persuaded. So that being weary of the Court, and
the court of her, she was permitted for a time to remain at Hun^sdon, in the
County of Hartford. To which place (being in the Diocese of London) Bishop
Ridley had recourse unto her, and at first was kindly entertained. 1552.
But having staid dinner at her request, he made an offer of his service, to
preach before her on the Sunday following; to which she answered, That the
doors of the Parish Church adjoining, should be open for him, that h^ might
preach there if he li^ted; but that neither she n^r any of her s^rvants, would
b^^her^ (...) hear him. Madam, said he, I hope you will not refuse to hear Gods
word. To which she answered, That she could not tell what they called Gods
word; that which was now called the ^^rd of God, (...) having been accounted
such in the ^^yes of her father. After which, falling into many different
expressions against the Religion then established, she ^ismissed him thus. My
Lord, said she* For your gentleness to come and see me* I thank you; but for
your offer to preach before me, I thank (...) not. Which said, he was conducted
by Sir Th^mas W^arton, one of her principal Officer^* to the place where they
dined, by whom he was presented with a cup of wine; which having drank, and
looking very sadly on it, Surely, said he, (...) Which words he spoke with such
a vehemence of spirit, a^ made the hair of some of those which were present* to
stand an end, as themselves afterward^ confessed.

Of this behavior of the Princess, 1553.
a^ the Bishop much complained in other p^a^es, so most especially in a Sermon
preached at St Paul's Cross* on the sixteenth of July; An. Reg. Mar. 1. 1553.
in which he was appointed by the Lords of the Council, to set forth the title
of Queen Jane, to whom the s^ccession of the Crown had been transferred by King
Edward, at the solicitation and procurement of the Duke of N^rth^mbe^land* who
served himself of nothing more, than of her obstinate averseness from the
reformed. Religion, then by law established. The cunning contrivance of which
plot, and all that had been done in pursuance of it, has been laid down at
large in the Appendix to the former book* Suffice in this place to know, that
being secretly advertised of her brothers death, she dispatched her letters of
the ninth of July, to the Lords of Council, requiring them not only to
acknowledge her just title to the Crown of this Realm, but to cause
pro^lamation of it to be made in the usual form; which though it was denied by
them, as the case then stood, yet she was gratified therein by the Mayor of
Norwich, who first proclaimed her Queen, on the fourth day after; as afterward
was done in some other places, by those who did prefer the interest of King
Henry's children, before that of the Dud^y's. But hearing of the great
preparations which were made against her, and finding her condition in a manner
desperate, when she first put her self into Fram^ngham Castle, she faithfully
assureu the Gentry, and other inhabitants of the County of Suffolk, that she
would not alter the Religion which had been settled and confirmed in the Reign
of her brother. On which assurance, there was such a confluence to her from
those parts of the Kingdom, that in short space she had an army of fourteen
thousand fighting men to maintain her quarrel. The news whereof, together with
the risings of the people in other places on the same account, wrought such an
alteration in the Lords of the Council, whom she had before solicited in vain
to allow her title, that on the nineteenth of July, she was solemnly proclaimed
Queen at Cheapside Cross; not only by their general and joint consent, but by
the joyful acclamations of all sorts of people. But as Mariners seldom pay
those vows which they make in a tempest, when once they are delivered from the
danger of it; so Mary once established in the Royal Throne, forgot the services
which she received from those of Suffolk, together with the promises which she
made unto them in the case of Religion. Insomuch, that afterward being
petitioned by them in that behalf, it was answered with more churlishness than
could be rationally expected in a green Estate, That members must obey their
Head, and not look to rule it. And that she might no more be troubled with the
like Petitions, she caused one Dobb. a Gentlemen on Windham side, who had
presumed to put her in remembrance of her former promise, to be punished by
standing in the Pillory three days together, to be a gazing stock to all men.
But such is the condition of our humane nature, that we are far more ready to
require a favor, when we stand in need of it, than willing to acknowledge or
requite it, when our turn is served. Of which we cannot easily meet with a
cleerer evidence, than the example of this Queen; who was so far from
gartifying those who had been most aiding to her in the time of her trouble,
that she persecuted them, and all others of the same persuasions, with fire and
faggot, as by the sequel of her story will at large appear.

The Life and Reign of QUEEN MARY.
An. Reg. Mar. 1. A. D. 1553. 1554.
THe interposings in behalf of the Lady Jane being disrelished generally in
most parts of the Kingdom, M^ry the eldest sister of King Edward the sixth is
proclaimed Queen by the Lords of the Council, assi^^ed by the Lord Mayor of
London, and such of the Nobility as were then resident about that City, on
Wednesday the nineteenth day of July, Ann^ 1553. The Proclamation published at
the Cross in Che^p, with all s^lemnities accustomed on the like occasions; and
entertained with joyful acclamations by all sorts of people, who feared
nothing more, than the pride and tyranny of the Duke of Northumberland. To
carry which news to the Queen at Framingham, the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord
Paget, are dispatched immediately by the rest of the Council, and Letters are
speedily posted by some private friends to the Duke at Cambridg^. Who
understanding how things went, without expecting any order from the Lords at
London, dismissed the remnant of his Army, and presently repairing into the
Market place, proclaimed the Queen, crying, God save Queen Mary, as loud as
any, and flinging up his cap for joy, as the others did. Which service he had
scarce performed, when Rose a Pou^suivant of Arms comes to him with
instructions from the Lords of the Council, subscribed by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor Goodrick, the Lord Treasurer Paulet, the Duke
of Suffolk, the Earl of Bedford, Shrewsbury, and Pembrook, the Lord Darsie, Sir
Robert Cotton, Sir William Peter, and Sir William Cecil, the two principal
Secretaries, Sir John Cheeck, Tutor to the last King, Sir John Baker,
Chancellor of the tenths and first fruits, Sir John Mason, Master of the
Requests, R. Bows, Master of the Rolls. Most of which had formerly subscribed
the answer to a Letter which came to them from the Princess Mary, on the ninth
of July, and were all p^^doned for so doing, except Cranmer only. Now the Tenor
of the said (...), was as follows.

In the name of our Sovereign Lady Mary the Queen, to be declared to the Duke
of Northumberland, and all other his Band, of what degree soever they be.
YOu shall command and charge in the Queens Highness name, the said Duke to
disarm himself, and the cease all his men of war, and to suffer no part of his
army to do any villainy, nor any thing contrary to the peace: and himself to
forbear his coming to this City, until the Queens pleasure be expressedly
declared unto him. And if he will show himself like a good quiet subject, we
will then continue as we have begun, as humble suitors to our Sovereign Lady
the Queen's Highness, for him and his, and for our selves. And if he do not,
we will not fail to spend our lives in subduing of him and his.

Item, Ye shall declare the like matter to the Marquess of Northampton, and
all other Noble men, and Gentlemen, and to all men of war, being with any of
them.

Item, Ye shall in all places where ye come, notify it: If the Duke of
Northumberland do not submit himself to the Queens Highness, Queen Mary; he
shall be accepted as a Traitor. And all we of the Nobility, that were
Counselors to the late King, will to the utmost portion of our power,
persecute him and his to their afterconfusion.


The Pursuivant having communicate his Instructions, found none more ready to
obey them, then the Duke himself, who had before dismissed his forces, and now
prepared for his departure from that place, though to what he knew not. But as
he was pulling on his boots, he was first slaid by some of the Pensioners, who
being drawn into the action against their wills, resolved to have him in a
readiness to bear witness to it; and after taken into custody by Slegg, a
Sergeant. The business being in dispute, another Packet comes from the Lords
of the Council, by which all parties were required to depart to their several
dwellings; the benefit whereof the Duke laid claim to for himself, and was
accordingly left by them at his own disposal. And so he passed that night in
some good assurance, that he should fare no worse than the rest of the Council,
who had engaged him in the same cause, and by whose order he had undertaken the
command of that Army. In the mean time, the Earl of Arundell had done his
errand to the Queen, to so good a purpose, that he was presently dispatched
with Order to seize upon him. Who coming to Cambridge the next morining, found
him preparing for his journey, laid hold upon him, and committed him to the
charge of some of the Guard. It is reported, that the Duke had no sooner seen
the Earl of Arundell, but he fell down upon his knees, and besought him to be
good unto him, humbling himself before him with more abjectednesse, than
formerly he had insulted over him with pride and insolence. By safe, but easy
journies, he is brought unto the Tower on the 25 day of July, together with the
Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Huntington, the Lord Hastings; the Lord Ambrose,
and the Lord Henry Dudley, two of Northumberlands younger sons; Sir Andrew
Dudly, the Duke's brother, Sir John Gates, and Henry Gates his brother, Sir
Thomas Palmer (who formerly had served his turn in the destruction of the Duke
of Sommerset), and Dr Sandys Vice Chancellor of the University of Cambridge,
Followed the next day after by the Marquess of Northampton, Dr Nicholas
Ridley, Bishop of London, the Lord Robert Dudley, another of Northumberland's
sons, and Sir Robert Corbet; who having made their Applications to the Queen at
Framingham, found there no better entertainment, than if they had been take in
some act of Hostility. The 27 day brings in Sir Roger Chomley, Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, and Sir Edward Mountague, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas;
the Duke of Suffolk, and Sir John Cheek on the morrow after shutting up the
Arrer. But the Duke of Suffolk stayed not long: for being considered in himself
as an easy person, of whom they were to fear no danger, and otherwise no more
in fault than the rest of the Council, he was released again within three days
after, to the great comfort of his daughter, the late queen Jane, who would
have died daily for her Father, though but once for her self.

But so it fared not with the Duke of Northumberland, a more dangerous person;
who, together with John Earl of Warwick, his eldest son, and William Marquess
of Northampton, was brought to their trial on the eighth of August, before
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, then sitting as Lord High Steward in Westminster Hall.
The Duke being brought unto the bar, humbled himself with great reverence
before his Peers, professing his faith and allegiance to the Queen; against
whom he confessed he had so grievously offended, that he intended not to speak
any thing in his own defense. But having been trained up to the study of the
Laws in his younger days, he desired the judgment of the Court in these two
points. First, Whether any man doing any act by Authority of the Princes
Council, and by warrant of the Great Seal of England, and doing nothing w^th^^t
the same, might be charged with treason, for any thing which he might do by
warrant thereof. And secondly, (which pinched then his Judges to some purpose)
Whether any such persons as were equally culpable in the crime, and those by
whose Letters and Commandments he was directed in all his doings, might sit as
Judges, and pass upon his trial as his Peers. Whereunto it was answered by the
Court, with advice of the Judges. First, That the Great Seal which ^e pre^ended
(...) his warrant, was not the Seal of the lawful Queen of the Realm, but the
Se^ of (...) ^^surper, who had no authority, and theref^re could b^ no warrant
to him. And secondly, That if any were as deeply to be touched in the case as
himself; yet so long as n^ attainder was upon Record against them, they were
looked upon by the Law, as persons capable of passing upon any trial, and not
to b^ challenged by any in that respect* but only at the Prince's pleasure.
Which being delivered by the Court in point of Law, the Duke conceived that it
would be to no purpose for him to plead Not Guilty, and thereupon confessed the
Indictment, as the other two prisoners also did; they all received judgment in
the usual form. On the pronouncing whereof, he besought the Lords to move the
Queen, that she would be gracious to his sons, who might be able to do good
service in the time to come; considering that they went not with him of their
own free will, but only in obedience to his commands, who was their Father; in
which as his desires were granted by the Lords, so the Lords were gratified in
them by the Queen; none of his sons being executed (though all condemned)
except Guilford only, whose case was different from the others. The like
judgment also passed on the morrow after, on Sir John Gates, Sit Henry Gates,
Sir Andrew Dudley, and Sir Thomas Palmer, who confessing the Indictment also,
submitted themselves to the Queens mercy, without further trial.

In that short interval, which past between the sentence, and the execution,
the Duke was frequently visited by Dr Nicholas Heath, then newly restored unto
the Sea of Worcester. It was another of the requests which he made to the
Lords, that some godly and learned man, might be licenced by the Queen, to
repair unto him, for the quiet and satisfaction of his conscience; and the
resolved to send him none (as she did to others in like case) but one of her
own, under a pretense of doing good unto their so^ls, by gaining them to a
right understanding of the faith in Christ. According to which purpose, He^^h
bestirs himself with such dexterity, that the Duke, either out of weakness, or
hope of life, or that it was indifferent to him in what Faith he died, who had
shown so little while he lived, retracted that Religion which he had adorned in
the time of King Edward, and outwardly professed for some years in the Reign of
King Henry. And hereof he gave public notice when he was on the scaffold, on
the 22 of that mon^h. In the way toward which, there passed some words betwixt
him and Gates, each laying the blame of the late action on the other; but
afterward mutually forgiving, and being forgiven, they died in good charity
with one another. Turning himself unto the people, he made a long Oration to
them, touching the quality of his offense, and his fore-passed life, and then
admonished the spectators, To stand to the Religion o^ their Ancest^rs,
rejecting that of l^^er date, which had occasioned all the (...) of the
foregoing thirty years; and that for prevention for the future, if they desired
(...) present their souls unspotted in the ^ight of God, and were truly
affected to their Country* they should expel those trumpets of Sedition, the
Preachers of the reformed Religion; that for himself* whatever had otherwise
been pretended, he professed ^o other Religion than that of his Fathers, for
testimony whereof, he appealed to his good friend, and gh^stly father, the Lord
Bishop of Worcester; and finally* that being blinded with ambition, he had been
conten^ed to make a rack of his conscience, by te^porising, for which he
professed himself sincerely repentant, and so acknowledged the justice of his
death. A declaration very unseasonable, whether true or false; as that which
rendered him less pitied by the one side, and more scorned by the other. With
him died also Gates and P^l^^r, the rest of the condemned prisoners being first
reprieved, and afterward absolutely pardoned.

Such was the end of this great person, the first Earl of Warwick, and the la^^
Duke of Northumberland, of this Name and Family. By birth he was the eldest son
of Sir Ed^ond Sutton, alias Dudley, who together with Sir Richard Empson, were
the chief instruments and promoters under Henry the 7th. for putting the penal
laws in execution, to the great grievance and oppression of all sorts of
subjects. For which, and other offenses of a higher nature, they were both
sacrificed to the fury of the common people, by King Henry the 8th. which
possible might make him carry a vindicative mind toward that King's children,
and prompt him to the dis-inheriting of all his Progeny. First trained up (as
his Father had also been before him) in the study of the common Laws, which
made him cunning enough to pick holes in any man's estate, and to find ways by
which to bring their lives in danger. But finding that the long sword was of
more estimation than the long Robe, in the time of that King, he put himself
forwards on all actions, wherein honor was to be acquired. In which he gave
such testimony of his judgment and valor, that he gained much on the
affections of his Prince. By whom he was created Viscount Lis^e, on the 15th.
of March, An. 1541. installed Knight of the Garter, 1543. and made Lord Admiral
of England. Employed in many action against the Scots, he came off always with
success and victory; and having said this, we have said all, that was
accounted good or commendable in the whole course of his life. Being advanced
unto the Title of Earl of W^rwick, by King Edward the 6th, he thought himself
in a capacity of making Queens, as well as Richard Nevil (one of his
Predecessors in that Title) had been of setting up and deposing Kings; and they
both perished under the ambition of those proud attempts. Punished as Nevil
also was, in having no iss^e male remaining to preserve his name. For though he
had six sons, all of them living to be men, and all of them to be married men,
yet they went all childlesse to the grave, I mean as to the having of lawful
issue, as if the curse of Jeconi^ah had been laid upon them. With him died also
the proud Title of Duke of N^rth^^berland, never aspired to by the Percies,
though men of eminent Nobility, and ever since the time of King Henry the
first, of the Race of Emperors: Which Family, as well in reference to the
merit o^ their Noble Ancestors, as the intercession of some powerful friends,
were afterward restored to all the Titles and Honors, which belonged to that
House, in the persons of Thomas and Henry, Grand children to Henry the 5th.
Earl thereof, An. 1557.

The matters being thus laid together, we must look back upon the Queen. Who
seeing all obstacles removed betwixt her and the Crown, dissolved her Camp at
(...), consisting of fourteen thousand men; and prepared for her journey
toward London* Met on the way by the Princess Elizabeth her sister, attended
with no fewer than 1000 horse, She made her entrance into London, on the third
of August, no less magnificent for the Pomp and bravery of it, than that of
any of her predecessors. Taking possession of the Tower, she was first welcomed
thither by I (...), the old Duke of Norfolk, Ann^ Duchess of Sommerset*
Edward Lord Co^^^ney, eldest son to the late Marquess of Excester, and Dr
Stephan Gardener, Bishop of Winchester; all which she lifted from the ground,
called them her prisoners, graciously kissed them, and restored them shortly
after to their former liberty* Taking the Great Seal from Dr Goodrick, Bishop
of Ely, within two days after, she gave it for the present, to the custody of
Sir Nich^l^s Hare, whom she made Master of the Rolls* and afterward committed
it, on the 23d. of the same month, together with the Title of Lord Chancellor,
on the said Dr Gardi^er, then actually restored to the Sea of W^^chestor.
Having performed the obsequies of her brother, on the 9th. and 10th. she
removes her Court unto Whitehall, and there contin^es, till it was within two
or three days of her Coronation. Which time now drawing near at hand, she
passed by water to the Tower, on the 27th. of September, accompanied by her
Sister, the Princess Elizabeth, and a great train of Noble Ladies; made her
return through the principal streets of the City, on the last of the same
month, in most ^tately manner* and the next day proceeded with the like
magnificence, to the Abbey Church* where she was met by three ^^lver Crosses,
and eighty singing men, all in ri^h and gorgeo^s Coaps, (so sudden a recruit
was made of these sac^ed Vestments); amongst whom went the new Dean of
Westminster, Dr. Westo^* and diverse Chaplains of her own, each of them ^earing
in their hands some Ensign or other. After them marched ten Bishops (which were
as many as remained of her persuasion) with their Mi^ers, rich Coaps, and
Crosier staves. The Sermon was preached by Dr ^ay, whom she had restored to the Sea of Chichester, and the solemnity of the Coronation, celebrated by the new
Lord Chancellor: Cra^ner, Archbishop of Canterbury, being then committed* and
otherwise conceived unworthy of so great an honor. Till this time, none more
dear to her then her Sister Elizabeth, whom she always took with her by the
hand, wheresoever she went, and seldom dined or supped without her. But this
solemnity being passed over (as if she were now freed from all the fea^s of a
competition) she estranged her self from her in such a manner, as showed that
she had formerly desited her company for some by-respects, and not out of
natural affection. More gratef^l unto other persons, who deserved well of her;
she preferred Henry Ratcliff, Earl of S^ssex, (Commander General of her Army)
to the Society of the Gatter, which Honor she conferred on his son Thomas
after his decease* and to be covered in her Presence, at all times and places,
tending to the custom of the Grandees in the Realm of Spain. Which privilege
not being very frequent in the Polit^ie of the Realm of England, I find to be
recorded in these following words, viz.

Mary by the Grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith; and of the Church of England and Ireland, in earth the Supreme Head;
o all, to whom this present writing shall come, sends Greeting in our Lord
everlasting. Know ye, that We do give and pardon to Our wel-beloved and trusty
Cosen, and one of Our Privy Council, Henry Earl of Sussex, and Viscount
Fittzwater, Lord Egremond and Burnel, Liberty, License and Pardon, to wear his
Cap, Coyfe, or Nightcap, or two of them at his pleasure, as well in Our
presence, as in the presence of any other person, or persons within this Our
Realm, or any other place of Our Dominions whatsoever, during his life; and
these Our Letters shall be his sufficient Warrant in this behalf. Given under
Our Sign Manual, at Our Palace of Westminster, 2. October. 1 Regni.

With the like Royal gratitute, she advance the Earl of Arundel, who had
deserved as well of her in the Council, as the Earl of Sussex in the Camp, to
the Place or Office of Lord Steward; investing him with all those powers and
privileges, which had been form^rly exercised by the Lord Great Master* whom
he succeeded in Authority, though not in Title. Sir Edward Hastings, who came
over to her with 4000 men, she first made Master of the Horse, and Knight of
the Gar^er, and afterward Lord Chamberlain of the Household, and Lord Hastings
of Louthborough. Sir John Williams, who had done her very good service in
Buckingham and Oxford ^hires, she honored with the Title of Lord Williams of
Ja^e; of which more hereafter. Sir H^nry Jernin^ham* who first appeared in
Norfo^k for her, she preferred to be Captain of her Guard, a^soon as she came
unto the Crown; and toward the latter end of her Reign, Sir Thomas Thre^^^m was
created Lord Prior of the Order of St John's of Jerusalem, and consequently
according to the old pretension, the first Baron of England. And as for her
domestique servants who had suffered with her, she thought it no unfit decorum,
that they should in part Reign with her also. To which end she preferred Hop^on
her old Chaplain, to the Sea of Norwich, R^chester to be Comp^roller of her
Household, Ing^^field to^ be Master of the Wards, and W^lgrave to be Master of
the Wardrobe, which is suffici^nt ^o de^l^re, that she was willing to comply
with all obligarion^, and not to b^ too long in debt to her greatest subjects,
but much less to her m^nial servants* But in ^^gard that all these were
considered for their per^onal merits, not in reference only to their zeal for
the Catholic Cause, she was to show some act of favor unto those of tha^
party, which might create a confidence in them of her good affections. To which
end she made choice of Sir John Gage (a man most zealously addicted to the
Church of Rome) to be Lord Chamberlain of ^^r Household, when she came first to
the Tower, to the great satisfaction of all those of that Religion. And that
she might in some mea^ure also ob^^ge the rest of her su^jects, and make the
ent^ance of her Reign the more plea^^ng to them, her Coronation was accompanied
with a general pardon, at the least in show. Out of which all prisoners in the
Tower, such as remained in the Fleet, together with sixty other, being
excepted, and the re^trictions and proviso's (with which it was in all parts
clogged) being well observed, there were not many, especially of those whom it
most concerned, that could create unto themselves any benefit by it.

Thus was the Civil State established on a right foundation, and the succession
settled most agreeably to the Laws of Nature, according to the last Will and
Testament of King Henry the 8th. and the Laws made in that behalf. But we
shall see the pillars of the Church removed, the very foundation of it shaken*
and the whole ^abrick of Religion so demolished, that scarce one stone thereof
did seem to stand upon the other; without reg^rd unto the Laws, and contrary to
the will and purpose of King Edw^^d the 6th. At the Queens first entrance into
London, on the thi^d of August, she disc^arged Gardin^r of the Tower, as she
did B^^ner of the Marshelsey, and Bishop T^^stall from the Kings Bench within
two days after. To make way to whose restitution to their former Sees, Bishop
Ridley is removed from London, Bishop Poi^ct from Winchester, and an Act of
Parli^ment p^oc^red for the restoring of the Church of Durham, to all its
Lands* Preheminences, and Juri^dictions* of which it stood divested by the l^te
Act of Dissolution, made in the last year of the King deceased. By the like
power, was Coverdale displaced from the Sea of Exon, S^ory from that of
Chichester* and Hooper dispossessed of that Jurisdiction, which he held as the
Commendatory of the Sea of Worcester; to which See, (...), Day, and Heath, were
again restored. The like course also followed, for the depriving of all Dea^^,
D^gn^^^^^^s, and Parochial Ministers, who had succeeded into any of those
pre^erments, during the Reign of the two last Kings* the old incumbe^ts whereof
were then ^ound living, and able to supply their places. Which though it could
not be objected against Dr Cox, either in r^ference to his De^nry of christ
Church, or that of (...) (both which he held at the same time) yet being
brought unto the Marshal^ey, on the 5th. of (...), he was unjustly spoi^ed of
both, to make room for Dr Richard Marshall in the one, and Dt Hugh Weston in
the other. And all this done without so much as any show of legal process, or
the conventing of the persons whom it did concern or any satisfaction given
unto the Laws, (which in some cases favor possession more than right) so
strangely violated.

But greater was the havoc which was made amongst them, when there was any
color or pretense of Law, as in the case of having wives, or not conforming to
the Queens pleasure in all points of Religion; con^idering how forward and
pragmatical too many were, to run before the Laws in the like particular. The
Queen was zealous in her way, and by her interesse, strongly biased to the
Church of Rome. But it concerned her to be wary, and not to press too much at
once upon the people, which generally were well affected to the Reformation. Of
this she had a stout experiment, within very few days after her first entrance
into London. For so it happened, that Dr Bourn, Archdeacon of London, and one of
the Prebends of St Paul's, preaching a Sermon at the Cross, on the 13th. of
August, inveighed in favor of Bishop Bonner, who was present at it, against
some proceedings in the time of the late King Edward. Which so incensed the
people, that suddenly a great tumult arose upon it; some pelting him with
stones, others crying out aloud, pull him down, pull him down, and one (who
never could be known) flinging a dagger at his head, which after was found
sticking in a post of the Pulpit. And greater had the mischief been upon this
occasion, if Mr Bradford and Mr Rogers, two eminent Preachers in the time of
King Edward, and of great credit and esteem with the common people, had not
endeavored to appease the enraged multitude, and with great difficulty secured
the Preacher in the School adjoining. By reason of which tumult, an Order was
taken by the Lords of the Coun^il, with the mayor and Aldermen of London, that
they calling the next day following a Common Council of the City, should
thereby charge every householder, to cause their children and Apprentices, to
keep their own Parish Churches, upon the Holy days, and not to suffer them to
attempt any thing to the violating of the common peace. Willing them also to
signify to the said Assembly, the Queens determination uttered to them by her
Highness, the 12th. of August, in the Tower. Which was, that albeit her
Grace's conscience was staid in matters of Religion; yet she graciously meant
to compel or strain other men's, otherwise than God should (as she trusted) put
into their hearts a persuasion of that truth which she was in, through the
opening of his word unto them, by godly, virtuous, and learned Preachers; that
is to say, such Preachers only, as were to be hereafter licenced by the Queen's
authority.

But yet for fear that these instructions might not edify with the common
people, Order was taken for preventing the like tumult on the Sunday following.
At what time the Sermon was preached by Dr Watson (who afterward was Bishop of
Lincoln, but Chaplain only at that time to the Bishop of Winchester). For whose
security, not only many of the Lords of the Council, that is to say, the Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Privy Seal, the Earl of Bedford, the Earl of Pembrook, the
Lords, Wentworth and Rich, were severally desired to be there present; but
Gerningham, Captain of the Guard, was appointed with two hundred of his
stourest Yeomen, to stand round about him with their Halberts. The Mayor had
also taken Order, that all the Companies in their Liveries should be present at
it, which was well taken by the Queen. And because the coming of the Guard on
the one side affrighted some, and the Order of the Lords above mentioned had
restrained others from coming to those public Sermons; it was commanded by
the Lord Mayor, that the Ancients of all Companies should give attendance at
those Sermons for the time to come, lest otherwise the Preachers might be
discouraged at the sight of so thin an Auditory. The safety of those public
Preachers being thus provided for by the Lords of the Council, there next care
was, that nothing should be preached in private Churches, contrary to the
Doctrine which was, and should be ^augh^ at the Cross by them which were
appointed to it. Whereupon it was further Ordered, that every Alderman in his
Ward, should forthwith send for the Curates of every Church within their
Liberties, and warn them not only to forbear preaching themselves; but also not
to suffer any other to preach, or make any open or solemn reading of Scripture
in their Churches, unless the said Preachers were severally licensed by the
Queen. To which purpose Letters were directed also to the Bishop of Norwich,
and possibly to all other Bishops in their several Diocesses. But nothing more
discovers the true state and temper of the present time, than a Proclamation
published by the Queen, on the 18th. of August. The Tenor of which is as
follows.

The Queen's Highness well remembering what great inconvenience and dangers,
have grown to this her Rea^m in times^ past, through the diversities of
opinions in Questions of Religion; and hearing also that now of late, sithence
the beginning of her most gracious Reign, the same contentions be again much
revived, through certain false and untrue reports, and rumo^rs spread by some
evil-disposed persons, has thought good to give to understand to all Her
Highnesse's most loving subjects, her most grrtious pleasure in manner
following.

First, Her Majesty being presently by the only goodness of God, settled in her
just possession of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and other Dominions
thereunto belonging, cannot now hide that Religion, which God and the world
knows she has ever pro^essed from her infancy hitherto. Which at her Majesty
is minded to observe and maintain for her self by God's grace, during her time;
so does her Highness much desire, and would be glad the some were of all her
subjects quietly and charitably entertained.

And yet she does signify unto all her Majesty's loving subjects, that of Her
most gracious disposition and clemency, Her Highness minds not to ^ompel any
Her said subjects thereunto, until such time as further Order by common assent
may be taken therein: Forbidding nevertheless all her subjects, of all degrees,
at their perils, to move seditions, or stir unquietness in her people, by
interpreting the Laws of this Realm, after their brains and fantasies, but
quietly to continue for the time, till ((...) before is said) further Order may
be taken, and therefore wills, and str^ightly charge and commondeth, all
her good loving subjects, to live together in quiet sort, and Christian
Charity, leaving those new found devilish terms, of Papist and Heretic, and
such like; and applying their whole care, study and travail, to live in the
fear of God, exercising their conversations in such charitable and Godly doing,
as their lives may indeed express the great hunger and thirst of God's glory*
which by rash talk and words, many have pretended: And in so doing, they shall
best please God, and live without danger of the Laws, and maintain the
tranquillity of the Realm. Whereof as her highness shall be most glad, so if any
man shall rashly presume to make any assemblies of people, or at any public,
assemblies, or otherwise, shall go about to stir the people to disorder or
disquiet, she mandeth according to her duty, to see the same most severely
reformed and punished, according to her Highnese's Laws.

And furthermore, for as much as it is well known, that sedition and false
rumors have been nourished and maintained in this Real^, by the subtilty and
malice of some evil-disposed persons, which take upon them without sufficient
authority, to preach and to interpret the word of God, after their own brains,
in Churches, and other places, both public and private, and also by playing of
Interludes, and Printing of false fond Books, and Ballads, Rimes, and other
lewd Treatises in the English Tongue, containing Doctrine in matter now in
question, and controversies touching the high points and mysteries in Christian
Religion; which Books, Ballads, Rimes, and Treatises, are chiefly by the
Printers and Stationers, set out to sale to her Graces subjects, of an evil
zeal for lucre and covetousness of vile gain: Her Highness therefore
straightly charge and commands all and every of her said subjects, of
whatsoever state, condition, or degree they be, that none of them presume from
henceforth, to preach, or by way of reading in Ch^rches, or other public or
pr^vate places, except in Schools of the University, to interpret or teach any
Scriptures, or any manner of points of Doctrine concerning Religion. Neither
also to Print any Bo^k, Mat^er, Ballad, Rhyme, Interlude, Process or Treatise,
nor to play any Interlude, except they have her Graces special License in
writing for the same, upon pain to incur her Highness indignation and
displeasure.

It cannot be denied* but that this Proclamation was very cautiously and
cunningly penned; giving encouragement enough to those which had a mind to
outrun the Law, or otherwise to conform themselves to the Queen's Religion, to
follow their own course therein, without dread or danger; and yet commanding
nothing contrary to the Laws established, which might give trouble or offense
to the other party. For hereupon many of the people showed themselves so ready
for receiving their old Religion, that in many places of the Realm, before any
Law was made for the same, they erected again their Altars, and used the Mass,
and Latin Service, in such sort as was wont to be in King Henry's time. Which
was so well taken by the Queen, that all such as stood upon the Laws which
were made to the contrary before, had a m^^k of displeasure set upon them.
Which being observed by some of the Clergy, they were as forward as the rest,
in setting up the Pageants of St Catherine, and St Nicholas, formerly erected
in the Chancels, and to set forth their Processions, (which they celebrated in
the Latin tongue) with their old solemnities, contrary to the Laws and
Ordinances of King Edward's time. All which irregular activities in the Priest
and People, were sheltred under the name of setting forward the Queens
proceedings. And by that name the official of the Archdeacon of Ely, gave it
in charge amongst the Articles of his visitation, that the Church Wardens
should present all such as did disturb the Queen's proceedings, in letting the
Latin Service, setting up of Altars, saying of Mass, etc. But more particularly
at Cambridge, the Vicechancellor, challenged one Pierson, on the 3d. of
October, for officiating the communion in his own Parish Church, in the English
tongue; and on the 26. displaced Dr Madew, Master of Clare Hall, for being
married, though they had both as much authority on their side, as the Laws
could give them. In like manner some of the Popish party in King's College
(not tarrying the making of any Law) on the 28th. of the same, officiated the
Divine Service in the Latin tongue; and on the 6th. of November then next
following, a Sermon is preached openly at St Michaels, contrary to the Laws in
that behalf, not as then repealed. Not altogether so eager on the scent at
Oxon, as they were at Cambridge, though with more difficulty brought at first
to the Reformation. Only it pleased Dr Tresham, one of the Canons of Christ
Church, of the last foundation, to cause the great bell there to be new cast,
and christened by the name of Mary; much comforting himself with the melodious
found thereof, when it tolled to Mass; which Marshall the new Dean, by his help
and counsel, had again restored.

But these were only the Essays of those alterations, which generally were
intended in all parts of the Church, as soon as the times were ripe for them,
and the people fitted to receive them; in order whereunto, it was not thought
sufficient to displace the Bishop^, and silence the Old Protestant Preachers
also unless they brought them under some exemplary punishment, that others
might be terrified from the outward profession of that truth, out of which they
could not be disputed. Of Ridley's being brought prisoner to the Tower, and of
Coxe's committing to the Marshal^ey, we have spoke before. On the 22d. of
August Letters are sent from the Lords of the Council, commanding Bishop
Coverdale, and Bishop Hooper, to appear before them. By whom (after two or
three appearances) committed to their several Prisons; the one reserved for the
stake, the other sent upon request to the King of Denmark. On the 5th. of
September, the like Letters are dispatched to old Bishop Latimer, committed
close prisoner to the Tower, on the 8th. day after; followed the next morning
by Archbishop ^ranme^, whose Story does require a more particular account, of
which more anon. Harley of Here^ord (to which he had been con^ecrated in May
foregoing) and ^aylor of Lincoln, another of the l^^t of King Edward's Bishops,
were present at the opening of the Parliament on the 10th of October. But no
sooner was the Mass began (though not then resto^ed by any Law) than they left
the Church. For which the Bishop of Lincoln being first examined, and making
profession of his Faith, prevented the malice of his enemies by a timely death.
And Harley upon information of his marriage, was presently ex^luded from the
Parliament House, and not long after from his B^shop^ick also. Which being
observed by Bishop Barlow of Wells, and Scory of Chi^h^ster, they withdrew
themselves beyond the Seas; followed not long after by Bishop Point of
Winchester. But Barlow made not so much haste, as not to be committed to the
Fle^t, by the Lords of the Council, from whence upon some satisfaction given to
the Lord Chancellor Gardener, by his discreet and moderate Answers, he was not
long after set at liberty, and so crossed the seas; resolved to trust himself
no more ^o a second hazard, having with so much difficulty escaped the first.
How it succeeded with the rest, we shall see hereafter. Upon which smiting of
the Shepherds, it is not to be wondered at, i^ their flo^ks (...) s^attered.

Now as concerning the Archbishop, the substance of his story is briefly ^his.
He had been a chief instrument in King Henry's time, of setting forward the
divorce; and in King Edward's, of advancing the Reformation The Queen conceived
hereupon such a high displeasure (It had been malice in another) against the
man, that nothing but his death could appease the same. His death is therefore
fully resolved upon, by Gardener, Banner, and the rest of the Popish Prelates.
Of which the first had p^osecuted the Divorce as far as any; and the second was
as forward as the best in the Reformation, as long as Cromwell lived to perfer
and countenance him. But their standings out, and sufferings for it in King
Edward's time were thought sufficient explations for their former errors, when
the good Offices which Cranmer had done for her in her Fathers ti^e, were worn
out of memory. Die then he must; but by what law he was to die, proved a knot
more difficult, than could be speedily untied. It was advised to charge him
with High Treason, as being privy to the plot of the Duke of Northumberland,
for excluding the Queen from the succession. But against this it was objected,
that he was the last of the Council who subseribed unto it; and that the
Council would be wary of making that a Capital offense in him, of which they
were all equally guilty. In the next place it was propounded, to proceed
against him in case of Heresy, that being the most likely way to content the
P^pe, whose favor was to be procured by all means immaginable. But the worst
was, that the Statutes made in the time of King Richard 2d. and King Henry 4th.
for putting Heretics to death, had been abrogated in the time of king Henry
8th. as that of the six Articles, more terrible than either of the other two
had been, repealed by the late King Edward the 6th. No better course therefore,
than to find some occasion for laying him up in some safe prison; and when they
had him there, to proceed against him as time and opportunity should administer
some fit matter for it.

About this time a bruit was raised, that Cranmer to ingratiate himself with
the Queen, had promised to celebrate the Exequies of the deceased King,
according to the Rom^sh manner. To clear himself of which reproach, he drew up
a Manifest, declaring in the same, that he was ready to maintain the Articles
of Religion, set forth by his procurement in the time of King Edward, to be
consonant to the word of God, the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the practice of
the best and p^rest times. These papers lying in the window in his private
chamber, were seen and liked by Bishop Scory, by whom they were transcribed and
communicated to many others. Coming at last unto the knowledge of the Council,
the Archbishop is commanded to appear before them. Interrogated about the
papers, and prompted by Bishop Heath, who was then amongst them, to let them
know whether he were not sorry for it. To which the Archbishop made reply, that
as he did not deny himself to be the author of those papers, so he must needs
confess himself to be sorry that they went from him in such sort as they did.
For I had purposed, says he, to set out the Manifest in a more large and ample
manner; and to have it set upon St Paul's door, and the doors of all the
Churches in London, with my own Seal affixed unto it. Upon which stout and
honest answer, they thought fit to dismiss him for the present: it being
conceived by some of the more moderate spirits, that it would be punishment
enough to deprive him only of his Bishopric, and to assign him sufficient
maintenance upon the exhibiting of a true Inventory of his whole estate, with a
commandment to keep his house without meddling in matters of Religion. But those
who better understood the mind of the Queen, so ordered it, that on the 14th.
of September, he was sent to the Tower, where he remained prisoner till the 3d.
of November. At what time he was arraigned in the Guild Hall of London,
together with the Lord Guilford Dadley, the late Queen Jane his wife, and
others; all of them being attainted and condemned of Treason, as before was
said. And he lay under this attainture till the year next following, when the
old Statutes for putting Heretics to death, were revived in Parliament. Which
having furnished his adversaries with a better ground to proceed upon, to the
contentment of the Pope and the Queen together, they waved the prosecuting of
the Attaindure, to an Execution, and wholly fixed themselves on the point of
Heresy. At the hearing whereof, he was right well pleased, because the case
was not now his own, but Christ's; not the Queens, but the Churches.

The severity of this beginning against the Natives, gave a sufficient warning
to all such strangers, who had tool sanctuary here in the time of King Edward,
to provide betimes for their departure. Amongst whom, none more openly aimed at
than Peter Mar^yr, because none of them had given wider wounds than he to the
Catholic Cause. Tresham, a senior Canon of Christ Church, had held some points
against him at his first coming thither; and now he took the benefit of the
times, in causing both that house, and many others in the University, to put
some public scorn upon him. Not finding any safety there, he retires to
Lambeth, where he was sure of as much safety as that place could give him. A
consultation had been held by some of the more fiery spirits, for his
commitment unto prison. But he came hither (as it was well known) on the
public Faith, which was not to be violated for the satisfaction of some
private persons. It was thought fit therefore to discharge him all further
employment, and to license him to depart in peace, none being more forward to
furnish him with all things necessary for his going hence, than the new Lord
Chancellor; whether in honor to his Learning, or out of a desire to send him
packing, shall not now be questioned. But less humanity was showed unto him in
his wife, whose body having been buried in the Church of St Frideswide, was
afterward by public order taken out of the grave, and buried in a common
dunghill. About the same time also such strangers as were gathered together into
the Church of John Alasco, not only were necessitated to forbear their
meetings, but to dissolve their Congregation, and to quit the Country. Such a
displeasure was conceived against them, by those which governed the affairs,
that it was no small difficulty for them to get leave for their departure; and
glad they were to take the opportunity of two Danish ships, and to put
themselves to sea in the beginning of winter, fearing more storms in England,
than upon the Ocean. And so farwell to John Alasco. It was an ill wind which
brought him hit her, and worse he could not have for his going back. The like
haste made the French Protestants also. And that they might have no pretense
for a long stay, command was sent unto the Mayor of Rye and D^ver, on the 16th.
of September, to suffer all French Protestants to cross the seas, except such
only, whose names should be signified unto them by the French Ambassadors. But
notwithstanding these removes, many, both Dutch and French, remained still in
the Kingdom, some of which being after found in Wiat's Army, occasioned the
banishing of all the rest, except Denizens and Merchants only, by a public
Edict. At which time many of the English departed also, as well Students as
others, to the number of 300. or thereabouts; hoping to find that freedom and
protection in a foreign Country, which was denied them in their own. The
principal of those which put themselves into this voluntary exile, were,
Katherine, the last wife of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffo^k, Robert Bertye,
Esquire, husband to the Duchess; the Bishops of Winchester and Wells, Sir
Richard Morison, Sir Anthony Cook, and Sir John Cheek, Dr Cox, Dr Sanays, and
Dr Grindall, and diverse others, of whom we shall hear more hereafter on another
occasion.

Of all these things, they neither were, not could be ignorant in the Court of
Rome, to which the death of Edward had been swiftly posted on the wings of
fame. The news of the succession of Queen Mary, staid not long behind, so much
more welcome to Pope Julius 3d. who then held that See, because it gave him
some assurance of his readmission into the power and jurisdiction of his
predecessors in the Realm of England. For what less was to be expected,
considering that she was brought up in the Catholic Religion, interessed in
the respects of her mother, and Cosen in the first degree unto Charles the
Emperor? In the pursuance of which hopes, it was resolved that Cardinal Pole
should be sent Legate into England, who being of the Royal blood, a man of
eminent learning, and exemplary life, was looked on as the fittest instrument
to reduce that Kingdom. The Cardinal well knowing that he stood attainted by
the Laws of the Land, and that the name of Henry was still preserved in
estimation amongst the people; thought it not safe to venture thither, before
he fully understood the state of things. He therefore secretly dispatcheth
Commendonius, a right trusty Minister, by whom he writes a private Letter to
the Queen. In which commending first her perseverance in Religion in the time
of her troubles, he exhorts her to a continuance in it in the days of her
happiness. He recommended also to her, the salvation of the souls of her
people, and the restitution of the true worship of God. Commendonius, having
diligently informed himself of all particulars, found means of speaking with
the Queen. By whom he understood not only her own good affections to the Sea
Apostolic; but that she was resolved to use her best endeavors for
re-establishing the Religion of the Church of Rome in all her Kingdoms. Which
being made known unto the Cardinal, he puts himself into the voyage. The news
whereof being brought to Charles (who had his own design apart from that of the
Pope) he signified by Dandino, the Pope's Nuncio with him; that an Apostolic
Legate could not be sent into England as affairs then stood, either with safety
to himself, or honor to the Church of Rome; and therefore that he might do
well to defer the journey, till the English might be brought to a better temper.

But the Queen knowing nothing of this stop, and being full of expectation of
the Cardinals coming, had called a Parliament to begin on the 10th. of October.
In which she made it her first Act, to take away all Statutes passed by the two
last Kings, wherein certain offenses had been made High Treason, and others
brought within the compass of a Praemunire. And this she did, especially for
Pole's security, that neither he by exercising his Authority, nor the Clergy by
submitting to it, might be entangled in the like snares, in which Cardinal
Wolsie, and the whole Clergy of his time had before been caught. It was
designed also to rescind all former Statutes which had been made by the said
two Kings against the jurisdiction of the Pope, the Doctrine and Religion of
the Church of Rome, and to reduce all matters Ecclesiastical to the same
estate, in which they stood in the beginning of the Reign of the King her
Father. But this was looked upon by others as too great an enterprise to be
attempted by a woman, especially in a green estate, and amongst people sensible
of those many benefits, which they enjoyed by shaking off their former
vassalage to a foreign power. It was advised therefore to proceed no further at
the present, than to repeal all Acts and Statutes which had been made in
derogation to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in the time of her brother;
which being passed in his minority, when all affairs were carried by faction
and strong hand, contrary to the judgment of the best and soundest part of the
Clergy and Laity, might give a just pretense for their abrogation, till all
particulars might be considered and debated in a lawful Synod. According to
which temperament, the point was carried, and the Act passed no higher than for
Repea^ing certain Statutes of the time of King Edward; by which one blow she
felled down all which had been done in the Reformation in seven years before.

For by this Act, they took away all former Statutes for Administering the
Communion in both kinds; for establishing the first and second Liturgy; for
confirming the new Ordinal, or form of consecrating Archbishops and Bishops,
etc. for abrogating certain Fasts and Feastivals which had been formerly
observed; for authorizing the marriage of Priests, and Legitimation of their
children; not to say any thing of that Statute (as not worth the naming) for
making Bishops by the King's Letters Patents, and exercising their Episcopal
jurisdiction in the King's name only. So that upon the matter, not only all
things were reduced to the same estate in which they stood at Edward's coming
to the Crown, but all those Bishops and Priests which had married by authority
of the former Statutes* were made uncanonical, and consequently obnoxious to a
deprivation. So that for want of Canonical Ordination on the one side, and
under color of uncanonical Marriages on the other, we shall presently find such
a general remove amongst the Bishops and Clergy, as is not any where to be
paralleled in so short a time. And because some affronts had been lately
offered to such Priests as had been forward in setting up the Mass in their
several Churches, and that no small danger was incurred by Dr Bourn above
mentioned, for a Sermon preached at St Paul's Cross; an Act was passed for the
preventing of the like for the time to come, Entitled An Act against offenders
of Preachers, and other Ministers, in the Church. Which two Acts were no sooner
passed, but they were seconded by the Queen with two Proclamations on the 5th.
of December. By one of which it was declared, That all Statutes made in the
time of the late King Edward, which concerned Religion, were repealed by
Parliament; and therefore that the Mass should be said as formerly, to begin on
the 20th of that month: And by the other it was commanded, that no manner of
person from thenceforth, should dare to disturb the Priests in saying Mass, or
executing any other divine Office, under the pains and penalties therein
contained. According unto which appointment, the Mass was publicly officiated
in all parts of the Kingdom, and so continued during the Reign of this Queen,
without interruption.

There also past another Act, wherein it was Enacted, That the marriage between
King Henry the 8th. and Queen Katherine his first wife, should be definitively,
clearly, and absolutely declared, deemed, adjudged to be, and stand with God's
Laws, and his most Holy word, and to be accepted, reputed and taken of good
effect and validity to all intents and purposes whatsoever; that the Decree or
Sentence of Divorce heretofore passed between the said King Henry the 8th, and
the said Queen, by Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, should be deemed,
taken, and reputed to be void and null; with a repeal of all such Statutes or
Acts of Parliament, in which the Queen had been declared to be illegitimate.
The making of which Act, as it did much conduce to the establishment of the
Queen's estate; so did it tacitly and implicitly acknowledge the supremacy to be
in the Pope of Rome, which could not be attained explicitly and in terms
express, as affairs then stood. For since the marriage neither was nor could be
reputed valid, but by the dispensation of Pope Julius the 2d. the declaration
of the goodness and validity of it, did consequently infer the Popes authority*
from which that dispensation issued. And therefore it was well observed by the
Author of the History of the Council of Trent, that it seemed ridiculous in the
English Nobility, to oppose the restitution of the Popes supremacy, when it was
propounded to them by the Queen in the following Session; considering that the
yielding to this demand was virtually contained in their assent to the Marriage.
There also past another Act, in which there was a clause for the invalidating
of all such Commissions, as had been granted in the time of the late Queen
Jane; and one in confirmation of the attainders of the late Duke of
Northumberland, Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. Which shows, that there
was somewhat in the said proceedings not so clear in Law, but that there seemed
necessity of calling in the Legislative power to confirm the same, for the
indemnity of those who had acted in them. Together with this Parliament, the
Queen was pleased to summon a Convocation, to the end that all matters of
Religion might be first debated and concluded in a Synodical way, before they
were offered to the consideration of the other Assembly. In the writs of which
summons, she retained the Title of Supreme Head on earth of the Church of
England, etc. the want whereof in those of the present Parliament, occasioned a
dispute amongst some of the members, Whether they might lawfully proceed or
not, in such public businesses as were to be propounded to them in that
Session. Archbishop Cranmer had been before imprisoned in the Tower of London,
and was detained there all the time of this Convocation, so that he could not
do that service to God and the Church, which his place required. This took for
a sufficient ground to transfar the Presidentship of the Convocation upon
Bonner of London, privileged in respect of his See, to preside in all such
Provincial Synods, which were either held during the vacancy of the Sea of
Canterbury, or in the necessary absence of the Metropolitan. The lower house of
the Clergy also, was fitted with a Prolocutor, of the same affections, Dr Hugh
Weston, then newly substituted Dean of Westminster in the place of Cox, being
elected to that Office. On Wednesday the 18th. of October, it was signified by
the Prolocutor, that it was the Queens pleasure, that they of the House should
debate of matters of Religion, and proceed to the making of such constitutions
as should be found necessary in that case. But there was no equality in number
between the parties, and reason was of no authority where the major part had
formerly resolved upon the points. So partially had the elections been returned
from the several Diocesses, that we find none of King Edward's Clergy amongst
the Clerks; and such an alteration had been made in the Deans and Dignitaries,
that we find but six of that rank neither to have suffrage in it, that is to
say, James Haddon Dean of Exeter, Walter Philips Dean of Rochester, John
Philpot Arch Deacon of Winchester, John Elmer Arch Deacon of Stow, in the
Diocese of Lincoln, Richard Cheny Arch Deacon of Hereford. One more I find, but
without any name, in the Acts and Mon* who joined himself to the other five in
the disputation. Nor would the Prolocutor admit of more, though earnestly
desired by Philpot, that some of the Divines which had the passing of the Book
of Articles in King Edward's time, might be associated with them in the defense
thereof.

Which motion he the rather made, because one of the points proposed by the
Prolocutor, related to a Catechism set forth in the said Kings time, entitled
to the said Convocation in the year 1552. Of which it was to be enquired,
whether or no it was the work of that Convocation. But that matter being passed
lightly over, the main point in debate concerned the manner of Christ's presence
in the blessed Sacrament. It was not denied by Philpot, and the rest of the
Protestant party, that Christ was present in his Sacrament, rightly ministered
according to his institution, but only that he was not present after the gross
and carnal manner, which they of the Popish party had before subscribed to. Six
days the disputation lasted, but to little purpose; for on the one side it was
said by Weston and his associates, that their adversaries were sufficiently
confuted, and all their Arguments fully answered. And on the other side it was
affirmed by the Divines of King Edward's time, that neither any satisfaction
had been given to their Arguments, nor that any right judgment could be made
in the points disputed, where the adverse party late as Judges in their own
concernments. Many checks had been given by Weston to the ^ix Divines, but
especially to the Archdeacon of Winchester; and there was much disorder
otherwise in the disputation (though certain great Lords were present at it)
which hindered it from producing any good effect. So that being weary at the
last of their own confusions, it was thought fit to put an end to the dispute.
Which Weston did accordingly in these following words. It is not (says he) the
Queens pleasure that we should spend any longer time in these debates, and ye
are well enough already, For you (says he) have the Word, and we have the
Sword. So powerful is the truth, that may times it will find some means to vent
it self, when we least intend it, and sometimes also when we most labor to
suppress it.

The Parliament and Convocation had thus concluded on the point, and little
question would be made, but that such Bishops as disliked the alterations in
the time of King Edward, will be sufficiently active in advancing the results
of both. But Bonner will not stay so long; he is resolved to go along with the
Parliament, if not before it. For after the ending of the Even song on St.
Katherine's day, before the consultations of the Parliament had been confirmed
by the Royal assent, he caused the Quire of St. Paul's to go about the steeple,
singing with lights after the old custom. And on St Andrew's day next
following, he began the Procession in Latin, himself, with many Parsons and
Curates, and the whole Quire, together with the Lord Mayor, and diverse of the
Aldermen, the Prebends of the Church attired in their old gray Amises (as they
used to call them) in which manner they continued it for three days after. In
setting up the Mass, with all the Pomps and Rites thereof at the time
appointed, it is not to be thought that he could be backward, who showed
himself so forward in the rest of his actings. And therefore it can be no news
to hear that on the 14th. of January, he restored the solemn Sundays Procession
about the Church, with the Mayor and Aldermen in their Clokes; the Preacher
taking his benediction in the midst of the Church, according to the ancient
custom; or that he should send out his Mandates to all Parsons and Curates
within his Diocese, for taking the names of all such as would not come the Lent
following to Auricular confession, and receive at Easter; or finally, that he
should issue out the like commands to all Priests and Curates, which lived
within the compass of his jurisdiction, for the abolishing of such Paintings
and Sentences of holy Scripture, as had been pensiled on the Church walls, in
King Edward's days. He knew full well, that as the actions of the Mother
Church would easily become exemplary to the rest of the City, so the
proceedings of that City, and the parts about it, would in time give the law to
the rest of the Kingdom; and that there was no speedier way to advance a
general conformity over all the Kingdom, than to take beginning at the head,
from whence both sense and motion is derived to the rest of the body. Which
makes it seem the greater wonder, that he should be so backward in advancing
Images (if at the least his actings in that kind have not been misplaced) as
not to go about it till the year next following; unless it were that he began
to be so wise as to stay until the Queen's affairs were better settled. But no
sooner was her marriage past, when we find him at it. For having by that time
prepared a fair and large Image of our Savior, which they called the Rood, he
caused it to be laid along upon the pavement of St Paul's Quire, and all the
doors of the Church to be kept close shut, whilst he together with the
Prebends, sung and said diverse prayers by it. Which done, they anointed it with
oil in diverse places, and after the anointing of it, crept unto it, and kissed
it, and after weighed it up, and set it in its accustomed place; the whole
quire in the mean time singing Te Deum, and the bells publishing their joy at
the end of the Pageant. After which a command is given to Dr Story (who was
then Chancellor of his Diocese, and afterward a most active instrument in all
his butcheries) to visit every Parish Church in London and Middlesex, to see
their Rood lo^ts repaired, and the Images of the Crucifix with Mary and John to
be placed on them.

But it is time that we return to the former Parliament; during the sitting
whereof, the Queen had been desired to mary, and three husbands had been
nominated of several qualities, that she might please her self in the choice of
one. That is to say, Edward Lord Courtney, whom she had lately restored to the
Title of Earl of Devon, Reginald Pole, a Cardinal of the Church of Rome,
descended from George Duke of Clarence; and Philip the eldest son of Charles
the Emperor. It is affirmed, that she had carried some good affections to the
Earl of Devonshire, ever since she first saw him in the Tower, as being of a
lovely personage and Royal extraction, the Grandson of a Daughter of King
Edward the 4th. But he being sounded afar off* had declined the matter.
Concerning which there goes a story, that the young Earl pe^itioning her for
leave to travel, she advised him to mary and stay at home, assuring him that no
Lady in the land how high soever, would refuse to accept him for an husband. By
which words though she pointed out her self unto him, as plainly as might
either stand with the Modesty or Majesty of a Maiden Queen; Yet the young
Gentleman not daring to look so high as a Crown, or being better affected to
the person of the Princess Elizabeth, desired the Queen to give him leave to
mary her sister. Which gave the Queen so much displeasure, that she looked with
an evil eye upon them both for ever after; upon the Earl for not accepting that
love which she seemed to offer, and on her sister as her Rival in the Earls
affections. It was supposed also, that she might have some inclinations to
Cardinal Pole, as having been brought up with him in the house of his Mother,
the late Countess of Salisbury. But against him it was objected, that he began
to grow in years, and was so given unto his book, that he seemed fitter for a
Coul than to wear a Crown; that he had few dependances at home, and fewer
alliances abroad; and that the Queen's affairs did require a man both stout and
active, well backed with friends, and able at all points to carry on the great
concernments of the Kingdom. And then what fitter husband ^ould be found out
for her, than Philip Prince of Spain? A Prince in the verdure of his years, and
eldest son to the most Mighty Emperor, Charles the 5th. by whom the
Netherlands being laid to England, and both secured by the assistance and power
of Spain, this nation might be rendered more considerable both by sea and land,
than any people in the world.

To this last Match the Queen was carefully solicited by the Bishop of
Winchester, who neither loved the person of Pole, nor desired his company, for
fear of growing less in power and reputation, by coming under the command of a
Cardinal Legate. To which end he encouraged Charles the Emperor to go on with
this marriage for his son; not without some secret intimation on his Advice, for
not suffering Pole to come into England (if he were suffered to come at all)
till the Treaty were concluded, and the Match agreed on. According whereunto*
the Lord Lamoralle Earl of Edgmond, Charles Earl of Lalain, and John (...)
Mount Morency, Earl of Horn, arrived in England as Ambassadors from the
Emperor. In the beginning of January they began to treat upon the marriage,
1553/4;.
which they found so well prepared before their coming, that in short time it
was accorded upon these conditions. 1. That it should be lawful for Philip to
assume the Title of all the Kingdoms and Provinces belonging to his wife, and
should be joint Governor with her over those Kingdoms; the Privileges and
Customs thereof always preserved inviolate, and the full and free distribution
of Bishoprics, Benefices, Favors and Offices, always remaining entire in the
Queen. 2. That the Queen should also carry the Titles of all those Realms, into
which Philip either then was, or should be afterward invested. 3. That if the
Queen survived Philip, 60 thousand pounds per annum should be assigned to her
for her jointure, as had been formerly assigned to the Lady Margaret, Sister to
King Edward the 4th. and Wife to Charles Duke of Burgundy. 4. An. Reg. Mar. 1.
1553/4;.
That the Issue begotten by this marriage, should succeed in all the Queens
Dominions, as also in the Dukedom and County of Burgundy, and all those
Provinces in the Neatherlands, of which the Emperor was possessed. 5. That if
none but daughters should proceed from this marriage, the eldest should succeed
in all the said Provinces of the Neatherlands, provided that by the Counsel and
consent of Charles (the son of Philip, by Mary of Portugal his first wife) she
should make choice of a husband out of England or the Neatherlands, or
otherwise to be deprived of her right in the succession in the said estates,
and Charles to be invested in them; and in that cafe convenient portions to be
made for her and the rest of the daughters. 6. And finally, That if the said
Charles should depart this life without lawful issue, that then the Heir
surviving of this marriage, though female only, should succeed in all the
Kingdoms of Spain, together with all the Dominions and Estates of Italy
thereunto belonging. Conditions fair and large enough, and more to the
advantage of the Realm of England, than the Crown of Spain.

But so it was not understood by the generality of the people of England, many
of which out of a restless disposition, or otherwise desirous to restore the
reformed Religion, had caused it to be noised abroad, that the Spaniards were
by this accord, to become the absolute Lords of all the Kingdom; that they were
to have the managing of all affairs; and that abolishing all the ancient Laws
of the Realm, they would impose upon the land a most intolerable yoke of
servitude, as a conquered Nation. Which either being certainly known, or
probably suspected by the Queen and the Council, it was thought fit that the
Lord Chancellor should make a true and perfect declaration of all the points of
the Agreement, not only in the Presence Chamber to such Lords and Gentlemen as
were at that time about the Court and the City of London; but also to the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen, and certain of the chief Commoners of that City, purposely
sent for to the Court upon the occasion: Which services he performed on the
14th* and 15th. days of January. And having summarily reported all the Articles
of the capitulation, he showed unto them how much they were bound to thank God,
That such a Noble, Worthy, and Famous Prince, would vonchsafe so to humble
himself, as in this marriage to take upon him rather as a subject than
otherwise. Considering that the Queen and her Council were to Rule and Govern
all things as they did before; and that none of the Spaniards or other
strangers, were to be of the Council, nor to have the custody of any Castles,
Forts, etc. nor to have any office in the Queen's house, or elsewhere
throughout the Kingdom. In which respect it was the Queens request to the Lords
and Gentlemen, That for her sake they would most lovingly receive the said
Prince with ^oy and honor: and to the Lord Mayor and the Citizens, That they
would behave themselves to be good subjects with all humility and rejoicing.

Which declaration notwithstanding, the subjects were not easily satisfied in
those fears and jealousies, which cunningly had been infused into them by some
popular spirits, who greedily affected a change of Government; and to that end
sowed diverse other discontents amongst the people. To some they secretly
complained, That the Queen had broke her promise to the Suffolk men, in
suppressing the Religion settled by King Edward the 6th. to others* That the
marriage with the Prince of Spain, was but the introduction to a second
vassalage to the Popes of Rome; sometimes they pitied the calamity of the Lady
Jane, not only forcibly deposed, but barbarously condemned to a cruel death;
and sometimes magnified the eminent virtues of the Princess Elizabeth, as the
only blessing of the Kingdom; and by those Articles, prepared the people in
most places for the act of Rebellion. And that it might succeed the better,
nothing must be pretended but the preservation and defense of their Civil
Liberties, which they knew was generally like to take both with Papists and
Protestants; but so that they had many engines to draw such others to the side,
as either were considerable for power or quality. The Duke of Suffolk was
hooked in, upon the promise of re-establishing his daughter in the Royal
throne; the Carews, and other Gentlemen of Devonshire, upon assurance of
marying the Lord Courtney to the Princess Elizabeth, and setting the Crown upon
their heads; and all they that wished well to the Reformation, upon the like
hopes of restoring that Religion which had been settled by the care and piety of
the good King Edward, but now suppressed, contrary to all faith the promise, by
the Quee^ and her Ministers. By means of which suggestions and subtle
practices, the contagion was so generally diffused over all the Kingdom, that
if it had not accidently broke out before the time appointed by them, it was
conceived by many wise and knowing men, that the danger might have proved far
greater, the disease incurable.

For so it happened, that the Carews conceiving that the deferring of the
execution of the plot thus laid, might prove destructive to that cause, or
otherwise fatally thrust on by their own ill destiny, began to leavy men in
Cornwall, which could not be so closely carried, but that their purpose was
discovered, and the chief of them forced to fly the Kingdom. The news whereof
gave such an allarum to the confederates, that they showed themselves in
several places before the people were prepared and made ready for them.
Insomuch, that the Duke of Suffolk, together with the Lord Thomas Gray, and the
Lord Leonard Gray, having made Proclamation in diverse places on the 25th. of
that month, against the Queens intended marriage with the Prince of Spain, and
finding that the people came not in so fast unto them as they did expect, were
forced to dismiss their slender company, and shift for themselves, upon the
first news that the Earl of Huntington was coming toward them with 300 horse.
An action very unfortunate to himself and to all his family. For first, The
Queen finding that she was to expect no peace or quiet as long as the Lady Jane
was suffered to remain alive, caused her and the Lord Guilford Dudley, to be
openly executed on the 12th. of February then next following. His daughter
Katherine ^ormerly married to Henry Lord Herbert, eldest son to the Earl of
Pembrook, (but the marriage by reason of her tender years, not coming unto a
Consummation by carnal knowledge) was by him repudiated and cast off, and a
marriage presently made betwixt him and another Katherine, a daughter of George
Earl of Shrewsbury. His brothers, John and Thomas, committed prisoners to the
Tower; of which two, Thomas suffered death about two months after. And for
himself, being compelled to hide his head in the house of one Underwood, whom
he had preferred unto the keeping of one of his Parks, he was by him most
basely and treacherously betrayed to the said Earl of Huntington, on the 11th.
of February. Arrained on the 17th. of the same month, and beheaded on the 23d.

Nor fared it better with the rest, though they of Kent, conducted by Sir
Thomas Wiat (the chief contriver of the plot) were suddenly grown considerable
for their number, and quickly formidable for their power. The news of whose
rising being swiftly posted to the Court, the Duke of Norfolk was appointed to
go against him, attended with few more than the Queen's ordinary Guards, and
followed by 500 Londoners newly raised, and sent by water to Graves End, under
the charge of Captain Alexander Bret. With which few forces he intended to
assault the Rebels, who had put themselves into Rochester Castle, and fortified
the bridge with some pieces of Canon. But being ready to fall on, Bret with his
Londoners fell off to Wiat, and so necessitated the old Duke to return to
London in great haste, accompanied by the Earl of Arundel and Sir Henry
Gerningham, with some few of their horse, leaving their foot, eight pieces of
Canon, and all their ammunition belonging to them, in the power of the enemy.
This brings the Queen to the Guild Hall in London, on the first of February,
where she finds the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and many of the chief Citizens in
their several Liveries. To whom she signified, That she never did intend to
marry, but on such conditions, as in the judgment of her Council should be
found honorable to the Realm, and profitable ble to her subjects; that
therefore they should give no credit to those many calumnies, which Wiat and
his accomplices, who according to the guise of Rebels, had purposely dispersed
to defame both her and her government; but rather that they should contribute
their best assistance for the suppressing of those, who contrary to their duty,
were in arms against her. And though she had as good as she brought, that is to
say, fair promises for her gracious words; yet understanding that many in the
City held intelligence with the Kentish Rebels, she appointed the Lord William
Howard (whom afterward she created Lord Howard of Effingham) to be Lieutenant
of the City, and Pembrook General of the field. The event showed that she
followed that Counsel which proved best for her preservation. For had she
trusted to the City, she had been betrayed.

Encouraged with his success, and confident of a strong party amongst the
Lond^ners, on the 3d. day of February, he enters Southwark, where he and his
were finely feasted by the people. But when he hoped to have found the way open
to the rest of the City, he found the Drawbridge to be cut down, the
bridge-Gate to be shut, and the Ordinance of the Tower to be bent against him,
by the appointment and direction of the Lord Lieutenant. Two days he trifled
out in Southwark to no purpose at all, more than the sacking of Winchester
House, and the defacing of the Bishops Library there, unless it were to leave a
document to posterity, that God infatuates the Counsels of those wretched men,
who traitorously take up arms against their Princes. And having liberally
bestowed these two days upon the Queen, the better to enable her to provide
for her safety, he wheels about on Sunday the 6th. of the same month to
Kingston bridge. And though the bridge was broken down before his coming, and
that the opposite shore was guarded by 200. men, yet did he use such diligence,
that he removed away those forces, repaired the bridge, past over both his men
and Canon, and might in probability have surprised both the Court and City in
the dead of the night, if the same spirit of infatuation had not rested on him.
For having marched beyond Brainford in the way toward London, without giving
or taking the allarum* it happened that one of his great piecs was dismounted by
the breach of its wheels. In the mending and mounting whereof, he obstinately
wasted so much time, notwithstanding all the persuasions which his friends
could make unto him, that many of his men slipped from him, and some gave
notice to the Court, not only of his near approach, but also what his purpose
was, and what had hindered him from putting it in execution. On this
Advertisment the Earl of Pembrook arms, and draws out his men to attend the
motion of the Rebels, who about 10 of the clock came to Chearing Cross, and
without falling on the Court, (which was then in a very great amazement) turn
up the S^rand to Temple Bar, and so toward Ludgate, the Earl of Pembrook
following and cutting him off in the arreir upon every turn. Coming to London,
(when it was too late for his intendments) he found the Gates fast shut against
him, and the Lord William Howard in as great a readiness to oppose him there,
as when he was before in Southwark. So that being hemmed in on both sides
without hope of relief, he yields himself to Sir Morris Berkley, is carried
prisoner to the Court, from thence committed to the Tower, arraigned at
Westminster on the 15th. of March, and executed on the 11th. of April, having
first heard, that no fewer than 50 of his accomplices were hanged in London,
and Bret, with 22 more in several places of Kent.

It can not be denied but that the restitution of the Reformed Religion, was
the matter principally aimed at in this Rebellion, through nothing but the
Match with Spain appeared on the outside of it. Which appears plainly by a Book
writ by Christopher Goodman (associated with John Knox, for setting up
Presbytery and Rebellion in the Kirk of Scotland) in which he takes upon him to
show How far Superio^r Magistrates ought ot be obeyed. For having filled almost
every Chapter of it with railing speeches against the Queen, and stirring up
the people to rebel against her, he falls amongst he rest upon this
expression, viz. Wyat did but his duty, and it was but the duty of all others
that profess the Gospel, to have risen with him for maintenance of the same.
His cause was just, and they were all Traitors that took not part with him. O
Noble Wyat* thou art now with God, and those worthy men that dyed in that happy
enterprise. But this Book was written at Geneva, where Calvin reigned. To whom
no pamphlet could be more agreeable, than such as did reproach this Queen; whom
in his Comment upon Amoz, he entituleth by the name of Porserpine, and says,
that she exceeded in her cruelties all the devils in hell. Much more it is to
be admired, that Dr John Poynct, the late Bishop of Winchester, should be of
Counsel in the plot, or put himself into their Camp, and attend them unto the
place where the carriage brake. Where when he could not work on Wiat to desist
from that unprofitable labor in remounting the Cannon, he counseled Vauham,
Bret, and others, to shift for themselves, took leave of his more secret
friends, told them that he would pray for their good success, and so departed
and took ship for Germany, where he after died.

The fortunate suppressing of these insurrections, secured the Queen from any
fear of the like dangers for the present. And thereupon it was advised to make
use of the opportunity for putting the Church into a posture, when the spirits
of the opposite party were so crushed and broken, that no resistance could be
looked for. Articles therefore are sent into every Diocese, and letters writ
unto the several and Respective Bishops, on the 3d. of March, to see them
carefully and speedily put in execution. The Tenor of which Articles were as
follows.

1. That every Bishop and his Officers, with all other having Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, shall with all speed and dil^gence, and all manner of ways to
them possible, put in execution all such Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws,
heretofore in the time of King Henry the 8th. used within this Realm of
England, and the Dominions of the same, not being directly and expressly
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

2. That no Bishop, or any his Officer, or other person, hereafter in any of
their Ecclesiastical writings, in process, or other extra-judicial acts, do
use or put in this clause or Sentence, Regia Auhoritate fulcitus.

3. That no B^^^op, nor any his Officers, or other person, do hereafter exact
or demand in the admessien of any person to any Ecclesiastical Promotion, Order
or Office, any O^^h touching the primacy or succession, as of late few years
past ha^h been acc^stomed and used.

4. That every Bishop and his Officers, with all other persons, have a vigilant
eye, and use special diligence and foresight, that no person be admitted or
received to any Ecclesiastical function, Benefice, or Office, being a
Sacramentary, infected or defamed with any notable kind of Heresy, or other
great crime; and that the said Bishop do stay, and cause to be staid, as much
as lies in him, that Benefices and Ecclesiastical promotions, do not notably
decay or take hinderance, by passing or confirming of unreasonable Leases.

5. That every Bishop, and all other persons aforesaid, do diligently travail
for the repr^ssing of Heresies and notable crimes, especially in the Clergy,
duly correcting and punishing the same.

6. That every Bishop, and all other persons aforesaid, do likewise travail for
the condemning and repressing of corrupt and naughty opinions, unlawful Books,
Ballads, and other pernicious and hurtful devices, enge^dri^g hatred and
discord amongst the people. And that Schoolmasters, Teachers, and Preachers, do
exercise and use their offices and duties, without Teaching, Preaching, or
setting forth any evil and corrupt doctrine, and that doing the contrary, they
may be by the Bishop and his said Officers, punished and removed.

7. That every Bishop, and all other person aforesaid, proceeding summarily,
and with all celerity and speed, may, and shall deprive, or declare deprived,
and remove according to their learning and discretion, and such persons from
their Benefices and Ecclesiastical promotions, who contrary to the state of
their Order, and the laudable custom of the Church, have married and used women
as their wives, or otherwise notably and slanderously disordered or abused
themselves, sequestring also, during the said process, the fruits and profits
of the said Benefices and Ecclesidstical promotions.

8. That the said Bishop and other persons aforesaid, do use more lenity and
clemency with such as have married, whose wives be dead, than with others whose
women do yet remain al^ve. And likewise such Priests as with the consent of
their wives or women, openly in the presence of the Bishop, do profess to
abstain, to be used more favorable. In which case, after th Penance
effectually done, the Bishop according to his discretion and wisdom, may upon
just consideration, receive and admit them again to their former
administrations, so it be not in the same place, appointing them such a portion
to live upon, to be paid out of their Benefice, whereof they be deprived, by
the discretion of the said Bishop or his Officer, as he shall think may be
spared of the same Ben^fice.

9. That every Bishop and other person aforesaid, do foresee that they suffer
not any ^^ligious man, having solemly professed chastity, to continue with his
woman, or wife, but that all such persons after deprivation of their Benefice,
or Ecclesiastical promotion, be also divorced every one from his said woman,
and due punishment otherwise taken for the offense therein.

10. Item, That every Bishop and all other persons aforesaid, do take Order and
direction with the ^arishioners of every Benefice where Priests do want, to
repair to the next Parish for divine Service, or to appoint for a convenient
time, till other better provision may be made, one Curate ^o serve alienis
vicibus, in diverse Parishes, and to allot the said Cura^e for his labor, some
part of the Benefice which he so serves.

11. That all, and all manner of Processions in the Church, be used frequently,
and continued after the old Order of the Church, in the Latin tougue.

12. That all such holy days and fasting-dayes be observed and kept, as were
observed and kept in the latter time of King Henry the 8. h.

13. That the laudable and honest Ceremonies which were wont to be used,
frequented and observed in the Church, be hereafter frequented, used and
observed; and that children be Christened by the Priest, and confirmed by the
Bishop, as hereto^^^e has been accusto^ed and used.

14. Touching such persons as were heretofore promoted to any Orders, after the
new sort and (...) of O^ders, considering they were not Ordered in very deed,
the Bishop of the Diocese finding otherwise sufficient ability in these men,
may supply that thing which wanted in them before, then according to his
discretion admit them to minister.

15. That by the Bishop of the Diocese, an uniform doctrine be set forth by
Hom^lies, or otherwise, for the good instruction and teaching of all people.
And that the said Bishop, and other persons aforesaid, do compel the
parishioners to come to their several Churches, and there devoutly to hear
divine Service, as of reason they ought.

16. That they examine all Schoolmasters, and Teachers of children, and finding
them suspect in any wise, to remove them, and place Catholic men in their
rooms* with a special commandment to instruct their children, so as they may be
able to answer the Priest at the Mass, and so help the Priest at Mass, as
has been accustomed.

17. That the said Bishops, and all other the persons aforesaid, have such
regard, respect, and consideration of and for the setting forth of the
premises, with all kind of virtue, godly living, and good example, with
repressing also, or keeping under of vic^ and unthriftinesse, as they and every
of them, may be seen to favor the restitution of (...) Religion, and also to
make and honest account and reckoning of their office and c^re, to the honor
of God, Our good contentation, and profit of this Our Realm, and the Dominions
of the same.

The generality of the people not being well pleased before with the Queen's
proceedings, An. Reg. Mar. 1. 1554.
were startled more than ever at the noise of these Articles; none more
exasperated than those whose either hands or hearts had been joined with Wiat.
But not being able to prevail by open army, a new device is found out to befool
the people, and bring them to a misconceit of the present government. A young
maid called Elizabeth Crofts, about the age of eighteen years, was tutored to
counterfeit certain speeches in the wall of a house not far from Aldersgate,
where she was heard of many, but seen of none, and that her voice might be
conceived to have somewhat in it more than ordinary, a strange whistle was
devised for her, out of which her words proceeded in such a tone, as seemed to
have nothing mortal in it. And thereupon it was affirmed by some of the people
(great multitudes whereof resorted daily to the place) that it was an Angel, or
at least a voice from Heaven, by others, that it could be nothing but the Holy
Ghost; but generally she passed by the name of the Spirit in the wall. For the
interpreting of whose words, there wanted not some of the confederates, who
mingled themselves by turns amongst the rest of the people, and taking on them
to expound what the Spirit said* delivered many dangerous and seditious words
against the Queen, her marriage with the Prince of Spain, the Mass, Confession,
and the like. The practice was first set on foot on the 14th. of March, which
was within ten days after the publishing of the Articles, and for a while it
went on fortunately enough, according to the purpose of the chief contrivers.
But the abuse being searched into, and the plot discovered, the wench was
ordered to stand upon a scaffold near St Paul's Cross, on the 15th. of July,
there to abide during the time of the Sermon, and that being done, to make a
public declaration of that lewd imposture. Let not the Papists be from
henceforth charged with Elizabeth Barton whom they called the Holy made of
Kent; since now the Zuinglian Gospellers, (for I cannot but consider this as a
plot of theirs) have raised up their Elizabeth Crofts, whom they called the
Spirit in the wall, to draw aside the people from their due Allegiance.

Wiat's Rebellion being quenched, 1554.
and the Realm in a condition capable of holding a Parliament, the Queen
Convenes her Lords and Commons on the 2d. of April, in which Session the Queens
marriage with the Prince of Spain, being offered unto consideration, was finally
concluded and agreed unto upon these conditions, that is to say, That Philip
should not advance any to any public office or dignity in England, but such as
were Natives of the Realm, and the Queens subjects. That he should admit of a
set number of English in his household, whom he should use respectively, and not
suffer them to be injured by foreiners. That he should not transport the Queen
out of England, but at her entreaty, nor any of the issue begotten by her, who
should have their education in this Realm, and should not be suffered but upon
necessity and good reasons, to go out of the same, not then neither but with
the consent of the English. That the Queen deceasing without children, Philip
should not make any claim to the Kingdom, but should leave it freely to him to
whom of right it should belong. That he should not change any thing in the
Laws, either public or private, nor the immunities and customs of the Realm,
but should be bound by oath to confirm and keep them. That he should not
transport any Jewels, nor any part of the Wardrobe, nor alienate any of the
revenues of the Crown. That he should preserve our Shipping, Ordnance and
Mu^ition, and keep the Castles, Forts, and Block Houses, in good repair, and
well maned. Lastly, That this Match should not any way derogate from the League
lately concluded between the Queen, and the King of France, but that the peace
between the English and the French should remain firm and inviolate.

For the clearer carrying on this great business, and to encourage them for the
performance of such further services as her occasions might require; the Queen
was pleased to increase the number of her Barons. In pursuance whereof, she
advanced the Lord William Howard, Cosen German to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, to
the Title of Lord Howard of Essingham, on the 11th. of March, and elected him
into the Order of the Garter within few months after; whose son called Charles,
being Lord Admiral of England, and of no small renown for his success at the
Isle of Gades, was by Queen Elizabeth created Earl of Nottingham, Anno 1589.
Next to him followed Sir John Williams, created Lord Williams of Tame on the
5th. of April; who dying without Issue Male, left his Estate (though not his
Honors) betwixt two daughters; the eldest of whom, called Margaret, was married
to Sir Henry Norris, whom Queen Elizabeth created Lord Norris of Ricot, in
reference perhaps to his fathe^s suffering in the cause of her mother; from
whom descended Francis Lord Norris, advanced by King James to the Honors of
Viscount Tame, and Earl of Berkshire, by Letters Patens bearing date in
January, Anno 1620. After him on the 7th. of April, comes Sir Edward North,
created Baron of Char^eleg, in the Country of Cambridge, who having been
Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations in the time of King Henry, and raised
himself a fair Estate by the fall of Abbyes, was by the King made one of his
Executors, and nominated to be one of the great Council of Estate in his Son's
Minority. Sir John B^ugis brings up the rear, who being descended from Sir John
Chandois, a right noble Banneret, and from the Bottelers Lords of Sudley, was
made Lord Chandois of Sudley on the 8th. of April, which goodly Manor he had
lately purchased of the Crown, to which it was Escheated on the death of Sir
Thomas Seymour, Anno. 1549. the Title still enjoyed, though but little else, by
the seventh Lord of this Name and Family; most of the Lands being dismembered
from the House by the unparalled Impudence (to give it no worse name) of his
elder brother.

Some Bishops I find consecrated about this time also, to make the stronger
party for the Queen in the House of Peers; no more Sees actually voided at that
time to make Rome for others, though many in a fair way to it, of which more
hereafter. Hooper of Gloucester commanded to attend the Lords of the Council on
the 22 of August, and committed prisoner not long after, was outed of his
Bishopric immediately on the ending of the Parliament, in which all
Consecrations were declared to be void and null, which had been made according
to the Ordinall of King Edward the 6 th. Into whose place succeeded James
Brooks Doctor in Divinity, sometimes Fellow of Corpus Christi, and Master of
B^liol College in Oxon; employed not long after as a Delegat from the Pope of
Rome in the proceedings against the Archbishop of Canterbury, whom he condemned
to the stake. To Jailer (of whose death we have spoken before) succeeded Doctor
John White in the Sea of Lincoln, first Schoolmaster, and after Warden of the
College near Winchester; to the Episcopal See whereof we shall find him
translated Anno 1556. The Church of Rochester, had been void ever since the
removal of Doctor Story to the Sea of Chichester, not suffered to return to
his former Bishopric, though dispoiled of the later: But it was now thought
good to fill it, and Maurice Griffin, who for some years had been the
Archdeacon, is consecrated Bishop of it on the first of April. One suffrage
more was gained by the repealing of an Act of Parliament, made in the last
Session of King Edward, for dissolving the Bishopric of Durham; till which
time, Doctor Cuthbert Tunstall, though restored to his Liberty, and possibly to
a good part also of his Churches Partimony, had neither Suffrage as a Peer in
the House of Parliament, not could act any thing as a Bishop in his own
Jurisdiction. And with these Consecrations and Creations I conclude this year.

An. Reg. Mar. 2o An. Dom. 1554, 1555.
THe next begins with the Arrival of the Prince of Spain, An. Reg. Mar. 2.
1554.
wafted to England with a Fleet of one hundred and sixty sail of Ships, twenty
of which were English, purposely sent to be his Convoy, in regard of the wars,
not then expired, betwixt the French and the Spaniards. Landing at Southampton
on the 19 th. of July (on which day of the month in the year foregoing the
Queen had been solemnly proclaimed in London) he went to Winchester with his
whole Retinue on the 24 th. where he was received by the Queen with a gallant
Train of Lords and Ladies; solemnly married the next day, being the Festival of
St. James, (the supposed Tutelary Saint of the Spanish Nation) by the Bishop of
Winchester; at what time the Queen had passed the eight and thirtieth year of
her age, and the Prince was but newly entered on his twenty seventh. As soon as
the Marriage-Rites were celebrated, Higueroa the Emperors Ambassador, presented
to the King a Donation of the Kingdoms of Naples and Cicily, which the Emperor
his father had resigned unto him. Which presently was signified, and the Titles
of the King and Queen Proclaimed by sound of Trumpet in this following Style.
PHILIP and MARY, by the grace of the God, King and Queen of England, France,
Naples, Jerusalem, Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; Princes of Spain and
Cicily, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Millain, Burgundy, and Brabant, Counts
of Ausperge, Flanders, and Tirroll, etc. At the proclaiming of which Style,
(which was performed in French, Latin, and English) the King and Queen showed
themselves hand in hand, with two Swords born before them, for the greater
state, or in regard of their distinct Capacity in the public Government. From
Winchester they removed to Basing, and so to Windsor, where Philip on the 5
th. of August was Installed Knight of the Garter, into the fellowship whereof
he had been chosen the year before. From thence the Court removed to Richmond
by land, and so by water to Suffolk-place in the Borough of Southwark, and on
the 12 th. of the same month made a magnificent passage through the principal
streets of the City of London, with all the Pomps accustomed at a Coronation.
The Triumphs of which Entertainment had continued longer, if the Court had not
put on mourning for the death of the old Duke of Norfolk, who left this life at
Framingham Castle in the month of September, to the great sorrow of the Queen,
who entirely loved him.

Philip thus gloriously received, endeavors to sow his Grandeur, to make the
English sensible of the benefits which they were to partake of by this
Marriage, and to engratiate himself with the Nobility and People in all
generous ways. To which end, he caused great quantity of Bullion to be brought
into England, loaded in twenty Carts, carrying amongst them twenty seven
Chests, each Chest containing a Yard and some inches in length, conducted to
the Tower on the second of October, by certain Spaniards and Englishmen of his
Majesty's Guard. And on the 29 th. of January then next following, ninety nine
Horses and two Carts, laden with Treasures of Gold and Silver, brought out of
Spain, was conveyed through the City of the Tower of London, under the conduct
of Sir Thomas Grosham the Queens Merchant, and others. He prevailed also with
the Queen for discharge of such Prisoners as stood committed in the Tower,
either for matter of Religion, or on the account of Wya^'s Rebellion, or for
engaging in the practice of the Duke of Northumberland. And being gratified
therein according unto his desire, the Lord Chancellor, the Bishop of Ely, and
certain others of the Council, were sent unto the Tower on the 18 th. of
January, to see the same put in execution; which was accordingly performed, to
the great joy of the Prisoners, amongst which were the Archbishops of York, ten
Knights, and many other persons of name and quality. But nothing did him
greater honor amongst the English, than the great pains he took for procuring
the enlargment of the Earl of Devonshire, and the Princess Elizabeth,
committed formerly on a suspicion of having had a hand in Wya^'s Rebellion,
though Wyat h^^ettly disavowed it at the time of his death. It was about the
Feast of Easter that the Earl was brought unto the Court, where having obtained
the leave to travel, for which before he had petitioned in vain, he passed the
Seas, crossed France, and came into Italy; but he found the air of Italy as
much too hot for him, as that of England was too cold, dying at Padua in the
year 1556. the eleventh and last Earl of Devonshire, of that noble Family.
About ten days after his enlargement, followed that of the Princess Elizabeth,
whose coming to the Court, her entertainment with the Queen, and what else
followed thereup on, we shall see hereafter.

But we have run our selves too far upon these occasions, and therefore must
look back again on that which followed more immediately on the Kings reception;
the celebrating of whose Marriage opened a fair way for the Cardinals coming,
so long expected by the Queen, and delayed by the Emperor, by whom retarded
for a while when he was in Italy, and openly detained at Dilling, a Town in
Germany, as he was upon his way toward England. From thence he writes his
Letters of Expostulation, representing to the Emperor the great scandal which
must needs be given to the Churches enemies, in detaining a Cardinal-Legat,
Commissioned by his Holiness for the peace of Christendom, and the regaining
of a Kingdom. Which notwithstanding, there he stays, till the Articles of the
Marriage were agreed on by the Queen's Commissioners, and is then suffered to
advance as far as Brussells, upon condition, that he should not pass over into
England till the consummation of the Marriage. The Interim he spends in
managing a Treaty of Peace betwixt the Emperor and the French; which sorted to
no other effect, but only to the setting forth of his dexterity in all public
businesses. And now the Marriage being past, the Emperor is desired to give
him leave to come for England; and Pole is called upon by Letters from the King
and Queen to make haste unto them, that they might have his presence and
assistance in the following Parliament; and in the mean time, that they might
advise upon such particulars as were to be agreed on, for the honor and
advantage of the Sea Apostolic. Upon the Emperor's dismission he repairs to
Calais, but was detained by cross winds till the 24 th. of November; at which
time we shall find the Parliament sitting, and much of the business dispatched
to his hand in which he was to have been advised with.

The business then to be dispatched was of no small moment, no less than the
restoring of the Popes to the Supremacy, of which they had been dispossessed in
the time of King Henry For smoothing the way to which great work, it was
thought necessary to fill up all Episcopal Sees, which either Death or
Deprivation had of late made vacant. Holgate Archbishop of York had been
committed to the Tower on the 4 th. of October, Anno 1553. from whence released
upon Philips intercession on the 18 th. of January: Marriage and Heresy are
his crimes, for which deprived during the time of his imprisonment. Doctor
Nicolas Heath succeeded him in the Sea of York, and leaves the Bishopric of
Worcester to Doctor Richard Pates, who had been nominated by King Henry the
Eighth, Anno 1534. and having spent the intervening twenty years in the Court
of Rome, returned a true servant to the Pope, every way fitted and instructed
to advance that See. Goodrich of Elie left his life on the 10 th. of April,
leaving that Bishopric to Doctor Thomas Thurlby, Bishop of Norwich, (one that
knew how to stand his ground in the strongest tempest) and Doctor John Hopton,
heretofore Chaplain and Controuler of Queen Mary's Household, when but Princess
only, is made Bishop of Norwich. Barlow of Wells having abandoned that
dignity which he could not hold, had for his Successor Doctor Gilbert Bourn
Archdeacon of London, and Brother of Sir John Bourn, principal Secretary of
Estate. Sufficiently recompensed by this preferment, for the great danger which
he had incurred the year before, when the Dagger was thrown at him, as he
preached in St. Paul's Churchyard. Harley of Hereford is succeeded by Purefew
(otherwise called Wharton) of St. Asaph; who had so miserably wasted the
Patrimony of the Church in the time of King Edward, that it was hardly worth
the keeping, For the same sins of Protestantism and Marriage, old Bujh of
Bri^^ow, and Bira of Chester (the two first Bishops of those Sees) were
deprived also; the first succeeded to by Holiman, once a Monck of Reading; the
last by Coals, sometimes Fellow of Magdalen, and afterward Master of Baliol
College in Oxon. Finally, in the place of Doctor Richard Sampson Bishop of
Coventry and Li^hfield, who lest this life on the 25th. of September, Doctor
Radolph Bayne, who had been Heb^ew Reader in Paris in the time of King Francis,
was consecrated Bishop of that Church; a man of better parts, but of a more
inflexible temper than his Predecessor.

And now the Parliament begins, opened upon the 11 th. of November, and closed
on the 16 th. of January then next following. It had been offered to
consideration in the former Session, That all Acts made against the Pope in the
Reign of King Henry might be declared null and void, for the better
encouragement of the Cardinal to come amongst us. But the Queen had neither
eloquence enough to persuade, nor power enough to awe the Parliament, to that
Concession: Nothing more hindered the design than general fear, that if the
Popes were one restored to their former power, the Church might challenge
restitution of her former possessions; Do but secure them from that fear, then
Pope and Cardinals might come and welcome. And to secure them from that fear,
they had not only the promise of the King and Queen, but some assurance
underhand from the Cardinal-Legat, who knew right well, that the Church Lands
had been so chopped and changed by the two last Kings, as not to be restored
without the manifest ruin of many of the Nobility, and most of the Gentry, who
were invested in the same. Secured on both sides, they proceed according to the
King's desires, and pass a general Act for the repealing of all Statutes,
which had been made against the Power and Jurisdiction of the Popes of Rome.
But first they are to be entreated to it by the Legate himself; for the opening
a way to whose reception, they prepared a Bill, by which he was to be
discharged of the Attainture which had passed upon him in the year 1539.
restored in Blood, and rendered capable of enjoying all those Rights and
Privileges, which formerly he stood possessed of in this Kingdom. For the
passing of which Bill into Act, the King and Queen vouchsafed their presence,
as soon as it was fitted and prepared for them, not staying till the end of the
Session as at other times, because the business might not suffer such a long
delay.

It was upon the 24 th. of November that the Cardinal came first to London, and
had his Lodgings in or near the Court, till Lambeth -house could be made ready
to receive him. Having reposed himself for a day or two, the Lords and Commons
are required to attend their Majesty's at the Court, where the Cardinal, in a
very grave and eloquent speech, first, gave them thanks for being restored unto
his Country; in recompense whereof he told them, that he was come to restore
them to the Country and Court of Heaven, from which, by their departing from
the Church, they had been estranged. He therefore earnestly exhorts them to
acknowledge their errors, and cheerfully to receive that benefit which Christ
was ready by his Vicar to extend unto them. His Speech is said to have been
long and artificial, but it concluded to this purpose, That he had the Keys to
open them a way into the Church, which they had shut against themselves, by
making so many Laws, to the dishonor and reproach of the Sea Apostolic; on
the revoking of which Laws, they should ^ind him ready to make use of his Keys,
in opening the doors of the Church unto them. It was concluded hereupon by both
Houses of Parliament, that a Petition should be made in the name of the
Kingdom, wherein should be declared how ^orry they were, that they had
withdrawn their obedience from the Apostolic See, and consenting to the
Statutes made against it; promising to do their best endeavor hereafter, that
the said Laws and Statutes should be repealed; and beseeching the King and
Queen to intercede for them with his Holiness, that they may be absolved from
the Crimes and Censures, and be received as penitent children into the bosom of
the Church.

These things being thus resolved upon, both Houses are called again to the
Court on St. Andrews day; where being assembled in the presence of the King and
Queen, they were asked by the Lord Chancellor Gardener, whether they were
pleased, that Pardon should be demanded of the Legate, and whether they would
return to the Unity of the Church, and Obedience of the Pope, Supreme Head
thereof. To which, when some cried Yea, and the rest said nothing, their
silence was taken for consent; and so the Petition was presented to their
Majesty's in the name of the Parliament. Which being publicly read, they
arose, with a purpose to have moved the Cardinal in it; who meeting their
desires, declared his readiness in giving them that satisfaction which they
would have craved. And having caused the Authority given him by the Pope to be
publicly read, he showed how acceptable the repentance of a s^nner was in the
sight of God, and that the very Angels in Heaven rejoiced at the conversion of
this Kingdom. Which said, they all kneeled upon their knees, and imploring the
mercy of God, received absolution for themselves and the rest of the Kingdom;
which Absolution was pronounced in these following words:

Our Lord Jesus Christ, which with his most precious blood has redeemed and
washed u^ from all our sins and iniquities, that he might purchase unto himself
a glorious Spouse, without spot or wrinckle; and whom the Father has appointed
Head over all his Church, He by his mercy absolve you. And we by Apostolic
Authority given unto us (by the most holy Lord Pope Julius the 3 d his
Vicegerent here on earth) do absolve, and deliver you, and every of you, with
the whole Realm and the Dominions thereof, from all Heresy and Schism, and
from all and every Judgment, Censures and Pains, for that cause incurred. And
also we do restore you again unto the unity of our Mother, the holy Church, as
in our Letters more plainly it shall appear; In the Name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Which words of his being seconded with a loud Amen by such as were present, he
concluded the days work with a solemn Procession to the Chapel, for rendering
Prayers and Thanks to Almighty God. And because this great work was wrought on
St. Andrews day, the Cardinal procured a Decree or Canon to be made in the
Convocation of the Bishops and Clergy, that from thenceforth the Feast of St.
Andrew should be kept in the Church of England for a Majus Duplex, as the
Rituals call it, and celebrated with as much solemnity as any other in the
year. It was thought fit also, that the actions of the day should be
communicated on the Sunday following, being the second of December, at St.
Paul's Cross, in the hearing of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the rest of the
City. According to which appointment, the Cardinal went from Lambeth by water,
and landing at St. Paul's Wharf, from thence proceeded to the Church, with a
Cross, two Pillars, and two Pole-axes of silver born before him. Received by
the Lord Chancellor with a solemn Procession, they ^arried till the King came
from Westminster; Immediately upon whose coming, the Lord Chancellor went into
the Pulpit, and preached upon on those words of St. Paul, Romans 13. Fratres,
scientes quia hora est jam nos de somno surger^, etc. In which Sermon he
declared what had been done on the Friday before, in the submission which was
made to the Pope by the Lords and Commons, in the name of themselves and the
whole Kingdom; and the Absolution granted to them by the Cardinal in the name
of the Pope. Which done, and Prayers being made for the whole Estate of the
Catholic Church, the company was for that time dismissed. And on the Thursday
after, being the Feast of St. Nicholas day, the Bishops and Clergy then
assembled in their Convocation, presented themselves before the Cardinal at
Lamboth, and kneeling reverently on their knees, they obtained pardon for all
their Perjuries, Schisms, and Heresies: From which a formal Absolution was
pronounced also, that so all sorts of people might partake of the Pope's
Benediction, and thereby testify their obedience and submission to him. The
news whereof being speedily posted over to the Pope, he caused not only many
solemn Processions to be made in Rome, and most parts of Italy, but proclaimed
a Jubilee to be held on the 24th. of December then next coming. For the
anticipating of which solemnity, he alleged this reason, That it became him to
imitate the father of the Prodigal child; and having received his lost son, not
only to express a domestical joy, but to invite all others to partake thereof.

During this Parliament was held a Convocation also, as before was intimated,
Bonner continuing President of it, and Henry Cole, Archdeacon of Ely, admitted
to the office of Prolocutor. They knew well how the Cards were played, and that
the Cardinal was to be entreated not to insist on the restoring of Church
Lands, rather to confirm the Lords and Gentry in their present possessions. And
to that end, a Petition is prepared to be presented in the name of the
Convocation, to both their Majesty's, that they would please to intercede with
the Cardinal in it. Which Petition being not easy to be met withal, and never
printed heretofore, is here subjoyned, according to the tenor and effect
thereof in the Latin Tougne.

WE the Bishops and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, assembled in
Convocation during the sitting of this Parliament, according to the ancient
custom, with all due reverence and humility do make known to your Majesty's,
That though we are appointed to take upon us the care and charge of all those
Churches, in which we are placed as Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Parsons, or
Vicars; as also of the Souls therein committed to us, together with all Goods,
Rights and Privileges thereunto belonging, according to the true intent and
meaning of the Canons made in that behalf; and that in this respect we are
bound to use all lawful means for the recovery of those Goods, Rights,
Privileges, and Jurisdictions, which have been lost in the late desperate and
pernicious Schism, and to regain the same unto the Church, as in her first and
right estate; Yet notwithstanding, having took mature deliberation of the whole
matter amongst our selves, we cannot but ingenuously confess, that we know
well how difficult a thing, if not impossible, it is, to recover the said Goods
unto their Churches, in regard of the manifold unavoidable Contracts, Sales,
and Alienations, which have been made about the same; and that if any such
thing should be attempted, it would not only redound to the disturbance of the
public peace, but be a means, that the unity in the Catholic Church, which by
the goodness of your Majesty's had been so happily begun, could not obtain its
desired effect, without very great difficulty. Wherefore preferring the public
good and quiet of the Kingdom, before our own private commodities, and the
salvation of so many souls, redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, before
any earthly things whatsoever, and not seeking our own, but the things of Jesus
Christ, we do most earnestly and most humbly beseech your Majesty's, that you
would graciously vouchsafe to intercede in our behalf with the most reverend
Father in God, the Lord Cardinal Pole, Legate a Latere, from his Holiness, our
most serene Lord, Pope Julius the third, as well to your most excellent
Majesty's, as to the whole Realm of England, that he would please to settle and
confirm the said Goods of the Church, either in whole or in part, as he thinks
most fit, on the present occupants thereof, according to the powers and
faculties committed to him, by the said most serene Lord the Pope; thereby
preferring the public good before the private, the peace and tranquillity of
the Realm before suits and troubles, and the salvation of Souls before earthly
treasures. And for our parts, we do both now, and for all times coming, give
consent to all and every thing, which by the said Lord Legate shall, in this
case, be finally ordained and concluded on; humbly beseeching your Majesty's,
An. Reg. Mar. 1. 1553/4.
that you would gratio^sly vouchsafe to persuade the said Lord Cardinal in our
behalf, not to show himself in the Premises too strict and d^fficult. And we do
further humbly beseech your Majesty's, that you would please, according to your
wonted goodness, to take such course, that our Ecclesiastical Rights,
L^berties, and Jurisdictions, which have been taken from us, by the iniquity of
the former times, and without which we are not able to discharge our common
duties, either in the exercise of the pastoral Office, or the cure of souls
committed to our trust and care, may be again restored unto u^, and be
perpetually preserved inviolab^e both to us and our Churches; and that all
laws which have been made to the prejudice of this our jurisdiction, and other
Ecclesiastical liberties, or otherwise have proved to the hindrance of it, may
be repeated, to the ^^nour of God, as also to the temporal and spiritual
profit, not only of your said most excellent Majesty, but of all the Realm;
giving our selves assured hope, that your most excellent Majesty's, according
to your singular pie^y to almighty God, for so many and great benefits received
from him, will not be wanting to the necessities of the Kingdom, and the
occasions of the Churches, having cure of souls, but that you would consider
and provide as need shall be, for the peace thereof.

Which Petition being thus drawn up, was humbly offered to the Legate, in the
name of the whole Convocation, by the Lord Chancellor, (who was present at the
making of it) the Prolocutor and six others of the lower house. And it may very
well be thought to be welcome to him, in regard it gave him some good color
for not touching on so harsh a st^ing, as the restoring of Church lands.
Concerning which, he was not ignorant that a message had been sent to the Pope
in the name of the Parliament, to desire a confirmation of the sale of the
lands belonging to Abbeys, Chanteries, etc. or otherwise to let him know that
nothing could be granted in his behalf. And it is probable, that they received
some fair promises to that effect, in regard that on the New years day then
next following, 1554/5.
the Act for restoring the Pope's supremacy, was passed in both houses of
Parliament, and could not but be entertained for one of the most welcome New
years Gifts which ever had been given to a Pope of Rome. What the Pope did in
retribution* we are told by Sleidan, in whom we find that he confirmed all
those Bishops in their several Sees, which were of Catholic persuasions, and
had been consecrated in the time of the Schism, as also that he established
such new Bishoprics which were erected in the time of King Henry the 8th. and
made good all such marriages, as otherwise might be subject unto dispute. He
adds a confirmation also, (which I somewhat doubt) of the Abbey lands, and
tells, that all this was ratified by the Bull of Pope Paul the 4th. He
dispensed also by the hand of the Cardinal, with irregularity in several
persons, confirmed the Ordination and Institution of Clergy men in their
Callings and Benefices; legitimated the children of forbidden marriages, and
retified the processes and sentences in matters Ecclesiastical. Which general
favors notwithstanding, every Bishop in particular, (except only the Bishop of
Landaff) most humbly sought, and obtained pardon of the Pope for their former
error, not thinking themselves to be sufficiently secured by any general
dispensation, how large soever. And so the whole matter being transacted to the
content of all parties, (the poor Protestants excepted only) on Friday the
25th. of January, being the Feast of the Conversion of Saint Paul, there was a
general and solemn Procession throughout London, to give God thanks for their
conversion to the Catholic Church. Wherein (to set out their glorious pomp)
were ninety Crosses, one hundred sixty Priests and Clarks, each of them attired
in his Cope; and after them eight Bishops in their Pontificalibus, followed by
Bonner, carrying the Popish Pix under a Canopy, and attended by the Lord Mayor
and Companies in their several Liveries. Which solemn Procession being ended,
they all returned into the Church of St Paul, where the King and Cardinal,
together with all the rest, heard Mass* and the next day the Parliament and
Convocation were dissolved.

Nothing now rested, but the sending of a solemn Embassery in the name of the
King and Kingdom, An. Reg. Mar. 2. 1554/5.
to the Court of Rome, for testifying their submission to his Holiness, and
receiving his Apostolical benediction. To which employment were designed Sir
Anthony Brown, who on the 2d. of September had been created Visco^nt
Mountacute, in regard of his descent from Sir John Nevil, whom King Edward the
4th. advanced unto the Title of Marquisse Mountacute, as being the second son
of Richard Nevil Earl of Sarisbury, and Al^ce his wife, daughter and heir of
Thomas Mountacute, the last and most renowned Earl of Sarisbury, of that Name
and Family. With whom was joined in Commission an another Ambassador
extraordinary, Dr Thomas Thurlby, Bishop of Ely, together with Sir Edward Kar^,
appointed to recide as Ordinary in the Papal Court. On the 18th day of
February, they began their journey, but found so great an alteration when they
came to Rome, that Pope Ju^^^us was not only dead, but that Marcellus, who
succeeded him, was deceased also; so that the honor and felicity of this
address from the King of England, devolved on Cardinal Caraffa, (no great
friend of Poles) who took unto himself the name of Paul the 4th. on the first
day of whose Papacy, it chanced that the three Ambassadors came first to Rome.
It was in the first Consistory also, after his inauguration, that the
Ambassadors were brought before him: Where prostrating themselves at the Pope's
feet, they in the name of the Kingdom, acknowledged the faults committed,
relating them all in particular, (for so the Pope was pleased to have it)
confessing that they had been ungrateful for so many benefits received from the
Church, and humbly craving pardon for it. The pardon was not only granted, and
the Ambassadors lovingly embraced; but as an overplus, the Pope was pleased to
honor their Majesty's with the Title of Kings of Ireland. Which Title he
conferred upon them, by the authority which the Popes pretend to have from God,
in erecting and subverting Kingdoms. He knew right well that Ireland had been
erected into a Kingdom by King Henry the 8th. and that both Edward the 6th. and
the Queen now reigning, had always used the Title of Kings of Ireland in the
style Imperial: But he conceived himself not bound to take notice of it, or to
relinquish any privilege which had been exercised in that kind by his
predecessors. And thereupon he found out this temperament, that is to say, to
dissemble his knowledge of that which had been done by Henry, and of himself to
erect the Island into a Kingdom; that so the world might be induced to believe,
that the Queen rather used that Title as indulged by the Pope, than as assumed
by her Father. And this he did according to a secret mystery of Government in
the Church of Rome, in giving that which they could not take from the
possessor; as on the other side some Kings to avoid contentions, have received
of them their own proper goods, as gifts; and others have dissembled the
knowledge of the Gift, and the pretense of the Giver.

These things being thus dispatched in public, the Pope had many private,
discourses with the Ambassadors, in which he found fault that the Church goods
were not wholly restored; saying, that by no means it was to be tolerated, and
that it was necessary to render all, even to a farthing. He added, that the
things which belong to God, could never be applied to humane uses, and that he
who withholdeth the least part of them, was in continual state of damnation;
that if he had power to grant them, he would do it most readily, for the
fartherly affection which he bare unto them, and for the experience which he
had of their filial obedience; but that his authority was not so large as to
profane things dedicated to Almighty God; and therefore he would have the
people of England be assured, that these Church lands would be an Anathema, or
an accursed thing, which by the just revenge of God would keep the Kingdom in
perpetual infelicity. And of this he charged the Ambassadors to write
immediately, not speaking it once or twice only, but repeating it upon all
occasions. He also told them that the Peter Pence ought to be paid as soon as
might be, and that according to the custom he would send a Collector for that
purpose, An. Reg. Mar. 2. 1555.
letting them know, that himself had exercised that charge in England, for
three years together; and that he was much edified by seeing the forwardness of
the people in that contribution. The discourse upon which particular he closed
with this, that they could not hope that St Peter would open to them the gates
of Heaven, as long as they usurped his goods on earth. To all which talk the
Ambassadors could not choose but give a hearing, and knew that they should get
no more at their coming home.

At their departure out of England, they left the Queen in an opinion of her
being with child, and doubted not but that they should congratulate her safe
delivery, when they came to render an account of their employment; but it
proved the contrary. The Queen about three months after her marriage, began to
find strong hopes, not only that she had conceived, but also that she was far
gone with child. Notice whereof was sent by Letters to Bonner, from the Lords
of the Council, by which he was required to cause Te Deum to be sung in all the
Churches of his Diocese, with continual prayers to be made for the Queen's safe
delivery. And for example to the rest, these commands were executed first on
the 28th. of November, Dr Chadsey one of the Prebends of Paul's preaching at
the Cross, in the presence of the Bishop of London, and nine other Bishops, the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen attending in their scarlet Robes, and many of the
principal Citizens in their several Liveries. Which opinion gathering greater
strength with the Queen, and belief with the people, it was Enacted by the
Lords and Commons then sitting in Parliament, That if it should happen to the
Queen otherwise than well in the time of her travel, that then the King should
have the politic Government, Order and Administration of this Realm, during
the tender years of her Majesty's issue, together with the Rule, Order,
Education and Government of the said issue. Which charge as he was pleased to
undergo at their humble suit, so they were altogether as forward to confer it
on him; not doubting, but that during the time of such Government, he would by
all ways and means, study, travail, and employ himself to advance the weal,
both public and private, of this Realm, and Dominions thereunto belonging,
according to the trust reposed in him, with no less good will and affection,
than if his Highness had been naturally born amongst us. Set Forms of Prayers
were also made for her safe delivery, and one particularly by Weston, the
Prolocutor of the first Convocation; in which it was prayed, That she might in
due season bring forth a child, in body beautiful and come^y, in mind noble and
valiant. So that she forgetting the trouble, might with joy, laud and praise,
etc. Great preparations were also made of all things necessary, against the
time of her delivery, which was supposed would fall out about Whi^sun tide, in
the month of June, even to the providing of Midwives, Nurses, Rockers and the
Cradle too. And so far the hopes thereof were entertained, that on a sudden
rumor of her being delivered, the bells were rung, and bonfires made in most
parts of London. The like solemnities were used at Antwerp, by discharging all
the Ordnance in the English ships; for which the Mariners were gratified by the
Queen Regent with 100 Pistolets. In which, as all of them seemed to have a
spice of madness in them, so none was altogether so wild as the Curate of St
Anns near Aldersgate, who took upon him after the end of the Procession, to
describe the proportion of the child, how fair, how beautiful, and great at
Prince it was, the like whereof had never been seen.

But so it happened, that notwithstanding all these triumphs, it proved in fine,
that the Queen neither was with child at the present, nor had any hopes of
being so for the time to come. By some it was conceived, that this report was
raised upon policy only, to hold her up in the affection of her husband, and
the love of her subjects, by others, that she had been troubled with a Timpany,
which not only made her belly swell, but by the windiness of the disease,
possessed her with a fancy of her being quick. And some again have left in
writing, that having had the misfortune of a false conception, which bred in
her a fleshy and informed substance, by the Physicians called a Mo^a, the
continual increase whereof, and the agitation it made in her, occa^ioned her to
believe what she most desired, and to report what she believed. But this
informed lump being taken from her with no small difficulty, did not only turn
her supposed joy to shame and sorrow, but made much game amongst some of the
Zu^nglian Gospellers, (for I cannot think, that any true English Protestant
could make sport thereat) who were so far from desiring that the Queen should
have any Issue to succeed in the Throne, that they prayed God by shortning her
days to deprive her of it. Insomuch that one R^se, the Minister to a private
Congregation in Bow Churchyard, did use to pray, That God would either turn
her heart from Idolatry, or else shorten her days. On which occasion, and some
others of the like ill nature, an Act was made in the said Parliament, for
punishing of traitorous words against the Queen; in which it was enacted, That
the said Prayers, and all others of the like mischievous quality, should be
interpreted to be high treason against the Queen. The like exhorbitances I find
too frequent in this Queens Reign, to which some men were so transported by a
furious zeal, that a Gun was shot at one Doctor Pendleton, as he preached at
St. Paul's Cross on Sunday the 10th. of June, Anno 1554. the Pellet whereof
went very near him; but the Gunner was not to be heard of. Which occasioned the
Queen to publish a Proclamation within few days after, prohibiting the shooting
in Hand-guns, and the bearing of weapons. Before which time, that is to say, on
the 8th. of April, some of them had caused a Cat to be hanged upon a Gallows,
near the Cross in Cheapside, with her head shorn, the likeness of a Vestment
cast upon her, and her two fore-feet tied together, holding between them a
piece of paper in the form of a Wafer* Which tending so apparently to the
disgrace of the Religion then by Law established, was showed the same day,
being Sunday, at St. Paul's Cross, by the said Doctor Pendleton; which
possibly might be the sole reason of the mischief so desperately intended to
him.

Such were the madnesses of those People; but the Orthodox and sober Protestant
shall be brought to a reckoning, and forced to pay dearly for the follies of
those men, which it was not in their powers to hinder. The Governors of the
Church exasperated by these provocations, and the Queen charging Wyat's
Rebellion on the Protestant^ party, she both agreed on the reviving of some
ancient Statutes made in the time of King Richard the 2d. King Henry the 4th.
and King Henry the 5th. for the severe punishment of obstinate Heretics, even
to death it self. Which Act being passed* the three great Bishops of the time
were not alike minded for the putting it in execution. The Lord Cardinal was
clearly of opinion, that they should rest themselves contented with the
restitution of their own Religion; that the said three Statu^es should be held
forth for a terror only, but that no open persecution should be raised upon
them; following therein, as he affirmed, the counsel sent unto the Queen by
Charles the Emperor, at her first coming to the Crown, by whom she was ^dvised
to create no troubble unto any man for matter of conscience, but to be warned
unto the contrary by his example, who by endeavoring to compel others to his
own Religion, had tired and spent himself in vain, and purchased nothing by it
but his own dishonor. But the Lord Chancellor Ga^din^r could not like of this,
to whom it seemed to be all one, never to have revived the said three Statutes,
as not to see them put in execution. That some blood should be drawn in case of
refractorinesse, and an incorrigible nonconformity, he conceived most
necessary. But he would have the Ax laid only to the Root of the Tree* the
principal supporters of the Heretics, to be taken away, whether they were of
the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, or the Lay-Nobility; and some of the more
pragmatick preachers to be cut off also; the rest of the people to be spared,
as they who merely did depend on the power of the other. Let but the Shepherds
be once smitten, and the whole flock will presently be scattered, without
further trouble.

Well then, said Bonner to himself, I see the honor of this work is reserved
for me, who neither fear the Emperor's frow^s, nor the peoples curses. Which
having said, (as if he had been pumping for a re^olution) he took his times to
make it known unto the other two, that he perceived they were as willing as
himself, to have the Catholic Religion entertained in all parts of the
Kingdom, though neither of them seemed desirous to act any thing in it, or take
the envy on himself; that he was well enough pleased with that reservednesse,
hoping they did not mean it for a precedent unto him or others, who had a mind
to show their zeal and forwardness in the Catholic cause. Have I not seen
(says he) that the heretics themselves have broke the Ice, in putting one of
their own number (I think they called him by the name of Servetus) to a cruel
death. Could it be thought no crime in them, to take that more severe course
against one of their brethren, for holding any contrary doctrine, from that
which they had publicly agreed amongst them? And can they be so silly, or so
partial rather, as to reckon it for a crime in us, if we proceed against them
with the like severity, and punish them by the most extreme rigor of their own
example? I plainly see, that neither you my Lord Cardinal, nor you my Lord
Chancellor, have any Answer to return to my present Argument, which is
sufficient to encourage me to proceed upon it. I cannot act Canonically against
any of them, but such as live within the compass of my jurisdiction, in which
I shall desire no help nor countenance from either of you. But as for such as
live in the Diocese of Canterbury, or that of Winchester, or otherwise not
within my reach in what place soever, let them be, sent for up by order from
the Lords of the Council, committed to the Tower, the Fleet, or any other
Prison within my Diocese, And when I have them in my clutches, let God do so,
and more to Bonner, if they escape his fingers.

The Persecution thus resolved on, home goes the bloody Executioner, armed with
as much power as the Law could give him, and backed by the Authority of so
great a King, taking some other of the Bishops to him, convents before him
certain of the Preachers of King Edwards time, who formerly had been committed
to several prisons; of whom it was demanded, Whether they would stand to their
former doctrines, or accept the Queens Pardon and Recant? To which it was
generally and stoutly answered, That they would stand unto their doctrines.
Hereupon followed that Inquisition for blood which raged in London, and more or
less was exercised in most parts of the Kingdom. The first that led the way was
Mr. John R^gers, a right learned man, and a great companion of that Tyndal, by
whom the Bible was translated into English in the time of King Henry: After
whose Martyrdom, not daring to return into his own country, he retired to
Witt^berge in the Dukedom of Saxony, where he remained till King Edward's
coming to the Crown, and was by Bishop Ridley preferred to the Lecture of St.
Paul's, and made one of the Prebends. Nothing the better liked of for his
Patron's sake, he was convented and condemned, and publicly burnt in
Smithfield on the 4th. of February. On the 9th. day of which Month, another
fire was kindled at Gloucester for the burning of Mr. John Hooper, the late
Bishop thereof, of whom, sufficient has been spoke in another place; condemned
amongst the rest at London, but appointed to be burnt in Gloucester, as the
place in which he most had sinned, by sowing the seeds of false doctrine
amongst the people. The news whereof being brought unto him, he rejoiced
exceedingly, in regard of that excellent opportunity which was thereby offered,
for giving testimony by his death to the truth of that Doctrine, which had so
often sounded in their ears, and now should be confirmed by the sight of their
eyes. The W^rra^^ for whose burning was in these words following, as I find it
in the famous Library of Sir Robert Cotton.

Whereas John Hooper, who of (...) was called Bishop of Worcester and
G^ocester, is by due order of the Laws Ecclesiastical condemned, and judged for
a most ^bstinate, false, and detestable Heretic, and committed to our Secular
Power, to be burned, according to the wholesome and good Laws of our Realm, in
that case provided: Forasmuch as in those Oities and Di^cesses thereof, he has
in times past preached and taught most pestilent Heresies and Doctrine to our
Subjects there, We have therefore given order, that the said Hooper, who yet
persisteth obstinate, and refuses mercy when it was graciously offered, shall
be put to execution in the said City of Gloucester, for the example and terror
of others, such a^ he has there seduced and mis-ta^get, and because he has
done most harm there. And will that you, calling to you some of reputation,
dwelling in that Shire, such as you think best, shall repair unto your said
City, and be at the said execution, assisting our Mayor and Sheriffs of the
same City in this behalf. And for as much as the said Hooper is, as other
Heretics, a vainglorious person, and delighted in his tongue, to persuade
such as he has seduced to persist in the miserable opinions that he ha^h sown
amongst them, our pleasure is therefore, and we require you to take order, that
the said Hooper be neither at the time of his execution, nor in going to the
place there, suffered to speak at large, but thither to be led quietly, and in
silence, for eschewing of further infection, and such inconveniences as may
otherwise ens^e in this part. Whereof fail ye not, as ye tender our pleasure,
and.

The like course was also taken with Bishop Earrar, but that I do not find him
restrained from speaking his mind unto the people, as the other was: A man of
an implausible nature, which rendered him the less agreeable to either side;
cast into prison by the Protestant, and brought out to his death and martyrdom
by the Popish party. Being found in prison at the death of King Edward, he
might have fared as well as any of his rank and order, who had no hand in the
interposing for Queen Jane, if he had governed himself with that discretion,
and given such fair and moderate Answers, as any man in his condition might
have honestly done. But being called before Bishop Gardener, he behaved himself
so proudly, and gave such offense, that he was sent back again to prison, and
after condemned for an obstinate Heretic. But for the sentence of his
condemnation, he was sent into his own Diocese, there to receive it at the hand
of Morgan, who had supplanted and succeeded him in the Sea of St. David's. Which
cruel wretch having already took possession, could conceive no way safer for
his future establishment, than by imbruing his hands in the blood of this
learned Prelate, and to make sure with him, for ever claiming a restitution, or
coming in by a Remitter to his former estate; in reference whereunto he past
sentence on him, caused him to be delivered to the Civil Magistrate, not
desisting till he had brought him to the Stake on the third of March, more glad
to see him mounting unto Heaven in a fiery Chariot, than once Elisha was on the
like translation of the Prophet Elijah. I shall say nothing in this place of
the death and martyrdom of Dr. Rowland Tayl^r, Rector of Had^ey in the County
of Hartford, and there also burned, Febr. 9. Or of John Cardmaker, Chancellor
of the Church of Wells, who suffered the like death in London on the last of
May; Or of Laurence Sanders, an excellent Preacher, martyred at Coventry, where
he had spent the greatest part of his Ministry, who suffered in the same month
also, but three weeks sooner than the other; Or of John Bradford, a right holy
man, and a diligent Preacher, condemned by Bonner, and brought unto the Stake
in S^ithfield on the first of July; though he had deserved better of that
bloody Butcher, (but that no courtesy can oblige a cruel and ungrateful
person) in saving the life of Doctor Bour^ his Chaplain, as before was showed:
Or finally of any of the rest of the noble Army of Martyrs, who fought the
Lords Battles in those times; only I shall insist on three of the principal
Leaders, and take a short view of the rest in the general Muster.

Anne Reg. Mar. 3. A. D. 1555, 1556.
BEing resolved to wave the writing of a Martyr^logy, An. Reg. Mar. 3. 1555.
which is done already to my hand in the Acts, and Monuments, I shall insi^t
only upon three of most (...) rank, that is to say, Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop
Latimer, and Bishop Ridley, men of renown, never to be forgotten in the Church
of England. Of whom there has so much been said in the course of this History,
that nothing need be added more, than the course of their sufferings. Committed
to the Tower by several Warrants, and at several times, they were at once
discharged from the Tower of London on the 10th. of April, Anno 1554. Removed
from thence to Windsor, and at last to Oxon. where they were to combare for
their lives. A combat not unlike to that of St Paul at Eph^^us, where he is
said to fight (...) beasts after the manner of men; the disputation being
managed so tumultuously with shou^s and outcries, and so disorderly without
rule or modesty, as might make it no unproper parallel to St Pa^^'s encounter.
The persons against whom they were to enter the lists, were ^ulled out of the
ablest men of both Universities, commissionated to dispute, and authorized to
sit as Judges. And then what was to be expected, by the three Respondents, but
that their oppos^tes must have the better of the day, who could not be supposed
to have so little care of their own reputation, as to pass sentence on
themselves. Out of the University of Oxon were selected Dr Weston, Prosocutor
of the Convocation then in being, Dr Tresham, Dr Cole, Dr Oylth^rp, Dr Pie, Mr
(...), and Mr Feck^am; with whom were joined by the Lord Chancellor Gardener,
(who had the nomination of them) Dr Young Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, Dr
G^yn, Dr Seaton, Dr Watson, Dr Sed^^wick, and Dr Aikinson, of the same
University.

The Questions upon which the Disputants were to try their fortune, related to
the Sacrament of the blessed Eucharist, and were these that follow. 1. Whether
the na^ural body and blood of Christ be really in the Sacrament, after the
words spoken by the Priest, or no? 2. Whether in the Sacrament after the words
of cons^cration, any other subst^^ce do remain, than the substance of the body
and b^ood of Christ? 3. Whether the Mass be a sacrifice propitiat^ry, for the
sins of the quick and the dead? Which having been propounded in the Convocation
at Cambridge, and there concluded in such manner, as had been generally
maintained in the Schools of Rome, the Vice Chancellor, and the rest of the
Disputants which came from thence, could have no power to determine otherwise
in the points, when they should come to sit as Judges. Nor is it to be thought,
but that as well the Cambridge as the Oxon Disputants, came well prepared,
studied and versed in those Arguments on which they intended to insist* having
withal the helps of books, and of personal conference, together with all other
advantages which might flatter them with the hopes of an easy victory. But on
the other side, the three Defendants had but two days of prepa^ation allotted
to them, debarred of all access unto one another; not suffered to enjoy the use
of their own books and papers; and kept in such uncomfortable places, as were
but little different from the common d^ngeo^s. But out they must to try their
fortune, there being no other choice left them, but to fight or yield; and
which made most to the advantage of the other side, they were to try their
fortune single, each of them destinated to a several day, so that they could
not contribute to the assistance of one another, if their occasions had
required it. Cranmer begins on the 16th, of April, Ridley succeeds upon the
next, and La^imer brings up the arreir on the morrow after; each man an army in
himself, and to encounter with an army, as the cause was managed.

At the first meeting, when the questions were to be propounded and disputed
op* Weston, by reason of his place, enter^ains the Auditory with a short
Oration, wherein he was to lay before them the cause of their assembling at
that place and time. But such was his ill luck, as to stumble at that very
threshold, and to conclude against himself in the very first opening of the
disputation, which he is said to have begun in these following words,
Conv^n^st^ hodie ^^atres profliga^uri (...) Haeresin, de veritate corporis
Christi^n Sacrament^, etc. That is to say, Ye are assembled hither brethren
this day, to confound that detestable Heresy, of the ve^ity of the body of
Christ in the Sacrament, etc. Which gross mistake, occas^oned no small shame in
some, but more laughter in many. It was observed of him also, that during the
whole time of the disputation, he had always a cup of wine, o^ some other
strong liquor standing by him, and that having once the pot in his hand, when
an argument was urged by one of the Disputants, which he very well liked of, he
cried aloud to him, urge hoc, (...) hoc, nam hoc ^acit pro nobis. Which being
applied by some of the spectators to his pot of drink, occassoned more sport
and ^e^iment than his first mistake. But let them laugh that win, as the
Proverb has it, and Weston is resolved to win the race, whosoever runs best.
The tumult and disorder of this d^^putation has been touched before, and may
be seen at large, with all the Arguments and Answers of either side, in the
Acts and Mo^. Suffi^e it in this place to know, that having severally made good
their appointed days, they were all called together on F^iday the 20th. of
that month, Weston then sitting with the ^e^t in the nature of Judges, by whom
they were demanded, whether they would subscribe or not? which when they had
severally refused to do* their sentence was pronounced by the Prolocutor in the
name of the rest, in which they were deolared to be no members of the Chruch,
and that therefore, they, their patrons and followers, were condemned as
Heretics. In the reading whereof, they were again severally asked whether they
would turn or not; to which they severally answered, read on in God's name, for
they were resolved not to turn. And so the sentence being pronounced, they were
returned again to their several prisons, there to expect what execution would
ensue upon it.

And execution there was none to ensue upon it, ^ill the end of the Session of
Parliament then next following, because till then, there was no saw in force
for putting Heretics to death, as in former times. During which interval, they
excrcited themselves in their private studies, or in some godly meditations,
wr^^ing consolatory Letters unto such of their friends as were reduced by the
iniquity of the times, to the like extremity; amongst which, as they understood
their dear brother Mr John Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester, to have been marked out
for the slaughter; so that intelligence revived in Bishop R^dley's thoughts,
the remembrance of that conterove^sie which had been between them (concerning
the Episcopal habit) in the time of King Edward, There is no question to be
made, but that they had forgotten and forgiven that quarrel long before; yet
Ridley did not think he had done enough, if he left, not to the world some
testimony of their mutual charity, as well as their consent in doctrine, such
as might witness to the world, that they maintained the spirit of unity in the
bond of peace. Concerning which he writes to him in this manner following, viz.
-- But now dear Brother, forasmuch as I understand by your books which I have
but superficially seen, that we thoroughly agree, and wholly consent together in
those things which are the grounds and substantial points of our Religion,
against the which the world so furiously rages in these our days, however in
times past in ce^ain by-matters and circumstances of Religion, your wisdom and
my simplicity (I must confess) have a little jarred, each of us following the
abundance of his own spirit. Now I say be assured, that even with my whole
heart, God is my witness, in the bowels of Christ I love you in the truth, and
for the truths sake which abides in us, as I am persuaded, and by the Grace of
God shall abide in us for ^ver more. And because the world, as I perceive,
brother, cease not to play his pageant, and busily conspireth against Christ
our Savior, with all possible force and power, Exalting high things against
the knowledge of God: Let us join hands together in Christ, as if we cannot
overthrow, yet to our power, and as much as in us lies, let us shake those
high Altitudes, not with carnal, but with spiritual weapons; and withal,
brother, let us prepare our selves to the day of diss^l^tion, by that which
after the short time of this bodily affliction, by the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we shall triumph together with him, in eternal glory.

Comforted with reciprocal letters of this holy nature, they both prepared
themselves for death, in which Hooper had the honor to lead the way, as being
more in B^nner's eye when the Act past for reviving the Statutes before
mentioned in the case of Heresy. But Hooper having led the way, and many ^ther
godly and religious men following the same tract which he had made, it came at
last unto the turn of these reverend Prelates to pass through the same (...) to
the Land of Promise. In order whereunto, a Commission is directed from the Pope
to Dr. James Bro^ks, Bishop of Gloucester, by which he is authorized as
Subdelegate to his Holiness, to proceed in the cause of ^homas Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury. The like Commission is directed to Dr Martin, and Dr
Story, to attend the business, as delegated thereunto by the King and Queen,
before whom convented in St Mary's Church on the 12th. of September he did his
reverence to the two Doctors, as Commissioners for the King and Queen, but
could not be persuaded to show any respect to the Bishop of Gl^ceste^, because
commissionared by the Pope. He had before abjured the Popes supremacy in the
time of King Henry, and would not now submit unto it in the Reign of Queen
Mary, desiring the Bishop not to interpret it an affront to his person, to whom
otherwise he should gladly pay all due regards, had he appeared in any other
capacity than the Popes Commissioner. Not being able to remove him from that
resolution, they propounded to him certain Articles concerning his having been
twice married, his denial of the Pope's supremacy, his judgment in the point of
the blessed Sacrament, his having been declared an Heretic by the late
Prolocutor, and the rest of the Commissioners there assembled. To all which
Articles he so answered, as to deny nothing of the charge in matter of fact,
but only to stand upon his justification in point of Doctrine. The whole
proceeding being summed up, he is cited to appear before the Pope within 80
days. To which he said that he was most willing so to do, if the King and
Queen would please to send him. And so he was returned to the prison from
whence he came, and there kept safe enough from making any journey to Rome,
remaining in safe ^^stody till he was brought out to suffer death, of which
more hereafter.

On the 28th. of the same month, comes out another Commission from the Cardinal
Legate, directed to John White, Bishop of Lincoln, James Brooks, Bishop of
Gloucester, and John Holyman, Bishop of Bristow, or any two of them; inabling
them to proceed to the degradation of the other two Bishops, if they retracted
not those doctrines, for holding which they had been formerly de^lared to be
Heretics. But they courageously adhering to their first opinions, and
otherwise expressing as little reverence to the Substitutes of the Cardinal
Legate, as Cranmer had done to the Commissioners of the Pope, the sentence was
pronounced upon them to this effect; that is to say. That forasmuch as the said
Nichosas Ridley, and Hugh Latimer, did affi^m, maintain, and stubbornly desend
certain opinions and Heresies contrary to the Word of God, and the received
faith of the Church; as first, In denying the true and natural body of Christ,
and his natural blood to be in the Sacrament of the Altar. 2. In affirming the
substance of bread and wine to r^main after the words of the consecration. And
3. In denying the Mass to be a lively sacrifice of the Church for the quick
and the dead, and by no means could be reduced from the same: that therefore
they said John of Lincoln, James of Gloucester, and John of Bristol, did adjudge
and condemn them the said N. Ridl^y, and H. Latimer as Heretics, both by word
and deed, to be degraded from the degree of a Bishop, from Pries^hood, and all
other Ecclesiastical Orders; declaring them moreover to be no members of the
Church, and therefore to be committed to the secular powers, to receive due
punishment according to the Tenor of the temporal Laws. According to which
Sentence, they were both degraded on the 15 th. of October, and brought unto
the Stake in the Town-ditch over against Baliol College on the morrow after,
where with great constancy and courage they endured that death, to which they
had been pre-condemned before they were heard. Cranmer was prisoner at that
time in the North-gate of the City, called Bocardo, from the top whereof he
beheld that most doleful spectacle; and casting himself upon his knees, he
humbly beseeched the Lord to endue them with a sufficient strength of Faith and
Hope; which he also desired for himself, whenever he should act his part on
that bloody Theater.

But he must stay the Popes leisure before he was to be brought on the Stage
again. The Queen had been acquainted with such discoutses, as had passed
betwixt the Pope and her Ambassadors, when they were at Rome; and she appeared
desirous to have gratified him in his demands. But the Kings absence, who set
sail for Calais on the fourth of September, and the next morning took his
journey to the Emperor's Court, which was then at B^uxels, rendered the matter
not so feasible as it might have been, if he had continued in the Kingdom. For
having called a Parliament to begin on the 21 of October, she caused many of
the Lords to be dealt withal touching the passing of an Act for the restoring
of all such Lands as had belonged unto the Church, and were devolved upon the
Crown, and from the Crown into the hands of private persons, by the fall of
Monasteries, and other Religious Houses, or by any other ways or means
whatsoever. But such a general avers^ess was found amongst them, that she was
advised to desist from that unprofitable undertaking. Certain it is, that many
who were cordially affected to the Queens Religion, were very much startled at
the noise of this Restitution, insomuch that some of them are said to have
clapped their hands upon their swords, affirming, not without some Oaths, that
they would never part with their Abbey-Lands as long as they were able to were
a sword by their sides. Which being signified to the Queen, it seemed good to
her to let fall that suit for the present, and to give them good example for
the time to come, by passing an Act, for releasing the Clergy from the payment
of first Fruits and Tenths, which had been formerly vested in the Crown in the
Reign of her Father. Against which when it was objected by some of the Lords of
the Council, that the state of her Kingdoms and Crown Emperial could not be so
honorably maintained as in former times, if such a considerable part of the
Revenue were dismembered from it; she is said to have returned this answer,
That she prefetted the salvation of her Soul before ten such Kingdoms. She
procured another Act to be passed also, which very much redounded to the
benefit of the two Universities, inhibiting all Purveyors from taking up any
provisions for the use of the Court within five miles of Oxon or Cambridge; by
mean^ whereof, those Markets were more plentifully served with all sorts of
Provisions than in former times, and at more reasonable rates than otherwise
they could have been, without that restraint. In her first Parliament, the
better to indear her self to the common subject, she had released a Subsidy
which was due unto her, by an Act of Parliament made in the time of King Edward
the sixth. And now to make her some amends, they gave her a Subsidy of four
shillings in the Pound for Lands, and two shillings eight-pence in the pound
for Goods. In the drawing up of which Act, an Oath, which had been formerly
prescribed to all manner of persons, for giving in a just account of their
estates, was omitted wholly, which made the Subsidy sinck beneath expectation.
But the Queen came unto the Crown by the love of the people, and was to do
nothing to the hazard of their affections, which she held it by.

At the same time was held a Convocation also, for summoning whereof, a Writ
was issued in the name of the King and Queen, to the Dean and Chapter of the
Metropolitical Church of Canterbury, the Sea being then vacant by the
attaindure of Archbishop Cra^^er. Bonn^r presides in it as before, Boxhall then
Warden of Winchester preaches (though not in the capacity) at the opening of
it, and Doctor John Christoperson, Dean of Norwich, is chosen Prolotor for the
House of the Clergy. But the chief business done therein was the granting of a
Subsidy of six shillings in the pound to be paid out of all their
Ecclesiastical Promotions in three years then following. Nor was it without
reason that they were enduced to so large a grant; The Queen ^ad actually
restored unto them their First Fruits and Tenths, though at that time the Crown
was not in such a plentiful condition, as to part with such an annual income.
And she had promised also, (as appears by the Records of the Convocarion) to
render back unto the Church all such Impropriations, Tithes, and portion of
Tithes, as were still remaining in the Crown. For the disposing of which Grant
to the best advantage, the Cardinal-Legat, at the Queens desire, had conceived
an Instrument, which was then offered to the consideration of the Prolocutor,
and the rest of the Clergy; it was proposed also by the Bishop of Elie, that
some certa^n learned men might be chosen out of the House, to review all the
ancient Canons, to fit them to the present state of the Church; and were they
sound any thing defective in them, to s^pply that defect, by making such new
C^nons and Constitutions, as being approved of by the Lords, should be made
obligatory to the Clergy, and the rest of the Kingdom. This was well moved, and
served to entertain the time; but I find nothing in pursuance of it.

But on the other side, the Prolocutor bringing up the Bill of the Subsidies in
the end of October, propounds three points unto their Lordships, which much
conduced to the establishment and advantage of the prejudiced Clergy. The first
was, That all such of the Clergy as building on the common report, that the
Tenths and First fruits were to be released in the following Parliament, had
made no composition for the same with her Majesty's Officers, might be
discharged from the penalty inflicted by the Laws in that behalf. The second,
That their Lordships would be pleased to intercede with the Lord
Cardinal-Legat, for settling and confirming them in their present Benefices by
some special Bull. The third, That by their Lordships means, an Act may be
obtained in the present Parliament, for the repealing of the Statute, by which
the Citizens of London, which refused to make payment of their Tithes, were to
be ordered at the discretion of the Lord Mayor of that City; And that from
thenceforth, all such censures as concerned Tithes might be heard and
determined by the Ordinary, as in other places. To all which Propositions the
Bishops cheerfully consented, and so adjurned the Convocation from St. Paul's to
Westminster, that they might have the better opportunity of consulting the
Lord-Cardinal in the business; of whom it was no hard matter to obtain the
second, and by his power to secure the Clergy in the first; but as for the
removal of the Cognizance of the London Tithes from the Lord Mayor unto the
Bishops, there was nothing done, that Statute still remaining as before it did,
to the continual impoverishing and vexation of the City Clergy. Nothing else
memorable in this Convocation, but the coming in of the two new Bishops, which
had never voted there before; Purefew the Bishop of St. Asaph, being translated
unto Hereford in the former year, had made such havoc of the Patrimony of the
Church of St. Asaph, that it lay void above a twelve month before any became
Suter for it. But being a Bishopric, though impoverished, and consequently a
step to some richer preferment, it was desired and accepted by Mr. Thomas
Goldnel, a right zealous Romanist, consecrated Bishop hereof in the beginning
of October, Anno 1555. not many days before the opening of the Parliament and
Convocation. And being Bishop here, he procured many Indulgences and other
Graces from the Pope then being, for all such persons of each sex, as went on
Pilgrimage, or for health, to St. Winifrids Well. The like havoc had been made
of the Lands and Patrimony of the Church of Bangor, by Buckley the present
Bishop of it, preferred unto this See Anno 1541. and continuing on it till this
year; who not content to alienate the Lands, and weaken the Estate thereof,
resolved to rob it of its Bells, for fear perhaps of having any Knell rung out
at the Churches Funetal. And not content to sell the Bells, which were five in
number* he would needs satisfy himself with seeing them conveyed on shipboard,
and had searce given himself that satisfaction, but he was p^esently struck
blind, and so continued from that time to the day of his death. To whom
succeeded Doctor William Glyn, a Cambridge man, but one of the Disputants at
Oxford, who received his Episcopal Consecration (if I guess aright) on the
same day with Bishop Goldne^.

And now it will be time to look back on Cranmer, whom we left under a Citation
to the Court of Rome, without which, nothing could be done; for by an ancient
privilege, no Judgment could be past upon the person of a Metropolitan, before
the Pope have taken cognizance of the cause; and eighty days had seemingly been
given to Cr^nmer for making his appearance in the Court of Rome. And though the
Pope knew well enough, as well the Archbishops readiness to appear before him,
if he were at liberty, as the impossibility of making any such appearance as
the case then stood; yet at the end of the said eighty days, he is pronounced
by the Pope to be contumacious, and for his contu^acy to be Degraded,
Excommunicated, and finally delivered over to the Secular Magistrate. According
unto which Decree, a second Commission is directed to Edmond Bonner Bishop of
London, and Th^mas Thoriby Bishop of Ely, to proceed to the Degradation of the
said Archbishop: In which Commission it was said with most horrible falsehood,
That all things had been so indifferently examined in the Court of Rome, that
is to say, as well the Articles laid unto his charge, as the Answers which he
made unto them, together with the Allegations, Witnesses, and Defenses, made or
produced by the Counsel on either side, so that nothing had been wanting which
was necessary to his just defense. According to which supposition, the said two
Bishops being commanded to proceed against him, caused him to be Degraded on
the 14 th. of February, notwithstanding that he appealed from the Pope and them
to a General Council, and caused the said Appeal to be drawn and offered in due
form of Law. During the interval between his degradation and the time of his
death, great pains was taken by some learned men in the University to persuade
him to a Retractation of his former Opinions; in which unhappy undertaking, no
man prevailed so far as a Spanish Ftier, by whom it was suggested to him, How
acceptable it would be to the King and Queen, how pleasing to the Lords, who
most dearly loved him, and how gainful to himself, in regard both of his soul
and his temporal being; assuring him (or at least putting him in good hope)
that he should not only have his life, but be restored again to his ancient
dignity, and that there should be nothing in the Realm which the Queen would
not easily grant him, whether it pleased him to make choice of Riches and
Honors, or otherwise should desire the sweet retirements of a private life,
without the charge and trouble of a public Ministry; and all this to be
compassed without putting himself to any more pains, than the subscribing of
his name to a piece of paper, which was made ready for his hand.

By these temptations, and many others of the like alluring and deceitful
nature, he suffered himself to be prevailed upon so far, as to sign the
Writing, in which were briefly comprehended the chief points of Doctrine
defended in the Church of Rome, and by him formerly condemned both in public
and private. The obtaining whereof occasioned great joy amongst the Papists,
and no less sorrow and astonishment in the hearts of those, who cordially were
affected to the Reformation. But all this could not save him from being made a
sacrifice to revenge and avarice; The Queen had still a vindicative* spirit
against him, for the injury which she conceived had been done to her mother;
and the Cardinal, who hitherto had enjoyed the profits of the Sea of Canterbury
as an usu-fructuary, was altogether as solicitous for getting a right and title
to them as the sole Proprietary; No way to pacify the one, and satisfy the
desires of the other, but by bringing him (when he least looked for it) to the
fatal Stake. And to the fatal Stake they brought him on the 21 of March, when
he had for some time flattered himself in a conceit, like the King of Amaleck,
that the bitterness of death was past. Finding the contrary, he first retracts
his Retractarion, and after punishes that hand which had subscribed it, by
holding it forth into the flame, and suffering it to be consumed before the
rest of his body had felt the fire. The residue of his body being burnt to
ashes, his heart was found entire and untouched in the midst of the sinders;
Which possibly may serve as a witness for him, that his heart stood fast unto
the Truth, though with his hand he had subscribed some Popish Errors: Which
whether it were done out of human frailty on the hope of life, or out of a
desire to gain the more time, for finishing his Book against Bishop Gardener,
which he alleged for himself in a Letter to one of his friends; Certain it is,
that it had too much in it of a sinful compliance, so much as might have
blasted both his fame and memory to all times succeeding, if he had not taken
off the scandal, and expiated the offense in so brave a manner. And thus he
dyed, leaving an excellent example to all posterity, as well of man's infirmity
in so strange a fall, as of Gods infinite grace and mercy, by which he was
enabled to recover his former standing.

These goodly Cedars of the Forest being thus ^ut down, it was not to be hoped
that any favor could be shown to the Shrubs and Underwoods, which were grubbed
up and felled without any distinction, as well the yourg Sapling, as the
decayed and withered Tree; but more in some parts than in others, according to
the sharpness of the Tools and the edge of the Woodman. The waste so great in
no place as in Bonner's wa^k, who seemed to be resolved, that whatsoever could
not serve for Timber (toward the buil^ing or re-edifying of the Papal palace)
should be marked for Puel. No fewer than two hundred are reported to have been
burnt within three years, by this cruel and unmerciful Tyrant, without
discrimination of sex or age; his fury reaching from John Fetty, a lad of eight
years old, by him s^ourged to death, even to Hugh Lavecork, a cripple sixty
eight years old, whom he caused to be burned. The most eminent of all which
number was Mr. John Philpot, Archdeacon of Winchester, who though of Gardiners
Diocese, was condemned by B^nner, Gardener being well enough contented to find
out the Game, and leave it to be followed by that bloody Hunter: His rage not
slackned by the interposings of Alphonso a Spanish Friar, inveighing sharply,
in a Sermon before the King, against the savage and unprofitable cruelty of the
English Bishops; but as it seems, he measured all the rest by that
London-Tyrant, though in most other places they were far more moderate: He that
came nearest to him was Doctor John Christopherson, Bishop of Chichester, who
is recorded to have burnt no less than ten in one fire at Lewis, and seventeen
others at several times in sund^y places. But still the nearer London, the more
the hea^; insomuch that Harpsfield Archdeacon of Canterbury, and Thornton the
Suffragan of Dover, are said to have poured out blood like water; As was also
done by Griffin of Rochester, and Downing Chancellor of Norwich, (though
somewhat further off from the scene of cruelty) in their several Diocesses.
Which character I find of Bishop Bain of Coventry and Lichfield; the gentle
birth and breeding of Mrs. Joyce Lewis not being too high for him to reach at,
nor the poor condition of Joan Wast, a blind woman in Darby, too low for him to
stoop too, whom he condemned unto the fire, as he did many faithful Ministers,
and others of the Masculine sex.

But on the other side, in all the Province of York, I find none brought unto
the Stake but George March of Chester, condemned thereto by Bishop Coals; and
not much more to have been done in the four Welsh Diocesses; in which, besides
the burning of Bishop Farrar at Carmarthen by Bishop Morgen; and of Rawlins and
White at Cardiff by Bishop Kitching; no extraordinary cruelty seems to have
been acted. In the Diocesses of Exceter, Wells, Peterborough and (...) (though
this last the greatest in the Kingdom) I find mention but of one apiece; of
two in that of E^y, and of no mote than three apiece at Bristol and Sarisbury.
In those of Oxon, Gloucester, Worcester and Hereford, I find none at all, which
made those Counties look like the land of Goshen, where there was nothing but
fair weather, when there was so much thunder and lightning in the rest of
Egypt. Nor were these storms and tempests in other places, of a short
continuance, but held on more or less till the death of the Queen, as appears
by those five persons which were burnt at Canterbury on the 10th. of November
1558. being but one full week before the day of her own dissolution. The
difference was, that these poor wretches were consumed by the rage of fire,
whereas she was carried out of the world in a deluge of water; falling into a
Dropsy in the time of her supposed childing, of which she was never perfectly
cured till she came to her grave. Nor were these all that suffered in the fury
of this persecution. For besides those that suffered Martyrdom in the sight of
the world, many are thought to have been made away in prison; but many more, to
the number of some scores or hundreds, supposed to have been killed by
starving, stinks, and other barbarous usages in their several Jayls. To which
if we should add a Catalogue of all those who fled the Kingdom, and put
themselves into a voluntary exile, amounting to the number of 800. or
thereabouts, I suppose it may be well concluded, that though many persecutions
have lasted longer, yet none since Dioclesian's time ever raged so terribly. So
terribly it raged in one particular, that no persecution of the ten can af^ord
a parallel. Katherine Gouches, a poor widow of St. Peter's Port in the Isle of
Guerns^y, was noted to be much absent from the Church, and her two daughters
guilty of the same neglect. Upon this they were presented before Jaques Amy,
then Dean of the Island, who finding in them that they held opinions contrary
to those then allowed, about the Sacrament of the Altar, pronounced them
Heretics, and condemned them to the fire. The poor women on the one side
pleaded for themselves, that that doctrine had been taught them in the time of
King Edward; but if the Queen was otherwise disposed, they were content to be
of her Religion. This was fair, but this would not serve; for by the Dean they
were delivered to Eli'er Gosling, the then Bailiff, and by him unto the fire,
July the 8th. 1556. One of the daughters ( Perotine Massey she was called) was
at that time great with child; her husband a Minister being in those dangerous
times fled the Island; In the middle of the flames and anguish of her torments,
her belly brake in sunder, and her child, a goodly boy, fell down into the
fire, but was presently snatched up by one W. House, one of the By standers.
Upon the noise of this strange accident, the cruel Bailiff returned command,
that the poor infant must be cast again into the flames; which was accordingly
performed; and so that pretty babe was born a Martyr, and added to the number
of the Holy innocents. A cruelty not paralleled in any story, not heard of
amongst the Nations. But such was the pleasure of the Magistrate, as once in
the Massacre of the younger Maximinus, viz. Canis pessimine catulum relinquendum
. that not any issue should be left of an Heretic Parent.

But to go back again to Cranmer, it is to be observed, that as his death
opened the way for Pole to the Sea of Canterbury, so it was respi^ed the longer
out of a politic design to exclude him from it. That Gardener loved him not,
has been said before, and he knew well that Cardinal Carraffa (now Pope Paul
the 4th.) loved him less than he. This put him first upon an hope, that the
Pope might be prevailed with to revoke the Cardinal (who had before been under
a suspicion in the Court of Rome, of having somewhat of the Lutheran in him)
and to bestow the Cardinal's Cap, together with the Legantine power, upon
himself, who doubted not of sitting in the chair of Canterbury if he gained the
rest. Upon which ground he is supposed to have hindered all proceedings against
the three Oxon Martyrs, from the ending of the Parliament on the 26th. of
January, till the 12th. of September then next following, the Pope not sending
out any Commission in all that interval, An. Reg. Mar. 3. 1555/6.
without which Cranmer was not to be brought to a condemnation. But at the
last, not knowing how much these procrastinations might offend the King, and
perhaps pressed unto it by Karn, the Queen's Ambassador, he found himself under
a necessity to dispatch Commission, though he proceeded not to the execution of
any part of the sentence, till more than ten weeks after the 80 days, which
had been given for his appearance in the Court of Rome.

During which time, death puts an end to Gardiners projects, who left his life
at Whitehal on the 12th. of November. From whence conveyed by water to his
house in Southwark, his body was first lapt in lead, kept for a season in the
Church of St Mary Over-Rhe, and afterward solemnly interred under a fair and
goodly Monument in his Cathedral. The custody of the Great Seal, together with
the Title of Lord Chancellor, 1555/6.
was upon New years day conferred on Dr Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York, a
man of great prudence and moderation; but the revenues of the Bishopric were
appropriated to the use of the Cardinal Legate, who purposed to have held it in
Commendam with the Sea of Canterbury, to which he received consecration on the
very next Sunday after Cranmer's death. But Dr John White Bishop of Lincoln,
having been born at Winchester, and educated in that School, of which he was
afterward chief Master, and finally Warden of that College, ambitiously
affected a translation thither. And so far he prevailed by his friends at
Court, that on the promise of an annual pension of 1000 l. to the use of the
Cardinal, he was permitted to enjoy the Title with the rest of the profits.
Which I have mentioned in this place, though this transaction was not made, nor
his translation actually performed till the year next following. No other
alteration made amongst the Bishops of this time, but that Voysie of Exon, dies
in some part of the year, 1555. and Dr James Turbervile succeeds him in the
beginning of the year 1556. A man well born, and well befriended, by means
whereof he recovered some lands unto his See, which had been alienated from it
by his predecessor; and amongst others, the rich and goodly Manors of
Credinson, or Kirton, in the County of Devon, (in former times the Episcopal
seat of the Bishop of Exon) though afterward again dismembered from it in the
time of Queen Elizabeth, by Bishop Cotton.

It is now time to take into consideration the affairs of State, nothing the
better cemented by the blood of so many Martyrs, or jointed any whit the
stronger by the secret animosities and emulations between the Lord Chancellor
and the Cardinal Legate. Though Wia^'s party was so far suppressed, as not to
show it self visibly in open action yet such as formerly had declared for it,
or wished well unto it, had many secret writings against the Queen, every day
growing more and more in dislike of her Government, by reason of so many
butcheries as were continually committed under her authority. Upon which ground
as they had formerly instructed Elizabeth Crofts to act the spirit in the wall;
so afterward they trained up one William Cunstable, alias Featherstone, to
take upon himself the name of King Edward, whom he was said to have resembled,
both in age and personage. And this they did in imitation of the like practice
used in the time of King Henry the 6th. by Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York,
who when he had a mind to claim his Title to the Crown, in regard of his
descent by the House of Mortimer, from Lionel of Antwerp Duke of Clarence, he
caused one Jack Cade (a fellow altogether as obscure as this) to take upon
himself the name of Mortimer, that the might see how well the people stood
affected unto his pretensions, by the discovery which might be made thereof on
this false allarum. And though this Featherstone had been taken and publicly
whipped for it in May last past, and thereupon banished into the North, where he
had been born; yet the confederats resolved to try their fortune with him in a
second adventure. The design was to raise the people under color of King
Edward's being alive, and at the same time to rob the Exchequer, wherein they
knew by some intelligence or other, that 50000. l. in good Spanish money had
been lately lodged. Few persons of any quality appeared in it, not thinking fit
to show themselves in any new practice against the Queen, till made prosperous
by some good success. The chief whom I find mentioned to be privy to it, were
Henry Peckam, the son of that Sir Edmond Peckam, who had been caterer of the
household to King Henry the 8th. one of the Throgmo^tons, and Sir Anthony
Kingston. But the first part of the plot miscarried by the apprehending of
Featherstone, who was arraigned and executed on the 13th. of March; and the
last part thereof discovered on the 28th. by one of the company. On which
discovery Sir Anthony Kingston being sent for, died upon the way; the said
Throgmorton, with one Udall, were executed at ^yburn on the 28th. of April, one
Stanton on the 29th. of May; Rosededike and Bedell, on the 8th of June; Peckam
and Daniel at the Tower hill, on the 8th. of July. Andrew Duchesne makes the
Lord Gray, and one of the Howards, to have a hand in this conspiracy; and
possibly enough it is, that some of greater eminence than any of those before
remembered, might be of counsel in the practice, though they kept themselves out
of sight as much as they could, till they found how it would succeed amongst
the people.

In this unquiet condition we must leave England for a time, and look on the
estate of the English Churches on the other side of the sea, That many of the
English Protestants had forsook the Kingdom, to the number of 800. as well
Students as others, has been said before; who having put themselves into
several Cities, partly in Germany, and partly among the Switzers, and their
confederates, kept up the face and form of an English Chruch, in each of their
several congregations. Their principal retiring places amongst the last, were
Arrow, Zurick, and Geneva, and in the first, the Cities of Embden, Stralsburge,
and Franckfort. In Franckfort they enjoyed the greatest privileges, and
therefore resorted thither in the greatest numbers, which made them the more
apt unto Schisms and factions. At their first coming to that place, which was
on the 27th. of June, Anno 1554. by the power and favor of John Glauberge, one
of the Senators of that City, they were permitted to have the use of one of
their Churches, which had before been granted to such French exiles, as had
repaired thither on the like occasion; yet so, that the French were still to
hold their right; the English to have the use of it one day, and the French
another, and on the Lords day so to divide the hours between them, that the one
might be no hinderance unto the other. It has been said also, that there was
another condition imposed upon them, of being conform unto the French in
Doctrine and Ceremonies. Which condition if it were imposed by the Magistrates,
not sought by themselves, must needs be very agreeable to the temper and
complexion of their principal Leaders; who being for the most part of the
Zuinglian-Gospellers, at their going hence, became the great promoters of the
Puritan faction at their coming home. The names of Whittingham, Williams,
Goodman, Wood and Sutton, who appeared in the head of this congregation,
declare sufficiently of what Principles and strain they were, how willing they
would be to lay aside the face of an English Church, and frame themselves to
any Liturgy but their own.

On July the 14th. they first obtained a grant of their Church, and on the
29th. took possession of it. The interval they spent in altering and
disfiguring the English Lyturgie, of which they left nothing but the reading of
the Psalms and Chapters. Those comfortable interlocutories between the Minister
and the People, were no longer used, as savouring in their opinion, of some
disorder in the course of the ministration; the Letany and the Surplice they
cast aside, as having too much in them of the Church of Rome; the Confession
they had altered so, as they conceived most agreeable to their present
condition; and for the Hymns which intervened between the Chapters and the
Creed, they changed them for such Psalms in the English Meerer, as had been
made by Sternhold and Hopkins in the time of King Edward. The Psalm being done,
the Preacher goes into the Pulpit, in which the Minister prayed for the
assistance of God's Spirit, and so proceeded to the Sermon. Which done, an
other Prayer was made for all orders and estates of men, but more particularly
for the welfare of the Church of England; composed in imitation of the Prayer
for the Church Militant here on earth, but ending (as that did not) with the
Paternoster. After which (most extremely out of order) followed the rehearsal
of the Articles of the Christian Faith, another Psalm, and finally the
dismission of the people, with The Peace of God. This was the form devised for
that Congregation, for the imposing whereof on all the rest of the English
Churches, they did then use their best endeavors, and for obtruding which on
the whole Church of England they raised such tumults and commotions in the
following times. Growing in love with this fair Babe of their own begetting,
they write their Letters of the second of August to such of the English as
remained at Stralsburge and Zurick, inviting them to repair to Franckfort, and
unite themselves unto that Church, which had been there erected with the leave
of the Magistrate. But they had heard in both places of those Alterations which
had been made at Franckfort, in the form of Gods public Service, and thereupon
refused to accept of the invitation, though it seemed to promise them some
advantages by the commodious situation of that City in respect of England, the
great resort of strangers thither at the yearly Marts, plenty of Books, and
other helps in the way of study, which were not to be found in the other two
Cities. From Stralsburge modestly, from Zurick resolutely, but from both it was
plainly signified, that they resolved to maintain the Order of the Church of
England. The like Letter had been writ to the English at Embden, of which
Congregation Doctor Scory, the late Bishop of Chichester, was the
Super-intendent; and we may readily believe, that they received the like
repulse from his Church at Embden, as they had from Gryndal, Sandys, and
Haddon, or who had the constituting of the Church of Stralsburge; or from Horn,
Chambers, Parkhurst, and other of the Students which remained at Zurick.

The noise of this new Church at Franckfort occasioned Knox, who after proved
the great incendiary of the Realm and Church of Scotland, to leave his
Sanctuary in Geneva, in hope to make a better market for himself in that
Congregation. He had not long before published a seditious Pamphlet, entitled,
The first blast of the Trumpet, in which he bitterly inveighed against the
Government of Women, aiming there especially at the three Queen Mary's, that is
to say, Mary Queen of England, Mary Queen of Scots, and Mary of Lorrain Queen
Regent of Scotland. By which seditious Pamphlet, he had made not only his own
Country too hot for him, but could assure himself of no safety in France or
England. To Geneva therefore he retires, and from thence removes to Franckfort,
as the ^itter Scene for his intendments, hoping to get as great a name in this
new Plantation, as Calvin had gotten in the old. It was about the end of
September that he came to Franckfort, where he took the charge of that Church
upon him, Whittingham and the rest submitting unto his Apostleship. This gave a
new dis-satisfaction to the English at Stralsburge and Zurick, who knew the
spirit of the man, and feared the dangerous consequents and effects thereof.
Nor was the condition of affairs much bettered by the coming of Whitehead, (who
afterward refused the Archbishopric of Canterbury) though far the more
moderate of the two. New Letters are reciprocated between Franckfort and
Zurick; from Franckfort on the 15th. of November, in open defiance as it were
to the English Liturgy; from Zurick on the 28th. in defense thereof, and of
their constancy and resolution for adhering to it. The breach growing every day
more wide than other, Gryndal and Chambers came from Stralsburge to atone the
difference, by whom it was proposed unto them, That the substance of the
English Liturgy being retained, there might be a forbearance of some ceremonies
and offices in it. But Knox and Whittingham were as much bent against the
substance of the Book, as against any of the circumstantials and extrinsicals
which belonged unto it. So that no good effect following on this interposition,
the Agents of the Church of Stralsburge return back to their brethren, who by
their Letters of the 13th. of December expostulate in vain about it.

In these distractions, some of the Franckfort Schismatics desire, that all
divine Offices might be executed according to the order of the Church of
Geneva; which Knox would by no means yield unto, thinking himself as able to
make a Rule for his own Congregation, as any Calvin of them all. But that the
mouths of those of Stralsburge and Zuri^k might be stopped for ever, he is
content to make so much use of him, as by the authority of his judgment to
disgrace that Liturgy, which those of Zurick did contend for. He knew well how
he had bestirred himself in quarrelling the first Liturgy of King Edward the
6th. and nothing doubts, but that the second (though reviewed on his
importunity) would give him as little satisfaction as the other did. To this
intent, the Order of the English Liturgy is drawn up in Latin, transmitted to
him by Knox and Whittingham, by this infallible judgment to stand or fall. The
Oracle returns this answer on the 31 of January, ( In Liturgia Angl^cana qualem
mihi describitis multas vid^o tolerabiles ineptias) That in the Book of England
as by them described, 1554/5;
he had observed many tolerable fooleries. Which last words being somewhat
ambiguous, as all Oracles are, he explicates himself by telling them, Non est
ea pur^tas quae opta^da ^oret.
That there wanted much of that purity which was to be desired in it; Faecis
Palpisticae reliqu^as.
that it contained many relics of the dregs of Popery; that being there was no
manifest impiety in it, it had been tolerated for a season, because at first it
could not otherwise be admitted: But howsoever, though it was lawful to begin
with such beggarly rudiments, yet it behoved the learned, grave, and godly
Ministers of Christ to endeavor farther, and set forth something more refined
from filth and rustinesse. This being sent for his determinate sentence unto
Knox and Whittingham, was of such prevalency with all the rest of that party,
that such who ^ormerly did approve, did afterward as much dislike the English
Liturgy; and those who at the first had conceived only a dislike, grew
afterward into an open detestation of it. Those who before had been desirous
that the Order of Geneva should be entertained; had now drawn Knox and
Whittingham unto them, Mr. John Fox (the Author of the Acts and Monuments)
contributing his approbation amongst the rest. But in the end, to give content
to such as remained affected to the former Liturgy, it was agreed upon, That a
mixed. Form, consisting partly of the Order of Geneva, and partly of the Book of
England, should be digested and received till the first of April; consideration
in the mean time to be had of some other course which should be permanent, and
obliging for the time to come.

In this condition of affairs, Doctor Richard Cox, the late Dean of
Christ-Church and Westminster, first Schoolmaster, and after Almoner to King
Edward the sixth, puts himself into Franckfort March 13. accompanied with
many English Exiles, whom the cause of Religion had necessitated to forsake
their Country: Being a man of great learning, of great authority in the Church,
and one that had a principal hand in drawing up the Liturgy by Law established;
he could with no patience endure those innovations in it, or rather that
rejection of it, which he found amongst them. He thereupon first begins to
answer the Minister contrary to the Order there agreed on, and the next Sunday
after causes one of his company to go into the Pulpit and read the Letany.
Against which doings of his, Knox in a Sermon the same day inveigheth most
bitterly, affirming many things in the Book of England not only to be
imperfect, but superstitious, For the which he is not only rebuked by Cox, but
forbidden to preach. Wherewith Whittingham being much offended, deals with some
of the Magistrates, from whom he procures an Order of the 22 of March,
requiring, That the English should conform themselves to the Rules of the
French. Knox had not long before published a seditious Pamphlet, entitled, An
Admonition to Christians, containing the substance of some Sermons by him
preached in Eng^and, in one of which, he affirmed the Emperor to be no less an
enemy to Christ that the ^yrant Nero. For this, and several other passages of
the like dangerous nature, he is accused by Cox for Treason against the
Emperor; the Senate made acquainted with it, and Knox commanded thereupon to
depart the City, who makes h^s Farewel-Sermon on the 25th. of March, 1555.
and retires himself unto Geneva. Following his blow, Cox gets an order of the
Senate, by the means of another of the Gla^berges, by which Whittingham and the
rest of his faction were commanded to receive the Book of England. Against
which order, Whi^tingham for a time opposes, encouraged therein by Goodman,
who for the love of Knox (with whom afterward he associated in all his
practices) had left the grave so^iety of those of Stralsb^rge, to join himself
unto the Sectaries of (...). But finding Cox to be too strong for them in the
Senate, both they and all the rest who refused conformity, resolved to betake
themselves to some other place, as they shortly did.

Cox thus made Master of the field, begins to put the Congregation into such
order, as might preserve the face and reputation of an English Church. He
procures Whitehead to be chosen for the principal Pa^^or, appoints two
Ministers for Elders, and four Deacons for a^^istants to him, recommends Mr.
Robert Horn (whom he had drawn from Zurick thither) to be Hebrew-Reader,
Mullings to read the Greek Lecture, Trahern the Lecture in Divinity, and
Chambers to be Treasurer for the Contributions, which were sent in from time to
time by many godly and well^affected persons, both Dutch and English, for the
use of that Church. Having thus settled all things answerable to his own
desires, he gives an account thereof to Calvin, subscribed by fourteen of the
chief men in that Congregation, partly excusing themselves that they had
proceeded so far without his consent, and partly rejoicing, that they had drawn
the greatest part of that Church to their own opinions. Calvin returns his
Answer on the last of May, which puts his party there on another project, that
is to say, to have the whole business referred to some Arbitrators, equally
chosen on both sides. But Cox was already in possession, great in esteem with
the chief Magistrates of the City, and would by no means yield to refer that
point, which had already been determined to his advantage. With these debates
the time is taken up till the end of August, at what time Whi^tingham and the
rest of the faction take their leave of Franckfort; Fox with some few others go
to Basil, but the main body to Geneva as their M^ther-City, where they make
choice of Knox and Goodman for their constant Preachers; under which Ministry
they reject the whole frame and fabric of the Reformation made in England,
conformed themselves wholly to the fashions of the Church of Geneva, and
therewith entertain also the Calvinian Doctrines, to the discredit of the state
of the Church of England in King Edwards time, the great grief of the Martyrs
and other godly men in the reign of Queen Mar^, and to the raising of most
unquenchable combustions in all parts of the Church, under Queen Elizabeth.

It was not long after the settling of the Liturgy, before Whitehead left the
Ministry of the English Congregation, which Cox obtained for Mr. Horn, whom he
knew to be a man both of courage and constancy. And that being done, he left
the Congregation, and so withdraws himself to ^ralsburge, there to enjoy the
company of Peter Martyr, with whom he was intimately acquainted while he lived
in Christ-Church. By his departure, a new gap is opened to another dissension.
Some words had passed at a supper, intended rather for increase of charity,
than the breach of friendship, betwixt Horn and Ash^ey; Horn the chief Pastor
of the flock, 1555/6.
and Ash^ey a Gentleman of good note in the Lay part of it. Some three days
after being the 16th. of January, Ashley^is is cited to appear at the house of
one of the Elders, to answer for some words which he had spoken in contempt of
the Ministry. But from the Elders, he appeals to the Congregation, amongst whom
he prevails so fat, that they send a message by two of their company to the
Pastor and Elders, requiring them to proceed no further in the cause. Horn
being backed by Chambers, the public Treasurer, excepts against this message,
as decreed at a private Conventicle, not by the general suffrages of the
Congregation, and thereupon resolves to stand to that Authority which formerly
had been conferred on him and the rest of the Elders, by the Rules of their
Discipline. Ashley and his adh^rents on the other side, declare their former
private meeting not to be a ^onventicle, protest against the Pastor and Elders,
as an adverse party, and therefore not in a capacity to sit as Judges in the
present case, and set themselves upon the making of a Book of Discipline, for
the curbing the exorbitant power (for such they thought it) of the Pastor and
Elders. The Pastor and Elders thereupon forsake their Offices, and on the 5th,
of February, being the next day of public meeting, take place amongst the rest
as private persons; The Congregation full, but the Pulpit empty, which put the
rest upon a humor of electing others to take the public charge upon them. The
noise of these disorders awakes the Magistrates, who command Horn and Chambers
to forbear the congregation, until further Order, and afterward restoring them
to their former authority by public Edict, were contradicted in it by Ashley's
party, who having got some power into their hands, were resolved to keep it.

In the mean time, a Book of Discipline had been drawn and tendered to the
Congregation, on the ^4th. of February. According to the Rules whereof, the
supreme power in all Ecclesi astical causes was put into the hands of the
Congregations, and the disposing of the public moneys committed to the trust
of certain Officers, by the name of Deacons. This makes the breach wider than
before, Horn and his party laboring to retain the old, the other to establish
the new Discipline of their own devising. The Magistrates not able to agree the
difference, dispatch their Letters unto S^ralsburge of the 3d. of April, 1556.
desiring Dr Cox and Dr. Sandys, together with Robert Bertie, Esquire to undertake
the closing of the present rupture. To their arbitrament each party is content
to submit the controversy, but differ in conclusion, in the terms of their
Reference. Much talk, and no small scandal grows upon these divisions, not
made the less by the Pen-combats between Horn and Whitehead. In the end, a form
of reconciliation is drawn up by some of the English, who more endeavored the
peace of the Church, than the interess of either party. But those who stood for
the new Discipline being grown the stronger, refused to submit themselves to
any establishment, by which the power of the diffusive body of the Congregation
might be called in question. Whereupon Horn and Chamb^rs depart to Stralshurge,
from whence Chambers writ his Letters to them of the 20th. of June, and after,
of the 30th. of July, but to no effect. They had before proceeded to the
election of some new Ministers, March the 22d. Against which, though Horn and
his opposed, yet they concluded it for the present, on the 29th. and now they
mean to stand unto the conclusion, let Horn and Chambers go or tarry, as best
pleased themselves. Such were the troubles and disorders in the* hurch of
Franckfort, occasioned first by a dislike of the public Liturgy, before which
they preferred the nakedness and simplicity of the French and Genevian
Churches, and afterward continued, by the opposition made by the general body
of the Congregation, against such as were appointed to be Pastors and Rulers
over them. Hence the beginning of the Puritan faction, against the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church; that of the Presbyterians against the Bishops, of
Episcopal Government; and finally that also of the Independents, against the
superintendency of the Pastors and Elders. The terrible effects, whereof will
appear hereafter, if God shall give me means and opportunity to carry on the
History of those disturbances which have been raised by the P^ritans or
Presbyterians, against the Orders of this Church, and the peace of Christendom.

But sorrows seldom go alone, the abberrations from the Government, and Form,
and Worship, established in the Church of England, drew on and alteration also
in point of Doctrine. Such of the English as had retired into Geneva, An. Reg.
Mar. 4. 1556/7.
employ themselves in setting out a new Translation of the Bible in the English
Tongue, which afterward they published with certain marginal Notes upon it,
most of them profitable for the understanding of the Text, but so that some
were he^e^odox in point of Doctrine, some dangerous, and seditious, in
reference to the Civil Magistrate, and some as scandalous in respect of
Episcopal Government. From this time the Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination
began to be dispersed in English Pamphlets, as the only necessary, Orthodox,
and saving truth. Knox publishes a book Against an adversary of God's
predestination, wherein it is declared, That whatsoever the Ethnicks and
ignorant did attribute to Fortune, by Christians is to be ^ssigned to God's
heavenly providence; that we (...) to judge nothing to come of Fortune, but
that all comes by the determinate counsel of God; and finally, that it would
be displeasing unto God, if we should esteem any thing to proceed from any
other; and that we do not only behold him as the principal cause of all things,
but also the author, appointing all things to the one or the other by his only
counsel. After comes out a Book first written in French, and afterward by some
of them translated into English, which they called A brief Declaration of the
Table of predestination, in which it is put down for a principal Aphorism, that
in like manner, as God has appointed the end, it is necessary also, that God
should appoint the causes leading to the same end; but more particularly, that
by virtue of God's will all things are done; yea, even those things which are
evil and execrable. In another book Entitled Against a privy Papist, it is
maintained more agreeably to Calvin's Doctrine, That all evil springs of Gods
Ordinance, and that Go^s predestination was the cause of Adam's fall, and of
all wickednesses. And in a fourth book published by Robert Crowley, who
afterward was Rector of the Church of St Giles's nere Cripple-gate, Entitled
The confutation of 13 Articles, etc. it is said expressly, That Adam being so
perfect a creature, that there was in him no lust to sin, and yet so weak, that
of himself he was not able to withstand the assault of the subtle Serpent; that
therefore there can be no remedy, but that the only cause of his fall, must
needs be the predestination of God. In which book it is also said, That the
most wicked persons that have been, were of God appointed to be even as wicked
as they were; and finally, that if God do predestinate man to do things rashly,
and without any deliberation, he shall not deliberate at all, but run headlong
upon it, be it good or evil. By which defenders of the absolute decree of
reprobation, as God is made to be the Author of sin, either in plain terms or
undeniable consequence; so from the same men, and the Genevian Pamphlets by
them dispersed, our English Calvinists had borrowed all their grounds and
principles on which they build the absolute and irrespective decree of
Predestination, contrary to the Doctrine publicly maintained and taught in the
time of King Edward.

Anno Reg. Mar. 4. A. D. 1556, 1557.
IT is now time that we set sail again for England, which we left flaming with
the fire of Persecutions, and the whole body of the State not a little inflamed
with a spirit of treason and sedition; the last ill spirit well allayed by the
execution of the chief Conspirators, the other fire not quenched by the blood
of the Martyrs, which rather served as oil to nourish, than as water to
extinguish the outragiousness of it. But the Queen hoped to salve the matter on
her part by some works of piety, as the restoring of such Church Lands as were
in the Crown, for the endowment of some new Convents of Moncks and Friars. But
first she thought it necessary to communicate her purpose unto some of the
Council, and therefore calling to her the Lord Treasurer Paulet, Inglefield
Master of the Wards, Rochester Comptrouler of her Household, and Master
Secretary Peter, who seemed to be most concerned in it, by their several
places, she is said to have spoken to them in these following words:

Y^u are here o^ Our Counsel, An. Reg. Mar. 4. 1556.
and We have willed you to be be called to Us, to the intent you might hear of
me my conscience, and the resol^tion of my mind, concerning the Lanas and
Possessions, as well of Monasteries, as of other Churches whatsoever, being now
presently in my possession. First I do consider that the said Lands were taken
away from the Churches aforesaid, in time of Schism, and that by unlawful
means, such as are contrary both to the Law of God and of the Church; For the
which cause my conscience does not suffer me to detain them. And therefore I
here expressly refuse either to claim or retain the said Lands for mine, but
with all my heart freely and willingly without all paction or condition, here
and before God, I do surrender and relinquish the said lan^s and possessions,
or inheritances whatsoever, and do renounce the same with this mind and
purpose, that order and disposition thereof may be taken, as shall seem best
liking to our most holy Lord the Pope, or else his Legate, the Lord Cardinal,
to the honor of God, and wealth of this our Realm. And albeit you may ob^ect
to me again, that con^idering the State of my Kingdom, the dignity thereof, and
my Crown Imperial, cannot be honorably maintained and furnished without the
possessions aforesaid; yet notwithstanding (and so she had affirmed before,
when she was bent upon the restitution of the Tenths and first Fruits) I set
more by the salvation of my soul, than by ten such Kingdoms; and therefore the
said poss^ssi^ns I utterly refuse here to hold, after that sort and title, and
give most hearty thanks to Alm^gh^y God, which has given me an husband
likewise minded, with no less good affection in this behalf, than I am my
self. Wherefore I charge and command that my Chancellor (with whom I have
conferred my mind in this matter before) and you four to morrow do resort
together to the most Reverend Lord Legate, and do signify to him the premises
in my Name; and give your attendance upon him, for the more full declaration of
the State of my Kingdom, and of the aforesaid possessions accordingly, as you
your selves do understand the matter, and can inform him in the same.

Upon this opening of her mind, the Lords perceived it would be to no purpose
to persuade the contrary, and therefore thought it requisite to direct some
course wherein she might satisfy her desires to her own great honor, and yet
not alienate too much at once of the public Patrimony. The Abbey of Westminster
had been founded in a Convent of Benedictines, or black Monks, by King Edward
the Confessor; valued at the suppression by King Henry the 8th. at the yearly
sum of 3977. pounds, in good old rents, Anno 1539. At what time having taken to
himself the best and greatest part of the Lands thereof, he founded with the
rest a Collegiat Church, consisting of a Dean and secular Canons; Benson the
last Abbot, being made the first Dean of this new erection. To B^nson succeeded
Dr Cox, and to him was substituted Dr Weston, in the first of this Queen. And
being preferred unto the place by her special favor, 'twas conceived to be no
hard matter to persuade him to make a surrendry of his Church into the hands of
the Queen, that so it might return to its former nature, and be erected into a
Convent of Benedictines, without any charge unto the Crown. And this they
thought would be the easier brought to pass, because by the preferment of Dr
Owen Ogl^thorp to the Sea of Carlisle, the Dean^y of Windsor would be void,
which was considered as a sufficient compensation, if bestowed on Weston, for
his surrendry of the other. But they found a greater difficulty in it than was
first imagined, Weston appearing very backward in conforming to the Queens
desires, partly out of a dislike which he had of the project (he being one that
never liked the profession of Monkery) and partly out of an affection which he
had to the place seated so opportunely for the Court, and all public
businesses. But at the last he yielded to that opportunity which he was not
able to resist, and thereby gained so much displeasure from the Cardinal
Legate, that before the end of the next year, Anno 1557. he was outed of his
Deanery of Windsor, and all his other Ecclesiastical promotions, upon an
information of his being taken in the act of adultery, which otherwise perhaps
might have been pardoned or connived at in him, as in many others. But willing
or unwilling he had first surrendered the Church of Westminster, which the
Queen stocked with a new Convent of Ben^dictines, consisting of an Abbot and
fourteen Monks, which with their officers, were as many as the Lands then left
unto it could well maintain. And for the first Abbot, she made choice of Dr
John Fecknam, a learned, grave, and moderate man, whom she had formerly made
Dean of St Paul's, in the place of Dr William May, and now made choice of Dr
Henry Cole, Archdeacon of Ely, and Prolocutor of the Convocation, Anno 1555.
to succeed him in it.

It was upon the 21 of November, that the new Abbot and his Monks entered on the
possession of their ancient Convent, which they held not fully out three years,
when it was once again dissolved by Act of Parliament, of which more hereafter.
Which fate befell the rest of her foundations also, two of which cost her little
more than this at Westminster. A Convent of Observants (being a reformed Order
of Franciscan Friars) had been founded by King Henry the 7th. near the Manor
of Greenwich, and was the first which felt the fury of King Henry the 8th. by
reason of some open opposition made by some of the Friars in favor of Queen
Katherine, the mother of the Queen now reigning. Which moved her in a pious
gratitude, to re-edifie that ruined house, and to restore as many as could be
found of that Order, to their old habitations; making up their Corporation with
some new Observants, to a competent number. She gathered together also a new
Convent of Dominicans, or black Friars, for whom she provided an house in
Smithfield, in the City of London, ^itting the same with all conveniences both
for divine Offices, and other necessary uses. And having done this, she was at
no more charges with either of them; for both the Observants and Dominicans
being begging Friars, might be resembled not unfitly to a swarm of Bees, which
being provided of an hive, are left to make their combs, and raise themselves a
livelihood by their natural industry.

But so she went not off in her other foundations, which were to be provided of
some proportionable endowment out of the revenues of the Crown, toward their
support. A^ Sion nere Brentford, in the Country of Middlesex, there had been
anciently a house of religious women, Nuns of the Order of St Bridget,
dissolved as were all teh rest, by King Henry the 8th. Most of the old ones
dead, and the younger married. Yet out of such of the old Nuns as remained
alive, and the addition of some others, who were willing to embrace that course
of life, a competent number was made up for a new Plantation; but seated as
before at Sion, which the Queen repaired, and laid unto it a sufficient estate
in Lands for their future maintenance. Which house being afterward dissolved
also by Queen Elizabeth, came first to the possession of Sir Thomas Perrot, who
gave it to his wife, the Lady Dorothy, one of the daughters of Walter Divereux,
Earl of Essex; by whom, being after married to Henry Lord Percy, Earl of
Northumberland, it was left for a retiring house to that Noble Family, who do
still enjoy it. At Sheen on the other side of the water, there had been
anciently another religious house, not far from a mansion of the Kings, to
which they much resorted till the building of Richmond. This house she stocked
with a new Convent of Carthusians (corruptly called the Charter-ho^se-Moncks)
which she endowed with a revenue great enough to maintain that Order, which
professed more abstemiousness in diet, and sparingness of expense in all other
things, than any others which embraced a Monastical life. And the next year
having closed up the West end of the Quire or Chancel of the Church of St John's
near Smithfield (which was all the Protector Sommerset had left standing of it)
she restored the same to the Hospitalry of Knights of St John, to whom it
formerly belonged, assigning a liberal endowment to it for their more
honorable subsistence. Over whom she placed Sir Thomas Tresha^^ for the first
Lord Prior, a Gentleman of an ancient Family, and one that had deserved
exceeding well of her, in defense of her claim against Queen Jane, who on the
30th. of November, 1557. received the Order of the Cross at Westminster, and
took possession of his place; which having scarce warmed, he was taken from it
by the stroke of death, and left it by the Queen to be disposed of to Sir
R^chard Shellie, the last great Master of that Order in the Realm of England.

But this expiring with the rest, within two years after, there remained
nothing of all Queen Mary's foundations, but her new Ho^pital in the Savoy. An
Hospital had formerly been founded in tha^ House by her Grandfather King Henry
the seventh, for the relief of such pilgrims, as either went on their Devotions
to the shrine of St. Thomas Becket of Canterbury, or any other eminent Shrine
or Saint in those parts of the Kingdom. On a suggestion made to King Edward the
sixth, that it served only for a recepracle of vagrant persons, it was
surrendered to him in the last year of his Reign by the Master and Brethren of
the same; out of the Lands whereof he assigned the yearly Rent of seven hundred
Marks for the maintenance of his new working house of Bridewel, which he had
given for ever to the Lord Mayor and City of London, as has been signified
before in the life of that King, (together with all the beds, bedding, and
other furniture, which were found in this Hospital.) And though this Grant bare
date on the 26 of June, in the last year of his Reign, Anno 1553. yet the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen entered not on the possession of it till the month of
February now last past, Anno 1555. But having took possession of it, and so
much of the Lands of this Hospital being settled on it, the Hospital in the
Savoy could not be restored to its first condition, but by a new Endowment,
from such other Lands belonging to Religious Houses which were remaining in the
Crown. But the Queen was so resolved upon it, that she might add some works of
Charity unto those of Piety, or else in honor of her Grandfather, whose
foundation she restored at Greenwich also, the Hospital was again refounded on
the third of November, and a convenient yearly Rent allotted to the Master and
Brethren for the entertainment of the Poor, according to the tenor and effect
of the first Institution. Which Prince-like Act so wrought upon the Maids of
Honor, and other Ladies of the Court, that for the better attaining of the
Queens good grace, they furnished the same at their own costs with new beds,
bedding, and other necessary furniture, in a very ample manner. In which
condition it continues to this very day, the Mastership of the Hospital being
looked on as a good preferment for any well deserving man about the Court; but
for the most part given to some of their Majesty's Chaplains for the
encouragement of learning, and the reward of their service.

How far the Queens example, seconded by the Ladies about the Court,
countenanced by the King, and earnestly insisted on by the Pope then being,
might have prevailed on the Nobility and Gentry for doing the like, either in
restoring their Church Lands, or assigning some part of them to the like
Foundations, it is hard to say; most probable it is, that if the Queen had
lived some few years longer, either for love to her, or for fear of gaining the
Kings displeasure, (who was now grown too great to be disputed with, if the
point were questioned) or otherwise out of an unwillingnesse to incur the Popes
curse, and the Churches censures, there might have been very much done that
way, though not all at once. For so it was, that Philip having past over to
Calais in the month of September, Anno 1555. And the next day departing to the
Emperors Court, which was then at Brussels, where he found his father in a
resolution of resigning to him all his Dominions and Estates, except the
Empire, (or the bare title rather of it) which was to be surrendered to his
brother Ferdinand; not that he had not a design to settle the Imperial Dignity
on his Successors in the Realm of Spain, for the better attaining of the
Universal Monarchy, which he was said to have aspired to, over all the West,
but that he had been crossed in it by Maxi^ilian the eldest son of his brother
Ferdinand, who succeeded to his father in it, and left the same hereditary in a
manner to the Princes of the House of Austria of the German Rate. For Charles
grown weary of the world, broken, with wars, and desirous to apply himself to
^ivine meditations, resolved to discharge himself of all civil employments, and
spend the remainder of his life in the Monastery of St. Justus, situate among
the Mountains of Extremadura, a Province of the Realm of Castile. In pursuance
whereof, having called before him the principal of the Nobility and great men
of his several Kingdoms and Estates, he made a Resignation of all his
hereditary Dominions to King Philip his son, on the 25th. of October, Anno
1555. having then scarce attained to the 55 year of his life, to the great
admiration of all the world. After which act, he found himself so abandoned by
all his followers, that sitting up la^e at night in conference with Seldiu^ his
brothers Ambassador, he had not a servant within call to light the Gentleman
down stairs. Which being observed by the Emperor, he took the candle into his
hands, and would needs in his own person perform that offi^e; and having
brought him to the top of the stairs, he said unto him, Remember Seldius, that
thou have known the Emperor Charles, whom thou have seen in the he^d of so many
Armies, reduced to such a low estate, as to perform the office of an ordinary
servant to his Brothers Minister. Such was the greatness to which Philip had
attained at the present time, when the Queen was most intent on these new
foundations.

As for the Pope, he had published a Bull in print at the same time also, in
which he threatened Excommunication to all manner of persons without exception,
as kept any Church Lands unto themselves; as also to all Princes, Noblemen, and
Magistrates, as did not forthwith put the same in execution: Which though it
did not much edify at the present in the Realm of England, yet it found more
obedience and conformity in that of Ireland, in which a Parliament being called
toward the end of this year, (that is to say, in the month of June, Anno 1557.)
there past a Statute for repealing all Acts, Articles, and Provisions made
against the Sea Apostolic, since the 20th. year of King Henry the 8th. and for
abolishing of several Eccelesiastical possessions conveyed to the Laity, as
also for the extinguishment of First Fruits and Twentieth parts, (no more than
the yearly payment of the twentieth part having been laid by Act of Parliament
on the Irish Clergy) in the first and last clause whereof, as they followed the
example of the Realm of England, so possibly they might have given a dangerous
example to it in the other point, if by the Queens death following shortly
after, as well K. Philip as the Pope had not lost all their power and influence
on the English Nation; by means whereof, there was no farther progress in the
restitution of the Abbey-Lands, no more re-edifying of the old Religious
Houses, and no intention for the founding of any new. Such as most cordially
were affected to the interest of the Pope of Rome, and otherwise were very
perfect at their Ave Maria, might love their Pater n^ster well, but their Penny
better.

Thus have we seen how zealously the Queen proceeded in her way, toward the
re-establishing of the Papal greatness. Let us next look on the proceedings of
the Cardinal Legate, not as a Legate a latere from the Pope of Rome, but as
Legatus natus, a Metropolitan, or Archbishop of the Church of England. As
Cardinal-Legat he had been never forward in the shedding of blood, declaring
many ways his averseness from that severity, which he saw diverse of the English
Bishops, but especially the Butcher of London, were so bent upon. And when he
came to act as Metropolitan, he was very sparing in that kind, as far as his
own person was concerned therein; though not to be excused from suffering the
under Officers of his Diocese to be too prodigal of the blood of their
Christian brethren. He had been formerly suspected for a favourer of the
Lutheran Doctrins, when he lived at Rome, and acted for the Pope as one of his
Legates in the Council of ^rent. Gardener and Bonner, and the rest of the sons
of Thunder, who called for nothing less than fire, (though not from heaven)
were willing to give out, that he brought the same affections into England
also; and therefore somewhat must be done to keep up his authority and
reputation, both at home and abroad. An. Reg. Mar. 4. 1556/7.
To which end, he inserteth some particulars amongst the printed Articles of
his Visitation, to witness for him to the world, that he had as great a care
for suppressing the growth of Heresy, as any Prelate in the Kingdom, who would
be thought more zealous because more tyrannical; of which sort are the 14, 15,
and 17th. Articles which concerned the Clergy, that is to say, Whether any of
them do teach or preach erroneous doctrine, contrary to the Catholic faith,
and the Unity of the Church; and whether any of them do say the divine Service,
or d^ minister the Sacraments in the English tongue, contrary to the usual
order of the Church? Of which sort also were the first of those touching the
Laity, viz. Whether any manner of persons, of what estate, degree, or condition
soever they be, do hold, maintain, and affirm any Heresies, Errors, and
erroneous Opinions, contrary to the Laws Ecclesiastical, and the unity of the
Catholic Church? Which general Article was after branched into such
particulars, as concerned the Carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, the
reverent esteem thereof, the despising of any of the Sacramentals, and the
decrying of Auricular Confession by the word or practice. And somewhat also of
this sort was the 17th. Article, by which it was enquired, Whether any of the
Priests or Clergy, that having been married under the pre^ence of Lawful
Matrimony, and since reconciled, do privily resort to their pretended wives, or
that the said women do privily resort to them. Nothing material or considerable
in all the rest, but what has been in use and practice by all the Archbishops,
Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Judges in the Church of England, since the
first and best times of Queen Elizabe^h; all of them seeming to have took their
pattern from this reverend Prelate,'s and to have precedented themselves by the
Articles of his Visitation. In two points only he appeared to be somewhat
singular, and therefore found no followers in the times succeeding; the first
whereof was, The Registring of the names of the Godfathers and Godmothers, as
well as of the child Baptized; which why it should be laid aside I can see no
reason, the Rubric of the Church allowing none to perform that office, before
they have received the holy Communion. The second was, an Enquiry, whether the
Parsons, Vicars, and Curats were diligent in teaching the Midwifes how to
Christen children in time of necessity, according to the Canons of the Church;
which seemed sufficiently necessary to be put in practice, as long as Baptism
was permitted to Midwives or any other persons not in holy Orders.

But though he seemed more favou^able than any of the rest of the Bishops,
toward those which were living, he was content to exercise the utmost of his
power upon those that were dead; nor was he without hope, that by the
punishment and disgrace of those which were not sensible of either, he might be
thought to manifest his greatest zeal toward the maintenance of the Doctrins
of the Church of Rome, as if he had inflicted the like censures on them when
they were alive. This prompts him to a Visitation of the University of
Cambridge, partly to rectify the Statutes of it, which in many points were
thought to stand in need of a Reformation; but principally to exercise some
more than ordinary rigor on the dead bodies of Martin Bucer and Paulus Fagius:
Of these, the first, having been the public Reader in Divinity in the time of
King Edward, was solemnly interred in the Church of St. Mary's; the other
having been Hebrew-Reader at the same time also, was buried in the Church of
St. Michael. In order to this Visitation, he Delegates one Ormanete an Italian,
honored with the title of the Popes Da^ary, Doctor Cuthbert Scot, then newly
consecrated Bishop of Chester, Doctor Watson Mr. of St. John's College, and
Lord Elect of Lincoln, and Doctor Christopherson, Master of Trinity College,
and Dean of Norwich, Lord Elect of Chichester, and Doctor Henry Cole Provost of
Eaton College, and Dean of St. Paul's. With these were joined as Commissioners
Doctor Andrew Pern, Master of Peterhouse, and Vice Chancellor, some Doctors of
Divinity, Sir James D^er then the Recorder of the Town, and certain others, in
the name of the King and Queen, It must be some great business doubtless, that
must require so many hands, and exercise the wits of so many persons, Bishops,
Deans, Doctors in Divinity, Canonists, common Lawyers, Knights, and Gentlemen.
But what the business was, and how little it required such preparations, we are
next to see.

The Cardinals Commissioners came to Cambridge on the 9th. of January, where
they found the rest ready to receive them, and the next day they interdicted
the two Churches above mentioned, for daring to entertain the dead bodies of
such desperate Heretics. I pretermit the eloquent speech made by Stoaks the
University-Orator, the Answer thereunto by S^ot, then Bishop of Chester, the
Latin Sermon preached by Peacock against Sects and Heretics, together with
the Solemn Mass, with which this weighty business was to take beginning. Which
preparations being past over, a Petition is presented to the Cardinals
Delegates in the name of the Vice Chancellor, and Heads of the University, for
taking up the bodies of the said Martin Bucer and Panlus Faglus, to the end
that some legal proceedings might be had against them, to the terror of
others, in regard of those many dangerous and heretical Doctrines by them
formerly taught. The Petition being granted, and the dead bodies condemned to
be taken out of their graves, a public Citation is set up at St. Mary's
Church, the Marketplace, and the common Schools, requiring the said Martin
Bucer and Paulus Fagius, or any other in their names, or in their behalf, to
appear before the Lords Commissioners on Monday the 18th. of that Month, to
answer to such Articles as then and there should be objected against them. But
the dead bones not being able to come unless they were carried, and no body
daring to appear as their Proctor or Advocate, they might have been taken pro
confessis, but that the Court was willing to proceed by Witnesses; and to that
end they took the Depositions of several persons, touching the Doctrine taught
by the said two Heretics; and then upon mature deliberation they condemned
them of Heresy, ordered them to be taken out of their graves, degraded from
all holy Orders, and delivered to the secular Magistrate. Of all this, an
account is given to the Cardinal-Legat, who is desired to take some course that
the ordinary Writ ( de comburendo Haeretic^) for the burning of Heretics,
might be taken out, and sent unto the Mayor of Cambridge, without which,
nothing could be done, in order to the execution of the rest of the Sentence.
The Writ accordingly comes down, and Saturday the sixth day of February is
appointed for the burning of the two dead bodies; which being taken out of
their graves, and laid in their coffins on men's shoulders, are carried to the
market^ place with a guard of men, well arme^ and weaponed, for fear of making
an escape; chained unto several posts, as if still alive, the wood and fire put
to them, and their bodies burned, together with as many of their Books as could
be gotten, which were cast into the same flames also.

And because one University should not mock the other, the like cruelty was
also exercised upon the dead body of Peter Martyr's wi^e at Oxford, a godly,
grave, and sober matron while she lived, and to the poor people there exceeding
charitable. It was supposed, that Oxon stood as much in need of a Visitation as
Cambrige did. A Commission is therefore granted by the Cardinal-Legat to Doctor
James Brooks Bishop of Gloucester, Ormanete the Popes Datary, Cole and Wright
Doctors of the Civil Law, etc. to rectify such things as they foundamiss in
that University, or in any College of the same. It was given them also in
charge amongst other things, that they should take the body of this good woman
out of her grave, into which she had been laid Anno 1552. and to consume the
same with fire, not doubting but she was of the same Religion which her husband
had professed before. But when the Commissioners came to execute that part of
their business, they could find no witness to depose any thing for certain
touching her Religion, such as were brought before them agreeing generally in
this answer, That they did not understand her Language, and therefore could not
tell of what Religion she was. It was therefore signified to the Cardinal, that
for want of legal evidence against her, they could not lawfully proceed in
burning her body, as they had done the bodies of Bucer and Fagius, against whom
there was evidence enough to be found in their writings, be^ides that which was
given in from the mouthe^ of Witnesses. The Cardinal thereupon gives order to
Doctor Marshal Dean of Christ-Church, to take up her body (which had been
buried near to that of St. Frideswide) and to lay it out of Christian burial;
who very readily obeyed, took up the bones of that virtuous woman; and most
profanely buried them in a common dunghill. But long they lay not in that
place, for Queen Elizabeth coming to the Crown within two years after; gave
order, that this body should be decently interred, as became the quality of her
person, and the reverence due unto her husband; as also that Bucer and ^agius
should in the other University be publicly restored to their former honors. In
obedience unto whose commands, the body of the one is taken out of the dunghill,
and laid into the grave of St. Frideswide, their bones so intermingled with one
another, that there could be no fear of offering the like inhumanity to them
for the time to come. And that the like honor might be done to Bucer and
^agius, a solemn commemoration of them was held at Cambridge, the Sermon
preached by Mr. James Pilkington, who not long after was preferred to the Sea
of Durham; the Panegyric made by Ackworth Orator of that University, who
spared no part of a good Orator, in setting forth their due praises, and
deserved commendations.

But we must now look back again on the Reign of Queen Mary, in which we find
little more to do than the magnificent reception of Osep Napea, Ambassador from
the great Duke of Muscovy, upon this occasion: The English Merchants at the
solicitation of Sebastian Cabot, had furnished out some ships for the
discovery of a North-East passage toward the rich Countries of Cathai and
China; in which they made so good a progress, that they attained as far as the
Port of St. Nicholas, one of the principal Port-towns of the Empire of Russia,
and laid the first foundation of a wealthy Trade with that mighty Empire. For
their encouragement therein, the Privileges of the Easterlings, commonly called
the Merchants of the Stilyard, (who before had managed all the Trade of the
North East parts) were seized on by King Edward the 6th. and the way thereby
laid open to the Merchant-Adventurers, to increase their shipping with their
wealth. For the continuance of which Trade betwixt the Nations, the Emperor
John Basiliwits sends his Ambassador above named, embarked in one of the
English ships, under the conduct and government of Richard Chancellor, the most
expert Pilot of that age. But so it happened, that the rest of the ships being
scattered by a strong tempest on the coast of Norway, the ship which carried
the Ambassador was wreckt upon the coast of Scotland* the lading for the most
part lost, amounting to twenty thousand pounds and upwards, besides many rich
presents sent from the Russian Emperor to the King and Queen. The Ambassador
with much ado was preserved from drowning, but the Pilot lost, who by laboring
to preserve the life of the other, neglected the best opportunity to save his
own. The news whereof being brought to the Merchants of London, (who by this
time were grown into a Company of 140.) they procured Letters from the King to
the Regent of Scotland; for the courteous entertainment of the said Ambassador,
and the restoring of such goods as had escaped the wreck: and having furnished
him with money and all other necessaries, caused him to be conducted toward the
Court.

Taking his leave of Scotland on the 14th. of February, he is brought by easy
journeys within twelve miles of London, honorably entertained in all places as
he past along, and there received by four-score of the Russian Merchants in
their chains of gold, Furnished with Gold, Velvet, Silk, and all other things,
he is by the whole Company of the Russian Merchants magnificently brought into
London on the last of that month; met on the way by the Lord Viscount
Montacute, attended with a gallant train of three hundred Horse, at the Queens
command, and received at Smithfield-bars by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen in
their scarlet Robes. Conducted to his lodgings in F^^-Church street, he was
there presented in the Queens name, with a piece of clo^th of Tissue, two
pieces of cloth of gold, one whereof was raised with Crimson Velvet, with many
other pieces of the like rich making, which very thankfully he received.
Abiding at his lodging till the Kings coming back from Flander^, which was not
till the 21 of March, he was brought upon out Lady day by water to the Court at
Westminster; received at his landing by six Lords, he was by them brought into
a chamber, where he found the Lords Chancellor, Treasurer, Privy Seal, Admiral,
Bishop of Ely, and other Counselors. Who having exchanged salutations with him
attended him to the King and Queen, sitting under a rich Canopy or cloth of
State in the great Hall there. Having presented his Letters of Credence,
expressed himself unto their Majesty's in a short Oration, which was interpreted
to them both in English and Spanish, and presented them with two timber of
Sables, 1557.
which with much diligence had been recovered out of the wreck, he was by them
remitted to his lodging with the like solemnity. Attended shortly after by the
Bishop of Ely, and Mr Secretary Peter; who after much Communication, and
several Treaties, settled at last a friendly intercourse and commerce betwixt
the Nations; the Articles whereof engrossed in parchment, were afterward
presented to him, ra^ified and confirmed by the Great Seal of England. On the
23d. of April he was brought again into the Court, where having seen the Pomps
and Orders of St George's Feast, the Service of the Royal Chapel, and the
magnificent Procession of the Knights of the Garter, he takes his leave of the
King and Queen, is re-conveyed unto his lodging, and on the 3d. of May embarks
for Russi^, accompanied with four good ships well frought with Merchandise most
proper for the trade of that Country to which they were bound. The costly
presents sent by him from the King and Queen to the Russian Emperor, and those
bestowed upon himself, I leave to be reported by him at his coming home, and
the relation of John Stow in his Annals of England, fol. 630* Nor had I dwelt
so long upon these particulars, but to set forth the ancient splendour and
magnificence of the State of England, from which we have so miserably departed
in these latter times.

Worse entertainment found an agent from the French King at his coming hither,
because he came on a worse errand. Stafford an English Gentleman of a Noble
Family, having engaged himself in some of the former enterprises against this
Queen, and finding no good fortune in them, retired with diverse others to the
Court of France; from whence they endeavored many times, to create some
dangers to this Realm, by scattering and dispersing diverse scandalous
Pamphlets, and seditious papers, tending to the apparent defamation of the King
and Queen. And having got some credit by these practices amongst the Ministers
of that King* he undertakes to seize upon some Fortress or Port Town of
England, and put the same into the hands of the French. In prosecution of which
plot, accompanied with some English Rebels, and diverse French Adventurers
intermingled with them, he seizes on the strong Castle of Scurborough, in the
Co^nty of York. From thence he published ^ most traitorous and seditious
Manifest, in which he traitorously affirmed the Queen, neither to be the
Rightful Queen of this Realm, nor to be worthy of the Title, affirming that the
King had brought into this Realm the number of twelve thousand Spaniards, who
had possessed themselves of twelve of the best Holds in all the Kingdom;
upbraiding the Queen with her misgovernment, and taking to himself the Title of
Protector of the Realm, of England. But the Queen being secretly advertised of
the whole design, by the diligence of Dr Nicholas Wotton, Dean of Canterbury,
who was then Ambassador in that Court, Order was taken with the Earl of
Westmorland, and other Noble men of those parts, to watch the Coasts, and have
a care unto the safety of those Northern Provinces, By whom he was so closely
watched, and so well attended, that having put himself into that Castle on the
24th, he was pulled out of it again on the last of April; from thence brought
prisoner unto London, condemned of Treason, executed on the Tower Hill, May 28.
and on the morrow after three of his accomplices were hanged at Tyburn, cut
down and quartered.

But as it was an ill wind which blows no body good, so this French Treason,
so destructive to the chief conspiratours, redounded to the great benefit and
advantage of Philip. He had for three years borne the Title of King of England,
without reaping any profit and commodity by it. But being now engaged in war
with King Henry the 3d. though in pursuit rather of his fathers quarrels, than
any new ones of his own, he takes this opportunity to move the Queen to declare
her self against the French, and to assist him in his war against that King,
for the good of her Kingdoms. It was not possible for the Queen to separate her
interest from that of her husband, without hazarding some great unkindness, if
not a manifest breach between them. She therefore yields to his desire, and by
her Proclamation of the 7th. of June, charge that King in having an hand not
only in the secret practices of the Duke of Northumberland, but also in the
open rebellion of What, and his confederates. She also laid unto his charge,
that Dudley Ashton, and some other male contents of England, were entertained
in the house of his Ambassadors, where they cotrived many treasons and
conspira^ies against her and her Kingdom; that flying into France, they were
not only entertained in the Court of that King, but relieved with pensions.
Finally, that he had aided and encouraged Stafford with shipping, men, money,
and munition, to invade her Realm, thereby if it were possible, to dispossess
her of her Crown. She therefore gives notice to her subjects, that they should
forbear all traffic and commerce with the Realm of France: from which she had
received so many injuries, as could admit no reparation but by open war. And
that she might not seem to threaten what she never intended, she causes an
army to be raised consisting of one thousand horse, four thousand foot, and two
thousand pioners, which she puts under the command of the Earl of Pembrook, and
so dispatcheth them for Flanders, to which they came about the middle of July.
King Philip had gone before on the 6th. of that month, and all things here were
followed with such care and diligence, that the army staid not long behind; but
what they did, falls not within the compass of this present year.

All which remains to be remembered in this present year, relates unto such
changes and alterations, as were made amongst the Governors of the Church, and
the Peers of the Realm. It has been signified before, that White of Lincoln
had prevailed by his friends in Court, to be translated unto Winchester, as the
place of his Nativity and Education. To whom succeeded Dr Thomas Watson, Master
of St John's College in Cambridge, and Dean of Durham, elected to the Sea of
Lincoln, before Christmas last, and acting by that name, and in that capacity,
against the dead body of Martin Bucer. To Day of Chichester, who deceased on
the 2d. of Aug. in the beginning of his year, succeeded Dr John Christopherson,
a right learned man, Mr of Trinity College in Cambridge, and Dean of Norwich,
elected about the same time when the other was, and acting as he did against
Bucer and Fagius, as also did Dr Cuthbert Scot, who at that time was actually
invested in the Sea of Chester, upon the death of Dr ^oats, the preceding
Bishop. And finally, in the place of Aldrick Bishop of Carlisle, who died on
the 5th. of March, 1555. Dr Owen Oglethorp, President of Magdalen College in
Oxon, and Dean of Windsor, receives Consecration to that See, in that first
part of this year; but the particular day and time thereof I have no where
found. Within the compass of this year (that is to say the 4th. year of the
Reign of this Queen) died two other Bishops, Salcot or Capon Bishop of
Salisbury, and Chambers the first Bishop of Peterborough; to the first of which
there was no successor actually consecrated or confirmed, for the reasons to be
showed anon in the Reign of this Queen. But to the other, succeeded Dr David
Pool, Dr of both laws, Dean of the Arches, Chancellor to the Bishop of
Lichfield, and Archdeacon of Derby, elected before the end of this year, but
not consecrated till the 15th of August, An. Reg. Mar. 5. 1557.
in the beginning of the next.

Some alterations happened also amongst the Peers of the Realm, in the creation
of one, and the destruction of another. A Rebellion had been raised in the
Nor^h upon the first suppression of Religious Houses, Anno 1536. in which Sir ^
homas Percy second so^ to Henry the fifth Earl of Northumberland of that name
and family, was thought to be a principal stickler, and for the same was
publicly arraigned, condemned, and executed. By Eleanar his wife, one of the
daughters and heirs of Sir G^iscard Har^^o^tle, he was the father of Tho^as and
Henry, who hitherto had suffered under his Attaindure: But now it pleased Queen
Mary to reflect on their Fathers sufferings, and the cause thereof, which moved
her not only to restore them to their blood and honors, but also to so much of
the Lands of the Percies as were remaining in the Crown. In pursuance whereof,
she advanced Thomas the elder brother, on the last of April, to the Style,
Title, and Degree of Earl of No^thumberland, the remainder to his brother
Henry, in case the said Thomas should depart this life without Issue male. By
virtue of which Entail, the said Henry afterward succeeded him in his Lands
and Honors, notwithstanding that he was attainted, condemned, and executed for
high Treason in the time of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1572.

Not many weeks before the restitution of which noble Family, that of the Lord
Sturton was in no small danger of a final destruction, a Family first advanced
to the state of a Baron in the person of Sir John Sturton, created Lord Sturton
in the 26th. of King Henry the 6th. and now upon the point of expiring in the
person of Charles Lord Sturton, condemned and executed with four of his servants
on the 6th. of March, for the murder of one Argal and his son, with whom he had
been long at variance. It was his first hope that the murder might not be
discovered, and for that cause had buried the dead bodies fifteen foot under
ground; his second, that by reason of his zeal to the Popish Religion it might
be no hard matter to procure a pardon. But the Murder was too foul to be
capable of any such favor, so that he was not only adjudged to die, but
condemned to be hanged. It is reported of Marcus Antonius, A^^anasdem Arm^niae
Regem, fraud deceptum, Catenis, sed ne quid honori d^^ss^t, auraeis vicit
Anto^ius.
that having vanquished Artanasdes King of Armenia, he led him bound in chains
to Rome; but for his greater honor, and to distinguish him from the rest of the
prisoners, in chains of gold: And such an honor was vouchsafed to this noble
Murderer, in not being hanged as his servants and accomplices were, in a halter
of hemp but in one of silk. And with this fact the Family might have expired,
if the Queen, having satisfied Justice by his execution, had not consulted with
her mercy for the restoring of his next Heir both in blood and honor. Vell.
Paterc.


An. Reg. Mar. 5o An. Dom. 1557, 1558.
WE must begin this year with the success of those forces which were sent under
the command of the Earl of Pembrock, to the aid of Philip; who having made up
an Army of 35 thousand Foot, and 12 thousand Horse, besides the Forces out of
England, sat down before St. Quintin the chief Town of Piccardy, called by the
Romans, Augusta Veromandnorum, and took this new name from St. Quintin the
supposed tutelaty Saint and Patron of it; a Town of principal importance to his
future aims, as being one of the Keys of France on that side of the Kingdom,
and opening a fair way even to Paris it self. For the raising of which Siege,
the French King sends a puissant Army under the command of the Duke of
Montmorancy, then Lord High Constable of France, accompanied with the Flower of
the French Nobility. On the 10th. day of August the Battles joy^, in which the
French were vanquished, and their Army routed; the Constable himself, the
Prince of Mantua, the Dukes of Montpensier and Long^aville, with fix others of
the prime Nobility, and many others of less note, being taken prisoners: The
Duke of (...), the Viscount Turin, four persons of honorable rank, most of the
Foor Captains, and of the common Soldiers to the number of 2500 slain upon the
place. The news whereof struck such a terror in King Henry the 2d. that he was
upon the point of for saking Paru, and retiring into Lang^edock, or some other
remote part of his Dominions; In the suddenness of which surprise, he dispatched
his Curriers for recalling the Duke of Guise out of I^aly, whom he had sent
thither at the Popes in^^igation with a right puissant Army for the Conquest of
Naples. But Philip knowing better how to enjoy than to use his victory,
continued his Siege before St. Quintin, which he stormed on the 18th. of that
month, the Lord Henry Dudley one of the younger sons of the Duke of Northu^b^r
land (who lost his life in the Assault) together with Sir Edward Windsor, being
the first that scaled the walls, and advanced their victorious Colors on the
top thereof. After which gallant piece of service, the English finding some
neglect at the hands of Philip, humbly desire to be dismissed into their Country,
which for fear of some fu^^her inconvenience was indulged unto them. By which
dismission of the English (as Thuan^s and others have observed) King Philip was
not able with all his Spaniards to perform any action of importance in the rest
of the War.

But the English shall pay dearly for this Victory, which the Spaniard bought
with no greater loss than the lives of 50 of his men. The English at that time
were possessed of the Town of Calais, with many other pieces and ^orts about,
as Guisuesse, Fanim, Ardres, etc. together with the whole Territory called the
County Oye, the Town by Caesar called Portus Iccius, situate on the mouth or
entrance of the English Chanel, opposite to Dover, one of the five principal
Havens in those parts of England, from which distant not above twenty five
miles, a Town much aimed at for that reason by King Edward this 3d. who after a
Siege of somewhat more than eleven months, became Master of it, Anno 1347. by
whom first made a Colonie of the English Nation, and after one of the Staple
Towns for the sale of Wool. Kept with great care by his Successors, who as long
as they had it in their possession, were said to ca^ry the Keys of France at
their girdle; esteemed by Philip de Comin^^ for the goodliest Captainship in
the world, and therefore trusted unto none but persons of most eminent rank
both for courage and honor. A Town which for more than 200 years had been such
an eyesore to the French, and such a thorn in their sides, that Monsieur de
Cords, a Nobleman who lived in the Reign of King Lewis the 11th. was wont to
say, that he could be content to lie seven years in hell, upon condition that
this Town were regained from the English. But the French shall have it now at
an easier rate; The Queen had broke the Peace with France, and sent a
considerable Body of Forces to the aid of Philip, but took no care to fortify
and make good this place, as if the same Garrison which had kept it in a time
of peace, had been sufficient to maintain it also in a time of war.

For so it happened, that Francis of Lorain Duke of Guise, one of the best
Soldiers of that age, being called back with all his forces from the war of
I^aly, and not well pleased with the loss of that opportunity which seemed to
have been offered to him for the conquest of Naples, resolved of doing somewhat
answerable unto expectation, as well for his own honor as the good of his
Country. He had long fixed his eyes on Calais, and was informed by Senarpont
Governor of Bolloigne, and by consequence a near neighbor to it, that the Town
was neither so well fortified, nor so strongly garrisoned, but that it might be
taken without any great difficulty. For confirmation whereof, Monsieur, a'
Strozzie one of the Marshals of France, under the favor of a disguise, takes a
view of the place, and heartneth on the Duke with the feasibility of the
undertaking. Philip, who either had intelligence of the French designs, or
otherwise rationally supposing what was like to follow in the course of War,
had often advised the Queen to have a care of that Piece, and freely offered
his assistance for de^ence thereof. But the English over wisely jealous left
Philip had a practice on (...) it lying commodiously for his adjoining
Neatherlands, neglected both (...) advice and proffer. Nay, so extremely
careless were the Council of England in looking to the preservation and defense
of this place, that when the Duke sat down before it, there was not above 500
Soldiers, and but two hundred fighting men amongst the Townsmen, 1557/8
although the whole number of Inhabitants amounted to 4200 persons. On New
years day the Duke of Guise sat down before it, and on Twelfth-day, had it
surrendered up unto him by the Lord Deputy Wentworth, who had the chief command
and government of it. The noise of the thundering Canon heard as far as Antwerp,
could not but rouse the drousie English to bethink themselves of some relief to
be sent to Calais, and they accordingly provided both ships and men to perform
that service. But the winds were all the while so strong and so cross against
them, that before the English ships could get out of their Havens, the French
were Masters of the Town. Some greater difficulty found the Duke in the taking
of the Castle of Guisnesse, where the Lord Gray, a valiant and expert Soldier,
had the chief command. But at length the Accessories followed the same fortune
with the Principal, both Guisnesse and Hanine, and all the other Pieces in the
County of Oye, being reduced under the power of the French within few days
after.

There now remained nothing to the Crown of England of all its ancient Rights
in France, but the Islands of Gernsey, Jersey, Sark, and Aldernay, all lying on
the coast of Normandy, of which Dukedom heretofore accounted members. Held by
the English ever since the time of the Norman Conquest, they have been many
times attempted by the French, but without success; never so much in danger of
being lost as they were at this present. Some of the French had well observed,
that the Island of Sark (an Island of six miles in compass) enjoined the
benefit of a safe and commodious Haven, but without any to defend it but a few
poor Hermites, whom the privacy and solitariness of the place had invited
thither. The Island round begirt with Rocks, lying aloft above the Sea, and
having only one straight passage or ascent unto it, scarce capable of two
abreast. Of this Island the French easily possessed themsevles, dislodged the
Hermites, fortify the upper part of the Ascent with some pieces of Ordnance,
and settle a small Garrison in it to defend the Haven. But long they had not
nested there, when by a Gentleman of the Neatherlands, one of the subjects of
King Philip, it was thus regained: The Flemmish Gentleman with a small Bark
came to Anchor in the Road, and pretending the death of his Merchant, besought
the French that they might bury him in the Chapel of that Island, offering a
present to them of such Commodities as they had aboard. To this request the
French were easily entreated, upon condition, that they should not come to
shore with any weapen, no not so much as a Penknife. This leave obtained, the
Flemming rowed unto the shore with a Coffin in their skiff for that us
purposely provided, and manned with Swords and Arcubusses. Upon their landing,
and a search so strict and narrow, that it was impossible to hide a Pen-kife,
they were permitted to draw their Coffin up the Rocks, some of the French
rowing back unto the ship to fetch the Present, where they were soon made fast
enough and laid in hold. The Flemmings in the mean time which were on the land
had carried their Coffin into the Chapel, and having taken thence their weapons
gave an Alarm unto the French, who taken thus upon the sudden, and seeing no
hopes of succor from their fellows, yielded themselves, and abandoned the
possession of that place. A Stratagem to be equalled, Quod vetera extollimus,
venientium incuriosi.
if not preferred, unto any of the Ancients, either Greeks or Romans, did not
that fatal folly, reprehended once by Tacitus, still reign amongst us, that we
extol the former days, and contemn the present.

The loss of this Island gave a new Alarm to the Council of England, who
thereupon resolved to set out a right puissant Navy, 1558.
as well for the securing of the rest of the Islands, as to make some
impression on the Main of France. It was not till the month of April that they
entered into consultation about this business, and so exceeding tedious were
they in their preparations, that the month of July was well spent before they
were ready to weigh Anthor. During which time the French h^d notice of their
purpose, and understanding that they had an aim on Breast in Bre^agn, they took
more care in fortifying it against the English, than the English did for Calais
against the French. It was about the middle of July that the Lord Admiral
Clynton set sail for France, with a Fleet of one hundred and forty ships,
whereof thirty (...). Finding no hopes of doing any good on Breast, bends his
course for Conqu^^, an open Sea-town of that Province; at this place he lands
his men, takes and sacks the Town, burns it together with the Abbey, and having
wasted all the Country round about, returned with safety to his ships. But the
Flemish somewhat more greedy on the spoil, and negligent in observing Martial
Discipline, are valiantly encountered by a Nobleman of that Country, and sent
back fewer by five hundred than they came on shore. This was the sum of what
the English did this year, in order to the recovery of the honor which they
lost at Calais; and possibly they might think they had done enough in the spoil
of Bre^agn, to satisfy for the loss of a Town in Piccardy; whereas in truth,
the waste which they had made in Bre^agn might be compared to the cutting off a
man's hair, which will grow again; the loss of Calais to the dismembring of an
arm or leg, never to be again united to the rest of the body.

Either by reason of these wars, or that men were not then so prompt to Suits
in Law, the Lawyers found but little work in Westminster Hall, insomuch that at
the King's Bench (...) there attended but one man of Law called Foster, and but
one Sergeant only called Bouloise of the Common Pleas, both having little more
to do than to look about them, and the Judges not much more to do than the
Lawyers had; but certainly, that great leisure which the Lawyers found for
doing nothing, proceeded rather from the noise of the wars, in which the voice
of the Law cannot easily be heard, than from the quietness and disposition of
the times, in which the number both of Suits and Pleaders had been much
increased, as may be gathered from the words of Heiwood the old Epigrammatist,
and one much made of by the Queen, who being told of the great number of
Lawyers, and that the number of them would impoverish the whole Profession,
made answer, No, for that always the more Spaniels there were in the field, the
more was the game. Not so much elbow-room in the Hall, though possibly not much
more business for them in the Term next following, by reason of the Parliament
which began on the 20th. of January, and held on till the seventh of March, in
which I find no Act which concerned Religion, no^ any thing which had relation
to the Clergy; more than the confirmation of their Grant of Subsidies. It was a
military time, and the Acts had something in them of that temper also, that is
to say, an Act, proportioning what number of Horse, Arms, and Weapons every man
should be charged withal in his several station, cap. 2. an Act for the due
taking and observing of Musters, cap. 3. that Accessaries in Murder, and such
as were found guilty of diverse Felonies, should not have their Clergy, cap. 4.
for the quiet behavior of such Frenchmen as had purchased the privilege of
being Denizens, cap. 6. and finally, for granting a Subsidy and Fifteen by the
Temporality toward the defense of the Realm, and carrying on the War against
those of France, Nothing else memorable in this Session, but that Fecknam the
new Abbot of Westminster, and Tresham the new Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem,
took place amongst the Lords in the House of Peers.

At the Convocation then holden for the Province of Canterbury, Harpsfield
Archdeacon of London, is chosen and admitted Prolocutor for the House of the
Clergy. Which done, the Cardinal-Archbishop offers it to the confideration of
the Bishops and Clergy, that some course might be thought upon for the recovery
of Calais, then lately taken by the French. Which whether it were done to spur
on the Parliament, or to show their good affections to the public service, is
not much material, considering that I find nothing acted in pursuance of it. As
little was there done in order to another of his propositions, touching the
revieuing and accommodating of the Statutes of the new foundations, though a
reference thereof was made to the Bishops of Lincoln, Chester, and
Peterborough, together with the Deans of Can^erbury, Worcester, and Winchester.
Some desires also were agreed on to be presented to the Prelate Cardinal, in
the name of the Clergy, as namely* 1. That request may be made to the Queens
Majesty, That no Parson, Vicar or Curate, be pressed by any Captain to go to
the wars. 2. That where two Benefices being contiguous, are so small that they
are not able to find a Priest, the Bishop of the Diocese may give them in
commendam to some one man to serve them altern^s vicibus. 3. That the
Pa^ishioners which have Chapels of ease, and yet want Priests to serve the
Cure, may be compelled to come to the Parish Churches, until some Curate may be
gotten to serve the same. And 4. That every Bishop may be authorized by the
Pope to give Orders extra tempora praescripta, that is to say, as well at any
other times, as on the Sundays after the four Ember weeks. And finally taking
into consideration the great necessities of the State, and preparation of the
enemies, they granted first unto the Queen, a Subsidy of eight shillings in the
pound, to be paid in four years, beginning after the last payment of the former
grant; and because the Laity at that time had charged themselves with horse and
armor for defense of the Realm; the Clergy also did the like according to
their several Orders and abilities. For the imposing whereof upon the rest of
the Clergy, they had no recourse at all unto the Midwifry of an Act of
Parliament, but acted the whole business in their own Synodical way, without
contradiction.

But the main business of this year, in reference to the concernments of holy
Church related to the Ca^dinal Legate; against whom the Pope had borne an
inveterate grudge, sharpened by the suggestions of Bishop Gardener, as before
was signified. Being of himself a rigorous man, and one that was extremely
wedded to his own opinion, he had so passionately espoused the quarrel of the
French against the Spaniard, that he intended to divest Philip of the Realm of
Naples, and to confer it on the French. For this cause Francis Duke of Guise
with a puissant army is drawn into Italy for the subduing of that Kingdom, but
suddenly recalled again, upon the routing of the French before St Quintin,
wherein the English forces had appeared so serviceable. Which gave the Pope so
much displeasure, that he resolved to let his greatest enemies feel the dint of
his spirit. But not daring upon second thoughts to fall foul with the Queen, he
turned his fury against Pole, by whose persuasion it was thought that the Queen
had broke her league with France to take part with her husband. In which humor
he deprives him of the Legantin^ power, confers the same on Friar Peitow an
English man by birth, but of good descent, whom he designs also to the Sea of
Salisbury, then vacant by the death of Capo^. Karn the Queens Agent with the
Pope, advertiseth her Majesty of these secret practices, which the Queen
concealing from the Cardinal, endeavors by all fair and gentle means to
mitigate the Pope's displeasure, and confirm the Cardinal in the place and
power which he then enjoyed. But the Pope not a man to be easily altered, Pole
in the mean time understanding how things went at Rome, laid by the Cross of
his Legation, and prudently abstaineth from the exercise of his Bulls and
Faculties. Peitow the new Cardinal Legate, puts himself on the way to England,
when the Queen taking to her self some part of her fathers spirit, commands him
at his utmost peril, not to adventure to set foot upon English ground; to which
he readily inclined, as being more affected unto Cardinal Pole, than desirous
to show himself the servant of another man's passion. In the end, partly by the
Queens mediation, the intercession of Ormaenete, the good successes of the
French in the taking of Calais, but principally by the death of Peitow in the
April following, the rupture was made up again, and Pole confirmed in the
possession of his former powers.

The fear of running the like hazard for the time to come, made him appear more
willing to connive at his under Officers, in shedding the blood of many godly
and religious persons, than otherwise he would have been. Whereupon followed
the burning of ten men in the Diocese of Canterbury, on the 15th of January,
whereof two suffered at Ashford, two at Ri^, and the other six in his own
Metropolitan City; and possibly the better to prepare the Pope toward this
Atonement, the Queen was moved to issue her Commission of the month of
February, directed to the Bishop of Ely, the Lords, Windsor, North, and
seventeen others, by which the said Commissioners, or any th^e^, or more of
them, were empowered to enquire of all and singular Heretical opinions,
Lollardies, Heretical and seditious books, conceal^ents, contempts,
conspiracies, and all false tales, rumors, seditious or slanderous words, etc.
As also seize into their hands all manner of Heretical and seditious Books,
Letters and Writings, wheresoever they, or any of them should be found, as well
in Printers houses, and shops, as elsewhere, willing them, and every of them,
to search for the same in all places according to their discretions. And
finally to enquire after ^ll such persons as obstinately do refuse to receive
the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, to hear Mass, or come to their Parish
Churches, and all such as refuse to go on Procession, to take holy bread, or
holy water, or otherwise misuse themselves in any Church or hallowed place,
etc. The party so offending to be proceeded against according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, or otherwise by fine or imprisonment, as to them seemed
best.

But the Commissioners being many in number, persons of honor and employment
for the most part of them, there was little or nothing done in pursuance of it,
especially as to the searching after prohibited books; the number whereof
increasing every day more and more, a Proclamation was set forth on the 6th. of
June, to hinder the continual spreading of so great a mischief. Which
Proclamation was as follows, viz. Whereas diverse books filled with Hersie,
Sedition, and Treason, have of late been daily brought into this Realm out of
foreign Countries and places beyond the seas, and some covertly printed within
this Realm, and cast abroad in sundry parts thereof; whereby not only god is
dishonored, but also encouragement given to disobey lawful Princes and
Governors; the King and Queens Majesty's for redress hereof, do by their
present Proclamation, declare and publish to all their subjects, that whosoever
shall after the Proclamation hereof, be found to have any of the said wicked
and seditious books, or finding them, do not forthwith burn the same, without
showing or reading the same to any other persons, shall in that case be reputed
and taken for a rebel, and shall without further delay be executed for that
offense, according to the order of Martial Law. Which Proclamation though it
were very smart and quick, yet there was somewhat of more mercy in it, than in
another which came out in the very same month, at the burning of seven persons
in Smithfield, published both at Newgate, where they were imprisoned, and at
the stake where they were to suffer; whereby it was straightly charged and
commanded, That no man should either pray for, or speak to them, or once say
God help them. A cruelty more odious than that of Domitian, or any of the
greatest Tyrants of the elder times, in hindering all intercourse of speech,
upon some jealousy and distrusts of State between man and man.

Which Proclamation notwithstanding, Bentham the Minister of one of the London
Congregations, seeing the fire set to them, turning his eyes unto the people,
cried and said, We know they are the people of God, and therefore we cannot
choose but wish well to them, and say God strengthen them; and so boldly he
said, Almighty God for Christ's sake strengthen them. With that all the people
with one consent cried Amen, Amen, the noise whereof was so great, and the
cryers so many, that the Officers knew not whom to seize o^, or with whom they
were to begin their accusation. And though peradv^nture it may seem to have
somewhat of a miracle in it, An. Reg. Mar. 5. 155.
that the Protestants should have a Congregation under Bonner's nose; yet so it
was, that the godly people of that time were so little terrified with the
continual thoughts of that bloody Butcher, that they maintained their constant
meetings for religious offices, even in London it self; in one of which
Congregations, that namely whereof Bentham was at this time Minister, there
assembled seldom under 40. many times 100. and sometimes 200. but more or less
as it stood most with their convenience and safety. The Ministers of which
successively were Mr Edward Scambler, after Bishop of Peterborough, Mr Thomas
Foul, of whom I find nothing but the name, Mr John Rough, a Scot by Nation,
convented and condemned by Bonner, and suffering for the testimony of a good
conscience, December 20. After whom followed Mr Augustine Bernher, a moderate
and learned man; And finally, Mr Thomas Bentham before mentioned, who continued
in that charge till the death of Queen Mary, and was by Queen Elizabeth
preferred to the Sea of Lichfield, Anno 1589. By the encouragement and constant
preaching of which pious men, the Protestant party did not only stand to their
former principle, but were resolved to suffer whatsoever could be laid upon
them, rather than forfeit a good conscience, or betray the cause. They had not
all the opportunity of such holy meetings, but they me^ frequently enough in
smaller companies, to animate and comfort one another in those great
extremities.

Nor sped the Queen much better in her Proclamation of the sixth of June,
concerning the suppression of prohibited Books; but notwithstanding all the
care of her Inquisitors, many good Books of true Christian Consolation and good
Protestant Doctrine, did either find some Press in London, or were sent over to
their brethren by such learned men as had retired themselves to their several
Sanctuaries, their places of Retreat, which not improperly may be called their
Cities of Refuge, which we have seen already; amongst which, I find none but
Embden in the Lutheran Countries, the rigid Professors of which Churches
abominated nothing more than an English Protestant, because they concurred not
with them in the monstrous Doctrine of Ubiquity, and their device of
Consubstantiation. Insomuch that In summo cum ess^ o^io, quod Anglos pro^^^^
hospitio susc^^^rat, etc. P. Mart. Epist. Ubi vocif^ra^tur quidam, Martyrs
Anglicos, esse Martyrs Diab^^^, In epist. october. 8.
Peter Martyr tells us of a friend of his in the Dukedom of Saxony, that he
was generally hated by the rest of Countrymen, for being hospitable to some
few of the English Nation, who had been forced to abandon their native soil.
And it is further signified by b Ph. Melancthon with no small dislike, in an
Epistle of this year, that many of those rigid Luthe^ans could find no other
name but the Devils Martyrs, for such as suffered death in England in defense
of Religion; so that they seemed to act the part of Diotrephes in St John, not
only prating against us with malicious words, and refusing to receive the
brethren in the day of their trouble, but forbidding and condemning them that
would. But John Alasco and his company had been lately there, where they spoke
so reprochfully of Luther, the Augustan Confession, the Rites and Ceremonies of
their Churches, as rendered them incapable of any better entertainment than they
found amongst them. And by the behavior of these men coming then from England,
the rigid Lutherans passed their judgment on the Church it self, and
consequently on all those who suffered in defense thereof. For stopping the
course of which uncharitable censures, it was thought fit by some of the
Divines in Embden, that Archbishop Cranmers book about the Sacrament* should be
translated into Latin, and forthwith published in Print, which was done
accordingly. Some of the Lutherans had given out on the former ground, that the
English had deservedly suffered the greatest hardships both at home and abroad,
because they writ and spoke less reverently of the blessed Sacrament; and it
was hoped that by the publishing of this book, they would find the contrary.
The like course taken also at Geneva by the English exiles, by publishing in
the Latin tongue, a discourse writ by Bishop Ridley on the self same Argument,
to the end it might appear unto all the world how much their brethren had been
wronged in these odious calumnies.

An. Reg. Mar. 6o An. Dom. 1558, 1559. An. Reg. Mar. 6. 1558.

BUt in the midst of all these sorrows, I see some hope of comfort coming by
the death of Queen Mary, whose Reign polluted with the blood of so many
Martyrs, unfortunate by the frequent insurrections, and made inglorious by the
loss of the Town of Calais, was only commendable in the brevity or shortness
of it. For now to bring it to an end, a dangerous and contagious Fever began
to rage in most parts of the land, insomuch that if the whole Realm had been
divided into four parts, three parts of the four would have been found infected
with it, so furiously it raged in the month of August, that no former plague or
pestilence was thought to have destroyed a greater number, so that diverse
places were left void of Justices and men of worth to govern the Kingdom. At
which time died also so many Priests, that a great number of Parish Churches in
diverse places were unserved, and no ^urats could be gotten for money: Much corn
was also lost in the field for want of laborers and workmen to get it in; both
which together seemed to threaten not only a spiritual but a temporal famine;
though God so ordered it, that by the death of so many of the present Clergy, a
door was opened for the preaching of sounder Doctrine, with far less envy and
displeasure from all sorts of people than it had been otherwise: Nor were the
heats of the disease abated by the coldness of the winter, or the malignity of
it mitigated by medicinal courses. It took away the Physicians as well as the
Patients, two of the Queens Doctors dying of it not long before her, and spared
not more the Prelate than it did the Priest, insomuch that within less than the
space of a twelvemonth, almost the one half of the English Bishops had made
void their Sees; which with the death of so many of the Priests in several
places, did much facilitate the way to that Reformation, which soon after
followed.

This terrible disease, together with the said effects which followed on it*
and the Queens death which came along with it, though not caused by it, may
seem to have been prognosticated or foretold by a dreadful tempest of thunder,
happening on the 11th. of July near the Town of Nottingham, which Tempest as it
came through two Towns, beat down all the Houses and Churches, the Bells were
cast to the outside of the Churchyard, and some sheets of Lead four hundred
foot into the field, wri^hen like a pair of gloves. The River of Trent running
between which two Towns, the water with the mud in the bottom was carried a
quarter of a mile and cast against the trees, the trees plucked up by the
roots, and from thence cast twelve-score paces; also a child was was taken
forth of a man's hand, and by the fury of it carried an hundred foot, two spears
length from the ground, and so fell down, broke its arm, and dyed. Five or six
men thereabouts were slain, and neither flesh nor skin perished; at what time
also there fell some Hailstones that were fifteen inches about, etc. But
neither that terrible disease, nor this terrible tempest, nor any other public
sign of God's displeasure, abated any thing of the fury of the Persecution,
till he was pleased to put an end unto it by the death of the Queen. It was
upon the tenth day of November that no fewer than five at once were burned at
Canterbury. The Cardinal and the Queen both lying on the bed of sickness, and
both dying within seven days after. It had been prayed or prophesied by those
five Martyrs when they were at the stake, that they might be the last who
should suffer death in that manner, or on that occasion; and by Gods mercy so
it proved, they being the last which suffered death under the severity of this
persecution.

Which Persecution, and the carriage of the Papists in it, is thus described by
Bishop Jewel, You have (says he) imprisoned your brethren, you have stripped
them naked, you have scourged them with rods, you have burnt their hands and
arms with flaming torches, you have famished them, you have drowned them, you
have summoned them being dead to appear before you out of their graves, you
have ripped up their buried carcases, burnt them, and thrown them out upon the
Du^ghil, you took a poor Babe falling from its mothers womb, and in most cruel
and barbarous manner threw it in^o the fire. By all which several ways and
means, the Martyrs in all parts of the Kingdom amounted to the number of two
hundred seventy seven persons of all sorts and sexes; But more particularly
there are said to have perished in these flames five Bishops, twenty one
Divines, eight Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, one hundred Husbandmen
Servants and Laborers, twenty six Wives, twenty Widows, nine Virgins, two
Boys, and two Infants; the one springing out of his mothers womb as she was at
the stake, and most unmercifully flung into the fire in the very birth. Sixty
four more in those furious times were presented for their faith, whereof seven
were whipped, sixteen perished in prison, twelve buried in Dunghills, and many
more lay in captivity condemned, which were delivered by the opportune death of
Queen Mary, and the most auspicious entrance of Queen Elizabeth, whose gracious
government blotted out the remembrance of all former sufferings; the different
conditions of whose Reigns, with the former two, may seem to have somewhat in
them of those appearances which were presented to Elijah in the Book of Kings,
in the first B^ok and ninteenth Chapter, wherein we find it written, That a
great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before
the Lord, but the Lord was not in the wind; and after the wind an earthquake,
but the Lord was not in the earthquake; and after the earthquake a fire, but
the Lord was not in the fire; and finally after the fire a still small voice,
in which the Lord spoke unto his Prophet: So in like manner it may be feared,
that God was neither in that great and terrible wind, which threw down so many
Monasteries and Religious houses in the Reign of King Henry; nor in that
Earthquake, which did so often shake the very foundations of the State in the
time of King Edward; nor in the Fire, in which so many godly and religious
persons were consumed to ashes in the days of Queen Mary; but that he showed
himself in that still small Voice, which breathed so much comfort to the souls
of his people, in the most gracious and fortunate Government of a Virgin-Queen.

For now it pleased God to hearken to the cry of those his Saints which lay
under the Altar, and called upon him for an end of those calamities, to which
their dear brethren were exposed. The Queen had inclined unto a D^opsie ever
since the time of her supposed being with child; which inclination appeared in
her more and more, when her swelling fell from the right place to her lower
parts, increasing irrecoverably in despite of Physic, till at last it brought
her to her death. But there are diverse other causes which are supposed to have
contributed their concurrence in it; Philip, upon the resignation of his
fathers Kingdoms and Estates, had many necessary occasions to be out of the
Kingdom, and yet she thought, that he made more occasions than he needed, to be
absent from her; This brought her first into a fancy that he cared not for her,
which drew her by degrees into a fixed and settled melancholy, confirmed, if
not increased, by a secret whisper, that Philip entertained some wandering Loves
when he was in Flanders. Her Glasses could not so much flatter as not to tell
her, that she had her fathers feitures with her mothers complexion; and she was
well enough able to inform her self, that the ^everity of her humor had no
great charms in it, so that on the point she wanted many of those natural and
acquired attractions, which might have served to invite or reward affection*
Fixed on this melancholy pin, the death of Charles the Emperor, which happened on
the 2^ of September, comes to help it forward; a Prince, upon whose countenance
and support she had much depended, both when she was in disgrace with her
father, and out of favor with her brother. But that which came nearest to her
heart was the loss of Calais, first lost for want of giving credit to the
intelligence which had been sent her by her Husband; and secondly by the loss
of that opportunity which might have been taken to regain it. Monsieur ^'
Terms who was made Governor of the Town, had drained it of the greatest part
of the Garrison to join with some other forces, for the taking of some Towns in
Flander^; But in a Battle fought near Graveling on the 13th. of July, he lost
not only his own liberty, but more then five thousand of his men; the fortune
of the day falling so heavily on the Soldiers of Calais, that few of them
escaped with life* So that if the Queens Navy, which had done great service in
the fight, had showed it self before the Town, and Count Egmond who commanded
the Flemmings had sat down with his victorious Army to the Landward of it, it
might have been recovered in as few days as it had been lost.

This opportunity being neglected, she gave her self some hopes of a
restitution upon an agreement then in treaty between France and Spain. But when
all other matters were accorded between those Crowns, and that nothing else was
wanting to compose all differences but the restoring of this Town, the French
were absolutely resolved to hold it, and the Spaniards could in honor make no
Peace without it. So the whole Treaty, and the deceiptful hopes which she built
upon it, came at last to nothing. And though she had somewhat eased her self
not long before, by attainting the Lord W^ntworth and certain others, for their
cowardly quitting of the place, which they could not hold; yet that served
only like a cup of Strong Water for the present qualm, without removing the
just cause of the present distemper. And it increased so plainly in her, that
when some of her Visitants, not knowing the cause of her discomforts, applied
their several cordials to revive her spirits, she told them in plain terms,
that they were mistaken in the nature of her disease; and that if she were to
be dissected after her death, they would find Calais next her heart. Thus
between jealousy, shame, and sorrow, taking the growth of her infirmity
amongst the rest, she became past the help of Physic. In which extremity she
began to entertain some thoughts of putting here sister Elizabeth beside the
Crown, and settling the Succession of it on her cosen the Queen of Scots; and
she had done it, (at the least as much as in her was) if some of the Council
had not told her, That neither the Act of the Succession, nor the Last Will and
Testament of King Henry the Eighth which was built upon it, could otherwise be
repealed, than by the general consent of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament. So that being altogether out of hope of having her will upon her
sister, of recovering Calais, of enjoying the company of her husband, and
reigning in the good affection of her injured subjects; she gave her self over
to those sorrows which put an end to her life on the 17th. of November, some
few hours before day, when she had reigned five years and four months wanting
two days only. Her death accompanied within few hours after by that of the
Lord Cardinal-Legat, ushered in by the decease of Purefew, alias Wharton,
Bishop of Hereford, and Holyman the new Bishop of Bristow, and Glyn of Bangor,
and followed within two or three months after by Hopton Bishop of Norwich, and
Brooks of Gloucester: As if it had been necessary in point of State, that so
great a Princess should not die without some of her Bishops going before, and
some coming after. Her funeral solemnized at Westminster with a Mass of
Req^iem, in the wonted form, on the 13th. of December then next following, and
her body interred on the North side of the Chapel of King Henry the seventh,
her beloved Grandfather.

I shall not trouble my self with giving any other character of this Queen,
than what may be gathered from her story, much less in descanting on that which
is made by others, who have heaped upon her many gracious praiseworthy
qualities of which, whether she were Mistress or not, I dispute not now. She
was indeed a great Benefactresse to the Clergy, in releasing them of their
Tenths and First Fruits; but she lost nothing by the bargain, the Clergy paid
her back again in their Bills of Subsidies, which growing into an annual
payment for seven years together, and every Subsidy amounting to a double
Tenth, conduced as visibly to the constant fill^ng of the Exchequer, as the
payment of the Tenths and First Fruits had done before. That which went clearly
out of her purse without retribution, was the re-edifying and endowment of some
few Religious Houses, mentioned in their proper place; she also built the
public Schools in the University of Oxon, for which commemorated in the list
of their Benefactors; which being decayed in tract of time, and of no beautiful
structure when they were at the best, were taken down about the year 1612. in
place whereof, but on a larger extent of ground, was raised that goodly and
magnificent Fabric which we now behold. And though she had no followers in her
first foundations, yet by the last she gave encouragement to two worthy
Gentlement to add two new Colleges in Oxon to the former number. Sir ^homas
Pope, one of the Visitors of Abeys and other Religious Houses in the time of
King Henry, had got into his hands a small College in Oxon, long before founded
by the Bishop and Prior of Durham, to serve for a Nursery of Novices to that
greater Monastery; with some of the Lands thereunto belonging, and some others
of his own, he erected it into a new Foundation, consisting of a President,
twelve Fellows, and as many Scholars, and called it by the name of Trinity
College; A College sufficiently famous for the education of the learned and
renowned Seldom, who needs no other T^tles of honor than what may be gathered
from his Books, and the giving of eight thousand Volumes of all sorts to the
Oxford Library. Greater, as to the number of Fellows and Scholars, was the
Foundation of Sir Thomas White, Lord Mayor of London, in the year 1553. being
the first year of the Queen; who in the place where formerly stood an old House
or Hostel, commonly called Barnards Inn, erected a new College by the name of
St. John Baptists College, consisting of a President, fifty Fellows and
Scholars, besides some Officers and Servants which belonged to the Chapel, the
vacant places to be filled for the most part out of the Merchant Tailors School
in London, of which Company he had been free before his Mayoralty. A College
founded as it seems in a lucky hour, affording to the Church in less than the
space of eighty years no fewer than two Archbishops and four Bishops, that is
to say, Doctor William Laud the most renowned Archbishop of Canterbury, of whom
more elsewhere, Doctor Tobi^ Matthews the most reverend Archbishop of York,
Doctor William Juxon Bishop of London and Lord Treasurer, Doctor John
Bucheridge Bishop of Elie, Doctor Row^and Serchfield Bishop of Bristol, Doctor
Boil Bishop of Cork in the Realm of Ireland. Had it not been for these
Foundations, there had been nothing in this Reign to have made it memorable,
but only the calamities and misfortunes of it.

ECCLESIA RESTAVRATA* OR, THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION of the CHURCH OF
ENGLAND:

CONTAINING The Beginning, Progress, and Successes of it; the Counsels, by
which it was conducted; the Rules of Piety, and Prudence, upon which it was
Founded; the several Steps, by which it was promoted, or retarded, in the
Change of Times:

FROM The first Preparations to it by King HENRY the Eight, until the Legal
Settling, and Establishment of it under Queen ELIZABETH:

TOGETHER With the Intermixture of such Civil Actions, and Affairs of State, as
either were Co-incident with it, or related to it.

BY PETER HEYLYN.

LONDON, Printed for H. Twyford, T. Dring, J. Place, W. Palmer; to be sold in
Vine-Court, Middle Temple, the George in Fleet Street, Furnival 's Inne-Gate in
Holborn, and the Palm Tree in Fleet Street, MDCLXI.

To the Most Sacred MAJESTY OF KING CHARLES THE SECOND.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
IT was an usual Saying of King JAMES (Your Majesty's most Learned
Grandfather) of Blessed Memory, that, Of all the Churches in the World, He
knew not any which came nearer to the Primitive Pattern, for Doctrine,
Government, and Worship, then the Reformed Church of England. A Saying, which
He built not upon Fancy, and Affection only; but on such Just, and Solid
Reasons, as might sufficiently endear it to all Knowing Men. The Truth, and
Certainty whereof, will be made apparent by the following History, which here,
in all Humility, is offered to Your Majesty's View. It is (Dread Sir) an
History of the Reformation of the Church of ENGLAND, with all the Various
Fortunes, and Successes of it, from the first Agitations in Religion under
HENRY the Eight (which served for a Preamble thereunto) until the Legal
Settling, and Establishment of it by the great Queen ELIZABETH, of Happy
Memory. A Piece not to be Dedicated to any other, then Your Sacred Majesty;
who, being raised by God, to be a Nursing-Father to this part of His Church,
may possibly discharge that Duty with the Greater Tenderness, when You shall
find upon what Rules of Piety, and Christian Prudence, the Work was carried on
by the first Reformers. Which being once found, it will be no hard matter to
determine of such Means, and Counsels, whereby the Church may be restored to
her Peace, and Purity; from which She is most miserably fallen by our late
Distractions. It cannot be denied, but that some Tares grew up almost
immediately with the Wheat it self; and seemed so specious to the Eye, in the
Blade, or Stalk, that they were taken by some Credulous, and Confiding Men, for
the better Grain. But still they were no more then Tares, distinguished easily
in the Fruits (the Fruits of Error, and False Doctrine; of Faction, Schism,
Disorder, and perhaps Sedition) from the LORD'S good Seed. And, being of an
after sowing (a Supersemination, as the Vulgar reads it) and sown on purpose by
a Cunning, and Industrious Enemy, to raise an Harvest to himself, they neither
can pretend to the same Antiquity, and much less to the Purity of that Sacred
Seed, with which the Field was sown, at first, by the Heavenly Husbandman. I
leave the Application of this Parable to the following History, and shall
conclude with this Address to Almighty God; That, as He has restored Your
Majesty to the Throne of Your Father, and done it in so strange a manner, as
makes it seem a Miracle in the Eyes of Christendom; so He would settle You in
the same, on so sure a Bottom, that no Design of Mischievous, and Unquiet Men
may disturb Your Peace, or detract any thing from those Felicities, which You
have acquired. So prays,

Dread Sovereign, Your Majesty's most obedient Servant, and most Loyal
Subject, PETER HEYLYN.

To the Reader.
READER,
I Here present thee with a Piece of as great variety, as can be easily
comprehended in so narrow a compass; the History of an Affair of such Weight,
and Consequence, as had a powerful Influence on the rest of Christendom: It is
an History of the Reformation of the Church of England, from the first
Agitations in Religion under HENRY the Eight, until the final settling, and
establishing of it (in Doctrine, Government, and Worship) under the Fortunate,
and most Glorious Reign of Queen ELIZABETH. Nor have thou here a bare Relation
only of such Passages, as those Times afforded, but a discovery of those
Counsels, by which the Action was conducted; the Rules of Piety and Prudence,
upon which it was carried; the several steps, by which it was promoted, or
retarded in the Change of Times; together with the Intercurrence of such civil
Concernments, both at home, and abroad, as either were co-incident with it, or
related to it. So that We may affirm of this present History, as Florus does of
his Compendium of the Roman Stories, Ut non tam populi unius, quam totius
generis humani; that is to say, That it contains not only the Affairs of one
State, or Nation, but, in a manner, of the greatest part of all Civil
Governments. The Work first hinted by a Prince of an undanted Spirit, the
Master of as great a Courage, as the World had any; and, to say truth, the Work
required it: He durst not else have grapled with that mighty Adversary, who,
claiming to be Successor to St. Peter in the Sea of Rome, and Vicar General to
Christ over all the Church, had gained unto himself an absolute Sovereignty
over all Christian Kings and Princes in the Western Empire: But this King being
violently hurried with the transport of some private Affections, and finding
that the Pope appeared the greatest Obstacle to his desires, he first divested
him by degrees of that Supremacy, which had been challenged, and enjoyed by his
Predecessors for some Ages past; and finally, extinguished His Authority in
the Realm of England, without noise, or trouble; to the great admiration and
astonishment of the rest of the Christian World This opened the first way to
the Reformation, and gave encouragement to those, who inclined unto it: To
which the King afforded no small Countenance, out of Politic Ends, by
suffering them to have the Bible in the English ^ongue, and to enjoy the
benefit of such Godly Tractates, as openly discovered the Corruptions of the
Church of Rome. But, for his own part, he adhered to his old Religion, severely
persecuted those, who dissented from it, and dyed (though Excommunicated) in
that Faith, and Doctrine* which he had sucked in, as it were, with his Mother's
Milk; and of the which he shew^d himself so stout a Champion against Martin
Luther, in his first Quarrels with the Pope.

Next comes a Minor on the Stage, just, mild and gracious; whose Name was made
a Property to serve turns withal, and his Authority abused (as commonly it
happens on the like occ^sions) to his own undoing. In his first year, the
Reformation was resolved on, but on different ends; endeavored by some Godly
Bishops, and other Learned and Religious Men of the lower Clergy, out of
Judgment and Conscience; who managed the Affair according to the Word of God,
the Practice of the Primitive Times, the general current and consent of the old
Catholic Doctors; but not without an Eye to such Foreign Churches, as seemed
to have most consonancy to the ancient Forms: Promoted with like Zeal, and
Industry, but not with like Integrity, and Christian Candor, by some great men
about the Court; who, under color of removing such Corruptions, as remained in
the Church, had cast their ^yes upon the spoil of Shrines, and Images (though
still preserved in the greatest part of the Lutheran Churches) and the
improving of their own Fortunes by the ^hantery-Lands: All which, most
sacrilegiously they divided amongst themselves, without admitting the poor King
to his share therein; though nothing but the filling of his Coffers, by the
spoil of the one, and the increase of his Revenue, by the fall of the other,
was openly pretended in the Conduct of it. But separating this ^bliquity from
the main Intendment, the Work was vigorously carried on by the King, and his
Councillors; as appears clearly by the Doctrinals in the Book of Homilies and
by the Practical part of Christian P^ety, in the first Public Liturgy
confirmed by Act of Parliament, in the second and third year of this King; and
in that Act (and, which is more, by Fox himself) affirmed to have been done by
the especial aid of the Holy Ghost. And here the business might have rested, if
Catvin's Pragmatical Spirit had not interposed: He first began to quarrel at
some passages in this Sacred Liturg^e* and afterward never left soliciting
the Lord Protector, and practicing by his Agents on the Court, the Country,
and the Universities, till he had laid the first Foundation of the Zuinglian
Faction, who labored nothing more, then Innovation both in Doctrine, and
Discipline. To which they were encouraged by nothing more, then some
improvident Indulgence granted unto John A-Lasco; Who bringing with him a mixed
multitude of Poles, and Germans, obtained the Privilege of a Church for himself
and his distinct in Government, and Forms of Worship, from the Church of
England.

This gave a powerful animation to the Zuinglian Gospellers (as they are called
by Bishop Hooper, and some other Writers) to practice first upon the Church;
who being countenanced, if not headed by the Earl of Warwick (who then began to
undermine the Lord Protector) first quarrelled the Episcopal Habit, and
afterward inveighed against Caps, and Surplices, against Gowns, and Tippets;
but fell at last upon the Altars, which were left standing in all Churches by
the Rules of the Liturgy. The touching on this String made excellent Music to
most of the Grandees of the Court, who had before cast many an envious Eye on
those costly Hangings that Massy Plate, and other rich and pre^ious Utensils,
which adorned those Altars. And What need all this waste? said Judas; when one
poor Chalice only, and perhaps not that, might have served the turn. Besides,
there was no small spoil to be made of Copes, in which the Priest officiated at
the Holy Sacrament; some of them being made of Cloth of Tyssue, of Cloth of
Gold and Silver, or embroidered Velvet; the meanest being made of Silk, or
Satin, with some decent Trimming. And might not these be handsomely converted
unto private uses, to serve as Carpets for their Tables, Coverlids to their
Beds, or Cushions to their Chairs, or Windows. Hereupon some rude People are
encouraged underhand to beat down some Altars, which makes way for an Order of
the Counci^-Table, to take down the rest, and set up Tables in their places;
Followed by a Commission, to be executed in all parts of the Kingdom, for
seizing on the Premises to the use of the King. But as the Grandees of the
Court intended to defraud the King of so great a Booty and the Commissioners to
put a Cheat upon the Court-Lords, who employed them in it: So they were both
prevented in some places by the ^o^ds, and Gentry of the Country* who thought
the Altar-Cloths, together with the Copes* and ^late of their several Churches,
to be as necessary for themselves, as for any others. ^his Change drew on the
Alteration of the former Liturg^, reviewed by certain Godly Prelates, reduced
almost into the same Form, in which now it stands, and confirmed by Parliament
in the 5th and 6th years of this King; but almost as unpleasing to the
Zuinglian Faction, as the former was. In which Conjuncture of Affairs dyed King
Edward the Sixth. From the beginning of whose Reign, the Church accounts the
^poche of a Reformation. All, that was done in o^der to it, under Henr^ the
Eight* seemed to be accidental only* and by the by rather designed on private
Ends, then out of any settled purpose to ^eform the Church, and therefore
intermitted, and resumed again, as those Ends had variance. But now the Work
was carried on wi^h a constant Hand, the Prelates of the Church cooperating
with the King and his Council, and each contriving with the other* for the
Honor of it. Scarce had they brought it to this pass, when King Edwa^d dyed,
whose Death I cannot reckon for an Infelicity to the Church of England: For
being ill-principled in himself, and easily inclined to embrace such Counsels
as were offered to Him; it is not to be thought, but that the rest of the
Bishoprics (before sufficiently impoverished) mu^t have followed Durham, and
the poor Church be left as destitute of Lands, and Ornaments, as when she came
into the World in Her Natural Nakedness. Nor was it like to happen otherwise in
the following Reign, if it had lasted longer then a Nine Day's Wonder. For
Dudley of Northumberland, who then ruled the Roast, and had before dissolved,
and in hope devoured* the Wealthy Bish^prick of Durham, might easily have
possessed himself of the greatest part of the Revenues of York, and Carlisle.
By means whereof, He would have made himself more absolute on the North-side of
the Trent, then the poor Titular Queen (a most virtuous Lady) could have been
suffered to continue on the South side of it. To carry on whose Interess, and
maintain Her Title, the poor remainder of the Church's Patrimony was, in all
probability, to have been shared amongst those of that Party, to make them sure
unto the side. But the Wisdom of this great Achitophel* being turned to
foolishness, He fell into the Hands of the Public Hangman, and thereby saved
himself the labor of becoming his own Executioner.

Now MARY comes to Act Her Part, and She drives on furiously: Her Personal
Interess had strongly biased Her to the Church of Rome; On which depended the
Validity of Her Mother's Marriage, and consequently Her own Legitimation, and
Succession, to the Crown of this Realm. And it was no hard matter for Her, in a
time unsettled, to Repeal all the Acts of Her Brother's Reign, and after to
restore the Pope unto that Supremacy, of which Her Father had deprived Him* A
Reign Calamitous, and unfortunate to Her Self, and Her Subjects; Unfortunate to
Her Self in the loss of Calais; Calamitous to Her Subjects, by many
Insurrections, and Executions; but more by the effusion of the Blood of so many
Marty^s. For though she gave a Check to the Rapacity of the former Times; yet
the Professors of the Reformation paid dearly for it, whose Blood she caused
to be poured forth, like Water, in most parts of the Kingdom; but no where more
abundantly, then in Bonner's Slaughterhouse: Which being within the view of
the Court, and under Her own Nose (as the Saying is) must needs entitle Her to
a great part of those Horrid Cruelties, which almost every day were acted by
that bloody Butcher. The Schism at Frank^o^t took beginning in the same time
also, occasioned by some Zealots of the Zuinglian Faction; who needs must lay
aside the use of the Public Liturgy (retained by all the rest of the English
Exiles) the better to make way for such Forms of Worship, as seemed more
consonant to Calvin's Platform, and the Rules of Geneva: Which woeful Schism, so
wretchedly begun in a Foreign Nation, they labored to promote by all sinister
Practices in the Church of England, when they returned from Exile in the
following Reign. The miserable Effects whereof we feel too sensibly and
smartly, to this very day.

But the great Business of this Reign related to the restitution of the
Abbey-Lands* end eavoured earnestly by the Queen, and no less strenuously
opposed by the then present Owners, who had all the reason in the World to
maintain that Right, which by the known Laws of the Land, had been vested in
them* For when the Monasteries, and Religious Houses, had been dissolved by
several Acts of Parliament, in the time of King Henry; the Lands belonging to
those Houses were by those Acts, conferred upon the King and His Successors,
Kings, and Queens of England. Most of which Lands were either exchanged for
others with the Lords, and Gentry, or sold, for valuable Consideration, to the
rest of the Subjects. All which Exchanges, Grants, and Sales, were passed, and
Confirmed by the King's Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, in
due Form of Law; Which gave unto the Patentees as good a Title, as the Law
could make them. This was well known unto the Pope, and He knew well upon what
ticklish Terms He stood with the Lords, and ^ommons, then Assembled in
Parliament; whom i^ He did not gratify with some Signal Favor, He could not
hope to be restored by them to His former Power: for, being deprived of His
Sup^emacy by Act of Parliament in the Time of King HENRY, He could not be
restored unto it, but by Act of Parliam^nt in the time of Queen MARY; and no
such Ast could be obtained, or compassed for Him, without a Confirmation of
Church-^ands to the present Owners. To which Necessity Pope Julius being forced
to submit Himself, He issues a Decree, accompanied with some Reasons, which
might seem to induce Him to it, for confirming all such Lands on the present
Occupants, of which they stood possessed (justo Titulo) by a Lawful Title. And
this was only reckoned by him for a Lawful Title; First, that they were
possessed of the said Lands (juxta Leges hujus Regni pro tempore existentes)
according to the Laws of the Land which were th^n in force; whether by
Purchase, or by Gift, or in the way of Exchange: which are the words of the
Decree. And secondly, If the said Lands were warranted, and confirmed unto
them, by Letters Patents from the two last Kings; (qui per literas Patentes
easdem Terras War^antiz^runt) as is declared in the Second of the following
Reasons. For which Consult the Book, Entitled, No Sacrilege, nor Sin, to
purchase Cathedr^l-Lands, etc. page 52. Where still observe, that nothing made
a Lawful Title in the Pope's Opinion, but the King's Letters Patents, grounded
on the Laws of the Land, as is expressed more clearly in the former Passages.
But this can no way serve the Turn of some present Purchasers, though much
insisted on by one of that number, to justify his defacing of an Episcopal
Palace, and his pretensions to the Wealthy Borough, which depended on it; For,
certainly, there must needs be a vast disproportion between such Contracts* as
were founded upon Acts of Parliament, Legally passed by the King's Authority,
with the Consent, and Approbation of the Three Estates, and those, which have
no other Ground, but the bare Votes, and Orders, of both Houses only, and
perhaps not that. And by this Logic, he may as well justify the late horrid
Murder committed on the most incomparable Majesty of King CHARLES the First,
as stand upon the making good of such Grants, and Sates, as were Contracted
for, with some of those very Men, who Voted to the setting up of the High Court
of Justice, as most ridiculously, they were pleased to call it: When I shall
see him do the one, I must bethink my self of some further Arguments to refute
the other.

And so Queen MARY makes Her Exit, and leaves the Stage to Queen ELIZABETH, Her
younger Sister; A Princess, which had long been trained up in the Schole of
Experience, and knew the Temper of the People, whom She was to Govern; who,
having generally embraced the Reformed Religion, in the Time of Her Brother,
most passionately desired the Enjoyment of it under Her Protection; And She
accordingly resolved to satisfy the Piety of their Desire, as soon as She had
Power, and Opportunity, to go thorough with it. In Prosecution of which Work,
She raised Her whole Fabric on the same Foundation, which had been laid by
the Reformers in the Reign of King EDWARD; that is to say, the Word of God, the
Practice of the Primitive Times, the General Current of the Fathers* and the
Example of such Churches, as seemed to retain most in them of the Ancient
Forms. But then She added thereunto such an equal mixture, both of Streng^h,
and Beauty, as gave great Luster to the Church, and drew along with it many
rare Felicities on the Civil State, both Extraordinary in themselves, and of
long Continuance, as the most Excellent King JAMES In His Proclamation of March
5th 1603.
has right-well observed: So that We may affirm of the Reformation of the
Church of England, as the Historian Quibus artibus Imperii fundamenta locavit
Pater* iisdem operis t^tius gloriam consummavit Filius. Just. lib. 6.
does of the Power and Greatness of the Realm of Macedon; that is to say, that
The same Arts, by which the first Foundations of it were laid by PHILIP, were
practiced in the Consummation, and Accomplishment of it, by the Care of
ALEXANDER. For, in the first Year of Her Reign, the Liturgy, being first
Reviewed, and qualified in some Particulars, was confirmed by PARLIAMENT; in
Her first Year, the Articles of Religion were agreed upon the Convocation; and
in the Eight, the Government of the Church, by Archbishops, and Bishops,
received as strong a Confirmation, as the Laws could give it. And, for this
last, We are beholden unto BONNER, the late Bishop of LONDON, who being called
upon, to take the OATH of Supremacy, by HORN of Winton, refused to take the
OATH, upon this Account, because HORNs Consecration was not good, and valid, by
the Laws of the Land: Which he insisted on, because the Ordinal, Established in
the Reign of King EDWARD, (by which both HORN, and all the rest of Queen
ELIZABETH's Bishops received Consecration^) had been discharged by Queen MARY;
and not restored by any Act of Parliament in the present Reign. Which being
first declared by PARLIAMENT, in the Eighth of this Queen, to be Casus omissus,
or rather, that the Ordinal was looked upon, as a part of the Liturgy, which
had been solemnly confirmed in the first of this Queen's Reign, they next
Enacted, and Ordained, That all such Bishops, as were Consecrated by that
Ordinal, in the Times precedent, or should be Consecrated by it, in the time to
come* should be reputed, to be lawfully Ordained, and Consecrated, to all
Intents, and Purposes, in the Law, whatever. Which added as much Strength to
the Episcopal Government, as the Authority of Man, and an Act of Parliament,
could possibly Conferr upon it. This made the Queen more constant to Her former
Principles, of keeping up the Church in its Power, and Purity, without
subjecting it* to any, but Her Self alone: She looked upon Her Self, as the
Sole Fountain of both Jurisdictions, which She resolved to keep in their proper
Channels; neither permitting them to mingle Waters upon any occasion, nor
suffering either of them to invade, and destroy the other. And to this Rule She
was so constant, that when one Morris, being then Attorney of the Duchy of
Lancaster, had offered a Bill, ready drawn, to the House of Commons, in the
Thirty Fifth of Her Reign, for the Retrenching of the Ecclesiastical Courts, in
much Narrower Bounds; She first commanded Coke, then Speaker, (and afterward
successively Chief Justice of either Bench) not to admit of any such Seditious
Bills, for the time to come. And, that being done, She caused the person of the
said Attorney to be seized upon, deprived him of his Place in the Dutchy-Court,
disabled him from Practicing as a Common-Lawyer; and, finally, shut him up in
Tutbury-Castle, where he continued till his Death. By which Severity, and
keeping the like Constant Hand in the Course of Her Government, She held so
great a Curb on the Puritan Faction, that neither Her Parliaments, nor Her
Courts of Justice, were from thenceforth much troubled with them, in the rest
of Her Reign.

This is the Sum, and Method, of the following History; in the Particulars
whereof thou will find more to satisfy thy Curiosity, and inform thy
Judgment, then can be possibly drawn up in this General View. As for my Self,
and my performance in this Work: in the first place, I am to tell thee, that,
toward the raising of this Fabric, I have not borrowed my Materials only out
of Vulgar Authors, but searched into the Registers of the Convocation;
consulted all such Acts of Parliament, as concerned my Purpose, advised with
many Foreign Writers, of great Name, and Credit, exemplified some Records, and
Charters, of no common Quality, many rare Pieces in the famous Cottonian
Library, and not a few Debates, and Orders, of the Council-^able, which I have
laid together in as good a Form, and beautified it with a Trimming as
agreeable, as my hands could give it. And, next, I am to let thee know, that,
in the whole Carriage of this Work, I have assumed unto my Self the Freedom of
a Just Historian; concealing nothing out of Fear, nor speaking any thing for
Favor: delivering nothing for a Truth without good Authority; but so
delivering that Truth, as to witness for me, that I am neither biased by Love,
or Hatred, Nec ^di^, nec amore, dicturus aliquid, etc. Tacit. Hist. lib. 1.
nor over-swayed by Partiality, and corrupt Affections: If I seem ^art at any
time, as sometimes I may, it is but in such Cases only, and on such occasions,
in which there is no good to be done by Lenitives, and where the Tumor is so
putrified, as to need a Lancing. For, in this Case, a true Historian must have
somewhat in him of the good Samaritan, in using Wine, or Vinegar, to cleanse
the Wound, as well as Oil to qualify the Grief of the Inflammation. I know it
is impossible (even in a Work of this Nature) to please all Parties, though I
have made it my Endeavor to dissatisfie none, but those, that hate to be
reformed, in the Psalmist's Language; or otherwise are so tenaciously wedded to
their own Opinions, that neither Reason, nor Authority, can divorce them from
it. And thus (good Reader) I commend thee to the Blessings of God, whom I
beseech to guide thee in the way to Eternal Life, amongst those intricate
Windings, and uncertain Turnings, those Crooked Lanes, and Dangerous
Precipices, which are round about thee. And so fare thee well.

From Westminster, October the 20th. 1660.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
THe Reader is to be informed of a mistake occuring in the first part of this
History, folio 126, where it is said that no care had been taken for
translating the English Liturgy into the Irish tongue for the use of that
Church from that day to this. Whereas it has been since translated into that
language, and recommended to the people for Gods public service, though not
so generally made use of as it ought to be; Neither the Bible, nor the book of
Homilies being yet translated, which makes the Liturgy imperfect, and the whole
service of the Church defective in the maine parts of it. The Reader also is to
know, that since these sheets were upon the Press the Lord Marquess of
Hartford mentioned part 1 folio 5. was made Duke of Somerset, and Doctor
William Juxon Bishop of London mentioned part 2 folio 84 is preferred to
Canterbury. Such other things as stand in need of any correction are summed up
in the following Errataes.

The Errata of the Preface.
Folio 1 line 1 for variel, read variety. p. 4. l. 13. f. reduced r. and
reduced. p. 4. l. 24. f. contriving, r. contending. l. 20. f. by the by, r, on
the By. p. 6. l. 2. f. first, r. fifth.

The Errata of the first part.
P. 3. l. 29. f. Baron, r. Baronet. p. 10. l. 13. f. mary wife, r. ma^quise. p.
17. l. 13. f. imposed, r. debased. p. 54. l. 40. f. advancing, r. abandoning.
p. 61. l. 14. f. Duke all, r. Dukes fall. p. 119. l. 24. Goodwine, r. Goodrith.
p. 130. l. 30. f. Campden, r. Camden. p. 131. for keeping him both beforehand,
etc. r. for keeping him from being both beforehand, etc. p. 134. l. 28. f.
allwaise, r. all or. p. 135. l. 48. f. Lorain, r. Lovain. p. 137. l. 21. f.
Cabol. r. Cabot. ibidem l. 23. Darralaos. r. Daccalaos, and f. Caenada, r.
Canada. p. 138. l. 39. f. Epy, r. Spy. p. 140. l. 39. for on the Church, r. in
the Church. p. 141. l. 44. f. redemption, r. exception. p. 150. l. 34. f.
venturer., r. ventes, p. 151. l. 6. for virtues, r. his virtues. p. 152. l. 31.
for thus, r. these. p. 152 l. 43. for Gale, r. Gates. p. 154. l. 4. for pay, r.
play. p. 155. l. 32. for hands, r. Bands. p. 158. l. 35. for rules, r. Rule. p.
160. l. 6. for letters, r. fetters. l. 28. for the heirs, r. by the heirs. l.
41. for Jenningham, r. Jerningham. p. 165. l. 23. de^e possibly. p. 168. l. 46.
for blows in the second place, r. blood.

Errata on the second part.
P. 8. l. 15. for bayden, r. bugden. p. 20. l. 39. for lending, r, according.
p. 20. l. 40. for poyner, r. poynet. p. 25. l. 12. for Poyner, r. Poynet. p.
27. l. 4. for 300. r. 800. p. 36. l. 24. for alienis r. alternis. p. 38. l. 24.
for impudence, r. imprudence. p. 49. l. 15. for there, r. thereof. p. 54. l.
23. for prejudiced, r. premised. p. 74. l. 32. for Artanasdes, r. Artavasdes.
p. 79. l. 25. for Fanim, r. hames. p. 81. l. 1. de 1559. p. 82. l. 13. for
presented, r. persecuted. p. 83. l. 40. for purefew, r. parfew. p. 103. l. 39.
for petite, r. petie. p. 109. l. 7. for a pover, r. that is to say a pover. p.
121. l. 44. for Dale r. vale. p. 121. l. 30. for any of, r. any two of. p. 122.
l. 2. for zeal r. weal. p. 124. l. 13. for. Oxon, r. Exon. p. 126. l. 15. for
with Knox. p. 173. l. 16. for fail r. failer. 156. l. 46. for Bishop, r. Bishop
of Bristow. p. 165. l. 13. d. as they all did. p. 179. col. 1. for one
substance, r. of one substance. p. 181. col. 1. art 8. for fur from God. ^.
fargon.

THE PARENTAGE, An. 1536
BIRTH, and FIRST FORTUNES of PRINCE EDWARD, The only surviving Son of King
HENRY the Eighth, before his coming to the CROWN. With the Condition of
Affairs both in Church and State, at his first Coming to the same.
PRINCE Edward, the only surviving son of King Henry the Eighth, was born at
the Royal Palace of Hampton Court* on the twelfth day of October, Anno 1537.
Descended from his Father, by the united Families of York and Lancaster; by his
Grandfather King Henry the seventh, from the old Royal Line of the Kings of
Wales; by his Grandmother Queen Elizabeth, the eldest daughter of King Edward
the fourth, from a long continued Race of Kings, descending from the Loins of
the Norman Conqueror; and finally by Maud, the wife of King Henry the first,
from Edmond, surnamed Iron-side, the last unquestionable King (as to the Right
of his Succession) of the Saxon Race; so that all Titles seemed to be
Concentred in the Person of this Infant Prince, which Might assure the Subjects
of a Peaceable, and un-troubled Reign, so much the more, because his Mothers
Marriage was not subject unto any Dispute (as were those of the two former
Queens) whereby the Legitimation of her Issue might be called in question: An
happiness, which recompensed all defects that might be otherwise pretended
against her Birth, not answerable unto that of so Great a Monarch, and short in
some respects of that of her Predecessor, in the Kings affections; though of a
Family truly Noble, and of great Antiquity. Concerning which, it will be
necessary to Premise somewhat in this place, not only for the setting forth of
this Queens Progenitors, but that we may the better understand the State of
that Family, which was to Act so great a part on the Stage of England.

Know then, that Queen Jane Seimour, was Daughter of S. John Seimour, of
Wolf-Hall, in the County of Wilts. Descended from that William de S. Mauro
(contractedly afterward called Seimour) who by the Aid of Gilbert Lord
Mareshall, Earl of Pembrooke, recovered Wendy, and Penhow, (now parts of
Monmouth shire) from the hands of the Welsh, Anno. 1240. being the two and
twentieth year of King Henry the thirds Reign; which William, as he descended
lineally from the (...) d' Sancto Mauro, whose name we find in the Roll of
Battle Abbey, amongst those Noble Families which came in with the Conqueror;
so was he one of the Progenitors of that S. Roger, S. Maur, or Seimour,
Knight, who married one of the daughters, and Heirs of John Beauchamp of Hach,
a right Noble Baron, who brought his Pedigree from Sybill, one of the five
daughters, and Heirs of William Mareshall, the famous, and most puissant Earl
of Pembrooke, married to William de Herrares, Earl of Herrars and Darby, as
also from Hugh d' Vivon, and William Mallet, men in times past most Renowned,
for Estate and Chivalry; which goodly Patrimony was afterward very much
augmented, by the marriage of one of this Noble Family, with the Daughter, and
Heir of the Esturmies, Lords of Wolf-Hall, not far from Marleborough, in the
County of Wilts, who bare for Arms, Argent, 3. D^mie Lions, Gules; And from
the time of King Henry the second, were by right of inheritance, the Bayliffes
and Guardians of the Forest of Sarerna^k, lying hard by; which is of great
note for plenty of Good Game, and for a kind of Fern there, that yields a
most pleasant savor: In remembrance whereof, their Hunters Horn, of a mighty
bigness, and tipped with silver, is kept by the Earls of Hartford unto this day,
as a Monument of their Descent from such Noble Ancestors. Out of which house
came Sir John Seimour, of Wolfe-Hall, the Father of this Excellent Queen; as
also of three sons, Edward, Henry, and Thomas; of which we shall speak somewhat
severally in the way of Preamble, the first and last being Principal Actors on
the Public Theater of King Edwards Reign.

And first, Sir Edward Seymour, the Eldest son, received the Order of
Knighthood at the hands of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, and brother in law
to King Henry the Eighth. In the fifteenth year of whose Reign, he Commanded a
Right puissant Army in a War with France, where he took the Town of Mont
Dedier, and other pieces of Importance. On this foundation he began the rise of
his following Fortunes, exceedingly improved by the Marriage of the King with
his only sister, from whom, on Tuesday in Whitson week, Anno 1536. he received
the Title of Viscount Beauchamp, with reference to his Descent, from the Lord
John Beauchamp, above mentioned, and on the eighteenth of October, in the year
next following he was created Earl of Hartford. A man obierved by Sir John
Haywood, in his History of K. Edward the sixth, to be of little esteem for
Wisdom, Personage, or Courage in Arms; but found withal, not only to be very
faithful* but exceeding fortunate, as long as he served under the more
Powerful Plannet of King Henry the eighth. About five years before the end of
whose Reign, (He being then Warden of the Marches against Scotland) the
invasion of K. James, the fifth, was by his direction encountered, and broken at
Sol^me Moss, where diverse of the Scottish Nobility were taken Prisoners. In
the next year after, accompanied with Sir John Dudly, Viscount Lisle (Created
afterward Earl of Warwick, and Duke of Northumberland, by king Edward the
sixth, with a handful of men he fired Lies, and Edinborough, and returned by
a leisurely March, 44. miles thorough the body of Scotlan^. And in the year
following he invaded the Scottish Borders. wasted Tive dale, and the Marches,
defacing all those Parts with spoil and ruin: As fortunate in his
undertakings against the French, as against the Sco^s, for, being appointed by
the King to view the Fortifications upon the Marches of Callice, he did not
only perform that service to the Kings contentment, but with the hardy
approach of 7000. English men, raised an Army of 21000. French, Encamped over
the River, before Bolloine, won their Ordinance, Carriage, Treasure, and Tents,
with the loss only of one man; winning in his return from thence, the Ca^tle of
Ouling, commonly called the Red Pile, within shot and rescue of the Town of
Ardes. And finally, in the year ensuing, (being the last of that Kings Reign)
he began the Fortresses of New Haven, Blackness, and Bullingberg; in which he
plied his work so well, that before his departure from those places, he had
made them tenable. Such were h^s Actings in the time of King Henry the Eighth,
against whose Powerful Genius, there was no withstanding. In all whose time,
he never rose to any haughtiness in himself, or contempt of others, but still
remained courteous, and affable toward all; choosing a course (least subject to
envy) between st^ffe stubbornness, and servile flattery; without aspiring any
further, then to hold a second place in the Kings good Grace. But, being left
unto himself, and either overwhelmed by the Greatness of that Authority which
was cast upon him, in the Minority of King Edward, or undermined by the
practices of his cunning and malicious Enemies, he suddenly became (according
to the usual Disports of Fortune) a calamitous ruin; as being in himself of
an easy nature, apt to be wrought upon by more subtle heads, and wholly
Governed by his last wife, of which more hereafter.

In the mean time we are to know, that having married one of the daughters, and
Co-heires of William Hilol, of Woodlands, in the County of Dorset, he had by
her, amongst other children, a son called Edward, from whom descends Sir Edward
Seim^ure of Berrie Pomerie, in the County of Devon, Knight, and Barron. After
whose death he married Ann, the daughter of Sir Edward Stanhop, by whom he had
a so^* called Edward also, on whom he was prevailed with, to entaile both his
Lands and Honors; the children of the former bed being pretermitted.
Concerning which there goes a sto^y, that the Earl having been formerly
^mployed in France did there acquaint himself with a Learned man, supposed to
have great skill in Magic: of whom he obtained, by great rewards* and
importunities, to let him see, by the help of some Magical perspective* in
what Estate all his Relations stood at home. In which impertinent curiosity, he
was so ^arr satisfied, as to behold a Gentleman of his acquaintance, in a more
familiar posture with his wife, then was agreeable to the Honor of either
Party. To which Diabollicall Illusion* he is said to have given so much credit,
that he did not only estrange himself from her society at his coming home, but
furnished his next wife with an excellent opportunity for, pressing him to the
disinheriting of his fo^mer children. But whether this were so or not, certain
it is that his last wife, being a proud imperious woman, and one that was
resolved to gain her own ends upon him, never le^t plying him, with one
suspicion after another, till in the end she had prev^iled to have the greatest
part of his lands, and all his Honorable Titles settled on her eldest son. And
that she might make sure work of it, she caused him to obtain a private Act of
Parliament, in the 32. year of Henry the Eighth. Anno 1540. for entailing the
same on this last Edward, and the Heirs male of his body. So easy was he to
be wrought on, by those that knew on which side he did lie most open to
assaults and batteries.

Of a far different temper was his brother Thomas, the youngest son of Sir
John Seimour, of a daring and enterprising nature, arrogant in himself, a
dispiser of others, and a Contemner of all Counsels, which were not first
forged in his own brain. Following his sister to the Court, he received the
Order of Knighthood from the hands of the King, at such time as his brother was
made Earl of Hartford, and on May day; in the thirtieth year of the Kings
Reign; he was one of the Challengers at the Magnificent Justs, maintained by
him, and others, against all comers in the Palace of Westminster; in which,
together with the rest, he behaved himself so highly to the Kings contentment,
and their own great Hono^r, that they were all severally rewarded with the
Grant of 100. Marks of yearly rent, and a convenient house for habitation
thereunto belonging, out of the late dissolved order of Saint John o^ I^rusalem
Which being the first foundation of his following greatness, proved not
sufficient to support the building which was raised upon it; the Gentleman, and
almost all the rest of the challengers, coming within few years after to
unfortunate ends. For, being made Lord Seimour of Sudley, and Lord High
Admiral of England, by King Edward the sixth, he would not satisfy his
ambition with a lower marriage then the widow of his deceased Sovereign,
aspiring after her death to the bed of the Princes of Elizabeth, the second
daughter of the King. Which wrought such Jealousies, and distrusts in the Head
of his brother, then being Lord Protector of the King, and Kingdom, that he was
thereupon, Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed (of which more anon) to the great
joy of such as practiced to ^ubvert them both. As for the Barrony of Sudley,
denominated from a goodly Manor, in the County of Gl^c^ster, it was^ anc^ently
the Patrimony of Harrold, the eldest Son of Ralph d' Mont. the son of (...).
(Medantinu^, or d' Mount, and of Goda his wife, one of the daughters of
Ethilred, and sister of Edmond, surnamed ^ro^side, Kings of England: whose
Posterity taking to themselves the name of Sudley, continued in possession of
it till the time of John, the last Baron of this name and Fami^y. Whose
daug^ter Joane conveyed the whole estate in marriage to Sir William Botteler,
of the Family of Wemm, in Shropshire. From whom de^cended Ralph, Lord Bottele^,
of Sudley Castle, Chamberlain of the Household to King Henry the sixth, by whom
he was created Knight of the Garter, and Lord High Treasurer of England. And
though the greatest part of this Inheritance being divided between the sisters
and co-heires, came to other Families, yet the Castle and Barony of Sudley
remained unto a male of this house* until the latter end of the Reign ^f King
Henry the eighth, to whom it was escheated, by the Attainder of the last Lord
Botteller, whose greatest Crime was thought to be this goodly Manor, which
some greedy Courtiers had an eye on. And being fallen unto the Crown, it was no
hard matter for the Lord Protector to estate the same upon his brother; who was
scarce warmed in his new Honor, when it fell into the Crown again. Where it
continued all the rest of King Edwards Reign, and by Queen Mary was conferred
on Sir John Bruges, (who derived his Pedigree from one of the said sisters, and
co-heires of Ralph, Lord Botteler) whom she ennobled, by the Title of Lord
Chaundos of Sudley.

As for Sir Henry Seimour, the second son of Sir John Seimour, he was not found
to be of so fine a metal as to make a Courtier, and was therefore left unto
the life of a Country Gentleman; Advanced by the Power and favor of his elder
Brother, to the o^der of Knighthood; and afterward Estated in the Mannours of
Marvel, and Twyford, in the County of Southhampton, dismembered in those broken
times from the sea of Winchester. To each of these belonged a Park, that of the
first containing no less then four miles, that of the last but two in compass;
the first being also Honored with a goodly Mancion house, belonging anciently
to those Bishops, and little inferior to the best of the Wealthy Bishoprics.
There goes a story, that the Priest Officiating at the Altar, in the Church of
Ouslebury (of which Parish Marvel was a part) after the Mass had been
abolished by the Kings Authority, was violently dragged thence by this Sir
Henry, beaten, and most reproachfully handled by him, his servants universally
refusing to serve him, as the instruments of his Rage and Fury; and that the
poor Priest having after an opportunity to get into the Church, did openly
curse the said Sir Henry, and his posterity, with Bell, Book, and Candle,
according to the use observed in the Church of Rome. Which, whether it were so
or not, or that the maine foundation of this Estate being laid on Sacrilidge,
could promise no long blessing to it; Certain it is, that his posterity are
brought beneath the degree of poverty. For, having three Nephews, by Sir John
Se^mour, his only Son; that is to say, Edward, the eldest, Henry and Thomas,
younger sons, besides several daughters, there remains not to any of them one
foot of Land, or so much as a penny of money to supply their necessities, but
what they have from the Munificence of the Marquess of Hartford, or the
charity of other well disposed people, which have affection, or Relation to
them.

But, the great ornament of this^ house, was their sister Jane, the only
daughter of her father, by whose care she was preferred to the Court, and
service of Queen Ann Bollen, where she out^shined all the other Ladies, and in
short time had gained exceeding much on the King, a great admirer of Fresh
Beauties, and such as could pretend unto no command on his own affections. Some
Ladies who had seen the pictures of both Queens at White Hall Gallery, have
entertained no small dispute* to which of the two they were to give
Pre-eminence in point of beauty; each of them having such a plentiful measure
of Perfections, as to Entitle either of them to a Superiority. If Queen Ann
seemed to have the more lively countenance, Queen Jane was thought to carry it
in the exact symitry, which showed it self in all her features; and what she
carried on that side, by that advantage, was over-ballanced on the other by a
pleasing sprightfulnesse, which gained as much upon the hearts of all
beholders. It was conceived by those Great Critticks in the schools of Beauty,
that love which seemed to threaten in the eyes of Queen Jane, did only seem to
sport it self in the eyes of Queen Ann, that there was more Majesty in the
Ga^b of Queen Jane Seimour, and more loveliness in that of Queen Ann Bollen;
yet so, that the Majesty of the one did excel in Lovelyness, and that the
Loveliness of the other did exceed In majesty. Sir John Russell, afterward
Earl of Bedford, who had beheld both Queens in their greatest Glories, did use
to say that the richer Queen Jane was in clothes, the fairer she appeared; but
that the other, the richer she was apparrelled, the worse she looked: Lord
Herb. Hist. fol. 387.
which shows, that Queen Ann only trusted to the Beauties of Nature, and that
Queen Jane did sometimes help her self by external Ornaments. In a word, she
had in her all the Graces of Queen Ann, but Governed (if my conjecture does not
fail me) with an evener, and more constant temper, or if you will, she may be
said to be equally made up of the two last Queens, 1536.
as having in her all the Attractions of Queen Ann, but Regulated by the
reservednesse of Queen Katharine also.

It is not to be thought, that so many rare per^ections, should be long
concealed from the eye of the King: or, that love should not work in him it is
accustomed effects of desire and hope. In the prosecution whereof, he lay so
open to discovery, that the Queen could not choose but take notice of it, and
intimated her suspitio^s to him, as appears by a letter of hers in the Scrinia
Sacra. I^ which she signifies unto him, that by hastening her intended death, he
would be left at liberty, both before God and man, to follow his affection,
already settled on the Party, for whose sake she was reduced unto that
condition; and whose name she could some while since have pointed to, his Grace
not being ignorant of her suspicions. And it appeared by the event, that she
was not much mistaken in the Mark she aimed at. For, scarce had her lementable
death, which happened on the nineteenth of May, prepared the way for the
Legitimating of this new affection, but on the morrow after the King was
secretly married to Mistress Seimour, and openly showed her as his Queen in the
Whitsontide following. A Marriage, which made some alteration in the face of
the Court, in the advancing of her kindred, and discountenancing the Dependants
of the former Queen; but otherwise produced no change in Affairs of State. The
King proceeded as before* in suppressing Monasteries, extinguishing the Popes
Authority, and ^ltering diverse things in the face of the C^u^ch which tended to
that Reformation, which after followed. For, on the eighth of June began the
Parliament, in which here past an Act for the final extinguishing of the Power
of the Popes of Rome, Cap. 10. And the next day a Convocation of the Bishops
and Clergy, managed by Sir Thomas Cromwell, advanced about that time unto the
Title of Lord Cromwell of Wimbledon; and made his Majesty's Viccar General, of
all Ecclesiast ^all Mat^ers in the Realm of England. By whose Authority* a
book was published, after Mature debate and Deliberation, under the name of
Articles, Devised by the Kings Highness, in which mentioned ^ut three,
Sacraments, that is to ^ay. Baptism, Pen^ance* and the Lords Supper. Besides
which book, there were some Acts agreed upon in the Convocation, for
diminishing the superfl^ous number of Holy days, especially of such as
happened in the time of Harvest. S^gnified afterward to the people in certain
Injunctions, published in the Kings name, by the new Viccar General, as the
first fruits of his Authority. In which it was ordained amongst other things,
that the Curates in every Parish Church should teach the People to say the
Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Ave-Mary, and the Ten Commandments in the English
Tongue.

But, that which seemed to make most for the Advantage of the new Queen, and
her Posterity (if it please God to give her any) was the unexpected death of
the Duke of Richmond, the Kings natural Son, begotten on the body of the Lady
Talboi^: So dearly cherished by his Father (having then no lawful Issu^-male)
that in the sixth year of his Age, An. 1525. he created him Earl of
Nottingham, and not long after Duke of Richmond and Sommerset, preferred him to
the Honorable office of Earl Marshall, elected him into the Order of the
Garter, made him Lord Admiral of the Royal Navy, in an expedition against
France, and finally Affianced him to Mary, the daughter of Thomas Howard, Duke
of Nor^olk, the most ^owerfull Subject in the Kingdom. Now were these all the
favors intended to him, The Crown it self being designed him by the King* in
default of Lawful Issue* to be procreated, and begotten of his Royal Body.
For, in the Act of the Succession, which past in the Parliament of this year,
the Crown being first settled upon the Issue of this Queen, with the remainder
to the Kings issue, lawfully begotten on any following wife whatsoever; there
past this clause in favor of the Duke of Richmond (as it was then generally
conceived) that is to say, An 28. Hen. 8. Cap. VII.
That for lack of lawful heirs of the Kings body, to be procreated, or
begotten, as is before limited by this Act, it should, and might be lawful for
him to confer the same on any such Person, or Persons, in Possession, and
Remainder, as should please his Highness, and according to such Estate, and
after such manner, ^orme, fashion, order, and condition, as should be
expressed, declared, named, and l^mitted, in his said Letters Patents or by his
last Will: the Crown to be enjoyed by such person, or persons, so to be
nominated and appointed, in as large and ample manner, as if such Person or
Persons, had been his Highness Lawful Heirs to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm.

And though it might please God, as it after did, to give the King some Lawful
Issue by this Queen, yet took he so much care for this natural son, as to
enable himself by another Clause in the said Act, to advance any person, or
persons of his most Royal Blood, by Letters Patents, under the Great Seal, to
any Title, Style, or Name, of any Estate, Dignity, or Honor, whatsoever it be,
and to give to them, or any of them, any Castles, Honors, Mannours, Lands,
Tenements, Liberties, Franchiefes, or other Hereditaments in ^ee simple, or Fee
^tail, or for term of their lives, or the life of any of them.

But all these expectations and Provisions were to no effect, the Duke
departing this life at the age of 17 years, or thereabouts, within few days
after the ending of this Session, that is to say, on the 22th. day of July,
Anno 1536. to the extreme grief of the King, An. 1537.
and the general sorrow of the Court, who had him in a High degree of
veneration, for his birth, and Galantry.

It appears also by a passage in this Act of Parliament, above mentioned, that
the King was not only hurried to this Marriage by his own affections, but by
the humble petition, and intercession of m^st of the Nobles of his Realm; moved
thereunto, as well by the conve^ien^y of her years, as in respect that by her
excellent beauty, and pureness of flesh and blood (I speak the very words of
the Act it self) she was apt (God willing) to concieve issue. And so
accordingly it proved. For, Anno. 15^
on the 12th. of October* 1537. about two of the clock in the morning she was
delivered of a young Prince (Christened not long after by the name of Edward)
but it cost her dear, she dying within two days after, and leaving this
Character behind her, of being the Discreetest, Humblest, and Fairest of all
the Kings Wives. It has been commonly reported, and no less generally
believed, that that child being come unto the birth, and there wanting
natural strength to be delivered, his Mothers body was ripped open to give him
a passage into the World, and that she died of the Incision in a short time
after. The thing not only so related in our common Heralds, but taken up for a
constant and undo^bted truth, by Sir John Haywood, in his History of the Life
and Reign of King Edward the sixth, which, notwithstanding there are many
reasons to evince the contrary. For, first it is observed by the said Sir John
Haywood, that children, so brought forth, were by the ancient Romans esteemed
fortunate, and commonly proved great enterprisers, with happy success. And so
it is affirmed by Pliny, Plin. Lib. 7. Cap. 9.
viz. Auspicatius Enecta Matre Nascuntur, etc. called first Caesones, and
afterward more commonly Caesares* as learned Writers do averr, quia caeso
matris utero in Lucem prodiissent, because their Mothers bodies had been
opened, to make passage for them. Amongst whom they reckon Caeso, and Fabius,
who was three times Consul; Scipio, surnamed Affricanus, Renowned for his
Victories in Spain, his vanquishing of Haniball, and humbling the proud Cities
of Carthage. And besides others, Julius Caesar, who brought the whole Roman
Empire under his Command, whereas the life of this Prince was short, his Reign
full of troubles, and his end generally supposed to be traitorously contrived,
without performing any memorable Action, either at home, or abroad, which might
make him pass in the account of a fortunate Prince, or any way successful in
the enterprising of Heroic Actions.

Besides, it may appear by two several Letters, the one written by the
appointment of the Queen her self, immediately after her delivery, the other
by one of her Physicians, on the morrow after, that she was not under any such
extreme necessity (though questionless she had a hard labor of it) as report
has made her. For first, the Queen immediately upon the birth of the Prince,
caused this ensuing Letter, signed with her own signet, to be sent unto the
Lord of the Privy Counsel, that is to say.

RIght trusty, and well Beloved, we greet you well. And forasmuch as by the
inestimable goodness, Church. Hist. 7. Fol. 422.
and Grace of Almighty God, we be delivered, and brought in Childe^^ed of a
PRINCE, concieved in most Lawful Matrimony between my Lord the Kings Majesty,
and us. Doubting not, but that for the Love and affection you bear unto us,
and to the Commonwealth of this Realm, this knowledge shall be joyous, and
Glad Tidings unto you: We have thought good to certify you of this same: To
the intent ye might not only render unto God Condign thanks, and praise for so
great a benefit, but also continually pray for the long Continuance, and
preservation of the same, here in this life to the Honor of God, joy and
pleasure of my Lord the KING, and us, and the Universal Weal, quiet, and
tranquillity of this whole Realm.

Given under our signet, at my Lords Manor of Hampton^Court, the twel^th day
of October.

But, having a hard labor of it, as before was said, it brought her first into
a very high distemper, and after into a very great looseness, which so
accelerated the approach of death, that she prepared her self for God,
according to the Rites of the Church then being. And this app^ares by a letter
of the Queens Physicians, directed in these words to the Lords of the
Counsel, viz.

THese shall be to advise your Lordships of the Queens Estate: Id. Ibid.
Yesterday afternoon she had a natural lax, by reason whereof she began to
lighten, and (as it appeared) to amend* and so continued till toward night.
All this night she has been very sick, and does rather appare, then amend. her
Confessor has been with her Grace this morning, and has done that to his
office appertains, and is even now preparing to Administer to her Grace the
Sacrament of Unction.

Subscribed at Hampton Court on Wednesday morning at eight of the clock, by
Thomas Cutland, Robert Karhold, Edward Bayntam, John Chambers Priest, William
Butts, George Owen.


So died this Noble, Beautiful, and Virtuous Queen, to the General
lamentation of all good Subjects, and on the twelfth of November following,
with great Solemnity was conveyed to Windsor, and there Magnificently interred
in the midst of the quire. In memory of whom, I find this Epitaph, not unworthy
the greatest wits of the present times, to have then been made, viz. Phoenix
Jana Jacet n^to Phaenice Dolendum est,
Saecula Phoenices nulla tulisse duas.


That is to say, Here Jane, a Phoenix lies, whose death,
Gave to another Phoenix breath.
Sad case the while, that no age ever,
Could show two Phaenixes together.


But, S^ow Chron p. 575. Godw.
to return unto the Prince, It is affirmed with like confidence, and as little
truth, Ann. Hen. 8. p. 117.
that on the 13th. day of October, then next following (that being but the
sixth day after his birth) he was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall,
Earl of Chester, etc. Lord Herb. Hist. fol. 430.
In which, though I may easily excuse John Stow, and Bishop Goodwine, who
report the same; yet I shall never pardon the late Lord Herbert for his
incuriosity, as one that had fit opportunities to know the contrary. For first,
Prince Edward was never created Duke of Cornwall, and there was no reason why
he should; he being actually Duke of Cornwall at the hour of his birth,
according to the Entaile* which was made of that Dukedom to the Crown, by King
Edward the third. And secondly, he was never created Prince of Wales, nor then,
nor any time then after following, his Father dying in the midst of the
preparations which were intended for the Pomp and Ceremony of that Creation.
This truth confessed by Sir John Haywood, in his History of the Life and Reig^
of this King; and generally avowed by all our Heralds, who reckon none of the
children of King Henry the Eighth, amongst the Princes of Wales, although all
of them successively by vulgar Appellation had been so entitled. Which
appears more plainly by a particular of the Robes and Ornaments, which were
preparing for the day of this Solemnity, as they are entered on Record in the
book called The Catalogue of Honor, published by Thomas Mills of Canterbury,
where it appears also, that they were prepared only, but never used, by reason
of the Kings death, which prevented the Sollemnities of it.

The ground of this Error, I conceive first to be taken from John Stow, who
finding a creation of some Noble men, and the making of many Knights, to relate
to the 18 day of October, supposed it to have been done with reference to the
Creation of a Prince of Wales, whereas, if I might take the liberty of putting
in my own conjecture, I should conceive rather that it was done with Reference
to the Princes Christning, as in like manner we find a creation of three
Earls, and five to inferior Titles, at the Christning of the Princess Mary,
Stow Chron. fol. 863.
born to King James, after his coming into England, and Christened upon Sunday,
the fifth of May. 1604. And I conceive withal, that Sir Edward Seimour,
Vicount Beauchamp, the Queens elder brother, was then created Earl of
Hartford, to make him more capable of being one of the Godfathers; or a
Deputy-Godfather at the least, to the Royal Infant, the Court not being then
in a condition, by reason of the mournful accident of the late Queens death,
to show it self in any extraordinary splendor, as the occasion had required
at another time. Among which persons so advanced to the Dignity and degree of
Knighthood, I find Mr. Thomas Seimour, the Queens youngest brother, to be one
of the number, of whom we shall have frequent occasion to speak more fully and
particularly in the course of this History. No other alteration made in the
face of the Court, but that Sir William Pawlet was made Treasurer, and Sir John
Russell Comptroller of his Majesty's Household, on the said 18th. day of October
(which I conceive to be the day of the Princes Christning (both of them being
principal Actors in the Af^aires, and troubles of the following times.

But, in the face of the Church, there appeared some lines, which looked
directly toward a Reformation. For, besides the surrendering of diverse
Monasteries, and the executing of some Abbots, and other Religious Persons for
their stiffenesse (if I may not call it a perverseness) in opposing the Kings
desires; there are two things of special note, which concurred this year, as
the Prognostics, or ^ore-runners of those great events, which after followed
in his Reign. For it appears by a Memorial of the Famous Library of Sir
Robert Cotton, Cot. M. S. p. 325.
that Grafton now made known to Cromwell, the finishing of the English Bible,
of which he had printed 1500. at his own proper charges, amounting in the
total to 500. p. desiring stoppage of a surreptitions Edition in a less
Letter, which else would tend to his undoing; the suit endeared by Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury, at whose request Cromwell presents one of the Bibles
to the King, and procures the same to be allowed by his Authority to be read
publicly, without comptrole, in all his Dominions, and for so doing, he
receives a letter of thanks from the said Archbishop, dated August the 13th.
of this present year. Nor were the Bishops and Clergy wanting to advance the
work, by publishing a certain book in the English Tongue, which they entitled
The Institution of a Christian Man; in which the Doctrine of the Sacraments,
the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Commandments, were opened and expounded
more perspicuously, and less abhorrent from the truth then in former times. By
which clear light of Holy Scripture, and the principal duties of Religion so
laid op^n to them, the people were the better able to discern the errors and
corruption^ of the Church of Rome, From which by the piety of this Prince they
were fully Freed. And for a preamble thereunto the Rood of Boxley, commonly
called the Rood of Grace, so Artificially contrived (by reason of some secret
wires in the body, or concavities of it) that it could move the eyes the lips,
An. 1538.
etc. to the great wonder and astonishment of the common people; was openly
discovered for a lewd imposture, and broke in pieces at St. Paul's Cross, on
Sunday the 24. of February; the Rood of Bermondsey Abbey in South-work following
the same fortune also within six days.

The next year brings an end to almost all the Monasteries, Anno 1538.
and Religious houses in the Realm of England, surrendered into the Kings
hands, by publ^que instruments, under the seals of all the several and
respective Convents, and those surrenderies, ratified and confirmed by Act of
Parliament. And this occasionally conduced to the future peace and quiet of
this young Prince, by removing out of the way some Great Pretenders, who
otherwise might have created to him no small disturbance. For so it happened,
that Henry* Earl of Dev^nshire, and Mary, wife of Exceter, descended from a
daughter of King Edward the f^urth, and Henry Pole, Lord Mountacute, descended
from a daughter of George, Duke of Clarence, the second brother of that Edward,
under color of preventing, or revenging the Dissolution of so many famous
Abbyes, and religious houses, associated themselves with Sir Edward N^vill, and
Sir Nicholas Carew, in a dangerous practice against the person of the King, and
the Peace of the Kingdom. By whose endictment it appears, that it was their
purpose and design to destroy the King, and advance Reginald Pole, one of the
younger brothers of the said Lord Mountacute (of whom we shall hear more in the
course of this History) to the Regal^ Throne. Which, how it could consist with
the Pretensions of the Marquisse of Exceter, or the Ambition of the Lord
Mountacute, the elder brother of this Reginald, it is hard to say. But, having
the Chronicle of John Speed to justify me in the truth hereof in this
particular, I shall not take upon me to dispute the point. The dangerous
practice of which Persons, did not so much retard the work of Reformation as
their execution did advance it; to this year also appertains the suppressing
of Pilgrimages, the defacing of the costly and magn^ficent shrines of our Lady
of Walsingham, Ipswich, Worcester, etc, and more particularly of Thomas Becket,
once Archbishop of Canterbury. This last, so rich in Jewels of most
inestimable value, that two great chests were filled with the spoils thereon;
so heavy and capacious, as is affirmed by Bishop ^oodwin, that each of them
required no fewer then eight men to carry them out of the Church, nothing
inferior unto Gold, being charged within them. More modestly in this then
Sanders, that malicious Sycophant, who will have no less then twenty six waine
load of silver, Gold, and precious stones, to be seized into the Kings hands,
by the spoil of that Monument. Which proceedings so exasperated the Pope then
being, that without more delay, by his Bull of January 1. he deprived the King
of his Dominions, and caused the sentence of his Deprivation to be posted up at
the Towns of Bruges, Taurney, and Dunki^ke in Flanders, at Bolloigne, and
Diepe in France, and St. Andrews in Scotland; eff^cting nothing by the
unadvi^edness of that desperate Counsel, but that the King became more fixed
in his Resolutions, and more averse from all the thoughts of Reconciliation
with the Sea of Rome. Anno 1539.


The surrenderies of the former year, cofirmed by Act of Parliament, in the
beginning of this, drew after it the final dissolution of all the rest; none
daring to oppose that violent Torrent, which seemed to carry all before it; but
the Abbots of Colchester, Reading, and Glastenbury quarrelled, for which they
were severally condemned, and executed, under color of denying the Kings
Supremacy; and their rich Abbeys seized upon, as confiscations to the use of
the King, which brought him into such a suspicion of separating from the
Communion of the Church of Rome, Anno 1540.
that for the better vindicating of his integrity, as to the particulars, he
passed in the same Parliament the terrible Statute of the six Articles, which
drew so much good blood from his Protestant Subjects.

And being further doubtful in himself what course to steer, he marries at
the same time with the Lady Ann, sister unto the Duke of Cleve, whom not long
after he divorseth; Advances his Great Minister* An. 1542.
Cromwell (by whom he had made so much havoc of Religious hou^es, in all parts
of the Realm) to the Earldome of Essex, and sends him headless to his Grave
within three months after; takes to his bed the Lady Katharine Howard, a Niece
of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and in short time found cause enough to cut off her
head; not being either the richer in children, by so many wives, Anno 1541.
nor much improved in his Revenue by such horrible Rapines. In the midst of
which confusions he sets the wheel of Reformation once more going, by
moderating the extreme severity of the said Statute, touching the six Articles,
abolishing the Superstitious usages, accustomedly observed on St. Nicholas day;
and causing the English Bible, of the Larger vollumne, to be set up, in all,
and every Parish Church, within the Kingdom* Anno 1542.
for such as were Religiously minded to Resort unto it.

The Prince had now but newly finished the first year of his age, when a fit
wife was thought of for him upon this occasion. The Pope incensed against King
Henry, had not long since sententially deprived him of his Kingdom, as before
was said. And having so done, he made an offer of it to King James the fifth,
then King of the Scots, the only Son of Margaret, his eldest sister, wife of
James the fourth. Speed ex John Leshly. Fol. 1014.
To whom he sent a Breve to this effect: viz.

That he would assist him against King Henry, whom in his Consistory, he had
pronounced to be an Heretic, a Scismatick, a manifest Adulterer, a public
Murderer, a committer of Sacrilege, a Rebel, and convict of Lesae
Majestatis, for that he had risen against his Lord, and therefore that he had
justly deprived him of his Kingdom, and would dispose the same to him, and
other Princes, so as they would assist him in the recovery of it.

This could not be so closely carried, but that the King had notice of it, who
from thenceforth began to have a watchful eye upon the Actions of his Nephew;
sometimes alluring him unto his party, by offering him great hopes and favors,
and practicing at other times to weaken, and distract him, by animating, and
maintaining his own Subjects against him. At last, to set all right between
them, an enterview was appointed to be held at York, proposed by Henry, and
condescended to by James. But, when the day appointed came, the Scots King
failed, being deterred from making his appeareance there, by some Popish
Prelates, who put into his head, a fear of being detained a Prisoner, as James
the first had been by King Henry the fourth. Upon this breach the King makes
ready for a War, sets out a manifest of the Reasons which induced him to it,
amongst which he insists especially on the neglect of performing that Homage,
which anciently had been done (and still of Right ought to be done) to the
Kings of England. In prosecuting of which War* the Duke of Norfolk entered
Scotland with an Army, October 21. Anno 1542. wa^ts and spoils all the
Country; followed not long after by an Army of Scots, consisting of 15000. men,
which in like manner entered England, but were discomfited by the valor and
good fortune of Sir Thomas Wharton, and Sir William M^sgrave, with the help of
some few Borderers only, the Scots upon some discontent, making little
resistance. In which fight, besides many of the Scottish Nobility, were taken
eight hundred Prisoners of inferior note: twenty four pieces of Ordinance,
some cart load^ of Arms, and other booty.

On the 19 of December the Scottish Lords, and other of the Principal
Prisoners, to the number of 20. or thereabouts, were brought into London;
followed on the third day after with the news of the death of King James, and
the birth of the young Queen his daughter. This put King Henry on some thoughts
of uniting the two Crowns in a firm and everlasting League, by the Marriage of
this infant Queen, with his Son Prince Edward: In pursuance whereof he sent for
the inprisoned Lords, feasted them royally at White Hall, and dealt so
effectually with them by himself and his Ministers, that they all severally
and jointly engaged themselves to promote this Match. Dismissed into their own
Country, upon these promises, and the leaving of Hostages, they followed the
Negotation with such care and diligence, that on the 29th. of June, in the
year ensuing (notwithstanding the great opposition made against them by the
Queen Dowager, Card^nall Beton, and diverse others who adhered to the Faction of
France) they brought the business at the last to this Conclusion, viz.

1. That the Lords of Scotland shall have the Education of the Princess for a
time, yet so, as it might be Lawful for our King to send thit^er a Noble man,
and his wife, with a Family under twenty Persons, to wa^te on her. 2. That at
ten years of Age she should be brought into England, the contract being first
finished by a Proxy in Scotland. Anno 1543
3. That within two months after the date he^eof, six Noble Sc^ts should be
given as Hostages for the performance of the Conditions on their Part: And that
if any of them dyed, their number should be sup^lyed. 4. And furthermore it was
agreed upon, that the Realm of Scotland (by that name) should preserve it is
Laws and Rights; and that Peace should be made for as long time as was
desired, the French being excluded.

But, though these Capitulations thus agreed on, were sent into ^ngland,
signed, and ^ealed in the August following; yet the Cardinal and his Party
grew so strong, that the wh^le Treaty come to nothing; the Noble Men who had
been Pr^soners, falsifying their Faith, and choosing rather the Lord Kenneth
Earl of Cassiles excepted) to leave their Hostages to King Henry's mercy, then
to put themselves into his Power. Provoked therewith, the King denounces War
against them, and knowing that they depended chiefly upon the strength of
France, he peeceth with the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Proclaims War
against the French, Following the War against both Kingdoms, he causes many
in-roades to be made into Scotland wasting and harrasing that poor Country;
Anno. 1544.
and with a Royal Army passes over into France* where he made himself Master
of the strong Town of Bolloigne; with the Forts about it, into which he made
his Royal entry, Sep. 25. 1544. The rest of the Kings life spent in continual
Action against both Nations, in which the Enemies had the worst, though not
without some loss to the English also; the poor Scots paying so dearly for
their breach of Faith, that no year passed, in which their Country was not
wasted, and their ships destroyed. Toward the charges of which VVarres, the
King obtained a Grant in Parliament of all Chanteries, Colleges, Hospitalls,
and free Chappells, with the Lands thereunto belonging, to be united to the
Crown. But, dying before he had took the benefit of it, he lef^ that part of
the spoil to such of his Ministers, who had the Managing of Affairs in his
Sons Minority.

In the mean t^me the Prince having attai^ed unto the Age of six years, Anno.
1545.
was taken out of the hands o^ his women, and committed to the tuition of Mr.
John Cheek, whom he afterward Knighted, and advanced him to the Provo^^ship
of Kings College in Cambridge, and Doctor Richard Cox, whom afterward he
preferred to the Deanery of Westminster, and made ch^efe Almoner. These two
being equal in Authority, employed themselves to his advantage in their
several kinds, Doctor Cox for knowledge of Divinity, Philosophy, and Gravity
of Manners; Mr. Cheek for eloquence in the Greek and Latin Tongues. Besides
which two he had some others to instruct him in the Modern Languages, and
thrived so well amongst them all, that in short time he perfectly spoke the
French tongue, and was able to express himself significantly enough in the
Italian, Greek and Spanish. And as for Latin, he was such an early proficient
in it, that before he was eight years old, he is said to have written the
ensuing Letter to the King his Father; seconding the same with another to the
Earl of Hartford, as he did that also with a third to the Queen Katharine
Parre, whom his Father had taken to wife, July the 12th. 1543. And though these
Letters may be used as good evidences of his great proficiency, with reference
to the times in which he lived; An. 1545.
yet in our days in which either the wits of men are sooner ripe, or the
method of teaching more exact, and facile, they would be found to contain
nothing which is more then ordinary. Now his Letter to the King (referring the
Reader for the other two, unto Fox, and Fuller) it bears date, on the 27th.
day of September, when he wanted just a fortnight of eight years old, and is
this that follows.

PRINCE Edwards Epistle to the King, September 27. 1545.
LIterae Meae semper habe^t unum Argumentum, Rex Nobilissime, atque pater
^^^^strissime, id est, in omnibus Epistolis ago tibi Gratias pro beneficentia
tua Erga me Maxima; si enim s^pius multo, ad te literas Exararem, nullo tamen
quidem modo potui pervenire officio Literarum ad magnitudinem benignitatis tuae
erga me. Quis enim potuit compensare beneficia tua erga me? Nimirum nullus qui
non est tam magnus Rex, ac Nobilis Princeps, ac tu es, cujusmodi ego non sum.
Quamobrem Pietas tua in me, multo gratior est mihi, quod facis mihi, quae nullo
modo compensare Possum; sed tamen Adnitar, and Faciam quod in me est, ut
placeam Majestati, atque Precabor Deum, ut diu te servet in columem. Vale Rex
Nobilissime,

Majestati tu^ Observantissimus Filius Halfeldiae Vicesimo Septimo. September.
EDVARDUS PRINCEPS.


For a companion at his book, or rather for a Proxy to bear the punishment of
such errors as either through negligence, or inadvertency were committed by
him, he had one Barnaby Fits Patrick, the son (if I conjecture aright) of that
Patrick, whom I find amongst the witnesses to King Henry's last Will and
Test^ment, as also amongst those Legatees which are therein mentioned, the King
bequeathing him the Legacy of one hundred marks. But, whether I hit right or
not, most probable it is, that he had a very easy substitution of it; the
harmlessenesse of the Princes nature, the ingenuity of his disposition, and his
assiduity at his book, freeing him for the most part from such corrections, to
which other children at the school are most commonly subject. Yet, if it
sometimes happened, as it seldom did, that the servant suffered punishment for
his Masters errors. It is not easy to affirm, whether Fits Patrick smarted
more for the fault of the Prince, or the Prince conceived more grief for the
smart of Fits Patrick. Once I am certain that the Prince entertained such a
real Estimation of him, that when he came unto the Crown, he acquainted him by
letter with the sufferings of the Duke of Sommerset, instructed and maintained
him for his travels in France, endowed him with fair lands in Ireland (his
native Country) and finally made him Baron of upper Ossery, which Honorable
Title he enjoyed till the time of his death, in the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, at what time he dyed a zealous and Religious Protestant. One
thing I must not pretermit to show the extraordinary piety of this hopeful
Prince in the days of his childhood, An. 1546.
when, being about to take down something, which seemed to be above his Reach,
one of his fellows proffe^ed him a Bossed-Plated Bible, to stand upon, and
heighten him for taking that which he desired. Which, when he perceived to be a
Bible, with Holy indignation he re^u^ed it, and sharply reprehended him that
made the offer. A st^ong assurance of that dear esteem and veneration, in
which he held that Sacred Book in his riper years.

Having attained the age of nine, Anno 1546.
there were great prepa^ati^ns made for his sollemne investiture in the
Principality of Wales, together with the Earledomes of Chester and Flint, as
dependants on it. Toward which Pomp, I find a provision to be made of these
Ornaments and Habiliments following* tha^ is to say, first an Honorable Habit,
viz. A Robe of Purple Velvet, having in it about eigh^een else, more or less,
Gar^i^^ed about with a ^ringe of Gold, and lined with Ermins, A S^rcot, or
inner Gown, having in it about fourteen else of Velvet, of like color, Fringe,
and Furr, Laces, Buttons, and Tassells (as they call them, O^naments made of
Purple, Silk, and Gold; A G^rdle of si^k, to g^rd his inn Gown; A sword with
a scabbard made (...) Purple, silk, and Gold, garnished with the like girdle
he is girt withal, thereby showing him to be Duke of Cornwall by birth, and
not by Creation. A cap of the same velvet tha^ ^is (...) is of, furred with
^^mines, with Laces* and a button, and Tassells on the Crown thereof, made of
Venice Gold* A Garland, or a little Coronet of Gold, to be put on his head,
together with his Cap. A long golden verge, or Rod, be^okening his Government.
A ring of Gold also, to be put on the third finger of his left hand, whereby he
was ^o declare his Marriage, made with equity and Justice. But scarce were
these prov^sions ready, but the Kings sickness brought a stop, and his death
shortly after put an end to those preparations; the expectation of a
Principality, being ther^by changed to the pos^ession o^ a Crown.

For, the King having long lived a voluptuous life, and indulgent too much unto
his Palate, was g^owne so corpulent, or rather so over^grown^ with in
unweildly bur^hen of flesh, that he was not able to go up stairs* from one
room to another, but as h^ was hoised up by an Engine: Which, filling his body
with ^oule and foggy humors, and those humors falling into his leg, in which
(...) ancient and uncured ^ore, they there began to settle to an inflammation
(...) both waste his Spirits, and increase his passions. In the m^ddest of
(...), it was not his least care to provide for the safet^ of his S^n, and
preserve the succession of the Crown to his own Posterity. At such time as he
had married Queen Ann Bollen, he procured h^s daughter Mary to be declared
(...) by Act of Parliament; the like he also did by his daughter Elizabeth,
when he ha^ married Queen Jane S^imour, settling the Crown upon his issue by the
said Queen Jane. But, having no other issue by her but Prince Edward only* and
none at all by any of his following wives; he thought it a high point of
Pr^dence (as indeed it was) to establish the Succession with more stays then
one, and not to let it rest on so weak a staff, as a child of little more
then nine years of age, For which cause he procured an Act of Parliament, in
the 35th. year of his Reign, in which it is declared, that in default of issue
of the said Prince Edward, the Crown should be entailed to the Kings daughter,
Act of An. 35. Henry the 8th. Cap. ^.
the Lady Mary, and the Heirs of her body, and for default thereof to the
Kings daughter, the Lady Elizabeth, and the heirs of her body, and for lack of
such issue, to such as the King by his Letters Patents, or his Last Will in
Writing should Limit.

So that he had three children by three several wives, two of them borne of
questionable Marriages, yet all made capable by this Act, of having their
several turns in the succession, as it after proved. And though a threefold
cord be not easily broken, yet he obtained further power for disposing the
Crown, if their issue failed; whereof, being now sick, and fearing his
approaching end, he resolved to make such use in laying down the State of the
succession to the Crown Imperial, as was more agreeable to his private
passions, then the Rules of Justice; which appeared plainly by his excluding of
the whole Scottish Line, descended from the Lady Margaret, his eldest sister,
from all hopes thereof; unless perhaps it may be said, that the Scottish Line
might be sufficiently provided for, by the Marriage of the young Queen with the
Prince his Son, and that it was the Scot^ own fault, if the match should fail.

This care being over, and the Succession settled by his Last Will and
Testament, bearing date, the 28th. of December, being a full month before his
death, he began to entertain some fears and Jealousies, touching the safety
of the Prince, whom he should leave unto a factious and divided Court, who were
more like to serve their own turns by him, then advance his interest His
brother-in-Law, the Duke of Suffolk (in whom he most confided) died not long
before; the kindred of Queen Jane were but new in Court, of no Authority in
themselves, and such as had subsisted chiefly by the countenance, which she had
from him. As they could contribute little to the defense of the Princes person,
and the preservation of his Right^; So there were some who had the Power, (and
who could tell but that they also had the will?) to change the whole frame of
his design, and take the Government to themselves. Amongst which there was none
more feared then the Noble Lord Henry, Earl of Surrey, the eldest son of
Tho^as Howard, Duke of Norfolk, strong in Alliance and Dependence, of a Revenue
not inferior to some foreign Kings, and that did derive his Pedigree from
King Edward the first. The Earl himself, beheld in general by the English as
the chief Ornament of the Nation; Highly esteemed for his Chivalry, his
Affability, his learning, and whatsoever other Graces might either make him
amiable in the eyes of the people, or formidable in the sight of a jealous,
impotent, and way-ward Prince. Against him therefore, and his Father, there
were Crimes devised, their persons put under an Arrest, their Arraignment
prosecuted at the Guild Hall in London, where they both received the sentence
of death; which the Earl suffered on the Tower Hill, on the 19. of January,
the old Duke being reserved by the Kings death, (which followed within nine
days after) for more happy times. Which brings into my mind a sharp, but
shrewd Character of this King, occurring in the writings of some, but more
common in the mouths of many* that is to say, that be never spared woman in
his lust, nor man in his anger. For proof of which last, it is observed, that
he brought unto the block two Queens, two Noble Ladies, one Cardinal declared,
Sand. de Scis. Angl. p. 214.
of Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, and the sons of Earls, no fewer then twelve:
Lords and Knights* eighteen; of Abbots and Priors thirteen; Monks, and
Religious Persons, about seventy seven; and many more of both Religions, to a
very great number. So as it cannot be denied, that he had too much (as all
great Monarchs must have somewhat) of the Tyrant in him. And yet I dare not say
with Sir Walter Rawleigh, That if all the patterns of a merciless Prince had
been lost in the World, they might have been found in this one King; some of
his Executions being justifiable by the very nature of their Crimes, others to
be imputed to the infelicity of the times in which he lived, and may be
ascribed unto Reasons of State, the Exigences whereof are seldom squared by the
Rule of Justice.

His Infirmity, and the weakness which it brought upon him, having confined
him to his bed, he had a great desire to receive the Sacrament; and being
persuaded to receive it in the easiest posture, sitting, or raised up in his
bed, he would by no means yield unto it; but caused himself to be taken up,
placed in his chair, in which he heard the greatest part of the Office, till
the Consecration, and then Received the Blessed Sacrament on his knees, Ibid.
p. 211.
as at other times, saying withal, as Sanders does Relate the story, That if
he did not only cast himself upon the ground, but even under it also, he could
not give unto the Sacrament the Honor which was due unto it. The instant of
his death approaching, none of his Servants, though thereunto desired by his
Physicians, durst acquaint him with it. Till at last Sir Anthony Denny
undertook that ungrateful office, which the King entertaining with less
impatience then was looked for from him, gave order that Archbishop Cramner
should be presently sent for. But, the Archbishop being then at his house in
Croyden, seven miles from Lambeth, it was so long before he came, that he found
him speechless. Howsoever, applying himself to the Kings present condition,
and discoursing to him on this Point, that Salvation was to be obtained only by
Faith in Christ, he desired the King, that if he understood the effect of his
words, and believed the same, he would signify as much by some sign or other,
which the King did by ringing him gently by the hand, and within short time
after he gave up the Ghost, when he had lived fifty five years, seven months,
and six days over, of which he had Reigned thirty seven years, nine months,
and six days also.

Having brought King Henry to his death, we must next see in what estate he
left the Kingdom to his Son* with reference to the condition of Affa^res both
at home and abroad. Abroad he left the Pope his most bitter enemy, intent on
all advantages for the recovery of the Power and Jurisdiction, which had been
exercised in England by his Predecessors; and all the Princes of his Party, in
Germany, Italy, and elsewhere, either in Action, or Design, concurring with
him. The Protestant Kings and Princes he had disobliged, by repudiating the
Lady Ann of Cleve, and the precipitated death of Cromwell, upon whose Power and
favor with him they did most rely: But, nothing did mo^e alienate their
affections from him, then the persecution raised at home, upon the terrible
Statute of the six Articles, before remembered; by which they saw themselves
condemned, and executed in the persons of those, who suffered for the same
Religion, which themselves professed. And, as for the two great Kings of France
and Spain, he had so carried himself between them, that he was rather feared
of both, then beloved by either of them. The Realms and Signeuries of Spain
(exc^pt Portugal only) together with the Kingdoms of Naples, Scicilie, and
Sard^nia, and the Estates belonging to the House of Burgundy, in the Belgic
Provinces, were all united in the Person of Cha^les the fifth, to which he
a^ded by his own proper Power and Valor, the Dukedomes of Millain, and
Gulldress, the Earldome of Z^tphen, with the Estates of Gr^ini^gen, Vtrecht,
and Over-yss^ll. And on the other side the French Kings were not only in the
quiet possession of those goodly Territories, (Normandy, Guienne, and the rest)
which anci^ntly belonged to the Kings of England; but lately had inpa^ronised
themselves of the Dukedomes of Burgoine, and Bretagne, and the Earldom of
Provence, all meeting in the Person of King Francis the first. Of which two
great and puissant Princes, the first being resolved to admit no equal, and
the second to acknowledge no superior, they endeavored by all ways and
means immaginable to subdue each other, whereby the Conqueror might attain in
time to the Empire of Europe. It was therefore King Henry's chiefest care, as
it was his interess to keep the scales to even between them, that neither of
them should preponderate, or weigh down the other, to the endangering of the
rest of the Princes of Christendom: Which he performed with so great constancy
and courage, as made him in effect the Arbitrer at all times between them. So
as it may be truly affirmed of him, that he sat at the Helmne, and Steered
the great Affairs of Christendom, to what point he pleased. But then withal
as his constant and continual standing to th^s Maxim of State, made him
friend to neither, so he was suspected of them both; both having also their
particular Animosities against his person and proceedings. The Emperor
irreconciliably incenst against him for the injury done unto his Aunt, from
whom he had caused himself to be divorced; the French King no less highly
enraged by the taking of B^iloigne, for which, though the King had shuffled up
a peace with France, Prince Edward shall be called to a sober Reckoning, when
he least looks for it.

To look to matters near at home, we find the Scots exasperated by his Annual
inrodes, but more by his demanding the long neglected duty of Homage to be
performed from that Kingdom to the Crown of England: The Irish on the other
side of the sea, being kept under by strong hand, but standing upon no good
terms of affection with him; the executing of the young Earl of Kildare, and
five of his Unckles at one time, being fresh in memory, and neither forgotten,
nor forgiven by the rest of the Clanns. And, as for England it self, the People
were generally divided into Schisms and Factions; some being two stiff in
their old Mumpsimus, as others no less busy in their new Sumpsimus, as he
used to phrase it. The Treasures of the Crown exhausted by prodigal gifts, and
his late chargeable Expedition against the French; the Lands thereof charged
with Rents, and Pensions granted to Abbots, Priors, and all sorts of Religious
Persons; some of which remained payable, and were paid accordingly, till the
time of King James; and, which was worst of all, the Money of the Realm so
imposed and mixed, that it could not pass for current amongst Foreign Nations,
to the great dishonor of the Kingdom, and the loss of the Merchant. For,
though an infinite Mass of Jewels, treasure in Plate, and ready Money, and an
incredible improvement of Revenue had acrued unto him by such an universell
spoil, and dissolution of Religious Houses, yet was he little or nothing the
richer for it. In so much, that in the year 1543. being within less then
seven years after the General suppression of Religious Houses, he was faign
to have recourse for moneys to his Houses of Parliament, by which he was
supplied after an extraordinary manner; the Clergy at the same time giving him
a subsidy of 6. s. in the pound, to be paid out of all their Spiritual
Promotions, poor stipendary Priests paying each 6. s. 8. d. to increase the
sum. Which also was so soon consumed, that the next year he pressed his
Subjects to a Benevolence, for carrying on his War with France and Scotland;
and in the next obtained the Grant for all Chanteries, Hospitalls, Colleges,
and Free-Chappells, within the Realm, though he lived not to enjoy the benefit
of it, as before was said.

Most true it is, that it was somewhat of the latest before he cast his eye on
the Lands of Bishoppricks, though there were some who thought the time long
till they fell upon them. Concerning which there goes a story, that after the
Court-Harpies had devoured the greatest part of the spoil, which came by the
suppression of Abbyes, they began to seek some other way, to satiate that
greedy Appetite, which the division of the former booty had left unsatisfied;
and for the satisfying whereof, they found not any thing so necessary as the
Bishops Lands. This to effect, Sir Thomas Seimour is employed as the fittest
man, as being in favor with the King, as brother to Queen Jane, his most, and
best beloved wife; and having the opportunity of access unto him, as being one
of the Gentlemen of his Privy Chamber. And he not having any good affection to
Archbishop Cranmer, desired that the experiment should be tried on him, and
therefore took his time to inform the King, that my Lord of Canterbury did
nothing but fell his woods, letting long leases for great fines, and making
havoc of the Royalties of his Arch-Bishopprick, to raise thereby a fortune to
his wife and children; withal, he did acquaint the King, that the Archbishop
kept no hospitality, in respect of such a large Revenue; and that in the
opinion of many wise men it was more meet for the Bishops to have a sufficient
yearly Stipend out of the Exchequer, then to be so encumbred with temporal
Royalties, being so great a hindrance to their Studies, and Pastoral Charge,
and that the said Lands and Royalists being taken to his Majesty's use, would
afford him (besides the said Annual Stipends) a great yearly Revenue. The King
soon smelt out the Device, and shortly after sent him on an Errand to Lambeth,
about dinner time, where he found all the tables in the great Hall to be very
bountifully furnished, the Archbishop himself accompanied at dinner, with
diverse persons of Quality, his Table exceeding plentifully served, and all
things answerable to the Port of so great a Prelate: Wherewith the King being
made acquainted at his coming back, he gave him such a Ratle for his false
information, and the design which visibly depended on it, that neither he, nor
any other of the Courtiers, durst stir any further in the suite, whilst King
Henry lived.

But the King, considering further of it, could not think fit that such a
plausible Proposition, as taking to himself the Lands of the Bishops, should
be made in vain. Only he was resolved to prey further off: and not to fall
upon the spoil two near the Court, for fear of having more partakers in the
Booty, then might stand with his profit. And to this end the deals with
H^lgate, preferred not long before from Land^ff to the Sea of York; from whom
he takes at one time no fewer then seventy Manors, and Town-ships, of good old
Rents, given him in exchange, to the like yearly value, certain Impropriations,
Pensions, Tithes, and Portions of Tithes, (but all of an extended Rent,) which
had accrued unto the Crown by the fall of Abbyes. Which Lands he said by Act of
Parliament, to the Duchy of Lancaster. For which, see 37* Hen. 8. C^p 16. He
dismembered also by these Acts certain Manors from the Sea of London, in fav^ur
of Sir William Petie; and others in the like manner from the Sea of Canterbury,
but not without some reasonable compensation, or allowance for them. And though
by reason of his death, which fol^owed within short time after; there was no
further alienation made in his time, of the Churches Patrimoney; yet having
opened such a Gap, and discovered this secret, that the sacred Patrimony might
be alienated with so little trouble; the Courtie^s of King Edwards time, would
not be kept from breaking violently into it, and making up their own fortune in
the spoil of the Bi^hopricks. Of which we may ^peak more hereafter in it is
proper place. So impossible a thing it is for the i^l example of Great Princes,
not to find followers in all ages, especially where profit, or preferment may
be furthered by it.

But then it cannot be de^ied, but that King Henry left the Church in many
Respects, in a better condition then he found it; not only in order to the
Reformation of Religion, which none but such a Masculine Prince durst have
undertaken, but also in the Polity and endowments of it. The M^n^steries and
Religious Houses, might possibly be looked upon no otherwise, then as so many
excrescences upon the body of the Church; exempt for the most part from the
Episcopal Jurisdiction, wholly depending on the Pope* and such as might be
taken away, without any derogation to the Church, in Power or Patrimony. But,
Bishoprics being more essential to the constitution of the same, he did not
only preserve, as before he found them, but increased their number. Such of the
old Cathedralls as were founded on a Prior and Covent, he changed into a
Corporation of secular Priests, consisting of a Deane, and Prebendarles,
according to the proportion of their yearly rents* of which sort were the
Churches of Canterbury, Winton, Durham, Elie, Rochester, Norwich and Carlisle.
Six of the wealthier Monasteries he turned into Episcopal Sees, that is to
say, the Abbyes of Westminster, Peter Borough, Bristoll* Gloucester, and
Chester, with that of O^sney for the Sea of the Bishop of Oxon; assigning to
every new Episcopal See its Deane and Chapter, and unto every such Cathedral,
a competent number of Quiremen, and other Officers, all of them liberally
endowed and provided for. And that the Church might be continually furnished
with sufficient Seminaries, he sounded a Grammar School in every one of his
Cathedralls, either old or new, with Annual pensions to the Master* and some
allowance to be made to the children yearly; and ordained also, that in each
of the two Universities there should be public Readers, in the faculties of
Divinity, Law and Physic, and in the Greek and Hebrew Tongues; all which he
pensioned, and endowed with l^berall Sa^aries, as the times then were. Besides
which public benefactions he confirmed Cardinal Wolsies College in Oxon by
the name of Kings College first, and of Christ church afterward; and erected
that most beautiful pi^e of Trinity College in Cambridge; those being the two
fa^rest, and most magnificent foundations in the Christian World.

As for the Polity of the Church, he settled it in such a manner, that
Archbishops and Bishops might be chosen, confirmed, and consecrated, and all
the Subjects be relieved in their suits and Grievances, without having such
Recourse to the Court of Rome, as formerly had drained the Realm of so much
Treasure. For* having by his Proclamation, of the 19th. of September, Anno
1530. prohibited all addresses and Appeals to the Popes of Rome, he prevailed
so far upon his Bishops and Clergy; entangled by the Cardinals fall in a
Praemunire, that they acknowledged him in their Convocation, to be the Supreme
Head on Earth of the Church of England, and signified as much in a Public
Instrument, bearing date, the 22th day of March, next following. Upon this
ground were bu^lt the Statutes, prohibiting all Appeals to Rome, and for
determining all Ecclesiastical suites and controversies within the Kingdom.
24. Hen. 8. cap. 1^. That for the manner of declaring, and consecrating of
Archbishops, and Bishops* 25. Hen. 8. Cap. 20. and the prohibiting the payment
of all impositions to the Court of Rome; and for obtaining all such
dispensations from the sea of Canterbury, which formerly were procured from the
Popes of Rome, 25. Hen. 8. Cap. 21. and finally, that for declaring the King to
be the Supreme Head of the Church of England, and to have all Honors and
Preheminences; and amongst others, the first fruits and tenths of all
Ecclesiastical promotions within the Realm which were annexed unto that Title.
In the form of consecrating Archbishops, and Bishops, and the rule by which
they excercised their Jurisdiction, there was no change made, but what the
transposition of the Supreme Power, from the Pope to the King, must of
necessity infer. For, whereas the Bishops and Clergy in the Convocation An.
1532. had bound themselves neither to make, nor execute any Canons, or
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, but as they were thereto enabled by the Kings
Authority; it was by them desired, assented to by him, and confirmed in
Parliament, that all such Canons, and Constitutions, Synodall and Provincial,
as were before in use, and neither Repugnant to the Word of God, the kings
Prerogative Royal, or the known Laws of the Land, should remain in force,
till a review thereof were made by thirty two Persons of the Kings appointment.
Which review, not having been made from that time to this, all the said old
Canons, and Constitutions so restrained and qualified, do still remain in
force, as before they did. For this Consult the Act of Parliament 25. Hen. 8.
Cap. 1. And this, and all the rest being settled, then followed finally the Act
for extinguishing the Power of the Pope of Rome. 28. Hen. 8 Cap. 10. which
before we mentioned.

In order to a Reformation in points of Doctrine, he first directed his Bishops
and Clergy in their Convocation, A^no 1537. to compile a Book, containing The
Exposition of the Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Avemary, and the Ten
Commandments, together with an Explication of the use and nature of the seven
Sacraments. More clearly in it self, and more agreeable to the Truth of Holy
Scripture, then in former times; which book being called The Institution of a
Christian Man, was by them presented to the King, who liked thereof so well,
that he sent it by Doctor Barlow, Bishop of St. David's, to King James the
fifth, hoping thereby, to induce him to make the like Reformation in the Realm
of Scotland, as was made in England, though therein he was deceived of his
expectation. But, this Book having lien dormant for a certain time, that is to
say, as long as the six Articles were in force, was afterward corrected, and
explained by the Kings own hand; and being by him so corrected, was sent to be
reviewed by Arch^Bishop Cranmer, by him referred (with his own emendations on
it) to the Bishop^ and Clergy, then Assembled in their Convocation, Anno 1543.
and by them Approved. Which care that Godly Prelate took, as himself
confesses in a Letter to a friend of his, M. S. de Eccles. in Bishop Cot. p. 5.
bearing date, January 25. because the book being to come out by the Kings
Censure and Judgment, he would have nothing in the same, which Momus himself
could Reprehend. Which being done, it was published shortly after, by the name
of a Necessary Doctrine and Erudition, for any Christian man, with an Epistle
of the Kings Prefixed before it, in which it was commended to the Perusal of
all his subjects, that were Religiously disposed. Now, as the first book was
ushered in by an injunction, published in S^ptember, An. 1536. by which all
Curates were required to Teach the people to say the Lords Prayer, the Creed,
the Ave^ary, and the Ten Commandments, in the English Tongue; ^o was the
second countenanced by a Proclamation which made way unto it, bearing date, May
the sixth. 1541, whereby it was commanded, that the English Bible, of the
Larger Vollumne, should publicly be placed in every Parish Church of the
Kings Dominions* And here we are to understand, that the Bible having been
Translated into the English Tongue, by the great pains of William Tyndall (who
after suffered for Religion, in the Reign of this King) was by the Kings
Command suppressed, and the reading of it interdicted by Proclamation; the
Bishops, and other Learned men, advising the re^traint thereof, as the times
then stood. But afterward, the times being changed, and the People better
fitted for so great a benefit, the Bishops and Clergy Assembled in their
Convocation, Anno 1536. humbly petitioned to the King, that the Bible being
faithfully Translated, and purged of such Prologues, and Marginall Notes, as
formerly had given offense, might be permitted from thenceforth to the use of
the people. According to which Godly motion, his Majesty did not only give
Order for a new Translation, but in the Interim he permitted Cromwell, his
Viccar General, to set out an Injunction, for providing the whole Bible, both
in Latin and English, after the Translation then in use;) which was called
commonly by the name of Matthews Bible, but was no other then that of Tyndall,
somewhat altered) to be kept in every ^arish Church throughout the Kingdom.
And so it stood (but not with such a General observation, as the case
required, till the finishing of the new Translation, Printed by Grafton,
countenanced by a learned Preface of Archbishop Cranmer, and Authorized by the
Kings Proclamation of the sixth of May, as before was said. Finally, that the
people might be better made acquainted with the Prayers of the Church, it was
appointed, a little before the Kings going to Bolloigne, Anno 1545. that the
L^tany (being put into the same form almost in which now it stands) should,
from thenceforth be said in the English Tongue. So far this King had gone, in
order to a Reformation, that it was no hard matter for his Son (or for those
rather, who had the Managing of Affairs, during his Minority) to go thorough
with it.

In Reference to the Regal State, he added to the Royal Style, these three
Glorious Attributes, that is to say. Defender of the Faith, The Supreme Head on
Earth of the Church of England, and King of Ireland. In what manner he obtained
the Title of Supreme Head, conferred upon him by the Convocation, in the year
1530. and confirmed by Act of Parliament, in the 26 year of his Reign, has
been shown before. That of Defender of the Faith, was first bestowed upon him
by Pope Leo the tenth, upon the publishing of a Book against Martin Luther;
which Book being presented unto the Pope, by the hands of Doctor Clark,
afterward Bishop of Bath and Wells, has been preserved ever since amongst the
choicest Rarities of the Vatican Library. Certain it is, that the Pope was so
well pleased with the present, as to receive the same in a Sollemn Assembly of
the Cardinals, and Court of Rome, expressing the contentment which he took
therein, by a fluent Oration, the Copy whereof we have in Speed, Fol. 991. And
whereas, in former times, the French were Honored with the Title of Most
Christian; and the Spaniard lately with the Title of The Catholic King, This
Pope, in due acknowledgement of so great a Merit, bestows on Henry the more
Glorious Attribute of, The Defender of the Faith. Which Bull being dated on the
tenth of October. Anno 1521. is to be found exemplified in The Titles of Honor,
and thither I referr the Reader for his satisfaction. Twenty three years the
King enjoyed this Title, by no other Grant, then the Donation of Pope Leo. But,
then considering with himself, that it was first Granted by that Pope, as a
Personal favor, and not intended to descend upon his Posterity, as also, that
the Popes, by the reason of such differences as were between them, might
possibly take a time to deprive him of it, he resolved to stand no longer on a
ground of no greater certainty. And therefore, having summoned his High Court
of Parliament, to Assemble on the 29th. of March, Anno 1544. he procured this
Title to be assured unto his Person, and to be made perpetual to his Heirs
and Successors, for all times succeeding. For which Consult, the Statute 35.
Hen. 8. Cap. 3. And by the Act it was ordained, that whosoever should
maliciously diminish any of his Majesty's Royal Titles, or seek to deprive him
of the same, should suffer death, as in case of Treason; and that from
thenceforth the Style Imperial should no otherwise be expressed, then in this
form following, that is to say, N. N. by the Grace of God, King of England,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and on Earth of the Churches of
England, and Ireland, the Supreme Head. By virtue of which Act Queen Mary still
retained this Title, though she disclaimed the other of Supreme Head, by Act of
Parliament, in the first year of her Reign, as being incompetible with her
submission, and Relations to the Sea of Rome.

As for the Title of King of Ireland, it was first given unto this King, by a
Parliament, there holden in the Month of June, 1541. under Sir Anthony
Saint-Leiger being then Lord Deputy. The Acts whereof being transmitted to the
King, and by him confirmed, he caused himself to be first Proclaimed King of
Ireland, on the 23th. of January, then next following. Which, though it added
somewhat to him in point of Title, yet it afforded him no advantage in point of
Power; but that the name of King was thought to carry more respect and awe with
it amongst the Irish, then the Title of Lord, which only till that time had
been assumed by the Kings of England. For, otherwise the Kings of England, from
the first Conq^est of the Country by King Henry the second, enjoyed and
exercised all manner of Royalties, and Preheminences, which do, or can belong
to the greatest Kings; Governing the same by their Vice-Ger^nts, to whom
sometimes they gave the Title of Lord Lieutenants, sometimes Lord Deputies of
Ireland, then whom no Viceroy in the World comes nearer to the Pomp and
splendour of a Sovereign Prince. And though they took no other Title to
themselves, then Lords of Ireland, yet they gave higher Titles to their
Subjects there, many of which they advanced to the Honor, and Degree of
Earls. And at the same time, when King Richard the second contented himself
with no Higher Style then Lord of Ireland, he exalted his great Favorite
Robert d' Vere, the tenth Earl of Oxon, of that Family, first, to the Dignity
and Style of Marquess of Dublin, and after to the invidious Appellation of
Duke of Ireland, which he enjoyed unto his death. The Country at the same time
changed it is Title also, being formerly no otherwise called in our Records,
then Terra Hiberniea, or the Land of Ireland, but, from henceforth to be called
upon all occasions, in Acts of Parliament, Proclamations, and Letters Patents,
by the name of Regnum Hiberniae, or the Realm of Ireland. At the assuming of
which new Title, by this King, the Scots were somewhat troubled, but the Pope
much more; The Scots had then some footing in the North parts of that Island,
and thought, the taking of that Title by the Kings of England, to tend to the
endangering of their possession, or at least to bring them under a Subjection
of a Foreign Prince. And on the other side, it was complained of in the Court
of Rome, as a great and visible encroachment on the P^pall Power, to which it
only appertained, to erect new Kingdoms; and that the injury was the greater
in the present case, because the King holding that Island by no other Title, (as
it was then, and there pretended) then by the Donation of Pope Adrian to King
Henry the second, was not without the Popes consent to assume that Title. But,
the King cared as little for the Pope, as he did for the Scots, knowing how
able he was to make good all his Actings against them both; and not only for
enjoying this Title for the rest of his life, but for the leaving of it to his
Heirs and Successors* though afterward Queen Mary accepted a new Grant of it
from the Pope then being.

Having thus settled and confirmed the Regal Style, his next care was for
settling, and preventing all disputes and quarrels, which might be raised about
the Succession of the Crown, if the Prince, his son, should chance to dye
without lawful issue, as he after did. In which, as he discharged the trust
reposed in him, so he waved nothing of the Power which he had took unto himself
by Act of Parliament, made in that behalf, in the 35 year of his Reign, as
before wasnoted. In pursuance whereof, finding himself sensibly to decay, but
having his wits and understanding still about him, he framed his last Will and
Testament, which he caused to be signed and attested on the 30 of December,
Anno 1546, being a full Month before his death. First published by Mr. Fuller,
in his Church History of Britain, Lib. 5. Fol. 243, 244. And out of him I
shall crave leave to transcribe so much thereof, as may suffice to show unto
posterity the sense he had of his own condition, the vile esteem he had of his
sinful body, what pious, but unprofitable care he took, for the Decent
Interment of the same; in what it was wherein he placed the hopes of Eternal
life; and finally, what course he was pleased to take in the intailing of the
Crown after his decease, by passing over the line of Scotland, and settling the
Reversion in the House of Suffolk, if his own children should depart without
lawful Issue, as in fine they did. In which, and in some other points, not
here summed up, the Reader may best satisfy himself by the words and tenor
of the Will, which are these that follow.

IN the name of God, and of the Glorious and blessed Virgin, our Lady St. Mary,
and of all the Holy Company of Heaven: We Henry, by the Grace of God King of
England, France, and Ireland; Defender of the Faith, and in Earth immediately
under God, the Supreme Head of the Church of England and Ireland, of that name
the eighth; Calling to our remembrance the great gifts and benefits of Almighty
God, given unto us in this Transitory life, give unto him our most lowly and
humble thanks, acknowledging our selves insufficient in any part to deserve, or
recompense the same. But fear that we have not worthily received the same; and
considering further also, that we be, (as all mankind are) mortal, and borne
in sin, believing nevertheless, and hoping that every Christian creature
living here in this Transitotory and Wretched World, under God, dying in
steadfast and perfect Faith, endeavoring, and exercising himself to execute in
this life time, if he have leisure, such good deeds, and charitable works, as
Scripture commands, and as may be to the Honor and pleasure of God, is
Ordained by Christ's Passion to be sacred, and attain eternal Life; of which
number we verily trust by his Grace to be one.

And that every creature* the more high that he is in Estate, Honor, and
Authority in this World, the more he is bound to love, serve, and thank God,
and the more diligently to endeavor himself to do good and charitable works,
to the Laud, Honor, and Praise of Almighty God, and the Profit of his soul; We
also calling to remembrance the dignity, Estate. Honor, Rule and Governance
that Almighty God has called us to in this World; and that neither we, nor any
other creature mortal knows, the place, time, when, nor where it shall
please Almighty God to call him out of this Transitory World; Willing
therefore, and minding with Gods grace, before our passage out of the same, to
dispose and order our latter Mind, Will, and T^stament, in that sort, as we
trust it shall be acceptable to Almighty God, our only Savior Jesus Christ,
and all the Holy Company of Heaven, and the due satisfaction of all Godly
brethren in Earth, Have now, being of whole and perfect mind, adhering wholly
to the right Faith of Christ, and his Doctrine, repenting also our old and
detestable life, and being in perfect will and mind, by his Grace, never to
return to the same, and such like. And minding, by Gods Grace, never to vary
therefrom as long as any remembrance, truth, or inward knowledge does, or may,
remain within this mortal body; most humbly and heartily do commend, and
bequeath our soul to Almighty God, who in person of the Son redeemed the same,
with his most precious body and blood* in time of his Passion: And for our
better remembrance thereof, has left here with us in his Church Militant, the
Consecration and Administration of his most precious Body and Blood, to our no
little Consolation and Comfort, if we as thankfully accept the same, as he
lovingly and undeservedly on man's behalf, has ordained it for our only
benefit, and not his.

Also, we do instantly require, and desire the blessed Virgin Mary, his Mother,
with all the Holy Company of Heaven, continually to pray for us; whilst we
live in this World, and in the time of passing out of the same, that we may the
sooner attain everlasting life, after our departure out of this transitory
life, which we do both hope and claim by Christ's Passion; And for my body,
when the soul is departed, shall then remain but as a Cadaver, and so return
to the vile matter it was made of; were it not for the Crown and Dignity which
God has called us unto, and that we would not be counted an inf^inger of
honest Wo^ldly Policies, and Customs, when they be not contrary to Gods Laws,
we would be content to have it buried in any place, accustomed for Christian
^olkes, were it never so vile, for it is but ashes, and to ashes it shall
return. Nevertheless, because we would be loath, in the Reputation of the
people, to do injury to the Dignity, which we are unworthily called unto, we
are content, and also by these presents, Our Last Will and Testament is, to
will and order, that our body be buried and interred in the Quire of our
College of Windsor, middle way, between the stalls and the High Altar, and
there to be made and set, as soon as conveniently may be done after our
decease, by our Executors, at our costs and charges; if it be not done by us in
our lifetime, an Honorable Tomb, for our bones to rest in, which is well
onward, and almost made therefore already with a fair Grate about it; in which
we will also, that the bones of our true and loving wife Queen Jane, be put
also: And that there be provided, ordained and set, at the cost and charge of
us, or of our Executors, if it be not done in our life time, a convenient
Altar, Honorably prepared, and apparrelled with all manner of things
requisite, and necessary for daily Mass, there to be said perpetually, while
the World shall endure: Also we Will, that the Tombs, and Altars of King Henry
the sixth, and also of King Edward the fourth, our great Uncle and Grandfather,
be made more Princely, in the same place where they now be, at our charge.

Which care being taken for his Tomb, he gives order that all Divine Offices,
accustomed for the dead, should be duly Celebrated for him; that at the
removal of his body to Windsor, 1000. Marks should be distributed amongst the
poor, to the end that they might pray for the remission of his sins, and the
Wealth of his soul; that a Revenue of 600 pound per Annum, be settled on the
Deane and Chapter of Windsor, for performance of the uses in the Will.
expressed, and more particularly for the maintenance of thirteen poor
Gentlemen, (to be called the Poor Knights of Windsor) at the rate of twelve
pence by the day to each of them, with a see of 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. yearly to be
superadded unto him; which should be chosen the Head and Gover^our over all the
rest. And that being done, he proceeds to the entailing of the Crown, in this
manner following.

And as concerning the Order and disposition of the Imperial Crown of this
Realm of England, and Ireland, with our Title of France, and all Dignities,
Honors, and Preheminences, Prerogatives, Authorities and Jurisdictions to the
same annexed, or belonging, and for the s^re Establishment of the Succession of
the same. And also for a full and plain gift, Disposition, Assignement,
Declaration, Limitation, and appointment, with what Conditions our Daughters,
Mary and Elizabeth, shall severally have, hold, and enjoy the said imperial
Crown, and other the like Premises after our Decease; and for default of
issue, and Heirs of the several bodies of us, and of our Son Prince Edward,
lawfully begotten, And also for a full Gift, Disposition, Assignement,
Declaration, Limitations, and appointment to whom, and of what Estate, and of
what Manner, Fortune, and Condition, the said Imperial Crown, and other the
Premises shall remain, and come after our Decease; And for default of Issue,
and Heirs of the several bodies of us, of our said Son Prince Edward, of our
said Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, lawfully begotten, We by these Presents do
make, and declare our last Will and Testament, conveying the said Imperial
Crown, and all other the Premises in manner and Form following.

That is to say, We will by these Presents, that Immediately after our
departure ^ut of this present life, our said Son Prince Edward shall have and
enjoy the said Imperial Crown, and Realm of England, our Title of France,
with all Dignities, Honors, Preheminences, Prerogatives, Authorities, and
I^risdictions, Lands and Possessions to the same annexed, or belonging unto
him, or to the Heirs of his body Lawfully begotten; And for default of such
Issue of our said Son Prince Edward's Body, lawfully begotten, We will the same
Imperial Crown, and other the Premises after our Deceases, shall wholly
remain, and come to the Heirs of our Body, lawfully begotten upon the body of
our entirely beloved wife, Queen Katharine, that now is, or of any other our
lawful wife that we shall hereafter marry. And for lack of such issue and
Heirs, we will also that after our decease, and for default of Heirs of the
several bodies of us, and of our said Son Prince Edward's, lawfully begotten,
the said Imperial Crown, and all other the Premises shall wholly remain, and
come to our said Daughter Mary, and the Heirs of her body, lawfully begotten,
upon condition, that our said daughter Mary, after our decease, shall not
marry, nor take any Person to her Husband, without the Assent, and Consent of
the Privy Counselors, and others, appointed by us to our dearest Son, Prince
Edward aforesaid, to be of Counsel, or of the most part of them, or the most
of such as shall then be alive thereunto, before the said Marriage, had in
writing, sealed with their seals. All which conditions ^s Declare, Limit,
Appoint, and Will by these Presents, shall be knit and invested to the said
Estate of our daughter Mary, in the said Imperial Crown, and other the
Premises. And if it fortune our said Daughter Mary to die, without Issue of her
body lawfully begotten, We will, that after our decease, and for default of
Issue of the several bodies of us, and of our said Son Prince Edward, lawfully
begotten, and of our daughter Mary, the said imperial Crown, and other the
Premises shall wholly remain to come to our said daughter Elizabeth, and to the
Heirs of her body, lawfully begotten, upon condition, that our said daughter
Elizabeth, after our decease, shall not marry, or take any Person to her
Husband, without the Assent, and Consent of the Privy Counselors, and others
appointed by us, to be of Counsel with our said dearest Son Prince Edward, or
the most part of them, or the most part of such of them as shall be then alive,
thereunto, before the Marriage, had in writing, sealed with their seals, which
Condition we Declare, Limit, and appoint, and Will by these presents, shall be
to the said Estate of Our said Daughter Elizabeth knit, and invested.

And, if it shall fortune Our said Daughter Elizabeth to die without Issue of
Her Body lawfully begotten, We will, that after our Decease, and for default of
Issue of the several Bodies of V^, and of Our said Son Prince Edward, and of
Our said Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, the said Imperial Crown, and other the
Premises, after Our Decease, shall wholly remain, and come to the Heirs of the
Body of the Lady Frances our Niece, eldest Daughter to Our late Sister the
French Queen, lawfully begotten. And, for default of such Issue of the Body of
the said Lady Frances, We will, that the said Imperial Crown, and other the
Premises, after Our Decease, and for default of Issue of the several Bodies of
V^, and of Our Son Prince Edward, and of Our Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, and
of the Lady Frances lawfully begotten, shall wholly remain, and come to the
Heirs of the Body of the Lady Elanor Our Niece, second Daughter to Our said
Sister the French Queen, lawfully begotten. And if it happen the said Lady
Elanor to die without Issue of Her Body lawfully begotten, We will, that after
Our Decease, and for default of Issue of the several Bodies of Us, and of Our
said Son Prince Edward, and of Our said Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, and of
the said Lady Frances, and of the said Lady Elanor, lawfully begotten, the said
Imperial Crown, and other the Premises, shall wholly remain, and come to the
next Rightful Heirs. And We will, that if Our said Daughter Mary do marry
without the assent and consent of the Privy Councillors, and others appointed
by Us to be of Council to Our said Son Prince Edward, or the most part of them
that shall then be alive, thereunto, before the said Marriage, had in writing,
sealed with their Seals, as is aforesaid; That then, and from thenceforth, for
lack of Heirs of the several Bodies of Us, and of Our said Son Prince Edward,
lawfully begotten, the said imperial Crown shall wholly remain be, and come, to
Our said Daughter Elizabeth, and to the Heirs of Her Body lawfully begotten, in
such manner and form, as though Our said Daughter Mary were then dead, without
any Issue of the Body of Our said Daughter Mary lawfully begotten; Any thing
contained in this Our Will, or any Act of Parliament, or Statute, to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And in case Our said Daughter, the Lady
Mary, do keep, and perform the said condition, expressed, declared, and limited
to her Estate in the said Imperial Crown, and other the Premises in this Our
last Will declared; And that Our said Daughter Elizabeth do not keep, and
perform, for her part, the said condition declared, and limited by this Our
last ^ill to the Estate of the said Lad^ El^zabeth in the said Imperial Crown
in this Realm of England, and Ireland, and other the Premises: We will, that
then, and from thence-forth, after Our Decease, and for lack of Heirs of the
several Bodies of Us, and of Our said Son Prince Edward, and of Our Daughter
Mary, lawfully begotten; the said Imperial Crown, and other the Premises shall
wholly remain, and come to the next Heirs lawfully begotten of the said Lady
Frances, in such manner and form, as though the said Lady Elizabeth were dead
without any Heir of Her Body lawfully begotten, Any thing contained in this
Will, or in any Act, or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding. The remainder
over, for lack of Issue of the said Lady Frances lawfully begotten, to be, and
continue, to such Persons, like Remainders, and ^states, as is before limited,
and declared.

And We, being now at this time (thanks to Almighty God) of perfect Memory, do
Constitute, and Ordain these Personages following Our Executours, and
Performers of Our last Will and Testament; Willing, Commanding, and Praying
them to take upon them the occupation and performances of the same, as
Executours: that is to say; The Archbishop of Canterbury; the Lord Wriothesly,
Chancellor of England; the Lord St* John, Great Master of Oar House; the Earl
of Hartford, Great Chamberlain; the Lord Russel, Lord Privy Seal; the Viscount
L'isle, Lord High Admiral of England; the Bishop Tonstal of Duresme; Sir
Anthony Brown Knight, Master of Our Horses; Sir Edward Mountague Knight, chief
Judge of the Common Pleas; Justice Bromly; Sir Edward North Knight, Chancellor
of the Augmentations; Sir William Paget Kni^ht Our chief Secretary; Sir Anthony
Denny, Sir William Herbert Knight, chief Gentlemen of Our Privy Chamber; Sir
Edward Wotton, Knight, and Mr. Dr. Wotten, his Brother. And all these We will
to be Our Executours, and Councillors of the Privy Council with Our said Son,
Prince Edward, in all matters both concerning His Private affairs, and the
Public affairs of the Realm; Willing and charging them, and every of them, as
they must, and shall, answer at the day of Judgment, wholly, and fully, to see
this My last Will and Testament performed in all things, with as much speed and
diligence as may be; and that none of them presume to med^le with any of Our
Treasure, or to do any thing appointed by Our said Will, alone, unless the most
part of the whole number of the Co-Executours do consent, and by writing agree
to the same; And w^ll that Our said Executours, or the most part of them, may
lawfully do what they shall think most convenient for the execution of this Our
Will, without being troubled by Our said Son, or any other for the same. --
After which, having taken Order about the payment of His Debts, He proceeds as
follows.

Further, according to the Laws of Almighty God, and for the Fatherly Love,
which We bear to Our Son, Prince Edward, and this Our Realm, We declare Him;
according to Justice, Equity, and Conscience, to be Our lawful Heir; and do
give, and bequeath unto Him the Succession of Our Realms of England and
Ireland, with Our Title of France, and all Our Dominions, both on this side the
Seas, and beyond: A convenient portion for Our will and Testament to be
reserved. Also we give unto Him all Our Plate, Stuff of Household, Artillery,
Ordnance, Ammunition, Ships, Cables, and all other things, and implements to
them belonging, and Money also, and Jewels; saving such portions, as shall
satisfy this Our Last Will and Testament: Charging, and commanding Him on pain
of Our curse, (seeing He has so Loving a Father of Us, and that Our chief
Labor, and Study in this world, is to establish him in the Crown Imperial of
this Realm, after Our ^^cease, in such sort as may be pleasing to God, and to
the health of this Realm,) that He be Ordered and Ruled both in His Marriage,
and also in ordering the Affairs of the Realm, as well outward as inward; and
also in all His own private Affairs, and in giving of Offices of Charge, by the
Advice and Counsel of Our Right-entirely beloved Councillors, the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Lord Wriothesly Chancellor of England, the Lord St. John
Master of Our Horse, the Lord Russel Lord Privy Seal, the Earl of Hartford
Great Chamberlain of England, the Viscount L'isle High Admiral of England, the
Bishop Tonstal of Dure^me, Sir Anthony Brown Knight Master of Our Horses, Sir
William Paget Our chief Secretary* Sir Anthony Denny, Sir William Herbert,
Justice Mountague and Bromely, Sir Edward Wotton, Mr. ^octour Wotton, and Sir
Edward North: Whom we Ordain, name and appoint, and by these Presents Signed
with Our hand, do make, and constitute Our Privy Council, with Our said Son;
and will that they have the Governance of Our most dear Son, Prince Edward, and
of all Our Realms, Dominions, and Subjects, and of all the Affairs, public and
private, until He shall have fully completed the eighteenth year of His Age.

And for because the variety, and number of things, affairs, and matters, are,
and may be, such, as We, not knowing the certainty of them before, cannot
conveniently prescribe a certain ^rder, or Rule, unto Our said Councillors,
for their behaviors, and proceedings, in this charge which we have now, and do
appoint unto them about Our said Son, during the time of His minority
aforesaid: We therefore, for the special Trust and Confidence, which We have in
them, will, and by these Presents, do give, and grant full Power, and
Authority, unto Our said Councelours; that they all, or the most part of them,
being assembled together in Council, or, if any of them fortune to dye, the
more part of them, which shall be for the time living, being assembled in
Council together, shall, and may make, devise, and ordain, whatsoever things
they, or the more part of them, as aforesaid, shall, during the Minority of
Our said Son, think meet, necessary, and convenient, for the Benefit, Honor,
and Surety of the Weal, Profit, and Commodity of Our said Son, His Realms,
Dominions, or Subjects, or the Discharge of Our Conscience. And the same things
made, ordained, and devised by them, or the more part of them, as aforesaid,
shall, and may, lawfully do, execute, and accomplish, or cause to be done,
executed, or accomplished, by their Discretions, or the Discretions of the more
part of them, as aforesaid, in as large and ample manner, as if We had, or did
express unto them, by a more special Commission under Our Great Seal of England
every particular cause, that may chance, or occurr, during the time of Our said
Son's Minority, and the self-same manner of Proceeding, which they shall from
time to time think meet to use, and follow: Willing, and charging Our said Son,
and all others, which shall hereafter be Councillors to Our said Son; that
they never charge, molest, trouble, or disquiet Our aforesaid Councillors,
nor any of them, for the devising, or doing, nor any other person, or persons,
for doing that they shall devise, or the more part of them devise, or do,
assembled as is aforesaid.

And We do charge expressly the same Our entirely-beloved Councillors, and
Executours, that they shall take upon them the Rule and Charge of Our said Son
and Heir, in all His Causes and Affairs, and of the whole Realm; doing
nevertheless all things, as under Him, and in His name, until Our said Son,
and Heir, shall be bestowed, and married by their advice, and that the
eighteenth year be expired. Willing, and d^siring furthermore, Our said Trusty
Councillors, and then all Our Trusty and Assured Servants; and Thirdly, all
other Our Loving Subjects* to aid and assist Our forenamed Councillors in the
Execution of the Premises, during the aforesaid time; not doubting, but that
they will in all things deal so truly and uprightly, as they shall have cause
to think them well chosen for the Charge committed unto them: Straightly
charging our said Councillors, and Executours, and in God's Name exhorting
them, for the singular Trust, and special Confidence, which we have, and ever
had in them, to have a due and diligent Eye, perfect Zeal, Love, and Affection,
to the Honor, Surety, Estate, and Dignity, of Our said Son, and the Good State
and Prosperity of this Our Realm; And, that all delays set apart, they well
aid, and assist Our said Councillors and Executours, to the performance of
this Our present Testament, and last Will in every part, as they will answer
before God at the day of Judgment, Cum venerit judicate vivos and mortuos.

And furthermore, for the special Trust and Confidence, which We have in the
Earls of Arundel, and Essex, that now be; Sir Thomas Cheney Knight, Treasurer
of Our Household; Sir John Gage Knight, Comptroller of Our Household; Sir
Anthony Wingfield Knight, Our Vice-Chamberlain; Sir William Peter Knight, one
of Our two principal Secretaries; Sir Richard Rich Knight, Sir John Baker
Knight, Sir Ralph Sadler Knight, Sir Thomas Seimour Knight, Sir Richard
Sou^hwel, and Sir Edmond Peckham, Knights: they, and every of them, shall be of
Council, for the aiding and assisting of the forenamed Councillors, and Our
Executours, when they, or any of them, shall be called by Our said Executours,
or the more part of the same.

Item, We bequeath to Our Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth's Marriage, they being
married to any outward Potentate by the Advice of the afore^said Councillors
(if We bestow them not in Our Lifetime) ten thousand pounds in Money, Plate,
Jewels, and Household Stuff, for each of them; or a larger sum, as to the
discretion of Our Executours, or the more part of them, shall be thought
convenient; Willing them on My Blessing to be ordered, as well in Marriage, as
in all other lawful things, by the Advice of Our fore^named Councillors: And,
in case they will not, then the sum to be minished at the Councillors
Discretions. And Our further Will is, That from the first Hour of Our Death,
until such time, as the said Councillors can provide either of them, or both,
some Honorable Marriages. They shall have, each of them, M. M. M. lb. ultra
reprisas, to live upon; Willing, and charging the aforesaid Councillors to
limit, and appoint to either of them* such said Officers, and Ministers, for
Orderance thereof, as may be employed both to Our Honor, and Theirs. And, for
the great Love, Obedience, and Chastness of Life, and Wisdom, being in Our
forenamed Wife and Queen; We bequeath unto Her, for Her proper Use, and as it
shall please Her to Order it, M. M. M. lb. in Plate, Jewels, and Stuff of
Household, besides such Apparel, as it shall please Her to take, as She has
already: And further We give unto Her M. lb. in Money, with the enjoying of Her
Dowry and Jointure, according to Our Grant by Act of Parliament.

Which said, He bequeathed, in other Legacies, amongst the Lords of His
Council, and other of His Principal Officers, whom He had declared for His
Executours, the sum of 6433. lb. 6. s. 8. d. And amongst other Knights, and
Gentlemen, His Domestic Servants, and such as were in Ordinary Attendance
about the Court, (under which style I find that Patrick before-remembred) the
Sum of 5^83. lb. 6. s. 8. d. Both Sums amounting in the total to 11516. lb. 13.
s. 4. d. And so concludes with a Revocation of all other Wills, and
Testaments, by Him formerly made; that only this might stand in Force, and be
effectual* to all Intents and Purposes in the Law whatsoever. Dated 30.
December, Signed with His own hand, and Witnessed by eleven of such of His
Physicians, and Attendants, as were then about Him.

Such was the Last Will, and Testament, of this Puissant Prince. Of which how
little was performed, and how much less should have been performed, if some
Great Persons (whom He had nominated for His Executours) might have had their
Wills; we shall hereafter show, in fit time, and place. In the mean season we
will see Him laid into His Grave: which was done with as much convenient speed,
as the necessary Preparations for a Royal Funeral could of right admit. For, on
the fourteenth day of February then next following, His Body, being removed in
a Solemn and Magnificent manner to Shene, near Richmond, was the next day with
like Solemnity attended to His Castle of Windsore (one of the Goodlie^t, and
most Gallant Seats of the Christian World) and there Interred in a Vault,
prepared for Himself, and His Dear Wife, Queen Jane; as in His Last Will He had
desired. For, though a most Magnificent, and Costly Tomb, had been begun for
Him, by Cardinal Wol^^e, in a by-Chapel of that Church, (commonly called, The
Chapel of King Henry the Eighth;) yet being an unfinished piece, and the King
having otherways disposed of His own Interment, a Vault was opened for Him in
the midst of the Quire. Into which the Body of the King was no sooner laid,
but all His Officers brake their Staves, and threw them in the Grave,
(according to the usual Ceremonies on the like Occasions) receiving new ones
the next day at the hands of His Son. Nor were the Funeral Rites performed by
His own Subjects only: but a Solemn Obsequie was kept for Him, in the Church
of Nostre-Dame in Paris, by King Francis the First; notwithstanding, that He
had been Excommunicated by the Popes of Rome. So much that Generous Prince
preferred His old affections to this King for former Favors: not only above
the late displeasures conceived against Him, for the taking of Bulloign; but
even above the Pope's Curse, and all the Fulminations of the Court of Rome,
which might follow on it. But long it will not be, before we shall discharg
this debt, in paying the like Duty to the Honor of Francis; who, dying on the
two and twentieth day of March next following, had here an Obsequie, as Solemn
as the Times could give Him. Of which more hereafter.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF KING EDWARD THE SIXTH. An. 1546/7

Anno Reg. 1. Anno Dom. 1546, 1547.
HENRY being dead, EDWARD, His only surviving Son, at the age of nine years*
three months, and sixteen days, by the name of King EDWARD the Sixth, succeeds
His Father in the Throne: Charles the Fifth being then Emperor of Germany, and
King of Spain; Francis of Ang^lesme (the last Branch of the Royal Line of
Valoys) King of the French; and Paul the Third (of the Noble House of the
Farnezi) presiding in the Church of Rome. No sooner was His Father dead; but
Edward Earl of Hartford, and Sir Anthony Brown, Master of the Horse, were by
the Rest of the Council dispatched in have to Hartford-Castle; where, at that
time, He kept His Court, accompanied with His Sister, the Princess Elizabeth,
about four years elder then Himself. Both whom they brought the next day as far
as Enfield, where they imparted to Them the sad News of the King's Decease;
received by both with such a measure of true Sorrow, that it was very hard to
say, whither Their Tears did more obscure, or set forth Their Beauties. The
next day, advancing toward London, where he was Proclaimed King with all due
Solemnities, He made his Royal Entry into the Tower, on the last of January.
Into which He was conducted by Sir John Gage, as the Constable of it, and there
received by all the Lords of the Council; who, with great Duty and Affection,
did attend His comings, and waiting on Him into the Chamber of Presence, did
very cheerfully swear Allegiance to him. The next day, by the general consent
of all the Council, the Earl of Hartford, the King's Uncle, was chosen
Governor of His Person; and Protector of His Kingdoms, till He should come
unto the Age of eighteen years and was Proclaimed for such in all parts of
London: Esteemed most fit for this high Office, in regard, that he was the
King's Uncle by the Mothers side; very near unto Him in Blood, but yet of no
capacity to succeed in the Crown: by reason whereof, his Natural Affection, and
Duty, was less easy to be over-carried by Ambition. Upon which G^ound of civil
Prudence, it was both piously, and prudently, Ordained by Solon, in the State
of Athens, ( Ne quis f^eree Curator, ad quem post Pupillorum obi^um spectaret
(...). Diog. Laert. i^ Vua Solonis, page 38.
) That no man should be made the Guardian unto any Orphan, to whom the
Inheritance might fall by the Death of his Ward. For the first Handselling of
his Office, he Knighted the young King, on the sixth of February: Who, being
now in a capacity of conferring that Order, bestowed it first on Henry
Hoble-Thorn, Lord Mayor of London, and presently after on Mr. William Portman,
one of the Justices of the Bench; being both dubbed with the same Sword, with
which He had received the Order of Knighthood, at the hands of His Uncle.

These first Solemnities being thus passed over, the next care was for the
Interment of the Old King and the Coronation of the New. In order to which
last, it was thought expedient, to advance some Confidents, and Principal
Ministers of State, to higher Dignities and Titles, then before they had; the
better to oblige them to a care of the State, the safety of the King's Person,
and the preservation of the Power of the Lord Protector, who chiefly moved in
the Design. Yet so far did self-Interest prevail, above all other Obligations,
and ties of State* that some of these men thus advanced proved his greatest
Enemies: the rest forsaking him, when he had most need to make use of their
Friendship. In the first place, having resigned the Office of Lord High
Chamberlain, he caused himself to be created Lord Seimour, and Duke of
Somerset. Which last Title, (^pp^rtaining to the King's Progenitors of the
House of Lancaster; and, since the expiring of the Beauforts, conferred on
none, but Henry, the Natural Son of the King decealed:) was afterward charged
upon him, as an Argument of his aspiring to the Crown; which past all doubt he
never aimed at. His own turn being thus unhappily served, the Lord William
Parr, Brother of Queen Katherin^ Parr, the Relict of the King deceased, (who
formerly in the thirty fifth of the said King's Reign, had been created Earl of
Essex, with reference to Ann his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Henry B^urchier,
the last Earl of Essex of that House;) was now made Marquess of Northampton, in
reference to her Extraction from the Bohunes, once the Earls thereof. John
Dudly Viscount L'isle, and Knight of the Garter, having resigned his Office of
Lord Admiral, to g^^tifie the Lord Protector, (who desired to confer that
place of Power and Trust on his younger Brother,) was, in Exchange, created
Lord High Chamberlain of England, and Earl of Warwick. Which Title he affected
in regard of his Descent from the Beauchamps, who for long time had worn that
Honor: from whom he also did derive the Title of Viscount L'isle, as being the
Son of Edmond Sutton, alias Dudley, and of Elizabeth his Wife, Sister and Heir
of John Gray Viscount L'isle, descended, by the Lord John Talbot Viscount
L'isle, from Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, and Dame Elizabeth his^ Wife,
the direct Heir of Waren Lord L'isle, the last of the Male Issue of that Noble
Family. In the next place comes Sir Thomas Wriothsley, a man of a very new
Nobility; as being Son of William Wriothsley, and Grandchild of John
Wriothsley: both of them, in their Times, advanced no higher, then to the
Office of an Herald; the Father by the Title of York, the Grandfather by that
of Garter, King at Arms. But this man, being planted in a warmer Sun, grew up
so fast in the esteem of King Henry the Eight, that he was first made Principal
Secretary, afterward created Baron of Tichfield; advanced not long after to
the Office of Lord Chancellor: And finally, by the said King, installed Knight
of the Garter, An. 1545. For an addition to which Honors, he was now dignified
with the Title of the Earl of South-hampton, enjoyed to this day by his
Posterity.

These men being thus advanced to the highest Titles; Sir Thomas Seimour, the
new Lord Admiral, is Honored with the Style of Lord Seimour of Sudeley, and in
the beginning of the next year made Knight of the Garter; prepared by this
accumulation of Honors for his following Marriage, which he had now projected,
and soon after compassed. With no less Ceremony, though not upon such lofty
Aims, Sir Richard Rich (another of the twelve, which were appointed for
Subsidiaries, to the great Council of Estate, by the King deceased, was
prefered unto the Dignity of Lord Rich of Leez in Essex, the Grandfather of
that Robert Lord Rich, who by King James was dignified with the Title of Earl
of Warwick, Anno 1618. In the third place came Sir William Willoughby,
descended from a younger Branch of the House of Eresby, created Lord Willoughby
of Parham in the County of Sussex. And in the Rear, Sir Edmond Sheffield,
advanced unto the Title of Lord Sheffield of Butterwick in the County of
Lincoln; from whom the Earls of Moulgrave do derive themselves. All which
Creations were performed with the accustomed Solemnities on the seventeenth of
February: and all given out to be designed by King Henry before his death, the
better to take off the Envy from the Lord Protector; whom otherwise all
understanding people must needs have thought to be too prodigal of those
Honors, of which the greatest Kings of England had been so sparing. For when
great Honors are conferred on persons of no great Estates, it raises commonly
a suspicion amongst the people: That, either some proportionable Revenue must
be given them also, to the impoverishing of the King; or else some way left
open for them, to enrich themselves out of the purses of the Subject.

These Preparations being dispatched, they next proceed unto the Coronation of
the King, performed with the accustomed Rites on the twentieth of the same
Month by Archbishop Cranmer. The Form whereof we find exemplified in a Book,
called The Catalogue of Honor, published by Thomas Mills of Canterbury, in the
year 1610. In which there is nothing more observable, then this following
Passage. The King, (says he) being brought unto the Church of Saint Peter in
Westminster, was placed in the Chair of Saint Edward the Confessor, in the
midst of a Throne seven steps high. This Throne was erected near unto the
Altar, upon a Stage arising with steps on both sides, covered with Carpets and
Hangings of Arras. Where, after the King had rested a little, being by certain
noble Courtiers carried in another Chair, unto the four sides of the Stage; He
was by the Archbishop of Canterbury declared unto the People (standing round
about) both by God's and Man's Laws to be the Right and Lawful King of
England, France, and Ireland; and Proclaimed that day to be Crowned,
Consecrated, and Anointed Unto whom He demanded whether they would obey and
serve, or Not? By whom it was again, with a loud cry, answered; God save the
King: and, Ever live his Majesty. Which Passage I the rather note; because it
is observed, that, at the Coronation of some former Kings, The Archbishop went
to the four squares of the Scaffold, and with a loud voice asked the Consent of
the People. But this was at such Times and in such Cases only, when the Kings
came unto the Crown by Disputed Titles; for maintenance whereof the Favor and
Consent of the people seemed a matter necessary: (as at the Coronations of King
Henry the Fourth, or King Richard the Third) and not when it devolved upon
them, as it did upon this King, by a Right unquestioned.

The Coronation was accompanied, as the Custom is, with a general Pardon. But
as there never was a Feast so great, from which some men departed not with
empty bellies; so, either out of Envy, or some former Grudge, or for some other
cause unknown, six Persons were excluded from the taste of this gracious
Banquet: that is to say, the Lord Thomas Howard Duke of N^rfolk, a condemned
Prisoner in the Tower; Edward Lord Courtney, eldest Son to the late Marquess of
Exeter beheaded in the last times of King Henry the Eight; Cardinal P^le, one
of the Sons of Margaret Countess of Salisbury, proscribed by the same King
also; Doctor Richard Pate, declared Bishop of Worcester, in the place of
Hierome de Nugaticis, in the year 1534. and by that Name subscribing to some of
the first Acts of the Council of Trent: who, being sent to Rome on some Public
Employment, chose rather to remain there in perpetual Exile, then to take the
Oath of Supremacy at his coming home; as by the Laws he must have done, or
otherwise have fared no better* then the Bishop of Rochester, who lost his head
on the refusal. Of the two others, Fortescue and Throgmorton, I have found
nothing, but the Names: and therefore can but name them only. But they all
lived to better times: the Duke of Norfolk being restored by Queen Mary to his
Lands, Liberty, and Honors; as the Lord Courtney was to the Earldom of
Devonshire, enjoyed by many of his Noble Progenitors; Cardinal Pole admitted
first into the Kingdom, in the capacity of a Legate from the Pope of Rome, and
after Cranmer's death advanced to the Sea of Canterbury; and Doctor Pate
preferred unto the actual Possession of the Sea of Worcester, of which he
formerly had enjoyed no more but the empty Title.

These Great Solemnities being thus passed over, the Grandees of the Court
began to entertain some thoughts of a Reformation. In which they found
Archbishop Cranmer, and some other Bishops, to be as foreward as themselves;
but on different ends: endeavored by the Bishops, in a pious Zeal for
rectifying such thing; as were amiss in God's public Worship; but by the
Courtiers, on an Hope to enrich themselves by the spoil of the Bishoprics. To
the Advancement of which work the Conjuncture seemed as proper, as they could
desire. For First the King, being of such tender age, and wholly Governed by
the Will of the Lord Protector, who had declared himself a friend to the
Lutheran Party in the time of King Henry, was easy to be molded into any
form, which the authority of Power and Reason could imprint upon Him. The Lord
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and Doctor Stephen Gardener Bishop of
Winchester, (who formerly) had been the greatest Sticklers at the Co^ncil-Table
in Maintenance of the Religion of the Church of Rome) were not long able to
support it: the one of them being a condemned Prisoner in the Tower, as before
was said; and the other, upon some just displeasure, not named by King Henry
amongst the Councillors of State, who were to have the managing of Affairs in
His Son's Mino^^ty. Bonner, then Bishop of London, was absent at that time in
the Court of the Emperor; to whom he had been sent Ambassador by the former
King. And no professed Champion for the Papacy remained amongst them, of whom
they had cause to stand in doubt: but the new Earl of South-hampton* Whom when
they were not able to remove from his old Opinions, it was resolved to make him
less both in Power and Credit; so, that he should not be able to hinder the
pursuit of those Counsels, which he was not willing to promote. And therefore
on the sixth of March, the Great Seal was taken from him by the King's Command,
and for a while committed to the custody of Sir William Pawlet, Created Lord
St* John of Basing, and made Great Master of the Household by King Henry the
Eighth.

And on the other side it was thought expedient, for the better carrying on of
the Design, not only to release all such as had been committed unto Prison;
but also to recall all such as had been forced to abandon the Kingdom, for not
submitting to the Superstitions and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Great
were the Numbers of the first, who had their Fetters stricken off by this
merciful Prince, and were permitted to enjoy that Liberty of Conscience; for
which they had suffered all Extremities in His Father's time. Only it is
observed of one Thomas Dobbs, once Fellow of Saint John's-College in Cambridg,
condemned for speaking against the Mass, and thereupon committed to the Counter
in Bread-street; that he alone did take a view of this Land of Canaan, into
which he was not suffered to enter. It being so ordered by the Divine
Providence, that he died in Prison, before his Pardon could be signed by the
Lord Protector. Amongst the rest, which were in number very many, those of
chief note were, Doctor Miles Coverdale, after Bishop of Exeter; Mr. John
Hooper after Bishop of Gloucester; Mr. John Philpot, after Archdeacon of
Winchester; Mr. John Rogers, after one of the Prebends of Saint Paul's; and
many others, eminent for their Zeal and P^ety: which they declared by
preferring a good Conscience before their Lives, in the time of Queen Mary.

But the bus^n^ss was of greater Moment, then to expect the coming back of the
Learned men: who though they came not time enough to begin the work; yet did
they prove exceeding serviceable in the furtherance of it. And therefore,
neither to lose time, nor to press too much at once upon the People, it was
thought sit to smooth the way to the intended Reformation, by setting out some
Preparatory Injunctions; such as the King might publish by his own Authority,
according to the example of His Royal Father in the year 1536. and at some
times after. This to be done by sending out Commissioners into all parts of the
Kingdom, armed with Instructions to enquire into all Ecclesiastical
Concernments, in the manner of a Visitation; directed by the King, as Supreme
Head on earth of the Church of England. Which Commissioners, being distributed
into several Circuits, were accompanied with certain Learned, and Godly
Preachers, appointed to instruct the People, and to facilitate the work of the
Commissioners, in all Towns, and Places, where they fate. And, that the People
might not cool, or fall off again, in, and from that, which had been taught
them by the Learned Preachers; they were to leave some Homilies to the same
effect with the Parish Priest: which the Archbishop had composed; not only
for the help of unpreaching Ministers, but for the regulating, and instructing
even of Learned Preachers. Which Injunctions being agreed upon by such of the
Great Council, as favored the Design of the Reformation; and the Commissions
drawn in due form of Law by the Counsel learned: they were all tendered to the
Lord Chancellor Wriothsley; that the Authority of the Great Seal might be
added to them. Which he, who was not to be told what these matters aimed at,
refused to give consent unto: and so lost the Seal, committed (as before is
said) to the Custody of the Lord Great Master, by whom the said Commissions
were dispatched, and the Visitours thereby Authorized in due form of Law And
here it is to be observed, that, besides the Points contained in the said
Injunctions, the Preachers abovementioned were more particularly instructed to
persuade the People from Praying to the Saints, from making Prayers for the
dead, from Adoring of Images, from the use of Beads, Ashes, and Processions,
from Mass, Diriges, Praying in unknown Languages, and from some other such like
things; whereunto long Custom had brought a Religious Observation. All which
was done to this intent; That the People in all places, being prepared by
little and little, might with more ease, and less opposition, admit the total
Alteration in the face of the Church, which was intended in due time to be
introduced.

Now, as for the Injuctions abovementioned, although I might exemplify them,
as they stand at large in the First Edition of the Acts and Monuments, (fol.
684.) yet I shall choose rather to present them in a smoother Abstract; as it
is done unto my hand by the Church-Historian: the Method of them only altered
in this manner following.

Rome, and Confirmation of the King's Authority and Supremacy: and four times
in the year, at the least, that they teach the People, That the one was now
justly taken away, (according to the word of God) and that the other was, of
most Legal Duty, only to be obeyed by all the Subjects.

That, once a Quarter, at the least, they sincerely declare the Word of God,
Pilgrimages, Praying to Images, etc. exhorting them to the Works of Faith,
Mercy, and Charity: 3. And that Images, abused with Pilgrimages, and Offerings
thereunto, be Wax-Candles, or Tapers, be burnt before any Image; but only two
lights upon the High Altar, before the Sacrament, shall remain still, to
signify, That Christ is the very Light of the World.

That every Holy Day, when they have no Sermon, the Paternoster, and Ten
Commandments, shall be plainly recited in the Pulpit to the Parishioners. 5.
And that Parents, and Masters, bestow their Children, and Servants,

That, within three Months after this Visitation, the Bible, of the Larger
English; and within twelve Months Erasmus his Paraphrases on the Gospels, be
provided, and conveniently placed in the Church, for the People to read
therein. 20. And that every Ecclesiastical Person, under the Degree of
Batchelour of Divinity, shall within three Months after this Visitation,
provide of his own The New Testament in Latin and English, with Erasmus his
Paraphrases thereon. And that Bishops, by themselves, and their Officers, shall
Examine them, how much they have profited in the study of Holy Scripture.

That such, who in Cases expressed in the Statute are absent from their
Benefices,

That a fifth part of their Benefices be bestowed on their Mansion-Houses,

That they Examine such as come to Confession in Lent, whether they can recite
Credo, Paternoster, and Ten Commandments, in English, before they receive the
Blessed Sacrament of the Altar; or else they ought not to presume to come to
God's Board.

That none be admitted to Preach, except sufficiently Licenced. 11. That, if
they Pilgrimages, Relics, Worshipping of Images, etc. they now Lettours of
the Word English, and Fautours of the Bishop of Rome his pretended Power.

That no Person from henceforth, shall alter any Fasting-day, or manner of
Common Prayer, Divine Service, (otherwise then is specified in these
Inju^ctions) until otherwise Ordered by the King's Authority. 21. And, that,
in time of High he, that says, or sings a Psalm, shall read the Epistle and
Gospel in English, and one Chapter in the New Testament at Mattens, and another
at Even-song; And that, when nine Lessons are to be read in the Church, three
of them shall be omitted with Responds: And at the Even-song, the Responds, with
all the Memories. By which last word I understand the Anniversary Commemoration
of deceased Persons on the day of their deaths, which frequently were expressed
by the name Obits.

That every Dean, Archdeacon, etc. being a Priest, Preach by himself, Souls
health: 25. And that no Curate admit to the Communion such, who are in Ranchor,
and Malice with their Neighbors, till such controversies be reconciled.

Procession; no Procession hereafter be used about the Church, or Churchyard:
but, immediately before High-Mass, the Letany shall be distinctly said, or sung
in English; none departing the Church without just cause, and all ringing of
Bells (save one) utterly forborne.

Shrines, Covering of Shrines, Tables, Candlesticks, Trindils, and Rolls of
Wax, Pictures, Paintings, and other Monuments of feigned Miracles; so that no
Memory of them remain in Walls, or Windows: exhotting their Parishioners to do
the like in their several houses.

Holy Day, at the first beginning Godly-Instituted and ordained, be wholly
given to God, in hearing the Word of God read and taught, in private and
public Prayers, in acknowledging their Offenses to God, and amendment, in
reconciling themselves to their Neighbors, receiving the Communion, Visiting
the sick, etc. Only it shall be lawful for them, in time of Harvest, to
labor upon Holy and Festival days, and save that thing which God has sent;
and that scrupulosity, to abstain from working upon those days, does grievously
offend God.

Register Book be carefully kept in every Parish for Weddings, and Burials: 29.
That a strong Chest, with an hole in the upper part thereof (with three keys
thereunto belonging) be provided to receive the Charity of the People to the
Poor; and the same, at convenient times, be distributed unto them in the
presence of the Parish. And that a comely Palpit be provided, in a convenient
place.

Homilies, Sermon, or Homily shall be had, the Primes and Hours shall be
omitted. Tithes, detain them, by color of Duty omitted Simonie, the Seller
shall lose his right of Patronage for that time, and the Buyer to be deprived,
and made unable to receive Spiritual Promotion.

They shall learn, and have always in readiness, such comfortable places, and
Sentences of Scripture; as do set forth the Mercies, Benefits, and Goodness of
God Almighty 30. But that Priests be not bound to go visit women in Childbed;
except in times of dangerous sickness: and fetch any Coars, except it be
brought to the Church yard. 34. That all persons, not understanding Latin,
shall pray on no other Primer, but what lately was set forth in English by King
Henry the Eighth; and that such, who have knowledge in the Latin, use no other
also: that all Graces before, and after Meat, be said in English; and no
Grammar taught in Schools* but that which is set

Injunctions be read once a Quarter.

Besides these general Injunctions for the whole Estate of the Realm, Acts, and
Mon. fol. 11^^.
there were also certain others, particularly appointed for the Bishops only;
which, being delivered unto the Commissioners, were likewise by them in their
Visitations committed unto the said Bishops, with charge to be inviolably
observed and kept, upon pain of the King's Majesty's displeasure: the effect
whereof is, as in manner follows.

1. That they should, to the utmost of their power, wit, and understanding,
s^e, and cause all, and singular, the King's Injunctions heretofore given, or
after to be given, from time to time, in, and through their Diocese, duly,
faithfully, and truly to be kept* observed, and accomplished. And, that they
should Personally Preach within their Diocese, every Quarter of a year, once at
the least: that is to say, once in their Cathedral Churches, and thrice in
other several places of their Diocesses, whereas they should see it most
convenient and necessary; except they had a reasonable excuse to the contrary.
Likewise, that they should not retain into their Service, or Household, any
Chaplain, but such as were Learned, and able to Preach the Word of God, and
those they should also cause to Exercise the same.

2. And Secondly, That they should not give Orders to any Person; but such as
were Learned in Holy Scripture: neither should deny them to such, as were
Learned in the same, being of honest conversation, or living. And Lastly, That
they should not at any time, or place, Preach, or set forth unto the People,
any Doctrine contrary, or repugnant to the effect, and intent, contained, or
set forth in the King's Highnesse's Homilies: neither yet should admit, or give
License to Preach to any, within their Diocese, but to such as they should know
(or at least assuredly trust*) would do the same: And, if at any time, by
hearing, or by report proved, they should perceive the contrary; they should
then incontinent not only inhibit that Person so offending, but also punish
him, and revoke their License.

There was also a Form of Bidding Prayer prescribed by the Visitours, to be
used by all Preachers in the Realm; either before, or in their Sermons, as to
them seemed best. Which Form of Bidding Prayer (or Bidding of the Beads, as it
was then commonly called) was this, that follows.

You shall Pray for the whole Congregation of Christ's Church and specially for
this Church of England and Ireland: wherein first I commend to your devout
Prayers the King's most Excellent Majesty, Supreme Head immediately under God
of the Spirituality and Temporality of the same Church: And for Queen Katharine
Dowager, and also for my Lady Mary, and my Lady Elizabeth, the King's Sisters.

Secondly, You shall Pray for my Lord Protectour's Grace* with all the rest of
the King's Majesty His Council; for all the Lords of His Realm, and for the
Clergy, and the Commons of the same: beseeching God Almighty, to give ^very of
them, in his degree, grace to use themselves in such wise, as may be to God's
Glory, the King's Honor, and the Weal of this Realm.

Thirdly, You shall Pray for all them, that be departed out of this World in
the Faith of Christ; that they with us, and we with them, at the day of
Judgment, may rest, both body and soul, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Such were the Orders, and Injunctions, wherewith the King's Commissioners were
furnished for their Visitation. Most of them such, as had been formerly given
out by Cromwell, or otherwise published and pursued (but not without some
intermissions) by the King deceased, and therefore to be put in Execution with
the greater safety. For though the young King, by Reason of his tender Age,
could not but want a great proportion of His Father's Spirit for carrying on a
work of such weight and moment; yet he wanted nothing of that power in
Church-concernment, which either Naturally was inherent in the Crown Imperial,
or had been Legally vested in it by Acts of Parliament. Neither could His Being
in Minority, nor the Writings in His Name by the Lord Protector, and the Rest
of the Council, make any such difference in the Case; as to invalidate the
Proceedings, or any of the Rest which followed in the Reformation. For, if they
did, the Objection would be altogether as strong against the Reformation, made
in the Minority of King Josias; as against this, in the Minority of the present
King. That of Josias being made (as Josephus ( Antiqu. Jud. lib. 10. cap. 4.
) tells us) by the Advice of the Elders: as this of King EDWARD the Sixth by
the Advice of the Council. And yet it cannot be denied, but that the
Reformation made under King I^sias, by Advice of His Council, was no less
pleasing unto God, nor less valid in the Eyes of all His Subjects: then those of
Jeboshaphat, and Hezekiah, in their Riper years; who perhaps acted singly on
the strength of their Own Judgments only, without any Advice. Now of Josias
we are told by the said Historian; That* When He grew to be twelve years old,
He gave manifest Approbation of His Piety, and Justice. For He drew the People
to a conformable Course of Life, and to the Detestation and Abolishing of
Idols, that were no Gods, and to the Service of the Only True God of their
Forefathers. And, considering the Actions of His Predecessors, He began to
Rectify them in that, wherein they were deficient, with no less
Circumspection, then if He had been an Old Man; And that, which He found to be
Correspondent, and Advisedly done by them, that did He both maintain and
imitate. All which things He did, both by Reason of His Innated Wisdom, as also
by the A^mo^shment and Council of His Elders: in following orderly the Laws*
not only in matters of Religion, but of Civil Polity. Which puts the Parallel
betwixt the two young Kings, in the Case before us, above all Exception; and
the Proceedings of King Edward, or His Council rather, beyond all Dispute.

Now, whereas Question has been made, whether the twenty fourth Injunction,
for Laboring on the Holy Day in time of Harvest, extend as well to the Lord's
Day, as the Annual Festivals: The matter seems, to any well-discerning eye, to
be out of Question. For in the third Chapter of the Statute made in the fifth
and sixth years of King Edward the Sixth, (when the Reformation was much more
advanced then it was at the present) the Names and Number of such Holy Days, as
were to be observed in this Church, are thus laid down; That is to say, All
Sundaies in the year, the Feasts of the Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ,
of the Epiphany, etc. with all the Rest, still kept, and there named
particularly. And then it follows in the Act, That it shall, and may, be
lawful for every Husbandman, Labourer, Fisherman, and to all, and every
other person or persons, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition, he, or they, be,
upon the Holy Days aforesaid, in Harvest, or at any other times in the year,
when necessity shall so require, to Labor, Ride, Fish, or Work any kind of
work, at their free will and Pleasure; any thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding. The Law being such, there is no question to be made in point
of practice, nor consequently of the meaning of the King's Injunction. For
further opening of which Truth, we find, that not the Country only, but the
Court were indulged the Liberty of attending business on that day; it being
Ordered by the King, amongst other things, That the Lords of the Council should
upon Sundays attend the public Affairs of this Realm, dispatch Answers to
Letters for good order of State, and make full dispatches of all things
concluded the Week before: Provided always, That they be present at Common
Prayer, and that on every Sunday-Night the King's Secretary should deliver him
a Memorial of such things, as are to be debated by the Privy Council in the
week ensuing. Which Order, being compared with the words of the Statute, may
serve sufficiently to satisfy all doubts, and scruples, touching the true
intent and meaning of the said Injunction.

But, as this Question was not startled till the Later Times, when the Lord's
Day began to be advanced into the Reputation of the Jewish Sabbath; so was
there nothing in the rest of the said Injunctions, which required a Commentary.
Some words, and Passages therein, which seem absurd to us of this present Age,
An. 1547.
being then clearly understood by all, and every one, whom they did concern;
Published, and given in charge, by the Commissioners in their several Circuits,
with great Zeal and Chearfullness; and no less readily Obeyed in most parts of
the Realms, both by Priests and People: who observed nothing in them, either
new, or strange, to which they had not been prepared in the Reign of the King
deceased. None forwarder in this Compliance, then some Learned men, in, and
about the City of London; who not long since had showed themselves of a
contrary Judgment: Some of them running before Authority, and others keeping
even pase with it; but few so confident of themselves as to lagg behind. It was
Ordered in the twenty first; That, at the time of High Mass, the Epistle, and
Gospel should be read in the English Tongue: and, That both at the Mattens, and
Even-Song, a Chapter out of the New Testament should be also read. And, for
Example to the rest of the Land, the Complime, being a part of the Evening
Service, was sung in the King 's Chapel on M^nday in the Easter-week, (then
falling on the eleventh of April) in the English Tongue. Doctor Smith, Master
of Whittington-College in London, and Reader in Divinity at the King's-College
at Oxford, (afterward better known by the name of Christ-Church) had before
published two Books: One of them written, In Defense of the Mass; The other
endeavoring to prove, That unwritten Verities ought to be believed, under pain
of Damnation. But, finding that these Doctrines did not now beat according to
the Pulse of the Times, he did voluntarily retract, the said Opinions;
declaring in a Sermon at Saint Paul's Cross, on Sunday the fifteenth of May,
that his said former Books, and Teachings, were not only erroneous, but
Heretical. The like was done in the Month next following by Doctor Pern,
afterward Master of Peter-House in Cambridge; who, having on Saint George's
day delivered, in the Parish Church of Saint Andrew Undershaft, for sound
Catholic Doctrine, That the Pictures of Christ, and of the Saints were to be
adored; upon the seventeenth day of June, declared himself in the said Church
to have been deceived in that, what he before had taught them, and to be sorry
for delivering such Doctrine to them. But these men might pretend some Warrant
from the King's Injunctions, which they might conceive it neither fit, nor safe
to oppose: and therefore, that it was the wisest way, to strike Sail betimes,
upon the shooting of the first Warning-Piece to bring them in. But no man was
so much before hand with Authority, as one Doctor Glasier; who, as soon as the
Fast of Lent was over, (and it was well he had the Pat^ence to stay so long)
affirmed publicly in a Sermon at Saint Paul's Cross; That, The Lent was not
ordained of God to be Fasted, neither the Eating of Flesh to be forborne; but
that the same was a Politic Ordinance of men, and might therefore be broken by
men at their pleasures. For which Doctrine as the Preacher was never
questioned, the Temper of the Times giving Encouragement enough to such
Extravagancies; so did it open such a Gap to Carnal Liberty, that the King
found it necessary to shut it up again by a Proclamation on the sixteenth of
January, commanding Abstinence from all Flesh, for the Lent then following.

But there was something more, then the Authority of a Minour King, which drew
on such a General Conformity to these Injunctions: and thereby smoothed the way
to those Alterations, both in Doctrine and Worship; which the Grandees of the
Court, and Church, had began to fashion. The Lord Protector, and his Party
were more experienced in Affairs of State; then to be told, That, All great
Counsels* tending to Innovation in the Public Government, (especially where
Religion is concerned therein) are either to be backed by* Arms, or otherwise
prove destructive to the Undertakers. For this cause, he resolves to put
himself into the Head of an Army: as well for the security of His Person, and
the Preservation of his Party; as for the carrying on of the Design against all
Opponents. And, for the Raising of an Army, there could not be a fairer Color,
nor a more popular Pretense, then a War in Scotland: not to be made on any new
emergent Quarrel, which might be apt to breed suspicion in the Heads of the
People; but in Pursuit of the great Project of the King deceased, for Uniting
that Realm (by the Marriage of their young Queen to His only Son) to the Crown
of England. On this pretense Levies are made in all parts of the Kingdom, great
store of Arms and Ammunition drawn together to advance the service,
considerable Numbers of Old Soldiers brought over from Bulloign, and the
Pieces which depended on it, and good Provision made of Shipping, to attend the
Motions of the Army upon all occasions. He entertained also certain Regiments
of Walloons, and Germans: not out of any great Opinion, which he had of their
Valor; (though otherwise of good Experience in the Wars) but because they were
conceived more likely to enforce Obedience, (if his Designs should meet with
any Opposition) then the Natural English.

But in the first place Care was taken, that none of the neighboring Princes
should either hinder his Proceedings, or assist the Enemy. To which end Doctor
Wotton, the first Dean of Canterbury, then Resident with the Queen Dowager of
Hungary, (who at that time was Regent of the Estates of Flanders for Charles the
Fifth) was dispatched unto the Emperor's Court: there to succeed in the place
of Doctor Bonner, Bishop of London; who, together with Sir Francis Bryan* had
formerly been ^ent Ambassadors th^ther from King Henry the Eighth. The
Principal part of his Employment, besides such matters as are incident to all
Ambassadors, was to divert the Emperor from concluding any League with
France, contrary to the Capitulations made between the Emperor and the King
deceased; but to deal with him, above all things, for declaring himself an
Enemy to all of the Scottish Nation, but such as should be Friends to the King
of England.

And, because some Remainders of Hostility did still remain between the English
and the French, (notwithstanding the late peace made between the Crowns) it was
thought fit to sweeten, and oblige that People, by all the acts of
Correspondence, and friendly Neighborhood. In Order whereunto it was commanded
by the King's Proclamation, That Restitution should be made of such Ships and
Goods, which had been taken from the French since the Death of King Henry.
Which being done also by the French, though far short in the value of such
Reprisals, as had been taken by the English: there was good hope of coming to a
better understanding of one another: and that, by this Cessation of Arms, both
Kings might come in short time to a further Agreement. But that which seemed to
give most satisfaction to the Court of France* was the performance of a solemn
Obsequie for King Francis the First; who left this Life on the twenty second
day of March, and was Magnificently Interred amongst His Predecessors, in the
Monastery of Saint Dennis, not far from Paris. Whose Funerals were no sooner
Solemnized in France: but Order was given for a Dirige to be sung in all the
Churches in London, on the nineteenth of June, as also in the Cathedral Church
of Saint Paul; in the Quire whereof, being hung with black, a sumptuous Hearse
had been set up for the present Ceremony. For the next day the Archbishop of
Canterbury, assisted with Eight other of the Bishops, all in their Rich Mitres,
and other their Pontificals, did sing a Mass of Requiem; the Funeral Sermon
being preached by Doctor Ridley, Lord Elect of Rochester: who, if he did his
part therein, as no doubt he did, could not but magnify the Prince for His
Love to Learning. Which was so great, and eminent in Him* that He was called by
the French, L' pere des Arts and des Sciences, and The Father of the Muses by
some Writers of other Nations. Which Attributes as He well deserved, so did He
Sympathize in that Affection, (as he did in many other things) with King Henry
the Eighth: of whose Munificence for the Encouragements of Learning we have
spoke before.

This great Solemnity being thus Honorably performed, the Commissioners for
the Visitation were dispatched to their several Circuits; and the Army drawn
from all parts to their Rendez-vous, for the War with Scotland. Of which two
Actions, that of the Visitation, as the easiest, and meeting with a People,
which had been long trained up in the Schole of Obedience, was carried on,
without any show of Opposition; submitted to upon a very small Dispute, even by
some of those Bishops, who were conceived most likely to have disturbed the
business. The first, who declared his aversness to the King's Proceedings, was
Dr. Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester: who, stomaching his being left out
of the Lift of the Council, appeared more cross to all their doings, then other
of his Order. For which being brought before their Lordships, and not giving
them such satisfaction, as they looked for from him, they sent him Prisoner to
the Fleet; where he remained from the twenty fifth of September, till the
seventh of January: the King's Commissioners proceeding in the mean time
without any disturbance.

With less aversness, but with success not much unlike, was the business
entertained by Dr. Edmond Bonner, then Bishop of London: whom the Commissioners
found far more tractable, then could have been expected from a man of so rough
a Nature, and one so cordially affected to the Church of Rome. The
Commissioners Authorized for this Employment were, Sir Anthony Cook, and Sir
John Godsal, Knights; John Godsal, and Christopher Nevinson, Doctors of the
Laws; and John Madew, Doctor in Divinity: who, sitting in St. Paul's Church on
the first day of September, called before them the said Bishop Bonner, John
Royston, the renowned Polydore Virgil, and many other of the Dignitaries of the
said Cathedral: to whom, the Sermon being done, and their Commission openly
read, they ministered the Oath of the King's Supremacy, according to the Statute
of the thirty first of King Henry the Eighth; requiring them withal to present
such things, as stood in need to be Reformed. Which done, they delivered to him
a Copy of the said Injunctions, together with the Homilies set forth by the
King's Authority; received by him with Protestation, that he would observe
them, if they were not contrary to the Law of God, and the Statutes and
Ordinances of the Church. Which Protestation he desired might be enrolled
amongst the Acts of the Court. But afterward, considering better with himself,
as well of his own Danger, as of the Scandal and ill Consequents, which might
thence arise, he addressed himself unto the King; revoking his said
Protestation, and humbly submitting himself to His Majesty's Pleasure, in this
manner following.

Whereas I, Edmond Bishop of London, at such time, as I received the King's
Majesty's Injunctions, and Homilies of my most Dread and Sovereign Lord, at
the Hands of His Highness Visitours, did unadvisedly make such Protestation; as
now, upon better consideration of my Duty of Obedience, and of the evil
Example, that might ensue unto others thereof, appears to me neither
Reasonable, nor such as might well stand with the Duty of a most humble
Subject: for so much, as the same Protestation, at my Request, was then by the
Register of the Visitation Enacted, and put in Record: I have thought it my
Duty, not only to declare before your Lordships, that I do now, upon better
consideration of my Duty, renounce, and revoke my said Protestation; but also
most humbly beseech your Lordships, that this my Revocation of the same may be
in like wise put in the same Records, for a perpetual Memory of the Truth: most
humbly beseeching your Good Lordships, both to take order, that it may take
effect; and also, that my former unadvised doings may be by your good
Mediations pardoned of the King's Majesty.

Edmond London.


This humble carriage of the Bishop so wrought upon the King, and the Lords of
the Council, that the edg of their displeasure was taken off; though, for a
terror unto others, and for the preservation of their own Authority, he was by
them committed Prisoner to the Fleet. During the short time of whose Restraint,
(that is to say, on the Eighteenth day of the same Month of September) the
Letany was sung in the English Tongue, in Saint Paul's Church, between the
Quire and the High Altar; the Singers kneeling, half on the one side, and half
on the other. And the same day the Epistle and Gospel was also read at the High
Mass in the English Tongue. And, about two Months after, (that is to say, on
the seventeenth day of November, next following) Bishop Bonner, being then
restored to his former Liberty, the Image of Christ, best known in those Times
by the name of the Rood, together with the Images of Mary, and John, and all
other Images in that Church, as also in all the other Churches of London were
taken down; as was commanded by the said Injunctions. Concerning which we are
to note, That, though the Parliament was then sitting, (whereof more anon) yet
the Commissioners proceeded only by the King's Authority, without relating any
thing to that High Court in this weighty Business. And in the speeding of this
Work, as Bishop Bonner, together with the Dean and Chapter* did perform their
parts in the Cathedral of Saint Paul: so Bellassere, Archdeacon of Colchester,
and Doctor Gilbert Bourn, (being at that time Archdeacon both of London and
Essex; but afterward preferred by Queen Mary to the Bishopric of Bath and
Wells) were no less Diligent and Officious in doing the like in all the
Churches of their Respective Jurisdictions, according to the Charge imposed
upon them by his Majesty's Visitours.

In the mean time, whilst matters were thus calmly Acted on the Stage of
England; all things went no less fortunately forward with the Lord Protector
in his War with Scotland: in which he carried himself with no less Courage, and
Success, when it came to blows; then he had done with Christian Prudence,
before he put himself on the Expedition. For, having taken Order for his Forces
to be drawn together, he thought it most expedient to his Affairs, to gain the
start in point of Reputation with his very Enemies, by not engaging in a War,
until they had refused all Terms of Peace. And to this end a Manifest is
dispatched unto them, declaring the Motives, which induced him to put this
Kingdom into a posture of Arms. In which he remembered them of the Promises,
Seals, and Oaths, which by public Authority had passed for concluding this
Marriage; That, These, being Religious Bonds betwixt God and their Souls, could
not by any Politic Act of State be dissolved, until their Queen should attain
unto years of Dissent: Adding that, The Providence of God did therein
manifestly declare it self, in that, the Male-Princes of Scotland failing, the
Kingdom was left unto a Daughter; and in that King Henry left only one Son to
succeed; That, These two Princes were agreeable, both for Years, and Princely
Qualities, to be joined in Marriage, and thereby to knit both Realms into One;
That, This Union, as it was like to be both easily done, and of firm
continuance: so would it be both profitable, and Honorable to both the Realms;
That, Both the Easiness and Firmness might be conjectured: for that both People
are of the same Language, of like Habit and Fashion, of like Quality and
Condition of Life, of one Climate; not only annexed entirely together but
severed from all the World besides; That, as these are sure Arguments that both
descended from one Original, so (by Reason, that Likeness is a great Cause of
Liking and of Love) they would be most forcible Means, both to join and hold
them in one Body again; That, Profit would rise by extinguishing Wars between
the two Nations: by Reason whereof, in former times, Victories abroad have been
impeached, Invasions and Seditions occasioned, the Confines of both Realms
laid wast, or else made a Nursery of Rapines, Robberies, and Murders; the
Inner Parts often deeply pierced, and made a wretched Spectacle to all Eyes of
Humanity and Pity; That, The Honor of both Realms would Increase: as well in
regard of the Countries, sufficient not only to furnish the Necessities, but
the moderate Pleasures of this Life; as also of the People, great in Multitude,
in Body able, assured in Mind: not only for the Safety, but the Glory of the
Common State: That, Hereby would follow Assurance of Defense, Strength to
Enterprise, Ease in sustaining public Burdens, and Charges; That, Herein the
English d^sired no Pre-eminence, but offered Equality, both in Liberty and
Privile^ge, and in capacity of Offices and Employments; and, to that end, the
Name of Britain should be assumed, indifferent to both Nations: That, This
would be the Complishment of their common Felicity; in case, (by their Evil,
either Destiny, or Advice) they suffered not the Occasion to be l^st.

It was no hard matter to foresee, that, either the Scots would return no
Answer to this Declaration, or such an Answer at the best, as should signify
nothing. So that the War began to open, and some Hostilities to be exercised on
either side; before the English Forces could be drawn together. For so it
happened, that a small Ship of the Kings, called The Pensie, hovering at Sea,
was assailed by The Lion, a principal Ship of Scotland. The fight began a far
off, and slow; but when they approached, it grew very furious: wherein the
Pensie so applied her Shot, that therewith the Lyon's Ore-Loope was broken, her
Sails, and Tacklings torn, and lastly she was boarded, and taken. But, as she
was brought for England, she was cast away by Negligence, and Tempest, near
Hare-wich-Haven, and most of her men perished with her. Which small Adventure
(as Sir John Hayward well observes) seemed to Prognosticate the Success of the
War: in which the English, with a small Army, gained a glorious Victory; but
were deprived of the Fruit, and Benefits of it, by the Storms at home.

All thoughts of Peace being laid aside, the Army draws together at
New Castle, about the middle of August, consisting of twelve or thirteen
thousand Foot, thirteen hundred Men at Arms, and two thousand Eight hundred
light Horse: Both Men and Horse so well appointed that a like Army never showed
it self, before that time, on the Borders of Scotland. Over which Army, so
appointed, the Lord Protector held the Office of General; the Earl of Warwick
that of Liev-tenant General; the Lord Gray, General of the Horse, and Marshal
also of the Field; Sir Ralph Vane, Liev-tenant of all the Men at Arms* and
Demi-lances; and Sir Ralph Sadlier, Treasurer General for the Wars: infeririour
Offices being distributed amongst other Gentlemen of Name and Quality,
according to their well-deservings. At New^Castle they remained till the Fleet
arrived, consisting of sixty five Bottoms: whereof one Gally and thirty four
tall Ships were well-appointed for Fight; the Residue served for carriage of
Munition, and Victuals. The Admiral of this Fleet being Edward Lord Clynton,
created afterward Earl of Lincoln, on the fourth of May 1572. in the
fourteenth year of Queen Elizabeth. Making some little stay at Berwick, they
entered not on Scottish Ground* till the third of September; keeping their March
along the Shore within Sight of the Fleet, that they might be both Aided* and
Releived by it, as Occasion served: and making all along the Shore, they fell,
at the end of two days, into a Valley called The Peuthes* containing six Miles
in length, in breadth about four hundred Pases toward the Sea, and but one
hundred toward the Land, where it was shut up by a River. The Issues out of it
made into several paths, which the Scots had caused to be cut in diverse places
with Traverse Trenches: and thereby so encumbered the Army in their marching
forwards; (till the Pioneers had smoothed the way) that a small Power of the
Enemy (if their Fortune had been anwerable to the Opportunity) might have given
a very good Account of them to the rest of their Nation. Which D^fficulty being
overcome, and a Passage thereby given them unto places of more Advantage, they
made themselves Masters of the three next Castles, for making good of their
Retreat, if the worst should happen.

Upon the first News of these Approaches, enlarged (as the Custom is) by the
Voice of Fame, the Earl of Arran, being then Lord Governor of Scotland, was
not meanly startled; as being neither furnished with Foreign Aid* nor much
relying on the Forces, which He had at Home. Yet resuming his accustomed
Courage, and well-acquainted with both Fortunes, He sent His Heralds through
all parts of the Realm, commanded the Fire-Cross (that is to say, two
Firebrarnds, set in fashion of a Cross, and pitched upon the point of a Spear)
to be advanced in the Field, (according to the Ancient Custom of that Country
in Important Cases) and therewithal caused Proclamation to be made, That All
Persons, from sixteen years of Age to sixty, should repair to Muscle-borough,
and bring their Ordinary Provision of Victuals with them. Which Proclamation
being made, and the Danger in which the Kingdom stoodrepresented to them, the
People flocked in such Multitudes to their Rendez^v^us; that it was thought fit
to make choice of such as were most serviceable, and dismiss the Rest. Out of
which they compounded an Army (the Nobility, and Gentry, with their Followers
being Reckoned in) consisting of thirty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse:
but poorly Armed, fitter to make Excursions, or to execute some sudden Inroad,
then to entertain any strong Charge from so brave an Army.

The Armies drawing near together, the General, and the Earl of Warwick, rode
toward the place, where the Scottish Army lay, to view the manner of their
incamping. As they were returning, an Herald, and a Trumpeter, from the Scots
overtook them; and, having obtained Audience, thus the Herald began; That, He
was sent from the Lord Governor of Scotland, partly; to enquire of Prisoners;
but chiefly to make offer, that because he was desirous, not only to avoid
profusion, but the least effusion of Christian blood; and for that the English
had not done any unmanlike Outrage, or Spoil, he was content they might
return, and should have his Safe Conduct for their peaceable passage. Which
said, the Trumpeter spoke, as follows; That, The Lord Huntly, His Master,
sent Message by him; that, as well for brief Expedition, as to spare expense of
Christian blood, He would fight upon the whole Quarrel, either with twenty
against twenty, or with ten against ten; or, more particularly, by single
Combat between the Lord General and himself. Which, in regard the Scots had
advantage, both for Number, and Freshness of men; in regard also, that, for
Supply, both for Provision, and Succors, they were at home, be esteemed an
Honorable and charitable Offer.

To the Herald the Lord General returned this Answer; That, As his coming was
not with purpose, or desire to endamage their Realm: as he was there, he would
neither entreat, nor accept of him leave to depart; but would measure his
Marches in Advancing or Retiring, as his own Judgment, guided by Advice of his
Council, should deem expedient.

To the Trumpeter he returned this Answer; That, The Lord Huntly, His Master,
was a young Gentleman, full of Free Courage but more desirous of Glory, then
Judicious (as it seemed) how to win it; That, For number of Combatants, it was
not in his power to conclude a bargain; but he was to employ all the Forces,
put under his Charge, to the best advantage that he could; That, In case this
were a particular Quarrel between the Governor and Him, he would not refuse a
particular Combat; but, being a difference between the two Kingdoms, it was
neither fit, nor in his Power, either to undertake the Adventure upon his own
Fortune, or bearing a Public Charge, to hazard himself against a man of
Private condition. Which said, and the Earl of Warwick offering to take upon
himself the Answer to Huntly's Challenge: the Lord Protector interposed, and
turning again unto the Herald; Herald (says he) tell the Lord Governor, and
the Lord Huntly, that we have entered your Country with a sober Company: (which*
in the Language of the Scots, is poor and mean) your Army is both Great and
Fresh; but let them appear upon indifferent Ground, and assuredly they shall
have fighting enough. And bring me word, that they will so do, and I will
reward thee with a thousand Crowns.

These Braveries thus passed over on either side, the Lord Protector wisely
considering with himself the uncertain Issue of pitched Fields, and minding to
preserve his Army for some other purposes, thought fit to tempt the Scots, by
another Missive, to yield unto his just Demands. In which, he wished them to
consider; That, This War was waged amongst Christians: And that, Our Ends were
no other, then a just Peace, whereto the endeavors of all Good men should
tend; That, An Occasion, not only of a League, but of a Perpetual Peace was
now happily offered, if they would suffer the two differing, and Emulous
Nations, by uniting the Head, to grow together; That, As this had formerly been
sought by us, so had it been generally Assented to by the Estates of Scotland;
That, Therefore he could not but wonder, why they should rather Treacherously
recurr to Arms (The events of War being usually, even to the Victour,
sufficiently unfortunate) then to maintain, inviolate, their Troth plighted to
the Good of both Nations; That, They could not in reason expect, that their
Queen should perpetually live a Virgin-life; That, If she Married, where could
She bestow her self better, then on a Puissant Monarch, inhabiting the same
Island, and speaking the same Language? That, They could not choose, but see,
what Inconveniences were the consequents of Foreign Matches. Whereof they
should rather make Trial by the Examples of Others, then at their Own Peril;
That, Though he demanded nothing but Equity, yet be so far abhorred the
Effusion of Christian blood, that, if he found the Scots not utterly averse
from an accord, he would endeavor, that some of the Contentions should be
remitted; That, He would also consent, that the Queen should abide, and be
brought up amongst them, until Her Age made Her Marriageable: at what time She
should, by the Consent of the Estates, Her self make choice of an Husband;
That, In the mean time, there should be a Cessation of Arms: neither should the
Queen be transported out of Her Realm, nor entertain Treaty of Marriage with
the French, or any other Foreigner; That, if this they would Faithfully
Promise, he would forthwith peaceably depart out of Scotland; And that,
Whatsoever Damages the Country had suffered by this Invasion, he would,
according to the esteem of indifferent Arbitratours, make Ample Satisfaction.

What Effect this Letter might have produced, if the Contents thereof had been
communicated to the Generality of the Scottish Army, it is hard to say. Certain
it is, that those, who had the Conduct of the Scot's Affairs, (as if they had
been totally carried on to their own Destruction,) resolved not to put it to
the venture: but, on the contrary, caused it to be noised abroad; That, Nothing
would content the English, but to have the young Queen at their disposal: and,
under color of a Marriage, to subdue the Kingdom; which was to be reduced for
ever to the form of a Province. This false Report did so exasperate all sorts
of people; that they were instant for the Fight. Which was as cheerfully
accepted by the Chief Commanders of the English Army; in regard of some
Intelligence, which was brought unto them, that the French were coming with
twelve Galleys, and fifty Ships, to fall upon them in the Rear. So as both
Parties being resolved to try their Fortune, they ranged their Armies in this
manner. The English, having gained an Hill, which was near their Shipping,
disposed their Army in this Order. The Avant-Guard, consisting of between three
and four thousand Foot, one hundred Men at Arms, and six hundred light
Horsemen, was Conducted by the Earl of Warwick. After which followed the
Main-Battail, consisting of about six thousand Foot, six hundred Men at Arms,
and about one thousand light Horsemen; Commanded by the Lord Protector
himself. And, finally, the Arrear, consisting of between three and four
thousand Foot, one hundred Men at Arms, and six hundred Light Horse, was led by
the Lord Dacres; an Active, though an Aged Gentleman. The rest of the Horses
was either cast into the Wings, or kept for a Reserve against all Events. And
so the Batt^il being d^sposed, the Lord General, in few words, but with no
small Gravity, (which to a Soldier serves in stead of Eloquence) puts them in
mind of the Honor, which their Ancestors had acquired in that Kingdom, of
their own extreme Disgrace, and Danger, if they fought not well: That, The
Justness of their Quarrel should not so much encourage, as enrage them; being
to revenge the Dishonor done to their King, and to chastise the deceitful
dealings of their ^nemies: That, The multitude of their Enemies should nothing
dismay them; because they, who come to maintain their own Breach of Faith,
(besides that the Check of their Consciences much breaks their spirit) have
the Omnipotent Arm of God m^st furious against them.

The Scots at the same time, having improvidently crossed the Esk, to find
their Graves on this side of the water, disposed their Army in this manner. In
the Avant-guard were placed about fifteen thousand, Commanded by the Earl of
Angus; about ten thou^and in the Main-battail, of whom the Lord Governor to^k
the Conduct; and so many more in the Arrear, Led by the Valiant Gourdon, Ea^l
of Huntly. And being ready to fall on (on a false hope that the English were
upon the flight) the Lord Governor put them in remembrance, how They could
never yet be brought under by the English but were always able either to beat
them back, or to weary them out; bid^^ng them look upon themselves, and upon
their enemies* themselves dreadful; their enemies gorgeous, and brave: on their
side men, on the other spoil, in case either through flowness, or cowardice,
they did not permit them to escape, who (^o, now) already had began their
flight. And to say truth, the English having changed their Ground, to gain the
Hill which ^^y near their Shipping and which also gave them the advantage both
of Sun and Wind, wrought an opinion in the Scots; that they dislodged to no
^ther end then to recover their Ships that they might save themselves, though
they lost their Carriages. In confidence whereof, they quitted a place of great
strength, where they were encamped, and from which the whole Army of England
was not able to force them.

But the old English Proverb tells us, that, They that reckon without their
Host, are to reckon twice; and so it fared with this infatuated People. For on
the tenth of September, the Battails being ready to join, a Piece of Ordnance,
discharged from the Galley of England, took off five and twenty of their men;
amongst whom the eldest Son of the Lord Graham was one. Whereupon four thousand
Archers, terrified with so unexpected a slaughter, made a stand, and could
never after be brought on: so, that they stood like men amaz^d; as neither
having Hearts to Fight, nor Opportunity to Fly. Which consternation
notwithstanding, the Lord Gray, being sent with a strong Party of Horse to give
the Onset, found the Main Body so well Embattailed, and such a Valiant
Opposition made by a stand of Pikes; that they were almost as impenetrable as a
Rock of Adamants: till being terrified by the English Ordnance, which came
thundering on them from the top of the Hill, and galled by the Great-Shot from
the Ships, they began to brangle. Which, being perceived by the English, they
gave a loud Shout, crying; They Fly, They Fly* and thereby so astonished the
affrighted Enemy; that they began to fly indeed, and presently throwing down
their Arms, betook themselves unto their Heels. Many were slain upon the Place*
more executed in the Chase, and not a few in the Esk; which so improvidently
they had passed the day before: so, that the number of the slain was thought to
have amounted to fourteen thousand. About fifteen hundred of both sorts were
taken Prisoners, amongst which the daring Earl of Huntly was one of the Chief;
who, being after asked, How he liked the Marriage, is said to have returned
this Answer, That, He could well enough brook the Wedding, but that he did not
like that kind of Woing. Amongst the number of the slain were found good store
of Monks and Friars: some thousands of which had put themselves into the Army;
which had been raised especially by their Power and Practices.

The Greatness of the Booty in Arms, and Baggage, was not the least cause, that
the English reaped no better Fruit from so great a Victory, and did not
prosecute the War to an absolute Conquest. For, being intent in pillaging the
dead, and gathering up the Spoils of the field, and solacing themselves in
Leith, for five days together; they gave the Scots time to make Head again, to
fortify some Strong places on the other side of the Fryth, and to remove the
Queen to Dun-britton-Castle: from whence they conveyed her into France in the
year next following. And, though the loss, rather then neglect, of this
opportunity is to be attributed in the first place to God's secret pleasure;
who had reserved the Union of the Kingdoms till an happier time: yet were there
many Second Causes and subordinate Motives, which might prevail upon the Lord
Protector to return for England, without advancing any further. For either he
might be taken off by the Earl of Warwick, who then began to cast an Envious
eye on his Power and Greatness. Or, might be otherwise unwilling, of his own
accord, to tempt his Fortune any further; by hazarding that Honor in a second
Battle, which he had acquired in the first. Or, he might think it more
conducible to his Affairs, to be present at the following Parliament; in which
he had some work to do, which seemed more needful to him, then the War with
Scotland. The good Success whereof would be ascribed to his Officers and
Commanders; but the Misfortunes wholly reckoned upon His account. Or finally,
(which I rather think) he might conceive it necessary to preserve his Army, and
Quarter it in the most convenient places near the English Borders: that it
might be ready at Command upon all occasions; if his Designs should meet with
any opposition, as before was said. And this may be believed the rather;
because that, having fortified some Islands in the Mouth of the Fryth, he
Garisoned the greatest part of his Army in Roxborough, Haddington, Hume-Castle,
and other Pieces of importance; most of them lying near together, and the
furthest not above a days March from Berwick.

Now as concerning the Day, in which this Victory was obtained, I find two
notable Mistakes. The one committed by the Right Reverend Bishop Godwin: and
the other by the no less Learned Sir John Hayward. By Bishop Godwin it is
placed, exceeding rightly, on the tenth of September; but then he does observe
it, as a thing remarkable; That this memorable Victory was obtained on the very
same day, in which the Images, which had been taken out of the several
Churches, were burned in London. Whereas we are informed by John Stow* a
diligent Observer of Days, and Times; That the Images in the Churches of London
were not taken down before the seventeenth of November. And we are told by Sir
John Hayward, that the day of this Fight was the tenth of December, which must
be either a mistake of the Press, or a slip of the Pen; it being noted in the
words next following, That on the same day, thirty four years before, the Scots
had been defeated by the English at Flodden-field. Which though it points us
back to the Month of September; yet the mistake remains as unto the Day:
that Battle being fought, not on the tenth, but the ninth of September; as all
our Writers do agree. But, leaving these Mistakes behind us, let us attend the
Lord Protector to the Court of England. Toward which he hastened with such
speed; that he stayed but twenty five days upon Scottish Ground from his first
Entrance to his Exit. And being come unto the Court, he was not only welcomed
by the King for so great a Service, with a Present of 500l. per Ann. to him,
and to his Heirs for ever; but highly Honored by all sorts of people: the
rather, in regard, that he had bought so great a Victory at so cheap a Rate; as
the loss of sixty Horse only, and but one of his Foot.

And now it is high time to attend the Parliament, which took beginning on the
fourth of November; and was Prorogued on the twenty fourth of December
following. In which the Cards were so well packed by Sir Ralph Sadlier; that
there was no need of any other shuffling till the end of the Game: this very
Parliament, without any sensible alteration of the Members of it, being
continued by Protogation, from Session to Session; until at last it ended by
the Death of the King. For a Preparatory whereunto, Richard Lord Rich was made
Lord Chancellor, on the twenty fourth of October; and Sir John Baker,
Chancellor of the Court of First Fruits and Tenths, was nominated Speaker for
the House of Commons. And, that all things might be carried with as little
opposition and noise as might be, it was thought fit, that Bishop Gardener
should be kept in Prison, till the end of the Session: and that Bishop Tonstal
of Du^ham (a man of a most even, and moderate Spirit) should be made less in
Reputation, by being deprived of his Place at the Council Table. And though the
Parliament consisted of such Members, as disagreed amongst themselves, in
respect of Religion: yet they agreed well enough together in one Common
Principle; which was, to serve the present Time, and preserve themselves. For,
though a great part of the Nobility, and not a few of the Chief Gentry in the
House of Commons, were cordially affected to the Church of Rome: yet were they
willing to give way to all such Acts and Statutes, as were made against it, out
of a fear of losing such Church Lands, as they were possessed of, if that
Religion should prevail, and get up again. And for the rest, who either were to
make, or improve their Fortunes; there is no question to be made, but that they
came resolved to further such a Reformation, as should most visibly conduce to
the Advancement of their several Ends. Which appears plainly by the strange
mixture of the Acts and Results thereof: some tending simply to God's Glory,
and the Good of the Church; some to the present Benefit, and enriching of
particular Persons; and some again being devised of purpose to prepare a way
for exposing the Revenues of the Church unto Spoil and Rapine. Not to say any
thing of those Acts, which were merely Civil, and tended to the Profit and
Emolument of the Commonwealth.

Of the first Sort was The Act for repealing several Statutes concerning
Treason. Under which head, besides those many bloody Laws, which concerned the
Life of the Subject in Civil Matters, and had been made in the distracted Times
of the late King Henry, there was a Repeal also of all such Statutes, as seemed
to touch the Subject in Life, or Liberty, for matter of Conscience: some
whereof had been made, in the Times of King Richard the Second, and Henry the
Fourth, against such, as, dissenting in Opinion from the Church of Rome, were
then called Lollards. Of which Sort also was another, made in the twenty fifth
of the King Deceased, together with that terrible Statute of the Six Articles
(commonly called The whip with six strings,) made in the thirty first year of
the said King Henry. Others were of a milder Nature, (but such as were thought
inconsistent with that Freedom of Conscience, which most men coveted to enjoy;)
that is to say, The Act for Qualification of the said Six Articles; 35. H. 8.
cap 9. The Act inhibiting the Reading of the Old and New Testament in the
English Tongue, and the Printing, Selling, Giving, or Delivering of any such
other Books or Writings, as are there in mentioned, and condemned; 34. H. 3.
cap. 1. But these were also Abrogated as the others were, together with all,
and every Act, or Acts of Parliament, concerning Doctrine and Matters of
Religion; and all* and every Article, Branch, Sentence, and Matter, Pains, and
Forfeitures in the same contained. By which Repeal all men may seem to have
been put into a Liberty of Reading Scripture, and being in a manner their own
Expositours; of entertaining what Opinions in Religion best pleased their
Fancies; and promulgating those Opinions, which they entertained. So that the
English for a time enjoyed that Liberty, which the Romans are affirmed by
Tacitus ( ubi and sentire quae velis, and quae velis loqui liceat. Tacit. Hist.
lib. 1.
) to have enjoyed without comptrol in the Times of Nerva; that is to say, A
liberty of Opining whatsoever they pleased, and speaking freely their Opinions
wheresoever they listed. Which whether it were such a great Felicity, as that
Author makes it, may be more then questioned.

Of this Sort al^o was the Act. entitled An Act against such, as speak against
the Sacrament of the Altar; and for the receipt thereof in both kinds: cap. 1.
In the first part whereof it is Provided with great Care and Piety; That, ( 1.
Edw. 6. cap. 1.
) Whatsoever person, or persons, from, and after the first day of May next
coming, shall deprave, despise, or contemn the most Blessed Sacrament, by any
contemptuous words, or by any words of depraving, despising, or reviling, etc.
that then he, or they, shall suffer Imprisonment, and make Fine and Ransom, at
the King's pleasure. And, to say Truth, it was but time, that some provision
should be made to suppress that Irreverence and Profaness, with which this
Blessed Sacrament was at that time handled by too many of those, who seemed
most ignorantly Zealous of a Reformation. For, whereas the Sacrament was in
those Times delivered unto each Communicant in a small round Wafer, called
commonly by the name of Sacramentum Altaris, or The blessed Sacrament of the
Altar; and that such parts thereof, as were reserved from time to time, were
hanged up over the Altar in a Pix, or Box: those zealous ones, in hatred to the
Church of Rome, reproached it by the odious Names of Jack-in-a-box,
Round-Robin, Sacrament of the Halter, and other Names, so unbecoming the Mouths
of Christians; that they were never taken up by the Turks, and Infidels. And
though Bishop Ridley, a right Learned, and Religious Prelate, frequently in his
Sermons had rebuked the irreverent behavior of such light and ill-disposed
Persons; yet neither he, nor any other of the Bishops were able to Reform the
Abuse: (the Quality, and Temper of the Times considered) which therefore was
thought fit to be committed to the power of the Civil Magistrate; the Bishop
being called in, to assist at the Sentence.

In the last branch of the Act, it is First declared, According to the Truth of
Scripture, and the Tenor of approved Antiquity; That it is most agreeable both
to the Institution of the said Sacrament, and more conformable to the common
Use, and Practice, both of the Apostles, and of the Primitive Church, by the
space of five hundred years after Christ's Ascension; that the said Blessed
Sacrament should rather be ministered unto all Christian people under both the
Kinds of Bread and Wine; then under the form of Bread only. And thereupon it
was Enacted, That, The said most Blessed Sacrament should be hereafter commonly
delivered, and ministered unto the People, within the Church of England, and
Ireland, and other the King's Dominions, under both the Kinds; that is to say,
of Bread and Wine. With these Provisoes notwithstanding, If necessity did not
otherwise require: as in the Case of sudden Sickness; and other such like
Extremities, in which it was not possible, that Wine could be provided for the
Use of the Sacrament, nor the Sickman depart this life in peace without it. And
Secondly, That the permitting of this Liberty to the People of England, and the
Dominions of the same, should not be construed to the condemning of any other
Church, or Churches, or the Vsages of them, in which the contrary was observed.
So far the Parliament Enacted, in relation to the thing it self to the subject
Matter; that the Communion should be delivered in both Kinds to all the good
People of the Kingdoms. But for the Form, in which it was to be administered,
that was left wholly to the King, and by the King committed to the Care of the
Bishops: (of which more hereafter) the Parliament declaring only, That a Godly
^xhortation should be made by the Ministers, therein expressing the great
Benefit and Comfort promised to them. Which worthily receive the same; and the
great Danger threatened by God to all such persons, as should unworthily receive
it.

Now, That there is not any thing, either in the Declaration of this
Parliament, or the Words by which it was Enacted, which does not every way
agree with Christ 's Institution: appears most plainly by this Passage of
Bishop Jewel. I would demand (says he) of Master Harding, what things he would
require to Christ's Institution, of Words, Christ's Words be plain; If Example,
Christ Himself Ministered in both Kinds; If Authority, Christ commanded His
Disciples, and in them all other Ministers of His Church to do the like; If
Certainty of His Meaning, the Apostles, endued with the Holy Ghost, so
practiced the same, and understood He meant so; If Continuance of Time. He ^ad
the same to be continued, till His Coming again. Jewel against H^rding, Art. 2.
Sect. 4. Which said, he thus proceeds in the eight Sect. (that is to say)
Some say, that the Priests in Russia, for lack of Wine, used to Consecrate in
Metheglin. Others, That Innocent the Eight, for the like want, dispensed with
the Priests of Norway, to Consecrate without Wine. It were no Reason to bind
the Church to the Necessity, or Imbecility of a few. For, otherwise the same
Want, and Imbecility, which Master Harding has here found for the one part of
the Sacrament, may be found for the other. For Arrianus, De Rebus Indicis, and
Strabo, in his Geography, have written, That, There be whole Nations and
Countries, that have no Bread. Therefore it should seem necessary by this
Conclusion, that, in Consideration of them, the whole Church should abstain
from the other Portion of the Sacrament also, and so have no Sacrament at all.
But, because he may be suspected to be over-partial, in favor of the Church of
England, let us see next what is confessed by Doctor Harding, the first who
took up Arms against it in Queen Elizabeth 's Time: who does acknowledge in
plain Terms; That, The Communion was delivered in both kinds at Corinth, as
appears by Saint Paul; and in many other places also, as may most evidently
be found in the Writings of many Ancient Fathers: And finally, that it was so
used for the space of six Hundred years, and after. Art. 2. Sect. 8* 28.

But, because Harding leaves the point at 600, and after, I doubt not, but we
may be able, on an easy search, to draw the Practice down to six hundred more,
and possibly somewhat after also. For Haymo of Halbe^stadt, who flourished in
the year 850. informs us, that, ( Appellatur Calix (...) (...) Haymo in 1. ad
Cor. cap. 11.
) The Cup is called the Cup of the Communion of the Blood of Christ because all
Communicate thereof. And we are certified in the History of A^toni^us,
Archbishop of Florence; that William Duke of Normandy, immediately before the
Battle near Hastings, Anno 966; caused His whole Army to communicate in both
Kinds; as the use then was. And finally, It is observed by Thomas Aquinas, who
lived in, and after the year 1260. That, In some Churches of his Time the Cup
was not given unto the People. Which though he reckons f^r a ( In quibusdam
Eccle^iis provide objervat^r; u^ po^ulo Sanguis non de^^r Sect. 3. qu. 80. Art.
11.
) Provident and Prudent Usage: yet, by restraining it only to some few
Churches, he shows the General Usage of the Church to have been otherwise at
that time, as indeed it was. So that the Parliament in this Case appointed
nothing, but what was consonant to the Institution of our Lord and Savior, and
to the Practice of the Church for 1260 years, and upwards: which is sufficient
to discharge it from the Scandal of an Innovation. Nor probably had the
Parliament appointed this* but that it was advised by such Godly Bishops, as
were desirous to Reduce the Ministration of that most Blessed Sacrament to the
first Institution of it, and the Primitive Practice: the Convocation of that
year not being enpowered to act in any Public business; for ought appearing on
Record.

The next great Business was the Retriving of a Statute made in the 27th. year
of King Henry the Eight: by which all Chanteries, Colleges, Free-Chapels, and
Hospitals, were permitted to the Disposing of the King for Term of His Life.
But the King dying, before He had taken many of the said Colleges, Hospitals,
Chant^ries, and Free-Chapels, into His Possession, and the Great Ones of the
Court not being willing to lose so Rich a Booty; it was set on Foot again, and
carried in this present Parliament. In, and by, which it was Enacted. That, All
such Colleges, Free-Chapels, and Chanteries, as were in Being within five years
of the present Session, which were not in the Actual Possession of the said
late King, etc. other then such, as by the King's Commissions should be
altered, transported, and changed; together, with a^^ ^an^^^s, Laxds,
Tenements, Rents, Tithes, Pensions, Portions, and other Hereditaments, to the
some belonging: after the Feast of Easter then next coming should be adjudged,
and deemed, and also be, in the Actual and Real Possession, an^ S^isin of the
King, His Heirs, and Succ^ssours for ever. And though the Hospitals, being at
that time an hundred and ten were not included in this Grant, as they had been
in that to the King decealed: yet the Revenue, which by this Act was designed
to the King, His Heirs, and Successors, must needs have been a great
Improvement to the Crown; if it had been carefully kept together, as it was
first pretended: there being accounted 90. Colleges within the Compass of that
Grant, (those in the Universities not being reckoned in that Number) and no
fewer then 2374. Free-Chapels and Chanteries: the Lands whereof were thus
conferred upon the King by Name, but not intended to be kept together for His
Benefit only. In which Respect it was very stoutly insisted on by Archbishop
Cranmer, that the dissolving of these Colleges, Free-Chapels, and Chanteries,
should be deferred until the King should be of Age; to the intent that they
might serve the better to furnish and maintain His Royal Estate, then that so
great a Treasure should be consumed in His Nonage, as it after was. Of this we
shall speak more in the following year, when the Grant of the said Chanteries,
Free-Chapels, etc. came to take Effect.

In the mean time, It will not be amiss to show, that these Chanteries
consisted of Salaries, allowed to one or more Priests to say daily Mass, for
the Souls of their deceased Founders, and their Friends. Which, not subsisting
on themselves, were generally Incorporated, and United to some Parochial,
Collegiate, or Cathedral Church. No fewer then 47. in Number, being found, and
Founded, in Saint Paul's. Free-Chapels, though Ordained for the same Intent,
were Independent of themselves, of stronger Constitution, and Richer Endowment,
then the Chanteries severally were; though therein they fell also short of the
Colleges, which far exceeded them, both in the Beauty of their Building, the
number of Priests* maintained in them and the Proportion of Revenue allotted to
them. All which Foundations, having in them an Admixture of Superstition, (as
Pre-supposing Purgatory, and Prayers to be made for Deliverance of the Soul
from thence) were therefore now suppressed upon that Account, and had been
granted to the late King upon other Pretenses. At what time it was Preached at
Mercers-Chapel, in London, by one Doctor Cromer, (a Man that wished exceeding
well to the Reformation) That, If Trentals, and Chantery-Masses, could avail
the Souls in Purgatory, then did the Parliament not well, in giving away
Colleges, and Chanteries; which served principally for that purpose. But if the
Parliament did well in dissolving and bestowing them upon the King: (which he
thought that no man could deny) then was it a plain Case, that such Chanteries,
and private Masses did confer no Relief on the Souls in Purgatory. Which
Dilemma, though it were unanswerable: yet was the matter so handled by the
Bishops, seeing how much the Doctrine of the Church was concerned therein, that
they brought him to a Recantation at Saint Paul's Cross, in the June next
following: (this Sermon being Preached in Lent) where he confessed himself to
have been seduced by naughty books, contrary to the Doctrine then received in
the Church. But the Current of these Times went the other way, and Cromer might
now have Preached that safely, for which before he had been brought into so
much trouble.

But that, which made the greatest Alteration, and threatened most danger to
the State Ecclesiastical, was the Act, entitled An Act for Election of
Bishops, and what Seals, and Styles, shall be used by Spiritual Persons. etc.
In which it was Ordained, (for I shall only repeat the Sum thereof) That,
Bishops should be made by the King's Letters Patents, and not by the Election
of the Deans and Chapters: That all their Processes, and Writings, should be
made in the King's Name only, with the Bishop's Test added to it: and sealed
with no other Seal, but the King's, or such, as should be Authorized and
Appointed by Him. In the Compounding of which Act there was more Danger
couched, then at first appeared. By the last Branch thereof it was plain and
evident, that the Intent of the Contrivers was, by degrees to weaken the
Authority of the Episcopal Order, by forcing them from their Strong-hold of
Divine Institution, and making them no other, then the King's Ministers only,
His Ecclesiastical Sheriffs (as a man might say) to execute His Will, and
disperse His Mandates. And of this Act such use was made, (though possibly
beyond the true intention of it) that the Bishops of those Times were not in a
Capacity of conferring Orders: but as they were thereunto enpowered by especial
License. The Tenor whereof (if Sanders be to be believed) was in these words
following: viz. The King to such a Bishop Greeting. Whereas all, and all manner
of Jurisdiction, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, flows from the King, as from
the Supreme Head of all the Body, etc. We therefore give, and grant to thee
full Power, and License, to continue during Our Good Pleasure, for holding
Ordination within thy Diocese of N. and for promoting fit Persons unto Holy
Orders, even to that of the Priesthood. Which being looked on by Queen Mary,
not only as a dangerous Diminution of the Episcopal Power; but as an Odious
Innovation in the Church of Christ ^ She caused this Act to be repealed in the
first Year of Her Reign; leaving the Bishops to depend on their former claim,
and to act all things, which belonged to their Jurisdiction, in their own
Names, and under their own Seals, as in former Times. In which Estate they have
continued, without any Legal Interruption, from that time to this.

But in the first Branch there was somewhat more, then what appeared at the
first sigh^. For, though it seemed to aim at nothing; but that the Bishops
should depend wholly on the King, for their preferment to those great and
eminent Places: yet the true Drift of the Design was to make Deans and Chapters
useless, for the time to come, and thereby to prepare them for a Dissolution.
For, had nothing else been intended in it, but that the King should have the
sole Nomination of all the Bishops in His Kingdoms, it had been only a Reviver
of an Ancient Power: which had been formerly Invested in His Predecessour's,
and in all other Christian Princes. Consult the Stories, and Records, of the
E^der Times* and it will readily appear, not only that the Roman Emperors of
the House of France, did nominate the Popes themselves: but that, after they
had lost that Power, they retained the Nomination of the Bishops in their own
Dominions. The like done also by the German Emperors, by the Kings of England,
and by the Ancient Kings of Spain: the Investiture being then performed Per
Annulum and Baculum, as they used to Phrase it; that is to say, by delivering
of a Ring, together with a Crosier, or Pastoral Staff, to the Party nominated.
Examples of which Practice are exceeding obvious in all the Stories of those
Times. But the Popes* finding at the last, how necessary it was in order to
that absolute Power, which they ambitiously affected over all Christian Kings,
and Princes, that the Bishops should depend on none but them, challenged this
power unto themselves: declaring it in several Petit Councels for no less then
Simony, if any man should receive a Bishopric from the Hands of his own
Natural Prince. From hence those long and deadly Quarrels begun between Pope
Hildebrand and the Emperor Henry the Fourth, and continued by their
Successors for many years after. From hence the like Disputes in England,
between Pope Urban the Second and King William Rufus; between Pope Innocent and
King John: till in the end the Popes prevailed both here and elsewhere, and
gained the point unto themselves. But so: that, to disguise the matter, the
Election of the future Bishop was committed to the Prior and Convent, or to the
Dean and Chapter of that Cathedral, wherein he was to be Installed. Which,
passing by the Name of Free Elections, were wholly, in a manner, at the Pope's
Disposing.

The Point thus gained, it had been little to their Profit, if they had not put
the same in Execution Which being done by Pope Innocent the Fourth, in
Consecrating certain English Bishops at Lions in France, without the King's
Knowledge and Consent: it was observed by Matthew Paris ( Matt. Paris. in H^n.
3. An 1245.
) to be dishourable to the King and of great Damage to the Kingdom* So much
the more, by how much the Mischief grew more common, and the Design, concealed
under that Disguise, became more apparent: which plainly was* ( (...)
) that being bound unto the Pope in the stricter Bonds, and growing into a
Contempt of their Natural King, they might the more readily be inclined to
work any Mischief in the Kingdom. The Danger whereof being considered by King
Edward the First, He came at last to this Conclusion with the Popes then being;
that is to say, That the said Priors and Convents, or the said Deans and
Chapters, as the Case might vary, before they proceeded to any Election, should
demand the King's Writ of Cong^^ D'^esliere: and, after the Election made, to
crave his Royal Assent unto it, for Confirmation of the same. And so much was
avowed by the Letters of King Edward the Third to Pope Clement the Fifth. In
which it was declared; That all the Cathedral Churches in England were Founded,
and Endowed by His Progenitors; ( Quas Ecclesias dicti Progenitores nostr^
dudum, singulis vacationibus earundem, per^ sonis ^doneis, jure suo Regio,
libere conferebant. Apud Mason. De Minist. Anglic. lib. 4. cap. 13: page 497.
) and that therefore, as often as those Churches became void of a Bishop, they
were filled again with fit Persons by His said Progenitors, as in their own
Natural and proper Right. The like done by the French Kings to this very day,
partly by virtue of the Pragmatical Sanction, established at the Council of
Basil, and partly by the Concordate between King Francis the First, and Pope
Leo the Tenth. And the like also challenged by the State of Venice, within the
Verge, and Territories of that Republic. For which consult the English History
of that State, Decad. 5. lib. 9. fol. 229. So that, upon the whole matter,
there was no Innovation made, as to this particular: but a Restoring to the
Crown an ancient Power, which had been Naturally and Originally in the Crown
before. But howsoever, having the appearance of an Alteration from the received
manner of Electings in the Church of Rome; and that, which was Established by
the late King for the Realm of England: it was repealed by Queen Mary, and put
into the former Chanel by Queen Elizabeth.

But from this Alteration, which was made in Parliament, in reference to the
manner of Making Bishops, and the way of Exercising their Authority, when they
were so made, let us proceed unto such Changes, as we find made amongst the
Bishops themselves. The first whereof was the Election of Doctor Nicholas
Ridley to the Sea of Rochester: to which he had been nominated by King Henry
the Eighth, when Holbeck, who preceded him, was designed for Lincoln. But, the
King dying shortly after, the Translation of Holbeck was deferred till the Time
of King Edward: which was no sooner done, but Ridley was chosen to succeed him;
although not actually Consecrated till the fifth of September. A man of great
Learning, as the Times then were, and for his excellent way of Preaching highly
esteemed by the late King; whose Chaplain he had been for many years before His
death: and upon that only designed to this Preferment, as the reward of his
Service. Being well studied in the Fathers, it was no hard matter for him to
observe; That, as the Church of Rome had erred in the Point of the Sacrament:
so, as well the Lutheran, as the Zuinglian Churches, had run themselves into
some error, by opposing the Papists: the one being forced upon the Figment of
Consubstantiation; the other to fly to Signs and Figures, as if there had been
nothing else in the blessed Eucharist. Which being observed, he thought it most
agreeable to the Rules of Piety, to frame his Judgment to the Dictates of the
Ancient Fathers: and so to hold a Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in
the Holy Sacrament; as to exclude that Corporal Eating of the same, which made
the Christian Faith a scorn both to the Turks and Moors. Which Doctrine as he
stoutly stood to in all his Examinations at Oxford, when he was preparing for
the Stake, so he maintained it constantly in his Sermons also: in which it was
affirmed; That, In the Sacrament were truly and verily the Body and Blood of
Christ, made forth effectually by Grace, and Spirit. And, being so persuaded in
his own Opinion he so prevailed by Discourse and Argument with Archbishop
Cranmer, as to bring him also to the same; (for which consult the Acts and M^n.
fol.) a man of a most even and constant spirit, as he declared in all his
Actions: but in none more, then in the opposition, which he made against Bishop
Hooper in Maintenance of the Rites, and Ceremonies, then by Law Established:
of which we shall have opportunity to speak more hereafter.

In the next place, we are to look upon the Preferment of Doctor Barlow, to the
Bishopric of Bath and Wells; succeeding in the place of Knight, An. 7/8
who dyed on the twenty ninth of the same September. He had been once Prior of
the Monastery of Bisham, in the County of Berks: from whence preferred to the Sea of Asaph, in the end of February, An. 1535. And, in the April following,
Translated to the Church of St. David's. During his sitting in which See, he
fell upon an honest and convenient Project, for removing the Episcopal See from
the decayed City of St. David's, most incommodiously Situate in the remotest
Angle of all the Diocese, to the rich Borough of Caer-marthen, in the midst
thereof; in the Chief Church whereof, being a Monastery of Grey-Friars, the
body of Edmond Earl of Richmond, the Father of K. Henry the Seventh received
Interment. Which Project he presented to Cromwell, being then Vicar General,
endearing it by these Motives and Propositions; that is to say, That, being
situate in the midst of the Diocese, it was very opportune for the profiting
of the King's Subjects, for the Preferment of God's Word, for abolishing all
Antichristian Superstition, and settling in the Diocese the King's Supremacy;
That it was furnished with all things necessary for the convenience of the
Canons, and might be done without any prejudice to the Friars: for every one of
which he offered to provide a sufficient, Maintenance. And, to advance the
work the more, he offered to remove his Consistory thither, to found therein a
Grammar-Schole, and settle a daily Lecture in Divinity there, for the reducing
of the Welsh from their ancient Rudeness to the Civility of the Time. All which
I find in the Memorials of Sir Robert Cotton. And unto these he might have
added, That he had a fair Episcopal House at Abberguilly, very near that Town:
in which the Bishops of that Diocese have for the most part made their
Dwelling. So that all Parties seemed to have been provided for in the
Proposition: and therefore the more to be admired; That, in a Time so much
addicted unto Alterations, it should speed no better. For, notwithstanding all
these Motives, the Sea remained where it was, and the Bishop continued in that
See till this present year; in which he was made use of, amongst many others,
by the Lord Protector, for Preaching up the War against Scotland. For which
and many other good Services already passed, but more to be performed
hereafter, he was Translated to this See on the death of Knight: but the
precise Day, and Time thereof, I have no where found. But I have found, that,
being Translated to this See, he gratified the Lord Protector with a Present
of eighteen or nineteen Manours, which anciently belonged unto it; and lying,
all, or most part of them, in the County of Sommerset, seemed very conveniently
disposed of, for the better Maintenance of the Dukedom, or rather of the Title
of the Duke of Sommerset; which he had took unto himself. More of which strange
Donations we shall find in others: the more to be excused, because there was
no other means (as the Times then were) to preserve the whole; but by advancing
some part thereof to the Spoil of others.

Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 2o. An. Dom. 1547, 1548.
THe Parliament ending on the twenty fourth day of December (as before was
said,) seems to have put a stop to all Public Businesses; as if it had been
done of purpose to give the great Ministers of State a time of breathing. But
no sooner was the year begun, (I mean the second year of the King) but that a
Letter is sent from the Archbishop to Doctor Bonn^r, Bishop of London;
requiring him in the name of his Majesty, and the Lords of his Council, to
proceed unto the Reformation of such Abuses, as were therein mentioned, and to
give Order for the like to the rest of the Suffragans. By ancient Right, the
Bishops of London are accounted Deans of the Episcopal College; and, being
such, were by their place to signify the pleasure of their Metropolitan to
all the Bishops of the Province, to execute his Mandates, and disperse his
Missives, on all Emergency of Affairs: as also to preside in Convocations, or
Provincial Synods; during the vacancy of the Sea, or in the necessary absence
of the Metropolitan. In which Capacity, and not out of any Zeal he had to the
Reformation, Bishop Bonner, having received the Archbishop's Letters,
communicates the Contents thereof to the rest of the Suffragan-Bishops, and
amongst others to Doctor Thomas Thirlby, then Bishop of Westminster, in these
following words.

My very Good Lord,
AFter my most hearty Commendations, These are to Advertise your Good Lordship,
that my Lord of Canterbury's Grace, this present 28th. of January, sent unto me
his Letters Missive, containing this in Effect; That my Lord Protectour's
Grace, with advice of other the King's Majesty's Honorable Privy Council (for
certain Considerations them moving) are fully resolved, that no Candles shall
be borne upon Candlemass^ day; nor also, from henceforth, Ashes, or Palms, used
any longer; requiring Me thereupon by his said Letters, to cause Admonition,
and Knowledge thereof, to be given unto your Lordship, and other Bishops, with
celerity accordingly. In consideration whereof, I do send at this present these
said Letters to your Good Lordship, that you thereupon may give Knowledge, and
Advertisement thereof, within your Diocese, as appertains. Thus committing
your Good Lordship to Almighty God, as well to fare, as your Good heart can
best desire.

Written in haste at my House in London, the said 28th. of January, 1547/8.

Such was the Tenor of this Letter: the Date whereof does very visibly
declare, that the Counsel was as sudden, as the Warning short. For, being
Dated on the 28th* of January, it was not possible, that any Reformation should
be made in the first particular; but only in the Cities of London, and
Westminster, and the parts adjoining: the Feast of Purification following
within five days after. But yet the Lords drove on so fast; that, before this
Order could be published, in the remote parts of the Kingdom, they followed it
with another, (as little pleasing to the main body of the People) concerning
Images; which in some places of the Realm were either not taken down at all, as
was required the year before by the King's Injunctions, or had been re-advanced
again as soon as the first Heats of the Visitation had began to cool. Which,
because it cannot be expressed more clearly, then in the Letters of the Council
to the Lord Archbishop, and that the Reader be not troubled with any
Repetitions; I shall commit the Narrative thereof to the Letters themselves:
which are these that follow.

AFter Our Right Hearty Commendations to Your Good Lordship, where now of late,
in the King's Majesty's Visitations, amongst other Godly Injunctions,
Commanded generally to be observed through all parts of this His Highness
Realm, One was set forth for the taking down of such Images, as had at any time
been abused with Pilgrimages, Offerings, or Censes; albeit that this said
Injunction has in many parts of the Realm been quietly obeyed, and executed;
yet, in many other places, much strife and contention has risen, and daily
rises, and more and more increases, about the execution of the same. Some men
being so Superstitious, or rather Wilful; as they would, by their good Wills,
retain all such Images still, though they have been most manifestly abused. An.
Reg. 2o 1547/8.
And almost in every place is Contention for Images, Whether they have been
abused, or not. And whilst these men go on on bothsides contentiously to obtain
their minds, contending whether this Image, or that I^age has been Offered
unto, Kissed, Censed, and otherwise abused; Paris have in some places been
taken in such sort, as further Inconveniences be like to ensue, if remedy be
not found in time. Considering therefore, that almost in no place of this Realm
is any sure quietness; but where all Image; be clean taken away, and pulled
down already: to the intent, that all Contention, in every part of this Realm,
for this matter, may be clearly taken away; and the lively Image of Christ
should not contend for the dead Ima^es, which be things not necessary; and
without the which the Churches of Christ continued most Godly many years: We
have thought good to signify unto you, that his Highness Pleasure, with the
Advice, and Consent of Us, the Lord Protector, and the rest of the Council,
is, That immediately, upon sight hereof, with as convenient diligence as you
may, you shall not only give Order, that all the Images, remaining in any
Church, or Chapel, within your Diocese, be removed, and taken away; but also,
by your Letters, signify unto the rest of the Bishops, within your Province,
this his Highness pleasure, for the like Order to be given by them, and every
of them, within their several Diocesses. And in the Execution hereof We require
both you, and the rest of the said Bishops, to use ^uch for^-sight, as the same
may be quietly done, with as Good satisfaction of the People, as may be.

From Sommerset- Place, the 11th. of Febr. 1547. Your Lordship's assured Loving
Friends, Edw. Sommerset, Hen. Arundel, Anth. Wingfield, John Russell, Thomas
Seimour, William Paget.



These quick Proceedings could not but startle those of the Romish Party,
though none so much, as Bishop Bonner* who, by his place, was to disperse those
unwelcome Mandates in the Province of Canterbury. And though he did perform the
service with no small Reluctance, yet he performed it at the last; his Letter
to the Bishop of Westminster (his next neighboring Bishop) not bearing Date
until the twentieth of that Month. Nor was Bishop Gardener better pleased,
when he heard the News: who thereupon signified, in his Letter to one Mr.
Vaughan, his great dislike of some Proceedings had at Portsmouth, in taking
down the Images of Christ, and his Saints; certifying him withal, not only,
that with his own eyes he had seen the Images standing in all Churches, where
Luther was had in Estimation; but that Luther himself had purposely written a
Book against some men, which had defaced them. And therefore it may well be
thought, that Covetousness spurred on this business, more then Zeal* there
being none of the Images so poor and mean, the Spoil whereof would not afford
some Gold and Silver, (if not Jewels also) besides Censers, Candlesticks, and
many other rich Utensils appertaining to them. In which Respect, the
Commissioners hereto Authorized were entertained in many places with scorn, and
railing: and the further they went from London, the worse they were handled.
Insomuch, that one of them, called Body* as he was pulling down Images in
Cornwall, was stabbed into the body by a Priest. And though the Principal
Offender was ^anged in Smithfield* and many of his Chief Accomplices in other
Parts of the Realm, which quieted all Matters for a time; yet, the next year
the storm broke out more violently then before it did: An. Reg. 2o 1548.
not only to the endangering of the Peace of those Western Counties, but in a
manner of all the Kingdom.

Which great Commotions the Council could not but foresee, as the most
probable Consequents of such Alterations: especially when they are sudden, and
pressed too fast. There being nothing, of which People commonly are so tender,
as they are of Religion: on which their Happiness depends, not only for this
World, but the World to come. And therefore it concerned them, in point of
Prudence, to let* the People see, that there was no intention to abolish all
their ancient Ceremonies; which either might consist with Piety, or the Profit
of the Commonwealth. And, in particular, it was held expedient to give the
generality of the Subject some contentment, in a Proclamation for the strict
keeping of Lent, and the Example of the Court in pursuance of it. For Doctor
Glas^er having broke the Ice, (as before was said) there was no scarcity of
those, that cried down all the Observations of Days, and Times; even to the
Libelling against that ancient and Religious Fast, in most scandalous Rhythms.
Complaint whereof being made by Bishop Gardener, in a Letter to the Lord
Protector; a Proclamation was set out, bearing Date in January, by which all
People were Commanded to abstain from Flesh in the time of Lent; and the King's
Lenten-Dyet was set out, and served, as in former Times.

And now comes Bishop Latimer on the Stage again: being a man of Parts and
Learning, and one that seemed inclinable enough to a Reformation. He grew into
esteem with Cromwell: by whose Power and Favor with the King, he was made
Bishop of Worcester* An. 1535. continuing in that See, till on the first of
Ju^ly, 1539. he chose rather willingly to Resign the same, then to have any
hand in Passing the Six Articles, then Agitated in the Convocation, and
Confirmed by Parliament. After which time, either upon Command, or of his own
accord, he forbore the Pulpit for the space of eight whole years, and upwards;
betaking himself to the retiredness of a private life: but welcome at all times
to Archbishop Cranmer; to whom the Piety, and Plainness of the Man was
exceeding acceptable. And possible enough it is, that being Sequestered from
Preaching, and all other Public Acts of the Ministration, he might be useful
to him in Composing the Homilies; having much in them of that plain and
familiar Style, which does so visibly show it self in all his Writings. On
New Years* Day last past, being Sunday, he Preached his first Sermon at St.
Paul'^-Cr^ss: (the first, I mean, after his Readmission to his former
Ministry) and, at the same place again, on that Day seven-night, and on the
Sunday after also; and, finally, on the day of St. Paul's Conversion, the
twenty fifth of that Month. By means whereof he became so Famous, and drew
such multitudes of People after him to hear his Sermons; that, being to Preach
before the King on the first Friday in Lent, it was thought necessary, that the
Pulpit should be placed in the King's Priv^-Garden; where he might be heard of
more, then four times as many Auditors, as could have thronged into the
Chapel. Which, as it was the first Sermon, which was Preached in that place;
so, afterward, a fixed, and standing Pulpit was erected for the like Occasions:
especially for Lent-Sermons on Sundays in the afternoon; and has so continued
ever since, till these later Times.

Now, whilst Affairs proceeded thus in the Court and City, some Godly Bishops,
and other Learned and Religious Men, were no less busily employed in the Castle
of Windsor; appointed by the King's Command to Consult together about one
Uniform Order for Administering the Holy Communion in the English Tongue, under
both Kinds of Bread and Wine, according to the Act of Parliament made in that
behalf. Which Persons so convened together (if at the least they were the same,
which made the first Liturgy of this King's time, as I think they were) were
these, who follow: that is to say, Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury;
Thomas Goodrick, Bishop of Ely, and afterward Lord Chancellor; Henry Holbeck,
Bishop of Lincoln; George Day, Bishop of Chichester; John Skip, Bishop of
Hereford; Thomas Thirlby, Bishop of Westminster; Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of
Rochester; Richard Cox, Almoner to the King, and Dean of Christ-Church; Doctor
May, Dean of St. Paul's; Doctor Tailor, then Dean (after Bishop) of Lincoln;
Doctor Heyns, Dean of Exeter; Doctor Robertson, afterward Dean of Durham;
Doctor Ridley, Master of Trinity-College in Cambridge. Who, being thus
Convened together, and taking into Consideration as well the right Rule of the
Scripture, as the Usage of the Primitive Church, agreed on such a Form, and
Order; as might comply with the Intention of the King, and the Act of
Parliament, without giving any just Offense to the Romish Party. For they so
Ordered it; that the whole Office of the Mass should proceed, as formerly, in
the Latin Tongue; even to the very end of the Canon, and the receiving of the
Sacrament by the Priest himself. Which being passed over, they began with an
Exhortation in the English Tongue, directed to all those, which did intend to
be part^kers of the Holy Communion. Which Exhortation, beginning with these
Words, Dearly-beloved in the Lord, ^ye coming to this Holy Communion, etc. is
in effect the last of those, which afterward remained in the Public Liturgy.
Then followed the Invitation thus; You, that do truly, and earnestly repent you
of your sins, etc. proceeding to the General Confession, the Absolution, the
Comfortable Sentences out of Holy Scripture; and so unto the Prayer of Humble
Address; We do not presume to come to this Table, etc. the Distribution of the
Sacrament to the People present, continuing still upon their knees, and finally
dismissing them, In the Peace of God. Which Godly Form, being presented to the
King, and the Lords of the Council, and by them exceeding well approved; was
Published on the eighth of March, together with his Majesty's Proclamation,
Authorizing the same, and Commanding all His Loving Subjects to conform unto
it, in this Manner following.

By the King.
EDWARD, by the Grace of God, King of England* France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith; and of the Church of England, and Ireland, in Earth the Supreme
Head: To All, and Singular, Our Loving Subjects, Greeting. For so much, as in
Our High Court of Parliament, lately holden at Westminster, it was by Us, with
the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons there
Assembled* most Godly, and agreeable to Christ's Holy Institution, Enacted;
That the most Blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior Christ
should from henceforth be commonly Delivered, and Ministered unto all Persons,
within Our Realm of England, and Ireland, and other Our Dominions, under both
Kinds, that is to say, of Bread and Wine; (except necessity otherwise require)
lest, every man fantasying and devising a sundry way by himself in the Use of
this most Blessed Sacrament of Unity, there might thereby arise any unseemly,
or ungodly Diversity: Our pleasure is, by the Advice of Our most Dear Uncle the
Duke of Sommerset, Governor of Our Person, and Protector of Our Realms,
Dominions, and Subjects, and other Our Privy Council; that the said Blessed
Sacrament be Ministered unto Our People, ^nely after such Form, and Manner, as
hereafter by Our Authority, with the Advice beforementioned, is set out, or
declared; Willing every man with due Reverence, and Christian Behavior, to
come to this Holy Sacrament, and most Blessed Communion; lest that, by the
unworthy receiving of such high Mysteries, they become guilty of the Body and
Blood of the Lord, and so eat and drink their own Damnation: but rather
diligently trying themselves, that they so come to this Holy Table of Christ,
and so be partakers of this Holy Communion; that they may dwell in Christ, and
have Christ dwelling in them: And also with such Obedience and Conformity, to
receive this Our Ordinance, and most Godly Direction; that we may be encouraged
from Time to Time further to travail for the R^formation, and setting forth of
such Godly Orders, as may be most to God's Glory, the Edifying of Our Subjects,
and for the Advancement of true Religion; which is thething We (by the help of
God) most earnestly endeavored to bring to effect: Willing all Our Loving
Subjects in the mean time to stay, and quiet themselves, with this Our
Direction; as men content to follow Authority (according to the bounden Duty of
Subjects) and not enterprising to run before: and so by their Rashness become
the greatest Hinderers of such things, as they, more arrogantly then Godly,
would seem (by their own Private Authority) most hotly to set forward. We would
not have Our Subjects so much to mistake Our Judgment, so much to mistrust Our
Zeal; as though we either would not discern what were to be done, or would not
do all things in due time: God be praised, We know both what by his Word is
meet to be redressed, and have an earnest mind by the Advice of Our most Dear
Uncle, and other of Our Privy Council, with all diligence and convenient speed,
so to set forth the same, as it may most stand with God's Glory, and edifying
and quietness of Our People* Which We doubt not, but all Our Obedient and
Loving Subjects will quietly and reverendly tarry for.


The next Care was, to see the said Order put in execution: of which the Lords
of the Council discharged the King, and took the whole Burden on themselves.
For, causing a sufficient Number of the Printed Copies to be sent to each
Bishop in the Realm, they there withal directed Letters to them; Requiring,
and in Hi^ Majesty's Name Commanding them, and every of them, to have an
earnest Diligence, and careful Respect, both in their own Persons, and all
their Officers, and Ministers, for causing the said Books to be so delivered to
every Parson, Vicar, and Curate in their several Diocesses; that they may have
sufficient time well to instruct and advise themselves for the Distribution of
the most Holy Communion, according to the Order of the said Book, before Easter
following: and that* by the good Means of them, (the said Bishops) they may be
well directed to use such Good, Gentle, and Charitable Instructions, to their
simple and unlearned Parishioners; as may be to their good Satisfaction:
Letting them further know, that, as the said Order was set forth, to the intent
there should be in all parts of this Realm, and among all men, one Uniform
manner quietly used; so that the Execution thereof did very much stand in the
Diligence of them, and others of their Vocation, who therefore were again
required to have a diligent respect unto it: as they tendered the King's
pleasure, and would answer the contrary. Which Letter, bearing Da^e on the
thirteenth of March, was subscribed by the Archbishop Cranmer, the Lord
Chancellor Rich, the Earl of Arundel, the Lords St. John and Russel, Mr.
Secretary Petre, Sir Anthony Wingfield, Sir Edward North, and Sir Edward
^otton. In Obedience unto whose Commands, as all the Bishops did not perform
their parts alike: ( Gardener of Winchester, Bonner of London, Voysie of
Exeter, and Sampson of Coventry and Lich-field, being more backward then the
rest) so many Parish Priests, not being willing to Advance so good a Work,
labored to disaffect the People to the present Government. And to that end it
was endeavored in their Sermons, to possess their Auditors with an ill
opinion of the King; as if he did intend to lay strange Exactions on the
Subject, by forcing them to pay half a Crown a piece for every one, who should
be Married, Christened, or Buried. For Remedy whereof it was Ordered by
Proclamation, bearing Date the twenty fourth of April; That none should be
permitted to Preach: but such as were Licenced under the Seals of the Lord
Protector, or the Archbishop of Canterbury.

In the next place we must attend the King's Commissioners, dispatched in the
beginning of March, into every Shire throughout the Realm, to take a Survey of
all Colleges, Free-Chapels, Chanteries, and Brother-Hoods, within the compass
of the Statute, or Act of Parliament. According to the Return of whose
Commissions, it would be found no difficult matter to put a just estimate and
value on so great a Gift, or to know how to parcel out, proportion, and divide
the Spoil betwixt all such, who had before in hope devoured it. In the first
place, as lying nearest, came in the Free-Chapel of Saint Stephen, Originally
Founded in the Palace at Westminster, and reckoned for the Chapel-Royal of the
Court of England. The whole Foundation consisted of no fewer* then thirty eight
Persons: viz. one Dean, twelve Canons, thirteen Vicars, four Clerks, six
Choristers; besides a Verger, and one that had the Charge of the Chapel. In
place of whom a certain Number were appointed for Officiating the daily Service
in the Royal-Chapels: (Gentlemen of the Chapel they are commonly called) whose
Sa^aries, together with that of the Choristers, and other Servants of the same,
amounts to a round yearly Sum: and yet the King, if the Lands belonging to that
Chapel had been kept together, and honestly said unto the Crown, had been a
very rich Gainer by it* the yearly Rents thereof being valued at 1085 l. 10 s.
5 d. As for the Chapel it self, together with a Clolyster of curious
Workmanship, built by John Chambers, one of the King's Physicians, and the last
Master of the same; they are still standing as they were: the Chapel having
been since fitted, and employed for an House of Commons, in all times of
Parliament.

At the same time also fell the College of St. Martin's, commonly called St.
Martin's le Grand, situate in the City of London, not far from Aldersgate:
first founded for a Dean, and Secular Canons, in the time of the Conqueror,
and afterward, privileged for a Sanctuary; the Rights whereof it constantly
enjoyed without interruption, till all privilege of Sanctuary was suppressed in
this Realm by King Henry the Eighth. But the Foundation it self being now found
to be Superstitious, it was surrrendred into the hands of King Edward the
Sixth: who after gave the same, together with the remaining Liberties, and
Precincts thereof, to the Church of Westminster: and they, to make the best of
the King's Donation, appointed, by a Chapter held the seventh of July, that the
Body of the Church, with the Quire and Isles, should be Leased out for fifty
years, at the Rent of five Marks per Annum to one H. Keeble of London;
excepting out of the said Grant, the Bells* Lead, Stone, Timber, Glass and
Iron, to be sold and disposed of, for the sole Use and Benefit of the said Dean
and Chapter. Which foul Transaction being made, the Church was totally pulled
down; a Tavern built in the East part of it: the rest of the site of the said
Church and College, together with the whole Precinct thereof, being built upon
with several Tenements, and let out to Strangers; who very industriously
affected to dwell therein (as the natural English since have done) in regard of
the Privileges of the place, exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Lord Mayor,
and Sheriffs of London; and governed by such Officers amongst themselves, as
are appointed thereunto by the Chapter of Westminster.

But for this Sacrilege the Church of Westminster was called immediately in a
manner to a ^ober Reckoning. For the Lord P^otectour, thinking it altogether
unnecessary, that two Cathedrals should be Founded so near one another, and
thinking, that the Church of Westminster, (as being of a late Foundation) might
best be spared, had cast a longing eye upon the goodly Patrimony, which
remained unto it. And being then unfurnished of an House, or Palace,
proportionable unto his Greatness, he doubted not to find room enough; upon
the Dissolution and Destruction of so large a Fabric, to raise a Palace, equal
to his vast Designs. Which coming to the ears of Benson, the last Abbot, and
first Dean of the Church, he could be^hink himself of no other means to
preserve the whole* but by parting for the present with more then half the
Estate, which belonged unto it. And thereupon a Lease is made of seventeen
Manours, and good Farms, lying almost together in the County of Gloucester, for
the Term of ninety nine years; which they presented to the Lord Thomas Seimour,
to serve as an Addition to his Manor of Sudeley: humbly beseeching him to
stand their Good Lord and Patron, and to preserv them in a fair Esteem, with
the Lord Protector. Another Present of almost as many Manours, and Farms,
lying in the Counties of Gloc^^ster, Worcester, and Hereford, was made for the
like Term to Sir John Mason, a special Confident of the Duke's: not for his
own, but for the use of his Great Master; which, after the Duke, all came to
Sir John Bourn, principal Secretary of Estate in the time of Queen Mary. And
yet this would not serve the Turn, till they had put into the Scale their
Manor of Islip, conferred upon that Church by King Edward the Confessor; to
which no fewer then two hundred Customary Tenants owed their Soil and Service:
and, being one of the best wooded things in those parts of the Realm, was to be
granted also without Impeachment of Wast, as it was accordingly. By means
whereof the Deantry was preserved for the later Times; how it succeeded with
the Bishopric, we shall see hereafter. Thus Benson saved the Deanery; but he
lost himself: ^or, calling to remembrance, that formerly he had been a means to
surrender the Abbey, and was now forced on the (...). Dilapidating the Estate of
the Deanery, he fell into a great disquiet o^ ^^nd, which brought him to his
death within few Months after. To whom succeeded Doctor Cox, being then
Almoner to the King, Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and Dean of
Christ-Church: and afterward preferred by Queen Elizabeth to the Sea of Ely.

I had not singled these two (I mean St. Martin's, and St. Stephen's) out of
all the rest: but that they were the best, and richest in their several kinds;
and that there was more depending on the Story of them, then on any others. But
Bad Examples seldom end where they first began. For the Nobility, and
inferior Gentry, possessed of Patronages, considering how much the Lords, and
Great men of the Court had improved their Fortunes, by the suppression of those
Chanteries, and other Foundations, which had been granted to the King;
conceived themselves in a capacity of doing the like, by taking into their
hands the yearly Profits of those Benefices, of which by Law they only were
entrusted with the Presentations. Of which abuse Complaint is made by Bishop
Latimer, in his Printed Sermons. In which we find, That the Gentry of that
Time invaded the Profits of the Church; leaving the Title only to the
Incumbent: and That Chantery-Priests were put by them into several Cures* to
save their P^nsions; p^g. 38. that many Benefices were let out in Fee-Farms,
(page 71) or given unto Servants for keeping of Hounds, Hawks, and Horses, and
for making of Gardens; page 91, 114. And finally, That the Poor Clergy, being
kept to some sorry Pittances, were forced to put themselves into Gentlemen's
Houses, and there to serve as Clerk^ of the Kitching, Surveyour^, Receivers,
etc. page 241. All which Enormities (though tending so apparently to the
D^shonour of God, the Disservice of the Church, and the Disgrace of Religion)
were generally connived at by the Lords, and others; who only had the power to
Reform the same: because they could not question those, who had so miserably
invaded the Churches Patrimony, without condemning of themselves.

Thus leaving England for a while, we are to take a short Survey of Affairs in
Scotland, into which the French had put ten thousand Soldiers; three thousand
of them being Almains, under the Command of Mounsieur D' Essie; who, joining
with the Scots* laid Siege before the Town of Haddington, on St. Peter's-Eve.
For the Relief whereof a strength of one thousand three hundred Horse was sent
from Berwick, An. Reg. 2.o 1548.
under the Conduct of Sir Robert Bows, and Sir Thomas Palmer; who, falling
very unfortunately into the Hands of the Enemy, were for the most part slain or
taken. The English notwithstanding made good the Town* and held it out so long;
that in the end the Earl of Shrewsbury, with a Power of sixteen thousand men,
(of which there were four thousand Lansquenets, or Germane Soldiers) appeared
in fight. On whose approach, the Enemy withdrew themselves, and raised their
Siege on or about the twentieth day of August; giving great commendation to the
English Garrison, for the notable service they had done in defense of the Town.
The Siege being raised, the Earl of Shrewbury with his Forces returned for
England; leaving the Town well stored with Victuals, and plentifully furnished
with all manner of Ammunition* which put the Soldiers of the Garrison into so
good heart; that they made many Sallies out, and frequently Skirmished with the
French, and Scots, whom they found Quartered in the Villages and Towns
adjoining. But, the matter being taken into Debate by the Council of England,
it was Resolved, especially by those, who secretly envied at the Power and
Greatness of the Lord Protector; That the keeping of the Town would not quit
the Cost; as being farthest from the Borders, and not to be Relieved, if it
were distressed, without the raising and employing of a Royal Army. And
thereupon the Earl of Rutland was sent thither with three thousand of the
Lansquenets, and as many Borderers: who, coming to the Town on the twentieth of
September, slighted the Works; and, having destroyed the Houses, caused all
the Ordnance, and Carriages, to be sent to Berwick, and returned without
Battle. The voluntary quitting of which Town drew after it the loss of all the
Pieces, which we held in Scotland.

The English Forces being removed from the Town of Haddington, the French
immediately prepared for their going homewards: carrying a richer Lading with
them; then all the Arms, and Ammunition, which they brought at their coming.
For, while the Army lay at the Siege at Haddington, the Ministers of the French
King were busied in Treaty with the Scots, for putting the Young Queen into
their Power, transporting her into France, and Marrying her unto the Daulphin.
But in this point they found the Council much divided. Some thought, That the
Conditions, offered by the Lord Protector, (not till then generally known)
were to be embraced; in regard it gave them an assurance of ten years Peace at
the least; and that, if either of the Princes died within that time, they
should be left at Liberty, to Order the Affairs of that Kingdom to the most
Advantage. But against this it was alleged by those of the opposite Party;
(whom the French King had bought with ready Money, and Anual Pensions.) That,
as long as the Queen remained amongst them, they should never be Free from the
Pretensions of the English. From which, there was no question, but they would
desist; when they saw the Ground thereof to be taken away by the Queens
Removal. Of which Party, (besides those, which were corrupted by the Gold of
France) were the Bishops and Clergy; who, being Zealous for the preservation of
their Old Religion, abominated nothing more, then the Alliance with England.
And so the matter being carried in behalf of the French, and there being now no
further need of them for defense of the Country, they gave Order to make ready
their Shipping, and nominated a set day for their Departure. Which day being
come, they Coasted about Scotland, by the Isles of Orkney, took in the young
Queen at Dun^britton-Castle, and passing through St. George's Chanel arrived in
Bretaigne; whilst a strong Squadron of the English attended for their coming
in the Narrow-Seas.

But this Departure of the French, though it much weakened, did not disanimate
the Scots, for making trial of their Fortune against the English. Hume-Castle,
and Fast-Castle, remained (amongst some others) as Thorns in their Sides: but
they regained them both this year. Hume-Castle they surprised by means of some
of their own Nation; who, being reputed Friends, and suffered to have free and
frequent Access unto it, had Opportunity, both to discover the Weaknesses of
it, and by what Ways it might most easily be taken. And, being more cordially
affected to their Old Countrymen, then their New Acquaintance, they directed a
select number of Soldiers to some secret Pa^sages; by which, having first
climbed up a very steep Rock, they found an Entrance into the Castle, put the
secure Garrison to the Sword, and possessed the Place, leaving a fair warning
unto all others; Never to trust the Courtesies, or Services of those, whom they
have provoked to be their Enemies. Fast-Castle they surprised by a Warlike
Stratageme. For the Governor having Commanded the neighboring Villages, at a
prefixed day, to bring in their Contribution of Corn, and other necessary
Provision; the Enemy makes Use of this Opportunity. Soldiers, habited like
Peasants, came at the day, fraught with their Burdens; whereof having eased
their Horses, they carry them on their shoulders over the Bridge, (which joined
two Rocks together) and so gained Entrance: the Watchword being given, they
cast down their Burdens, till the Sentinels open the Gates to their Fellows;
and become Masters of the Place. The News of which Surprisals, together with
that of the Queens Removal, being brought into the Court of England, which then
began to be divided into Sides and Factions; there was no further Care taken
for the Prosecution of the Scottish War: which for the p^esent much refreshed
that impove^ished K^ngdom.

Now while these Traverses of War were made in Scotland, there was no solid
Peace, though no open Discord in the Church of England. It has been showed;
that Bishop Gardener, having long lain Prisoner in the Fleet, was, on the
Morrow after Twel^th-Day last, restored to Liberty; and permitted to return
unto his Diocese. Where, contrary to the Promise made at his Enlargment, he
began to show himself displeased with the King's Proceedings in the case of
Images. Concerning which he wrote a long Letter to the Lord Protector, on the
twenty first of May, and backed it with another of the sixth of June: and
otherwise appeared so cross to the King's Designs; that he was sent for to the
Co^rt, and after some Reproofs dismissed unto his house in South-Wark, where he
was commanded to remain until further Order. But there also he behaved himself
with much unquietness, meddling in many matters, which concerned the King; for
which he had neither Warrant, nor Commission: whereof being once again
admonished by their Lordships, he did not only promise to conform himself like
a good Subject; but to declare his Conformity to the World, in an open Sermon,
in sundry Articles agreed upon; that such, as were offended, might be satisfied
in him. St. Peter's-Day, then near at hand, was given him for the Day, whereon
he was to Preach this Sermon. In which though he allowed the Sacrament to be
Administered in both Kinds, and showed his Approbation of the King's Proceedings
in some other Points: yet in the rest he gave such little satisfaction to the
King and Council; that the next day he was sent Prisoner to the Tower, where he
remained till his Enlargment by Queen Mary.

The Punishment of this great Prelat^ did not so much discourage those of the
Romish Party: as his Example animated, and emboldened them to such
I^conformity; as gave no small Disturbance to the King's Proceedings. For
notwithstanding His great Care to set forth one Uniform Order of Administering
the Holy Communion in both Kinds; yet so it happened, that, (through the
perverse Obstinacy, and froward Dissembling of many of the inferior Priests,
and Ministers, of Cathedral, and other Churches of this Realm) there did arise
a marvailous Schism, and Variety of Factions, in celebrating the
Communion-Service, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites, and
Ceremonies of the Church. For some, zealously allowing the King's Proceedings,
did gladly follow the Order thereof; and others* though not so willingly
admitting them, did yet dissemblingly and patchingly use some part of them: but
many, causlesly contemning them all, would still continue in their former
Popery. Besides, it is Observed in the Register-Book of the Parish of Petworth;
That many at this time affirmed the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar to be
of little regard; that in many places it was irreverently used, and cast out of
the Church, and many other great Enormities committed: which they seconded by
oppugning the established Ceremonies; as Holy Water, Holy Bread, and diverse
other Usages of the seven Sacraments.

And yet these were not all the Mischiefs, which the Time produced. For, in
Pursuance of this Schism, and to confirm the People in their former ways, many
of those, which had been Licenced in Form, and Manner prescribed by the
Proclamation of the twenty fourth of April* appeared as Active in Preaching
against the King's Proceedings; as any of the Unlicenced Preachers had been
found to be. Which being made known unto the King, and the Lords of the
Council, it was advised; That a Public Liturgy should be drawn, and confirmed
by Parliament* with several Penalties to be inflicted on all those, who should
not readily con^orm to the Rules, and Appointments of it For though some
ill-affected men might look upon the late Order for Administering the Holy
Sacram^nt in the English Tongue, as the Act of some few Persons about the King;
and not proceeding reall^ from the King Himself: yet, when the King's Pleasure
came to be dec^ared by Act of Pa^li^ment, it was to be presumed; that (all
such, Subterfuges and Ev^sio^s being taken away) the Subjects would conform
unto it without fu^ther trouble. Which being thus resolved upon, He caused
those Godly Bishops, and other Learned Divi^es, whom He had formerly employed
in drawing up the Order for the Holy Communion, to attend His pleasure on the
first day of September then next following. Attending at the day appointed, it
pleased His Majesty to commend unto them the framing of a Public Liturgy,
which should contain the Order of Morning and Evening Prayer, together with a
Form of Ministering the Sacraments and Sacramentals, and for the Celebrating of
all other Public Offices; which were required by the Church, of good Christian
People. Which as His Majesty commanded out of a most Religious Zeal to the
Honor of God, the Edification of His Subjects, and to the Peace and Happiness
of His Dominions; so they (who knew no better Sacrifice, then Obedience) did
cheerfully apply themselves to the Undertaking.

And, that they might proceed therein, not only with the less Disquiets, but
with the greater Hope of gaining their desired End; it pleased His Majesty to
declare by His Proclamation, bearing Date the twenty third day of the said
Month of September, into what course he had put this Business: letting them
know; That, for the settling of an Uniformity and Order th^oughout his Realm,
and for putting an End to all Controversies in Religion, He had caused certain
Godly Bishops, and other notable Learned men to be Congregated, or called
together. And thereupon does infer, That, notwithstanding many of the
Preachers, formerly Licenced, had behaved themselves very discreetly, and
wisely; to the Honor of God, and the Contentation of His Highness: yet till
such time, as the said Order should be generally set forth throughout the
Realm, His Majesty did thereby inhibit all manner of Persons, whatsoever they
be, to Preach in open Audience, in the Pulpit, or otherwise, by any sought
color, or fraud, to the disobeying of His Commandment. And this he did to this
intent; That the whole Clergy in the mean space might apply themselves, to
Prayer to Almighty God, for the better atchieving of this same Godly Intent and
Purp^se; not doubting, but that all His Loving Subjects in the mean time would
occupy themselves to God's Honor, with due Prayer in the Church, and patient
Hearing of the Godly Homili^s, heretofore set forth by His Highness
Injunctions: and so endeavor themselves, that they may be the more rea^y, with
thankful Obedience to receive a most quiet, Godly and Uniform Order, through
all His said Realms, and Dominions. And to the end, that His Majesty's
Pleasure in the Premises should be the more punctually obeyed, He wil^^th and
r^quireth all His Loving Officers and Ministers, as well Justices of the Peace;
as Maors Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, or any other His Officers, of what
State, Degree, and Condition soever they be, to be attendant upon this
Proclamation, and Commandment: and to see the Infringers, and Breakers thereof,
to be Imprisoned, and His Highness, or the Lord Protectour's Grace, or His
Majesty's Council, to be certified thereof immediately, as they tendered His
Majesty's Pleasure, and would answer to the contrary at their Perils.

And here it is to be Observed; That those, who had the chief directing of this
weighty Business, were beforehand resolved, that none but English Heads, or
Hands, should be used therein: left otherwise it might be thought, and perhaps
Objected; that they rather followed the Example of some other Churches, or were
swayed by the Authority of those Foreign Assistants; then by the Word of God,
and the most uncorrupted Practice of the Primitive Times. Certain it is, that,
upon the very first Reports of a Reformation here intended, Calvin had offered
his Assistance to Archbishop Craenmer; as himself confesses. But the
Archbishop knew the Man, and refused the Offer. And it appears in one of
Bishop Latimer's Sermons, that there was report, about this time, of
Melancthon's coming; but it proved only a Report. And, though it was thought
necessary, for the better seasoning of the Universities in the Protestant
Reformed Religion; that Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, two eminent Divines of
the Foreign Churches, should be invited to come over: yet the Archbishop's
Letter of Invitation, sent to Martin Bucer, was not written till the twelfth
day of October. At what time the Liturgy then in hand, being the chief Key to
the whole Work of Reformation, was in very good forwardness: and must needs be
completely finished, before he could so settle, and dispose his Affairs in
Germany; as to come for England. And though Peter Martyr, being either more at
Leisure, or less engaged, or otherwise more willing to accept of the
Invitation, came many Months before the other: yet neither do we find him
here, till the end of November* when the Liturgy had been approved of by the
King and Council, if it had not also passed the Approbation of both Houses of
Parliament. Nor was it likely, that they should make use of such a Man in
composing a Liturgy; wherein they were resolved to retain a great part of the
Ancient Ceremonies: who, being made Canon of Christ-Church in Oxford, and
frequently present at Divine Service in that Church, could never be prevailed
with, to put on the Surplice.

Being left therefore to themselves, they were at the more liberty for
following the King's most Godly, and most Wise Directions: having in the first
place an eye, and respect, to the most sincere, and Pure Religion, taught by
the Scripture; and, in the second, to the Vsages of the Primitive Church: and
making, out of both, one convenient and meet Order, Rite, and Fashion of Common
Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments* to be had, and used in the Realm
of Engl^nd, and the Principality of Wales. Which being finished, they all
subscribed their Names unto it; but ( Sed Richardus Ciscestriensis (ut ipse
mihi dixit) non sub^cripsit. Lib. Pe^w.
) Day of Chichester: who would by no means have his Hand in the Subscription;
as is related in the Register-Book of the Parish of Petwo^th. But* being
subscribed by all the rest, it was by them, with all due Reverence, humbly
presented to the King: by whom it was received to His great Comfort, and
Quietness of mind; as the Statute ( Act. 2. Edw. 6. 1.
) tells us. And being by him commended to the Lords, and Commons, then
Assembled in Parliament; (which Parliament took beginning on the fourth day of
November) they, did not only give His Highness most hearty and lowly thanks,
for his Care therein: but, on peru^a^ of the Book, declared it to be done by
the aid of the Holy Ghost. And ther^upo^, considering the Godly Prayers,
Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies, in the said Book mentioned; and also the reasons
of Altering of those things, which be altered, and the retaining those things,
which be retained; together with the Ho^our of God, and the great Quiet^ess,
which by the Grace of God, was likely to ens^e on such an U^iform Order, in
Common Prayer, Rites, and External Ceremonies to be used in all England, and
Wales, in Calice, and the Marches of the ^ame: it was E^ac^ed; That all, and
singular, Ministers, in any Cathedral, or (...)-Church, or other Place, within
this Realm of England, Wales, Calce* and the Marches of the same, or other the
King's Dominions, should from, and after the Feast of Pentecost, next coming,
(that Interval being given for the Printing of it) be bounden to say, and use
the Mattens, Even-song, Celebration of the Lord's Supper, ^^mmonly ca^^ed The
Mass, and Administration of each of the Sacraments, and all their Common and
Open Prayer* in such Order, and Form, as is mentioned in the same Book, and no
otherwise: with several Penalties therein mentioned, to be imposed on all such
in their several places, as either should wilfully refuse to Officiate by it;
or hinder the Lawful Ex^cution o^ it; or speak any thing in Derogation of the
said Book, or any thing therein contained.

The passing of this Act gave great Offense to those of the Romish Pa^ty: not,
that they could except against it, in regard either of the Manner, or Matter of
it; (which they acknowledged to be Consonant to the Ancient Forms) but because
it was communicated to the People in the Vulgar Tongue. And this they charged,
as a great E^rour in those Men; who had the chief Hand in the Conduct of that
Aff^i^: beca^se that, by the Rules thereof, the Scriptures were to be read
publ^ckly in the (...) Tongue. Which, what else was it, (as they said) but the
committing so much Heavenly Treasure unto R^tten Vessels? the trusting so much
Excellent (...) to such Musty B^ttles? And, being that there are many things in
he Divine Offices of the Church, quae secreta esse debent, as the Cardinal
tells us, which ought to have been kept as Secrets from all Vulgar knowledge*
it must needs be of very ill Con^equence, to communicate them to all sor^s of
People. But certainly the Holy Ghost was able to direct the Church in ^ better
way; then such, as should be subject unto Man's Exceptions. And he directs the
Service of the Church to be Officiated in such a Language, to which the
ignorant, and unlearned may say Amen; 1 Cor. xiv. 9, 16. Upon which Words it is
observed by Lyra, and Aquinas; two as great Clerks as any in the Church of
Rome: That, The Public Service of the Church, in the Primitive Times, was in
the Common Vulgar Language. The like affirmed by Doctor Ha^aing, as great a
Stickler for that Church, and the Doctrines of it, as any other of his Time:
adding withal; That it was necessary in the Primitive Times, that it should be
so: and granting also* That it were still better, that the People had their
Service in their own Vulgar Tongue, for their better understanding of it. So
he, in Answer to the Challenge made by Bishop Jewel, Art. 3. Sect. 28, and 33.
And therefore having the confession, and acknowledgment of the very Adve^sa^y;
not only as to the Antiquity, but the Fitness also of Celebrating Divine
Offices in the Vulgar Language: it may be thought a loss both of Time and
Travail* to press the Argument any further.

Which n^twithstanding, for the more perfect clearing of the Point in question,
it w^ll be found upon a very easy seach; that the Jews did Celebrate their
Divine Offi^es, Tractatus, and Oblationes (as the Father has it) most commonly
in the Syriack, and sometimes in the Hebrew Tongue, the natural Languages of
that People; as is affirmed by St. Ambrose, upon 1 Cor. cap. 14. and out of him
by Durand, in his Rationale. Eckius, a great Servant of the Popes, affirms in
his Common Places; That the Indians have their Service in the Indian Tongue;
and that St. Hierom* having Translated the whole Bible into the Dalmatick,
procured that the Service should be celebrated in that Language also. The like
St. Hierom himself, in his Epistle to Heliodorus, has told us of the Bessi, a
Sarmatian People. The like St. Basil, in his Epistle to the Neo-Caesarians,
assures us for the Egyptians, Lib^ans, Palestinians, Phoenicians, Arabians,
Syrians, and such as dwell about the Bank of the River Euphrates. The
Aethiopians had their M^ssal, the Chaldeans theirs, each in the Lan^uage of
their Countries; which they still retain: so had the Moscovites of old, and all
the scattered Chu^ches of the Eastern Parts; which they conti^^e to this day.
Nay, rather then the People should be kept in Ignorance of the Word of God, and
the Divine Offices of the Church, a signal Miracle should be wrought to command
the contrary. For we are told of the Sclavonians, by Aeneas Sylvius, (who being
afterward Pope, was called Pius the Second,) that being converted unto the
Faith, they made suit unto the Pope, then being, to have their Public Service
in their Natural Tongue: but some delay being made therein by the Pope and
Cardinals, a voice was heard, seeming to have come from Heaven, saying in the
Latin Tongue; Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum, and omnis lingua confiteatur Ei:
that is to ^ay, Let every Soul praise the Name of God, and every Tongue or
Language make Profession of it; whereupon their Desires were granted without
more delay. Which probably might be a chief Inducement to Innocent the Third,
to set out a Decree in the Lateran Council, importing. That in all such Cities,
in which there was a Concourse of diverse Nations, and consequently of Different
Languages (as in most Towns of Trade there does use to be) the Service should
be said, and Sacraments administered, Secundum diversitates Nationum, and
Linguarum; that is, According to the Difference of their Tongues and Nations.
So that, if we consider the Direction of the Holy Ghost* the Practice of the
Primitive Times, the General Usage of all Nations not inthralled to the Popes
of Rome, the Confession of the very Adversary, the Act and Approbation of the
Pope himself, and finally, the Declaration of God's P^easure by so great a
Miracle: The Church did nothing in this Case, but what was justifiable in the
sight, both of God, and Man.

But then again it is Objected on the other side, That neither the undertaking
was advised, nor the Book it self approved, in a Synodical Way, by the Bishops
and Clergy: but that it was the Act only of some few of the Prelates, employed
therein by the King, or the Lord Protector, without the Privity, and
Approbation of the rest. The Consideration whereof shall be referred to another
place: when we shall come to speak of the King's Authority for the composing,
and imposing of the Sea the Book called Cyprianus Anglicus: lib. 4. An. 1637.
Scottish Liturgy.

In the mean time, we must take notice of another Act, of as great importance
for the Peace, and Honor of the Church, and the Advancing of the Work of
Reformation: which took away those positive Laws* by which all men in Holy
Orders were restrained from Marriage. In which (...) it is first declared,
That; It were much to be desired, that Priests, and all others in Holy Orders,
might abstain from Marriage, that, thereby being freed from the Cares of
Wed-lock, and abstracted from the Troubles of Domestical Business, they might
more diligently attend the Ministry, and apply themselves unto their Studie^.
But, then withal it is considered, That as all men have not the Gift of
Continence, so many great Scandals, and other notable Inconveniences, have
been occasioned in the Church by the enforced Necessity of a single Life, in
those admitted unto Orders. Which seeing it was no more imposed on them, then
on any other, by the Word of God, but only such positive Laws and
Constitutions, as had been made to that Effect by the Church of Rome: It was
therefore Enacted by the Authority of the present Parliament; That, All such
Positive Laws, and Ordinances, as prohibited the Marriages of Priests, or any
other in Holy Orders, and Pains and Forfeitures therein contained, should be
utterly void. Which Act, permitting them to marry, but looked on as a matter of
Permission only, made no small Pastime amongst those of the Romish Party:
reproaching both the Priests, and much more their Wives, as not lawfully
married; but only suffered to enjoy the Company of one another, without Fear
of Punishment. And thereupon it was Enacted in the Parliament of the fifth and
sixth of Edw. 6. cap. 12. that, The Marriages of the Priests should be reputed
lawful, th^mselves being made Capable of being Tenants by Courtesy, their
Wives to be endowed, as others, at the Common Law, and their Child^en Heritable
to the Lands of their Fathers, or M^thers. Which Privileges, or Capacities
rather, (notwithstanding the Repeal of this Statute in the Time of Queen Mary)
they, and their Wives, and Children, still enjoyed without D^sturbance, or
Dispute.

And to say truth, it was an Act, not only of much Ch^istian Piety; but more
Civil Prudence: the Clergy by this means being taken off from all Dependence on
the Popes of Rome, and rivited in their Dependence on their Natural Princes, to
whom their Wives and Children serve for so many Hostages. The Consequents
whereof was so well known to those of Rome: that when it was desired by the
Ambassadors of the Emperor, and the Duke of Bavaria, in the Council of Trent,
That Marriage might be permitted to the Priests in their several Territories,
it would by no means be admitted. The Reason was; Because that having Houses,
Wives and Children, they would depend no longer upon the Pope, but only on
their several Princes: that the Love to their Children would make them yield to
many things, which were prejudicial to the Church, and in short time confine
the Pope's Authority to the City of Rome* For otherwise if the Pope^ were not
rather governed in this business by Reason of State, then either by the Word of
God, or the Rules of Piety, they had not stood so stiffly on an Inhibition,
accompanied with so much Scandal, and known to be the only Cause of too much
Lewdness and Impu^ity in the R^mane Clergy. If they had looked upon the
Scriptures, they would have found, that Marriage was a Remedy ordained by God,
for the preventing of Incontinencies, and wandering Lusts, extending generally
to all, as much to those in Holy Orders, as to any others; as being subject all
al^ke to Humane Infirmities. If they had ruled the Case by the Proceedings o^
the Council of Nice, or the Examples of many Good, and Godly men in the
Primitive Times; they would have found, that, when the single Life of Pri^sts
was moved at that great Council, it was rejected by the general Consent of all
the Fathers there assembled, as a Yoke intolerable: that Eupsychius, a
Cappad^cian Prelate, was married after he had taken the Degree of a Bishop: the
like observed of one Phileus, an Egyptian Prelate: and that it is affirmed by
Hierom, That many Priests in h^s Time had their proper Wives. Had they
consulted with the Stories of the middle Times, when Priests were forced to put
away their Wives, by the Pope's Commandment, or else to lose the Benefices,
which they were possessed of; they would have found what horrible Confusions
did ensue upon it in all the Kingdoms of the West, what Tragical Exclamations
were made against the Popes, for so great a Tyranny. Or finally, If they had
looked upon the scandalous Effects, which this forced Coelibate produced, they
could not but have heard some News of Pope Gregory's Fish Pond: and must have
been informed in their own Panormitan, that the greatest part of the Clergy
were given over to prohibited Lusts; and by others of their Canonists, that
Clerks were not to be deprived for their Incontinency: considering, how few
there were to be found without it; so universal was the Mischief, that it was
thought incapable of any Remedy.

If we desire to be further informed in it, as a matter Doctrinal, we shall
find many eminent men in the Church of Rome, to state the point in favor of a
married Clergy. By Gratian it is said, That the Marriage of Priests is neither
prohibited by the Law, or any precept in the Gospel, or any Canon of the
Apostles. By Cardinal Cajetan, That it can neither be proved by Reason, nor
good A^thority, that a Priest commits any sin by being married. By the same
Cajetan, That Orders neither in themselves, nor as they are accompanied by the
Title of Holy, are any Hindrances, or Obstructions in the Way of Marriage. By
Panormitan, The Coelibate, or the single Life of Priests, is neither of the
Essence of Holy Orders, nor required by the Law of God. By Antoninus, That
there is nothing in the Episcopal Function, which can disable the Bishop from
the married life. By the Author of the Gloss upon the Decrees, That the Greek
Priests neither explicitly, nor implicitly, do bind themselves to Chastity or
a single life. By Pope Pius himself in the Council of Basil, That many might be
saved in a married Priesthood, which are in danger to be damned by living
unmarried. By Durand, That it would be profitable to the Church, if Marriage
were allowed to Priests, from whom it has been found a very vain thing to look
for chastity. And finally by Martinus, Multis piis vi^um est, ut leges de
Coelibatu ^^llerentur propter Scandalum.
That it seemed fi^ to many good, and Godly men, that all Laws for compell^ng a
single life should be wholly abrogated for the avoiding of those Scandals,
which ensued upon it. For (...) which Passages* together with the words of the
several Authors in the Latin Tongue, I shall refer the Reader to the Learned
and Laborious Works of Bishop Jewel, in the Defense of his Challenge against
Doctor Harding, cap. 8. 1. 3. And so I shut up this Discourse, and therewith
the Defense of this Act of Parliament, with the most memorable Apophthegm of
the said Pope Pius, viz. That the Law had taken away Priests Wives, and the
Devil had given them Concubines to supply their places.

Two other Acts were passed in this present Parliament, exceeding necessary for
the Preservation of the Churches Patrimony, and the Retaining of good Order.
The first was made for the Encouragement and Support of the Parochial Clergy,
in the true Payment of their Tithes, lately invaded by their Patrons, and
otherwise in danger to be lost for ever, by the avaritiousness of the
Parishioners, as before was said. For Remedy whereof, it was Enacted, That no
Person, or Persons, should from thenceforth take, or carry away, any Tithe, or
Tithes, which had been received, or paid, within the space of forty years next
before the Date thereof, or of Right ought to have been paid, in the place, or
places, tithable in the same, before he has justly divided, or set forth for
the Tithe thereof, the tenth part of the same, or otherwise agree, for the same
Tithes, with the Parson, Vicar, or other Owner, Proprietary, or Farmer of the
same, under the Pain or Forfeiture of the treble Value of the Tithes, so taken,
or carried away. To which a Clause was also added, enabling the said Parsons,
Vicars, etc. to enter upon any man's Land, for the due setting out of his
Tithes, and carrying away the same without Molestation; with other Clauses no
less beneficial to the injured Clergy. And because the Revenue of the Clergy
had been much diminished by the Loss of such Offerings, and Oblations, as had
been accustomably made at the Shrines of Certain Images, now either defaced, or
removed; it was thought meet, to make them some amends in another way. And
thereupon it was Enacted, That every Person exercising Merchandises,
Bargaining, and Selling, Clothing, Handy-Craft, and other Art, and Faculty,
being such kind of Persons, and in such Places, as heretofore, within the space
of forty years then before passed, have accustomably used to pay such Personal
Tithes, or of right ought to pay, (other then such as the Common Day-Labourers
shall yearly, at, or before the Feast of Easter,) shall pay for his Personal
Tithes, the tenth part of his clear Gains; his Charges, and Expenses, according
to his Estate, and Condition, or Degree, to be there a^owed, abated and
deducted; with a Proviso for some Remedy to be had therein before the Ordinary,
in the case of Tergiversation, or Refusal. But the Power of the Bishops, and
other Ordinaries, growing less and less; and little, or no execution, following
in that behalf, this last Clause proved of little Benefit to those, whom it
most concerned: who, living for the most part in Market Towns, and having no
Predial Tithes to trust to, are thereby in a far worse Condition, then the
Rural Clergy.

There also passed another Act, for Abstinence from Flesh upon all such Days,
as had been formerly taken, and reputed for Fasting^days. By which it was
enjoined; That for the better subduing of the Body to the Soul, and the Flesh
to the Spirit, as also for the Preservation of the breed of Cattle, the
Encouragement of Mariners, and increase of Shipping; all manner of Persons
should abstain from eating Flesh, upon the days there named; that is to say,
all Frydays and Saturdays in the year, the Time of Lent, the Ember-Days, the
Eves, or Vigils, of such Saints, as had been anciently used for Fasts by the
Rules of the Church. An Act, or Ordinance, very seasonable, as the case then
stood, the better to beat down the Neglect of all Days and Times of public
Fastings: which Doctor Glasier had cried up, and his Followers had pursued in
contempt of Law. And here I should have closed this year, but that I am to
remove some Errors about the Time of Doctor Farra'rs Consecration to the Sea
of Saint David's; put off by ^ishop Godwin to the following year 1549. and
ante-Dated by the Acts and Monuments to the fifth day of December, in the year
foregoing, An. 1547. But by neither rightly. For first, I find on good
Record, that Knight departed not this life till Michaelmass-Day, An. 1547. At
what time, and for some time after, Doctor Barlow, who succeeded Knight, was
actually Bishop of St. Davia's; and therefore Farrars could not be Consecrated
to that See some weeks before. I find again in a very good Author, that
Doctor Farrar was the first Bishop made by Letters Patents, without Capitular
Election: which could not be till after the end of the last years Parliament;
because till then the King pretended not to any such Power of making Bishops.
And Thirdly, if Bishop Barlow had not been Translated to the Sea of Wells, till
the year 1549. as Bishop Godwin says he was not; it must be Barlow, and not
Farrars, who first enjoyed the benefit of such Letters Patents: because Barlow
must first be removed to Wells, before the Church of St. Davia's was made void
for Farrars. So that the Consecration of Farrars, to the Sea of St. David's,
being placed by the Canons of that Church, (in an Information made against him)
on the fifth of September; it must be on the fifth day of September, in this
present year: and neither in the year 1547. as the Acts and Monuments make it;
nor in the year 1549. as in Bishop Godwin.

Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 3o. An. Dom. 1548, 1549.
THere remains yet one Act of this Parliament, An. Reg. 3o 1548/9.
which we have not spoke of; but of a different nature from all the rest: I
mean the Act for the Attainder of the Lord Thomas Seimour; whose Tragedy came
on but now, though the Ground thereof was laid in the former year. The
occasion, much like that of the two great Ladies in the Roman Story. Concerning
whom it is related by Herodian: that, when the Emperor Commodus was unmarried,
he permitted his Sister Lucilla, whom he had bestowed on Pompeianus, a Right
Noble Senator, to have a Throne erected for Her on the Public Theater; Fire
to be borne before Her when she walked abroad; and to enjoy all other
Privileges of a Princ^'s Wife. But, when Commodus had Married Crispina, a Lady
of as great a Spirit, though of lower Birth; Lucilla was to lose her place, and
to grow less in Reputation, then before she was. This so tormented her proud
heart, when she perceived that nothing could be gained by disputing the Point:
that she never lest practicing one mischief on the neck of another, till she
had endangered the young Emperor's life; but utterly destroyed her self, and
all those friends, whom she had raised to advance her Interess. Which Tragedy
(the Names of the Actours being only changed) was now again played over in the
Court of England.

Thomas Lord Seimour, being a man of lofty Aims, and aspiring Thoughts, had
Married Queen Katharine Parr, the Relict of the King deceased; who looking on
him as the Brother of the Lord Protector, and being looked on as Queen Dowager
in the eye of the Court, did not conceive, that any Lady could be so forgetful
of her former Dignity, as to contend about the place. But therein she found her
self deceived: for the Protectour's Wife, a Woman of most infinite Pride, and
of a Nature so imperious, as to know no rule but her own Will; would needs
conceive her self to be the better Woman of the two. For, if the one were widow
to the King deceased; the other thought her self to st^nd on the Higher ground,
in having all advantages of Power above her.

For what said She within Her self; Am not I wife to the Protector, who is
King in Power* though not in Title; a Duke in Order and Degree; Lord Treasurer,
and Earl Marshal, and what else he pleases; and one, who has En^obled His
highest Honors by his late great Victory? An. Reg. 2. 1548/9
And did not Henry Marry Katharine Parr in His doting Days: when he had brought
himself to such a Condition by His Lusts, and Cruelty; that no Lady, who stood
upon Her Honor, would adventure on Him? Do not all Knees bow before Me, and
all Tongues celebrate My Praises, and all Hands pay the Tribute of Obedience to
Me, and all Eyes look upon Me, as the first in State; through whose Hands the
Principal Offices in the Court, and chief Preferments in the Church, are
observed to pass? Have I so long Commanded him, who Commands two Kingdoms? And
shall I now give place to Her; who, in her former best Estate, was but
Latimer's Widow, and is now fain to cast Her self, for Support and Countenance,
into the despised Bed of a younger Brother? If Mr. Admiral teach his Wife no
better Manners; I am She, that will: and will choose rather to remove them
both, (whether out of the Court, or out of the World; shall be no great m^tter)
then be out-shined in My own Sphere, and trampled on within the Verge of my
Jurisdiction.

In this Impatiency of Spirit, she rubs into the Head of the Duke her Husband
(over whom she had obtained an absolute Mastery) How much he was despised by
the Lord Admiral for his Mildness and Lenity: What secret Practices were on
foot, in the Court, and Kingdom, to bring him out of Credit with all sorts of
People. What ^tore of Emissaries were employed to cry up the Lord Admiral, as
the Abler man: And finally, that, if he did not look betimes about him, he
would he forthwith dispossessed of his Place and Power; and see the same
conferred on one of his own preferring. This first begat a Diffidence in the
Duke of his Brother's Purposes; which afterward improved it self to an
estranging of Affection, and at last into an open Breach. But before Matters
could proceed to the last Extremity, the Queen died in Childbirth, (which
happened September last, 1648) being delivered of a Daughter; who afterward
was Christened by the name of Mary. A Lady of a mild and obliging Nature,
honored by all the Court for her even Behavior, and one, who in this Quarrel
had been merely passive; rather maintaining what she had, then seeking to
invade the place, which belonged not to her.

And here the Breach might have been closed, if the Admiral had not ran himself
into further Dangers, by practicing to gain the good Affections of the Princess
Elizabeth. He was (it seems) a man of a strange Ambition in the choice of his
Wives, and could not level his Affections lower, then the Bed of a Princess.
For an Essay whereof he first addressed himself to the Lady Mary, Duchess of
^ichmond and Sommerset, Daughter of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Widow of Duke
Henry before mentioned, the King's Natural Brother. But, she being of too high
a Spirit to descend so low, he next applied himself to the W^dow-Queen: whom he
beheld, as double Jointured, one, who ha^ filled her Coffers in the late King's
Time; and had been gratified with a Legacy of four thousand pounds in Plate,
Jewels, and Money: which he had Means enough to compass; though all other Debts
and Legacies should remain unpaid. And on the other side She looked on him, as
one of the Peers of the Realm, Lord Admiral by Office, Uncle to the King, and
Brother to the Lord Protector, with whom she might enjoy all Content and
Happiness, which a virtuous Lady could desire. And that they might appear in
the greater Splendor, he took into his hands the Episcopal House, belonging to
the Bishop of Bath and Wells: which, being by him much Enlarged, and
Beautified, came afterward to the Possession of the Earls of Arundel, best
known of late Times, by the name of Arundel-House. And so far all things went
on smoothly betwixt him and his B^other; though afterward there were some
distrust between them: but this last Practice gave such an hot Alarm to the
Duchess of Sommerset; that noth^ng could content her, but his absolute Ruin.
For what hope could she have of Disputing the Precedence with any of King
Hen^^e's Daughters: who, if they were not married out of the Realm, might
Create many Troubles, and Disturbances in it? Nor was the Lord Pr^tect^ur so
insensible of his own Condition, as not to fear the utmost Danger; which the
Effecting of so great an Enterprise might bring upon him: so that the Rupture,
which before had began to close, became more open then before, made wid^r by
the Artifices of the Earl of Warwick; who, secretly playing with both hands,
exasperated each of them against the other, that so he might be able to destroy
them both.

The Plot being so far carried on, the Admiral was committed to the Tower, on
the sixteenth of January, but never called unto his Answer, it being thought
safer to Attaint him by Act of Parliament, where Power and Faction might
prevail, then put him over to his Peers in a Legal way. And, if he were guilty
of the Crimes, which I find charged upon him in the Bill of Attainder, he
could not, but deserve as great a Punishment, as was laid upon him. For, in
that Act, he stands condemned, for Attempting to get into his Custody the
Person of the King, and the Government of the Realm: for obtaining many
Offices, retaining many Men into his Service, for making great Provision for
Money, and Victuals: for endeavoring to marry the Lady Elizabeth the King's
Sister, and for persuading the King, in His Tender Age, to take upon Him the
Rule, and Order, of Himself. But Parliaments being Governed by a ^allible
Spirit, the Business still remains under such a Cloud: that he may seem
rather to have fallen a Sacrifice to the Private Malice of a Woman; then the
Public Justice of the State. For, the Bill of Attainder passing at the End of
the Parliament, which was on the fourteenth day of March, he was beheaded at
Tower Hill, on the sixth day after, (the Warrant for his Execution coming under
the hand o^ his own Brother,) at what time he took it on his Death: That, he
had never committed, or meant any Treason against King, or Kingdom. Thus, as it
is aff^^med of the Emperor Valentinian; that, by causing the right Noble
Aetius to be put to Death, he had cut off his Right Hand with his Left: so
might it be affirmed of the Lord Protector; that, when he signed that unhappy
Warrant, he had with his Right Hand robbed himself of his greatest Strength.
For as long as the two Brothers stood together, they were good support unto one
another: but now, the one being taken away, the other proved not Sub^tantive
enough to stand by himself, but fell into his Enemies hands within few Months
after. Comparing them together, we may find the Admiral to be Fierce in
Courage, Courtly in Fashion, in Personage Stately, in Voice Magnificent; the
Duke to be Mild, Affable, Free, and Open, more easy to be wrought upon, and no
way Malicious: the Admiral generally more esteemed amongst the Nobles; the Duke
Honored by the Common People: the Lord Protector, to be more desired for a
Friend; the Lord Admiral, to be more feared for an Enemy. Betwixt them both,
they might have made one excellent man; if, the Defects of each being taken
away, the Virtues only had remained.

The Protector, having thus thrown away the chief Prop of his House, hopes to
repair that Ruin, by erecting a Magnificent Palace. He had been bought out of
his purpose for building on the Deanery and Close of Westminster, and casts his
Eye upon a piece of Ground in the Strand; on which stood three Episcopal
Houses, and one Parish Church: the Parish Church Dedicated to the Virgin Mary;
the Houses belonging to the Bishops of Worcester, Lichfield, and Landaff. All
these he takes into his Hands; the Owners not daring to oppose, and therefore
willingly consenting to it. Having cleared the place, and projected the
intended Fabric, the Workmen found, that more Materials would be wanting to go
thorough with it, then the Demolished Church and Houses could afford unto them.
He thereupon resolves for taking down the Parish Church of Saint Mar^arets in
Westminster, and turning the Parishioners, for the celebrating of all Divine
Offices, into some part of the Nave, or main Body, of the Abby-Church, which
should be marked out for that purpose. But the Workmen had no sooner advanced
their Scaf^olds; when the Parishioners gathered together in great Multitudes,
with Bows, and Arrows, Sta^es, and Clubs, and other such offensive Weapons; An.
Reg. 3o 1549.
which so terrified the Workmen, that they ran away in great Amazement, and
never could be brought again upon that Employment.

In the next place, he is informed of some superfluous, or rather Superstitious
Buildings on the North-side of Saint Paul's, that is to say, a goodly Cloister,
environing a goodly piece of Ground, called Pardon-Church-Yard, with a Chapel
in the midst thereof, and beautified with a piece of most curious Workmanship,
called the Dance of Death, together with a fair Charnel-House, on the
South Side of the Church, and a Chapel thereunto belonging. This was conceived
to be the safer undertaking, the Bishop then standing on his good Behavior,
and the Dean and Chapter of that Church, (as of all the rest) being no better
in a manner by reason of the late Act of Parliament) then Tenant at Will of
their great Landlords. And upon this he sets his Workmen, on the tenth of
April: takes it all down, converts the Stone, Timber, Lead, and Iron, to the
use of his intended Palace, and leaves the Bones of the dead Bodies to be
buried in the Fields in unhallowed Ground. But, all this not sufficing to
complete the Work, the Steeple, and most parts of the Church of Saint John's of
Jerusalem, not far from Smithfield, most beautifully built not long before by
Dockwray, a late Priour thereof, was blown up with Gunpowder; and all the Stone
thereof employed, to that purpose also. Such was the Ground, and such were the
Materials of the Duke's New Palace, called Sommerset-House: which either he
lived not to finish, or else it must be very strange; that having pulled down
two Churches, two Chapels, and three Episcopal Houses, (each of which may be
probably supposed, to have had their Oratories) to find Materials for this
Fabric, there should be no room purposely erected for Religious Offices.

According unto this Beginning, all the year proceeds; in which there was
nothing to be found; but Troubles, and Commotions, and Disquiets, both in
Church and State. For about this Time there started up a sort of men, who
either gave themselves, or had given by others, the Name of Gospellers: of whom
Bishop Hooper tells us, in the Preface to his Exposition on the Ten
Commandments; That, They be better Learned then the Holy Ghost: for they
wickedly attribute the Cause of Punishment, and Adversity to God's Providence,
which is the Cause of no Ill, as he himself can do no ill; and of every
Mischief that is done, they say it is God's Will. And at the same time, the
Anabaptists, who had kept themselves unto themselves in the late King's Time,
began to look abroad, and disperse their Dotages. For the preventing of which
Mischief, before it grew unto a Head, some of the Chiefs of them were
convented, on the second of April, in the Church of Saint Paul, before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Westminster, Doctor Cox, Almoner
to the King, Doctor May, Dean of that Church, Doctor Cole, Dean of the
Arches, and one Doctor Smith, afterward better known by the Name of Sir
Thomas Smith. And, being convicted of their Errors, some of them were
dismissed only with an Admonition, some sentenced to a Recantation, and others
condemned to bear their Faggots at Saint Paul's Cross. Amongst which last, I
find one Campneys: who, being suspected to incline too much to their Opinions,
was condemned to the bearing of a Faggot, on the Sunday following, (being the
next Sunday after Easter,) Doctor Miles Coverdale, who afterward was made
Bishop of Ex^ter, then preaching the Rehearsal Sermon; which Punishment so
wrought upon him, that he relinquished all his former Errors, and entered into
Holy Orders, flying the Kingdom for the better keeping of a good Conscience in
the Time of Queen Mary, and coming back again with the other Exiles, after Her
Decease. At what time he published a Discourse, in the way of a Letter, against
the Gospellers abovementioned. In which he proves them to have laid the blame
of all sins, and wickedness, upon God's Divine Decree of Predestination, by
which men were compelled unto it. His Discourse answered not long after by John
Veron, one of the Pre^ends of Saint Paul's, and Robert Crowley, Parsons of
Saint Giles's near Cripplegate; but answered with Scurrility and Reproach
enough, according to the Humor of the Predestinarians.

And now the Time draws on for putting the New Liturgy in Execution, framed
with such Judgment out of the Common Principles of Religion, wher^in all
Parties do agree, that even the Catholics might have resorted to the same
without Scruple, or Scandal; if Faction more then Reason did not sway amongst
them. At Easter, some began to officiate by it, followed by others as soon as
Books c^^ld be provided. But on Whitsunday, being the day appointed by Act of
Parliament, it was solemnly Executed in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, by
the Command of Doctor May, for an example unto all the rest of the Churches in
London: and consequently of all the Kingdom. In most parts whereof, there was
at the first a greater forwardness then could be rationally expected, the (...)
men amongst the Papists conforming to it, because they (...) in the maine (no
not so much as in the Canon of the (...) Latin Se^vice. And the unlearned had
good reason to be pleased (...), in regard that all Divine Offices were
Celebrated in a Tongue which (...) understood, whereby they had means and
opportunity to become acq^aint^^ with the ch^e^ Mysteries of their Religion,
which had been before (...) s^cret from them. But then withal, many of those,
both Priests and Bishops, who ^pe^^y had Officiated by it, to avoid the Penalty
of the Law, did Celebrate their private Masses in such secret places, wherein
it was not easy to discover their doings. More confidently ca^ried in the
Church of St. Paul: in many Chapels whereof, by the Bishop's sufferance, the
former Masses were kept up; that is to say Our Ladies Mass, the Apostles Mass,
etc. performed in Latin, but Disguised by the English names of the Apostles
Communion, and Our Ladies Communion. Which coming to the knowledge of the Lords
of the Council, they add^^ssed their Letters unto Bonner: Dated the twen^y
fourth of June; and Subscribed by the Lord Protector, the Lord Chancellor
Rich, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lord St. John, Chief Justice Mountague, and
Mr. Cecil, made not long after one of the Secretaries of State. Now the Tenor
of the said Letters was as follows.

AFter Hearty Commendations; having very credible notice, that within that your
Cathedral Church, there be as yet the Apostles Mass, and Our Ladies Mass, and
other Masses of such peculiar name, under the defense and nomination of Our
Ladies Communion, and the Apostles Communion, used in private Chapels, and
other remote places of the same, and not in the Chancel, contrary to the King's
Majesty's Proceedings: the same being for that misuse displeasing unto God; for
the place, Paul's, in example not tolerable; for the fondness of the name, a
scorn to the Reverence of the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood: We, for the
Augmentation of God's Glory, and Honor, and the Consonance of His Majesty's
Laws, and the avoiding of Murmur, have thought good, to will and Command you,
that from henceforth no such Masses in this manner be in your Church any longer
used; but that the Holy Blessed Communion, according to the Act of Parliament,
be Administered at the High Altar of the Church, and in no other places of the
same; and onel^ at such time as your High Masses were wont to be used: except
some number of People desire (for their necessary business) to have a Communion
in the Morning, and yet the same to be executed at the Chancel on the High
Altar; as it is appointed in the Book of the Public Servic^; without Cautele,
or Digression from the Common Order. And herein you shall not only satisfy
Our Expectation of your Conformity in all Lawful things; but also avoid the
murmur of sundry, that be therewith justly offended. And so We bid your
Lordship farewell, etc.


These Commands being brought to Bon^er, he commits the Execution of them to
the Dean and Chapter; not willing to engage himself too far upon either side,
An. Reg. 3o 1546.
till he had seen the Issue of such Commotions, as were then raised in many
Parts of the Kingdom on another occasion. Some Lords and Gentlemen, who were
possessed of Abbey-Lands, had caused many enclosures to be made of the waste
Grounds in their several Mannours; which they conceived to be (as indeed it
was) a great advantage to themselves, and no less profitable to the Kingdom.
Only some poor and indigent people were offended at it, in being thereby
abridged of some liberty, which before they had in raising to themselves some
inconsiderable profit from the Grounds enclosed. The Lord Protector had then
lost himself in the love of the Vulgar, by his severe, if not unnatural
proceedings against his Brother; and somewhat must be done for his restoring to
their good opinions, though to the prejudice of the Public. Upon this ground
he caused a Proclamation to be Published in the beginning of May; Commanding,
that they who had enclosed any Lands, accustomed to be common, should upon a
certain pain, before a day signed, lay them open again. Which so encouraged the
rude Commons, in many Parts of the Realm, that without Expecting the time
limited by the Proclamation, they gathered together in a riotous, and
tumultuous manner; pulled up the Pales, flung down the Banks, and filled the
Ditches, laying all open as before. For which, some of them had been set upon,
and sl^in in Wiltshire, by Sir William Herbert; others suppressed by force of
Arms, conducted by the Lord Gray of Wilton, as were those in Oxfordshire; and
some again reduced to more moderate, and sober courses, by the persuasion of
the Lords and Gentlemen; as in Kent, and Sussex. But the most dangerous
commotions, which held so long, as to Entitle them to the name of Rebellions,
were those of Devonshire, and Norfolk; places remote from one another, but such
as seemed to have communicated Counsels, for carrying on of the design.

The first of these in Course of time, was that of Devonshire, began (as those
in other places) under pretense of throwing open the enclosures, but shortly
found to have been chiefly raised, in maintenance of their old Religion. On
Whitson-Munday, June the tenth, being next day after the first exercising of
the Public Liturgi^. Some few of the Parishioners of Samford Courtney,
compelled their Parish Priest, who is supposed to have invited them to that
compassion, to let them have the Latin Mass, as in former times. These being
seconded by some others, and finding that many of the better sort were more
like to engage in this quarrel, then in the other; prevailed with those which
before had Declared only against Enclosures, to pretend Religion for the cause
of their coming together. And that being done, they were first Headed by
Humphry Arundel Esquire, Commander of St. Michaels Mount, and some other
Gentlemen, which so increased the Reputation of the Cause, that in short time
they had made up a Body of ten thousand men. Of this Commotion, there was but
little notice taken at the first beginning, when it might easily have been
crushed; the Lord Protector not being very forward to suppress those Risings,
which seemed to have been made by some encouragement from his Proclamations. In
which Respect, and that his good fortune now began to fail him, when the
mischief did appear with a face danger, and could not otherwise be redressed
but by force of Arms; in stead of putting himself into the Head of an Army, the
Lord Russel is sent down with some slender Forces, to give a stop to their
Proceedings. But whether it were, that he had any secret instructions to drill
on the time, or that he had more of the Statesman, then the Soldier in him;
or that he had not strength enough to encounter the Enemy, he kept himself
aloof, as if he had been sent to look on, at a distance, without approaching
near the danger.

The Rebels in the mean time increasing as much in confidence, as they did in
numbers; sent their Demands unto the King. Amongst which, one more specially
concerned the Liturgy, which therefore I have singled out of all the rest,
with the King's Answer thereunto, in the words that follow. It was demanded by
the Rebels; An. Reg. 3o 1549.
That, for as much as we constantly believe, that after the Priest has spoken
the words of Consecration, being at Mass there Celebrating, and Consecrating
the same; there is very really the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ,
God and Man; and that no substance of Bread and Wine remains after, but the
very self-same Body, that was born of the Virgin Mary, and was given upon the
Cross for our Redemption: therefore we will have Mass Celebrated as it was in
Times past, without any man communicating with the Priests; for as much as
many, presuming unworthily to receive the same, put no difference between the
Lord's Body, and other kind of meat; some saying, that it is Bread both before
and after; some saying, that it is profitable to no man, except he receive it,
with many other abused Terms.

To which Demand of theirs the King thus Answered; viz. That for the Mass, I
assure you, no small study, nor travail has been spent, by all the Learned
Clergy therein, and, to avoid all contention, it is brought even to the very
use as Christ left it, as the Apostles used it, as the holy Fathers delivered
it; indeed somewhat altered from that, to which the Popes of Rome, for their
Lucre, had brought it. And, although (says He) ye may hear the contrary from
some Popish evil men, yet. Our Majesty, which for Our Honor may not be
blemished and stained, assures you, that they deceive, abuse you, and blow
these Opinions into your heads, to finish their own purposes.

But this Answer giving no content, they Marched with all their Forces to the
Siege of Exeter; carrying before them in their March (as the Jews did the Ark
of God, in the Times of old) the Pix, or Consecrated Host, borne under a
Canopie, with Crosses, Banners, Candlesticks, Holy-Bread, and Holy Water, etc.
But the Walls of Exeter fell not down before this False Ark; as Dagon did
before the True. For the Citizens were no less gallantly resolved to make good
the Town; then the Rebels were desperately bent to force it. To which
Resolution of the Citizens, the natural Defenses of the City, (being round in
Form, situate on a rising Hill, and environed with a good Old Wall,) gave not
more Encouragement: then some insolent speeches of the Rebels; boasting, that
they would shortly measure the Silks, and Sattens therein, by the length of
their Bows. For forty days the Siege continued, and was then seasonably
raised; the Rebels not being able to take it sooner, for want of Ordnance: and
the Citizens not able to have held it longer, for want of Victuals; if they had
not been Succored, when they were. One fortunate Skirmish the Lord Russel had
with the daring Rebels about the passing of a Bridge, at which he slew six
hundred of them: which gave the Citizens the more Courage to hold it out. But
the coming of the Lord Gray, with some Companies of Almain-Horse, seconded by
three hundred Italian-Shot under the Command of Baptista Spinoli, put an end to
the Business. For, joining with the Lord Russel's Forces, they gave such a
strong Charge upon the Enemy: that they first beat them out of their Works; and
then compelled them, with great Slaughter, to raise their Siege. Blessed with
the like Success in some following Fights, the Lord Russel enters the City on
the sixth of August; where he was joyfully received by the half-starved
Citizens: whose Loyalty the King rewarded with an increase of their Privileges;
and giving to their Corporation the Manor of Eviland. The sixth of August,
since that Time, is observed amongst them for an Annual Feast, in perpetual
Gratitude to Almighty God, for their Deliverance from the Rebels; with far more
Reason, then many such Annual Feasts have been lately Instituted in some Towns,
and Cities, for not being gained unto their King. But, though the Sword of War
was Sheathed, there remained work enough for the Sword of Justice; in Executing
many of the Rebels, for a Terror to others. Arundel, and the rest of the
Chiefs, were sent to London, there to receive the recompense of their Deserts;
most of the Raskal Rabble Executed by Martial Law; and the Vicar of St. Thomas,
one of the Principal Incendiaries, hanged on the Top of his own Tower,
apparailed in his Popish Weeds, with his B^ads at his Girdle.

The Norfolk Rebels brake not out, till the twentieth of June; beginning first
at a place called Ail-borough: but not considerable, either for Strength, or
Number, till the sixth of July; when mightily increased by Ket, a Tanner of
Windham: who took unto himself the conducting of them. These men pretended
only against Enclosures: and, if Religion was at all regarded by them, it was
rather kept for a Reserve; then suffered to appear in the Front of the Battle.
But, when their Numbers were so vastly multiplied, as to amount to twenty
thousand; nothing would serve them, but the suppression of the Gentry, the
placing of New Councillors about the King, and somewhat also to be done in
favor of the Old Religion. Concerning which they thus Remonstrate to the King,
or the People rather; viz: First, That the Freeborn Commonalty was oppressed
by a small Number of Gentry: who glutted themselves with Pleasure; whilst the
poor Commons, wasted with daily Labor, did, like Pack-Horses, live in extreme
Slavery. Secondly, That Holy Rites, Established by Antiquity, were abolished,
New ones Authorized, and a New Form of Religion obtruded; to the subjecting of
their Souls to those Horrid Pains, which no Death could terminate. And
therefore, Thirdly, That it was necessary for them, to go, in person, to the
King, to place New Councillors about him, during his Minority; removing those,
who, ruling as they list, confounded things Sacred and Profane, and regarded
nothing but the enriching of themselves with the Public Treasure, that they
might Riot it amidst these Public Calamities.

Finding no satisfactory Answer to these proud Demands, they March directly
toward Norwich; and possess themselves of Moushold-Hill: which gave them not
only a large Prospect over; but a full Command upon that City: which they
entered, and re-entered as they pleased. For what could a Weak City do in
Opposition to so Great a Multitude: being neither strong by Art, nor Nature;
and therefore not in a capacity to make any Resistance. Under a large Oak, on
the top of this Hill, (since called The Oak of Reformation) Ket keeps his
Courts, of Chancery, King's Bench, etc. forcing the neighboring Gentry to
submit to his lawless Ordinances; and committing many huge Enormities, under
pretense of rectifying some Abuses. The King sends out his Gracious Pardon;
which the proud Rebels entertain with Contempt, and Scorn. Whereupon it was
resolved; that the Marquess of North-hampton should be sent against them,
accompanied with the Lords Sheffield, and Wentworth, and diverse Gentlemen of
Note, assisted by a Band of Italians (under the Command of Mala-testa, an
Experienced Soldier.) The Marquess was an excellent Courtier; but one more
skilled in Leading a Measure, then a March: so that being beaten out of
Norwich, (into which he had peaceably been admitted) with loss of some Persons
of Principal Quality, and the firing of a great part of the City, he returns
ingloriously to London.

Yet all this while, the Lord Protector was so far from putting himself upon
the Action, that he suffered his most dangerous Enemy, the Earl of Warwick, to
go against them, with such Forces, as had been purposely provided for the War
of Scotland. Who, finding the City open for him, entertained the Rebels with
diverse Skirmishes; in most of which he had the better: which put them to a
Resolution of forsaking the Hill, and trying their Fortune in a Battle, in a
place called Dussing-dale, where they maintained a bloody Fight. But, at the
last, were broken by the Earl's good Conduct, and the valiant Loyalty of his
Forces. Two thousand of the Rebels are reported to have been slain in the Fight
and Chase, the residue of them scattered over all the Country, the Principals
of them taken, and deservedly Executed: Robert Ket hanged on Norwich-Castle;
William, his Brother, on the top of Windham-Steeple; nine of his chief
Followers on as many Boughs of the Oak, where Ket held his Courts. Which great
Deliverance was celebrated in that City by a Public Thanks giving on the
twenty seventh of August: and has been since perpetuated Annually on that day,
to these present Times. The like Rising happened about this time in Yorkshire,
began by Dale, and Ombler two seditious persons, and with them it ended, for
being taken in a Skirmish, before their number had amounted to three thousand
men, they were brought to York, where they were executed, with some others, on
the twenty first of September* then next following.

The breaking out of these Rebellions, but most especially that of Devonshire,
quickened the Lords of the Council to a sharper course, against all those whom
they suspected not to favor the King's Proceedings, nor to advance the
Execution of the Public Liturgy, amongst whom, none was more distrusted then
Bonner of London, concerning whom it was informed, that by his negligence, not
only many People within his Diocese, were very forgetful of their Duty to
God, in frequenting the Divine Service, then by Law established, but diverse
others utterly despising the same, did in secret places often frequent the
Popish Mass. For this he is Commanded to attend the Lords of the Council on the
eleventh of August, by whom he was informed of such Complaints as were made
against him, and so dismissed with certain private Injunctions to be observed
by him for the time to come. And for a further Trial to be made of his Zeal and
Loyalty (if it were not rather for a Snare to entrap him in) he was Commanded
to Preach against the Rebels, at Saint Paul's Cross, on the first of September,
and there to show the unlawfullness of taking Arms on Pretense of Religion. But
on the contrary, he not only touched^ not upon any thing which was enjoined
him by the Council, but spent the most part of his Sermon in maintenance of the
Gross, Carnal, and Papistical presence of Christ's Body and Blood, in the most
Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. Complaints whereof, being made by William
Latimer, Parson of St. Laurence Poult^ey, and John Hooper, sometimes a
Cister'ian Monk; a Commission is issued out to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Bishops of Rochester and Peterborough, Sir Thomas Smith, and Doctor May,
before whom he was convented at Lambeth, on the tenth of the Month, where
after many Shifts on his part, and much patience on theirs, he is taken pro
confesso, on the twenty third, and in the beginning of October deprived of his
Bishopric. To whom succeeded Doctor Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of Rochester, a
Learned, Stout, and Resolute Prelate, as by the Sequel will appear: not
actually translated till the twel^th of April, in the year next following, and
added not long after to the Lords of the Council.

The necessary Execution of so many Rebels, and this seasonable Severity
against Bishop Bonner, did much facilitate the King's Proceedings in the
Reformation. As certainly the Opposition to A^thority when it is suppressed,
both makes the Subject, and the Prince more absolute. Howsoever to make sure
Work of it, there passed an act of Parliament in the following Session, (which
also took beginning on the fourth of November) for taking down such Images, as
were still remaining in the Churches; as also for the bringing in of all
Antiphonaries, Missalls, Breviaries, Offices, Horaries, Primers, and
Processionals, with other Books of False and Superstitious Worship. The Tenor
of which Act was signified to the Subject by the King's Proclamations, and
seconded by the Missives of Archbishop Cranmer, to the Suffragan Bishops,
requiring them to see it put in execution with all Care and Diligence. Which so
secured the Church on that side, that there was no further Opposition against
the Liturgy by the Romish Party, during the rest of this King's Reign. For
what can any workman do when he wants his Tools, or how could they Advance the
Service of the Church of Rome, when the Books by which they should officiate
it, were thus taken from them.

But then there started up another Faction, as dangerous to the Church, as
opposite to the Public Liturgy, and as destructive of the Rules of the
Reformation, then by Law established, as were those of Rome. The Archbishop
and the rest of the Prelates, which co-operated with him in the Work, having so
far proceeded in abolishing many Superstitions, which before were used,
resolved in the next place to go forwards with a Reformation in a Point of
Doctrine. In Order whereunto Melancthon's coming was expected the year before,
but he came not then. And therefore Letters were directed by the Arch^Bishop of
Canterbury to Martin Bucer, and Peter Martyr, two Great and Eminent Divines,
but more addicted to the Zuinglian, then the Lutheran Doctrines, in the point
of the Sacrament. Martyr accordingly came over in the end of November, and,
having spent some timewith the Archbishop in his House at Lambeth, was
dispatched to Oxford, where he was made the King's Professor for Divinity, and
about two years after made Canon of Christ-Church. In his first Lectures he is
said by Sanders (if he may be credited) to have declared himself so much a
Zuinglian in that point, as to give great offense to Cranmer, and the rest of
the Bishops; but afterward, upon notice of it, to have been more moderate, and
to conform his Judgment to the Sense of those Learned Prelates: Which whether
it be true or not, certain it is, that his Readings were so much disliked by
some of that University; that a public Disputation was shortly had, betwixt
him, and some of those who disliked his Doings: in which he publicly
maintained these two Propositions: 1. That the Substance of the Bread and Wine
was not changed; and 2. That the Body and Blood of Christ was not Carnally and
Bodily in the Bread and Wine; but united to the same Sacramentally. And for the
better Governing of the Disputation, it was appointed by the King, that Doctor
Cox, Chancellor of that University, assisted by one Mr. Morrison, a right
Learned man, should preside as Judges, or Moderatours, as we call them; by whom
it was decl^red in the open Schools, that Martyr had the upper hand, and had
sufficiently answered all Arguments, which were brought against him. But
Chadsey the chief of the Opponents, and the rest of those who disputed with
him, acknowledged no such Satisfaction to be given unto them; their party
noising it abroad (according to the Fate of such Dispu^ations) that they had
the Victory.

But Bucer not coming over at the same time also, he was more earnestly invited
by Pet. Alexander, the Archbishop's Secretary. whose Letters bear Date March
24. which so prevailed with him at the last, that in June we find him here at
Canterbury, from whence he writes to Peter Martyr, who was then at Oxford. And
being here, he receives Letters from Calvin, by which he was advised to take
heed of his old fault (for a fault he thought it) which was to run a Mediis
consiliis vel Authorem esse, vel approbatorem. Calv. Epist. ad Bucer.
moderate course in his Reformations. The first thing that he did at his coming
hither (as he says himself) was to make himself acquainted with the English
Liturgy; translated for him into Latin, by Alexander Alesius, a Learned Scot,
and generally well approved of by him, as to the main Frame, and Body of it,
though not well satisfied perhaps in some of the particular Branches. Of this
he gives account to Calvin, and desires some Letters from him to the Lord
Protector (with whom C^lvin had already began to tamper) that he might find
the greater favor, when he came before him, which was not till the Tumults of
the time were composed and quieted. Having received a courteous entertainment
from the Lord Protector, and being right heartily welcomed by Archbishop
Cranmer, he is sent to take the Chair at Cambridg. Where his first Readings
gave no such distaste to the Learned Academicks, as to put him to the necessity
of challenging the Dissentients to a Disputation: though in the Ordinary Form,
a Disputation was there held at his first^coming thither, concerning the
Sufficiency of Holy Scripture, the Fallibility of the Church, and the true
Nature of Justification. But long he had not held the place, when he left this
life, deceasing on the nineteenth of January, 1550. according to the
computation of the Church of England, to the great loss and grief of that
University. By the chiefest Heads whereof, and most of the Members of that
Body, he was attended to his Grave with all due Solemnity: of which more
hereafter.

But so it was, that the Account which he had given to Calvin of the English
Liturgy, and his desiring of a Letter from him to the Lord Protector, proved
the occasions of much trouble to the Church, and the Orders of it. For Calvin,
not forgetting the Repulse he found at the hands of Cranmer, when he first
offered his Assistance, had screwed himself into the Favor of the Lord
Protector. And thinking nothing to be well done, which either was not done by
him, or by his Direction (as appears by his Letters to all Princes, which did
but cast an eye toward a Reformation) must needs be meddling in such Matters,
as belonged not to him. He therefore writes a very long Letter to the Lord
Protector; in which, approving well enough of set Forms of Prayer, he
descends* more particularly to the English Liturgy, in canvasing whereof, he
there excepteth against Commemoration of the Dead (which he acknowledges
however to be very Ancient,) as also against Chrism, and Extreme Unction; the
last of which being rather allowed of, then required by the Rules of that Book:
which said, he makes it his Advice, that all these Ceremonies should be
abrogated, and that withal he should go forwards to Reform the Church without
fear or wit, without regard of Peace at home, or Correspondency abroad: such
Considerations being only to be had in Civil Matters: but not in Matters of
the Church; In quo nihil non ad Dei Verbum exigi fas est. Epist. ad Prot.
wherein not any thing is to be Exacted, which is not warranted by the Word,
and in the managing whereof, there is not any thing more distasteful in the ey^
of God, then Worldly Wisdom, Ut vel moderemur* vel rescindamus, etc. ibid.
either in moderating, cutting off, or going backwards, but merely as we are
directed by his Will revealed.

In the next place, he gives a touch on the Book of Homilies, which Bucer, (as
it appears by his Epistle to the Church of England) had right-well approved of.
These very faintly he permits for a season only; but by no means allows of
them for a long continuance, or to be looked on as a Rule of the Church, or
constantly to serve for the instruction of the People: and thereby gave the
hint to the Zuinglian Gospellers, who ever since almost have declaimed against
them.

And whereas some Disputes had grown by his setting on, or the Pragmatick
Humor of some Agents, which he had amongst us, about the Ceremonies of the
Church, then by Law established, he must needs trouble the Protector in that
business also. ( Nisi mature compositum esset Dissidium de Ceremoniis. p. 98.
) To whom he writes to this effect, That the Papists would grow insolenter
every day then other, unless the differences were composed about the
Ceremonies. But how? not by reducing the Opponents to Conformity, but by
encouraging them rather in their Opposition: which cannot but appear most
plainly to be all he aimed at, by soliciting the Duke of Sommerset, in behalf
of Hooper, who was then fallen into some troubles upon that; of which more
hereafter.

Now in the Heat of these Employments, both in Church and State, the French and
Scots lay hold on the Opportunity, for the Recovering of some Forts, and Pieces
of Consequence, which had been taken from them by the English in the former
War. The last year Bulloign-Siege was attempted by some of the French, in hope
to take it by Surprise, and were courageously repulsed by the English Garrison.
But now they are resolved to go more openly to work, and therefore send an
Herald to defy the King, according to the Noble manner of those Times, in
proclaiming War, before they entered into Action against one another. The Herald
did his Office on the eighth of August, and pre^ently the French, with a
considerable Army, invade the Territory of Bulloign. In less then three weeks,
they possess themselves of Blackness, Hamiltue, and New Haven, with all the
Ordnance, Ammunition, and Victuals in them. Few of the Soldiers escaped with
Life: but only the Governor of New Haven, (a Bastard Son of the Lord
Sturton's,) who was believed to have betrayed that Fort unto them, because he
did put himself immediately into the Service of the French. But they sped worse
in their Designs by Sea, then they did by Land: for giving themselves no small
Hopes in those broken Times, for taking in the Islands of Guer^sey and Jersey,
they made toward them with a great number of Galleys: but they were so manfully
encountered with the King's Navy, which lay then hovering on those Coasts; that,
with the loss of a Thousand men, and great spoil of their Galleys, they were
forced to retire into France, and desist from their purpose. Nor were the
Scot^, in the mean time, negligent in preparing for their own Defense; against
whom some considerable Forces had been prepared in the Beginning of this
Summer, but most unhappily diverted: though very fortunately employed for the
Relief of Exeter, and the taking of Norwich. So that, no Succors being sent
for the Relief of those Garrisons, which then remained unto the English; the
Scots, about the middle of November following* courageously assault the strong
Fort of Bouticrage, take it by Storm, put all the Soldiers to the Sword;
except the Captain: and him they spared, not out of any Pity, or Humane
Compassion, but because they would not lose the Hope of so great a Benefit, as
they expected for his Ransom. Nothing now left unto the English, of all their
late Purchases, and Acquists in Scotland: but the strong Fort of Aymouth, and
the Town of Rox-borough.

The loss of so many Pieces in France, one after another, was very sad News to
all the Court; but the Earl of Warwick. Who purposely had delayed the sending
of such Forces, as were prepared against the French, that the Forts
abovementioned might be lost: that, upon the loss thereof, he might project
the Ruin of the Lord Protector. He had long cast an envious Eye at his Power
and Greatness, and looked upon himself, as a man of other parts, both for Camp
and Counsel; fitter in all Respects to Protect the Kingdom, then he that did
enjoy the Title. He looked upon him also, as a man exposed to the Blows of
Fortune, in being so fatally deprived of his greatest strength, by the Death of
his Brother: after which he had little left unto him, but the worst half of
himself; feared by the Lords, and not so well beloved by the Common People, as
he had been formerly. There goes a Story, that Earl Godwine, having
treacherously slain Prince Alfred, the Brother of Edward the Confessor, was
afterward present with the King, when his Cup Bearer, stumbling with one foot,
recovered himself by the Help of the other. One Brother helps another, said
Earl Godwine merrily: And so, replied the King as tartly, My Brother might have
been useful unto me; if you had pleased to spare his Life, for my present
Comfort. The like might have been said to Earl Dudly of Warwick: That, if he
had not lent an helping hand to the Death of the Admiral, he could not so
easily have tripp'd up the Heels of the Lord Protector. Having before so
luckily taken in the Outworks, he now resolves to plant his Battery for the
Fort it self. To which end he begins to muster up his Strengths, and make ready
his Forces, knowing which way to work upon the Lords of the Court: many of
which began to stagger in their good Affections, and some openly to declare
themselves the Protectour's Enemies. And he so well applied himself to their
several Humors, that in short time his Return from Norfolk* with Success and
Honor, he had drawn unto his side the Lord Chancellor Rich; the Lord
Saint-John, Lord Great Master: the Marquess of North-hampton; the Earl of
Arundel, Lord Chamberlain; the Earl of South-hampton; Sir Thomas Cheny,
Treasurer of the Household; Sir John Gage, Constable of the Tower; Sir William
Peter, Secretary; Sir Edward Mountague, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir
Edward North, Sir Ralph Sadlier, Sir John Baker, Sir Edward Wotton, Doctor
Wotton, and Sir Richard Southwell. Of which some showed themselves against him
upon former Grudges, as the Earl of South-hampton; some out of hope to share
those Offices amongst them, which he had engrossed unto himself; many, because
they loved to follow the strongest side; few in regard of any Benefit, which
was like to Redound by it to the Commonwealth; the greatest part complaining*
that they had not their equal Dividend, when the Lands of Chanteries,
Free-Chapels, etc. were given up for a Prey to the greater Courtiers; but all
of them disguising their private Ends, under pretense of doing service to the
Public.

The Combination being thus made, and the Lords of the Defection convented
together, at Ely-House in Holborn, where the Earl then dwelt: they sent for the
Lord Mayour, and Aldermen, to come before them. To whom it is declared by the
Lord Chancellor Rich (a man of Sommerset's own preferring) in a long Oration,
in what dangers the Kingdom was involved by the mis-Government, and Practices
of the Lord Protector: against whom he objected also many Misdemeanors: some
frivolous, some false, and many of them of such a Nature, as either were to be
condemned in themselves, or forgiven in him. For in that Speech he charged him,
amongst other things, with the loss of the King's Pieces in France, and
Scotland, the sowing of Dissension betwixt the Nobility and the Commons,
Embezelling the Treasures of the King, and inverting the Public stock of the
Kingdom to his private use. It was Objected also; That he was wholly acted by
the Will of his Wife, and therefore no fit man to command a Kingdom: That he
had interrupted the ordinary Course of Justice, by keeping a Court of Requests
in his own House, in which he many times determined of men's Free-holds: That he
had demolished many Consecrated Places, and Episcopal Houses, to Erect a Palace
for himself, spending one hundred pounds per diem, in superflous Buildings:
That by taking to himself the Title of Duke of Sommerset, he declared plainly
his aspiring to the Crown of this Realm: and finally, having so unnaturally
labored the Death of his Brother, he was no longer to be trusted with the Life
of the King. And thereupon he desires, or conjures them rather, to join
themselves unto the Lords, who aimed at nothing in their Counsels; but the
Safety of the King, the Honor of the Kingdom, and the Preservation of the
People in Peace and Happiness. But these Designs could not so closely be
contrived, as not to come unto the Knowledge of the Lord Protector, who then
remained at Hampton Court, with the rest of the Lords, who seemed to continue
firm unto him. And, on the same day, on which this meeting was at London,
(being the sixth day of October) he causes Proclamation to be made at the
Court-Gates, and afterward in other places near adjoining; requiring all sorts
of persons to come in, for the defense of the King's Person: whom he conveyed
the same night unto Windsore-Castle, with a strength of five hundred men, or
thereabouts; too many for a Guard, and too few for an Army. From thence he
writes his Letters to the Earl of Warwick, to the rest of the Lords, as also to
the Lord Mayour, and City of London, of whom he demanded a supply of a thousand
men for the present service of the King. But that Proud City, seldom true to
the Royal Interess, and secretly obsequious to every popular Pretender, seemed
more inclinable to gratify the Lords in the like Demands, then to comply with
his Desires. The News hereof being brought unto him, and finding that Master
Secretary Peter, whom he had sent with a secret Message to the Lords in London,
returned not back unto the Court, be presently flung up the Cards: either for
want of Courage to play out the Game; or rather choosing willingly to lose the
Set, then venture the whole Stock of the Kingdom on it. So that, upon the first
coming of some of the opposite Lords to Windsore, he puts himself into their
hands: by whom, on the fourteenth day of the same Month, he is brought to
London, and committed Prisoner to the Tower; pitied the less, even by those
that loved him, because he had so tamely betrayed himself.

The Duke of Sommerset* no longer to be called Protector, being thus laid up;
a Parliament begins (as the other two had done before) on the fourth of
November. In which there passed two Acts of especial consequence, (besides the
Act for removing all Images out of the Church, and calling in all Books of
false and superstitious Worship, before-remembred,) to the concernments of
Religion. The first declared to this Effect; That Such form, and manner of
making, and Consecrating Archbishops, and Bishopt, Priests, Deacons, and other
Ministers of the Church, as by six Prelates, and six other Learned Men of this
Realm, learned in God's Law, by the King to be appointed and assigned, or by
the most number of them, shall be devised for that purpose, and set forth under
the Great Seal, before the First of April next coming, shall be lawfully
exercised, and used, and no other. The number of the Bishops, and the Learned
Men, which are appointed by this Act, assure me, that the King made choice of
the very same; whom he had formerly employed in composing the Liturgy; the
Bishop of Chichester being left out, by reason of his Refractoriness in not
subscribing to the same. And they accordingly applied themselves unto the Work,
following therein the Rules of the Primitive Church, as they are rather
recapitulated* then ordained, in the fourth Council of Carthage, Anno 401.
Which, though but National in it self, was generally both approved, and
received (as to the Form of Consecrating Bishops, and inferior Ministers) in
all the Churches of the West. Which Book, being finished, was made use of,
without further Authority, till the year 1552. At what time, being added to the
second Liturgy, it was approved of, and confirmed, as a part thereof, by Act
of Parliament, An. 5. Edw. 6. cap. 1. And of this Book it is, we find mention
in the 36th. Article of Queen Elizabeth's Time. In which it is Declared; That,
Whosoever were Consecrated, and Ordered, according to the Rites thereof, should
be reputed, and adjudged to be lawfully Consecrated, and rightly Ordered. Which
Declaration of the Church was afterward made good by Act of Parliament, in the
eighth year of that Queen: in which the said Ordinal, of the third of King
EDWARD the Sixth, is confirmed, and ratified.

The other of the said two Acts was, For enabling the King to nominate Eight
(Bishops, as many Temporal Lords, and sixteen Members of the Lower House of
Parliament: for reviewing all such Canons, and Constitutions, as remained in
force, by Virtue of the Statute made in the 25th. year of the late King HENRY;
and fitting them for the Use of the Church, in all Times succeeding. According
to which Act, the King directed a Commission to Archbishop Cranmer, and the
rest of the Persons, whom he thought fit to nominate to that employment. And
afterward appointed a Sub-Committee of eight Persons, to prepare the Work, and
make it ready for the rest; that it might be dispatched with the more
expedition: which said eight persons were, the Archbishop of Canterbury*
Doctor Thomas Goodrick, Bishop of El^; Doctor Richard Cox, the King's
Almoner; and Peter Martyr, Doctor in Divinity; William May, and Rowland
Taylour, Doctors of the Laws; John Lucas, and Richard Goodrick, Esquires. By
whom the Work was undertaken, and digested, fashioned according to the Method
of the Roman Decretals; and called by the Name of Reformati^ Legum
Ecclesiasticarum, etc. But not being Commissionated hereunto, till the eleventh
of November in the year 1551, they either wanted time to communicate it to the
chief Commissioners, by whom it was to be presented to the King: or found the
King encumbred with more weighty matters; then to attend the pe^^sal of it. And
so the King dying (as he did) before he had given life unto it by his Royal
Signature, the Design miscarried: never thought fit to be resumed in the
following Times, by any of those; who had the Government of the Church, or were
concerned in the Honor, and Safety of it.

There also passed another Act, in Order to the Peace of the Commonwealth, but
especially procu^ed by the Agents of the Duke of Sommerset; the better to
secure him from all Attempts, and Practices, for the Times ensuing; by which
his Life might be illegally endangered. The purport of which Act was, to make
it High Treason, for any twelve Persons, or above, assembled together, to kill,
or imprison any of the King's Council; or alter any Laws; or continue together
the space of an hour, being Commanded to return by any Justice of the Peace,
Mayour, Sheriff, etc. Which Act, intended by his Friends for his Preservation,
was afterward made use of by his Enemies, for the only means of his
Destruction; deferred a while, but still resolved upon, when occasion served.
It was not long before Earl Dudly might perceive; that he had served other men's
Tur^s against the Duke, as well as his own: and that, having served their Turns
therein, he ^ound no such forwardness in them, for raising him unto the Place.
They were all willing enough to unhorse the Duke; but had no mind, that such a
rank Rider* as the Earl, should get into the Saddle. Besides, he was not ^o be
told; that there was nothing to be charged against the Duke, which could touch
his life; that so many men, of d^fferent Humors, were not like to hold ^ong in
a Plot together, now their Turns were served; that the Duk^'s Friends could not
be so dull, as not to see the emptiness of the Practice* which was forged
against him; nor the King so forgetful of his Uncle, when the Truth was known,
as not to raise him up again to his former height: it therefore would be
fittest for his ends, and purposes, to close up the Breach, to set the Du^e at
Liberty, from his Imprisonment; but so to order the Affair, that the Benefit
should be acknowledged to proceed from himself alone. But first, the Duke must
so acknowledge his Offenses; that his Adversaries might come off with Honor. In
Order whereunto, he is first Articled against, for many Crimes and
Misdemeanors, rather imputed to him, then proved against him. And unto all
these he must be labored to subscribe, acknowledging the Offenses contained in
them; to beg the Favor of the Lords, and cast himself upon his Knees, for his
Majesty's Mercy. All which he very poorly did, subscribing his Confession on
the twenty third of December. Which he subjoyned unto the Articles, and so
returned it to the Lords.

Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 4o. An. Dom. 1549, 1550.
THe Lords, An. Reg. 4o 1549/50.
thus furnished with sufficient matter for a Legal Proceeding* condemned him,
by a Sentence passed in the House of Peers, unto the Loss of all his Offices;
of Earl Marshal, Lord Treasurer, and Lord Protector: as also to ^he Forfeiture
of all his Goods, and near two thousand pounds of good yearly Rents. Which
being signified unto him, he acknowledged himself, in his Letter of the second
of February, to be highly ^avoured by their Lordships; in that they brought his
Cause to be Finable. Which Fine, though it was to him almost unsupportable, yet
he did never purpose to contend with them, nor once to justify himself in any
Action. He confessed, That, being none of the wisest, he might easily err: that
it was hardly possible for any man, in Eminent place, so to carry himself; that
all his Actings should be blameless in the eye of Justice. He therefore
submitted himself wholly to the King's Mercy; and to their Discretions, for
some Moderation: desiring them, to conceive of what he did amiss; as rather
done through Rudeness, and want of Judgment* then through any malicious
Meaning: and, that he was ready both to do, and suffer, what they should
appoint. And finally, he did again, most humbly, upon his Knees, entreat
Pardon, and Favor; and they should ever find him so lowly to their Honors,
and Obedient to their Orders, as he would thereby make Amends for his former
Follies.

By which Submission (it may be called an Abjectedness rather) as he gave much
secret Pleasure to the most of his Adversaries: so he gained so far upon the
King; that he was released of his Imprisonment on the fourth day after. And by
his Majesty's Grace, and Favor, he was discharged of his Fine: his Goods, and
Lands, being again restored unto him; except such, as had been given away:
either the malice of his Enemies being somewhat appeased, or wanting power, and
credit, to make Resistance.

This great Oak being thus shrewdly shaken, there is no doubt, but there will
be some gathering up of the Sticks, which were broken from him, and somewhat
must be done, as well to gratify those men, which had served the Turn, as to
inclin^ others to the like Propensions. And therefore upon Candlemas^-Day,
being the d^y, on which he had made his humble Submission beforementioned,
William Lord St. John, Lord Great Master, and President of the Council, is made
Lord Treasurer; John Dudley, Earl of Warwick, Lord High Chamberlain, is
preferred to the Office of Lord Great Master; the Marquess of North-hampton
created Lord High Chamberlain; Sir Anthony Wingfield, Captain of the Guard, is
made Comptroller of the King's House, in the place of Sir William Paget* (of
whom more anon) and Sir Thomas Darcie advanced to the Office of
Vice-Chamberlain, and Captain of his Majesty's Guard. And, though the Earls of
Arundel, and Sou^^-hampton, had been as forward as any of the rest, in the
Duke's destruction; yet now, upon some Court-displeasures, they were commanded
to their Houses, and dismissed from their Attendance at the Council Table: the
Office of Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household being taken from the Earl
of Arundel, and bestowed on Wentworth, ennobled by the Title of Lord Wentworth,
in the first year of the King. Some Honors had been given before, between the
time of the Duke's Acknowledgment, and the Sentence passed on him by the Lords;
and so disposed* that none of the Factions might have any ground for a
Complaint. One of each side being taken out for these Advancements. For, on the
nineteenth day of January, William Lord St. John, a most affectionate Servant
to the Earl of Warwick, was preferred unto the Title of Earl of Wiltshire; the
Lord Russell, who had made himself the Head of those; which were engaged on
neither side, was made Earl of Bedford; and Sir William Paget, Comptroller of
his Majesty's Household, who had persisted faithful to the Lord Protector,
advanced to the Dignity of a Baron, and not long after to the Chancellour-ship
of the Duchy of Lancaster.

Furnished with Offices, and Honors, it is to be presumed, that they would
find some way to provide themselves of sufficient Means, to maintain their
Dignities. The Lord Wentworth, being a younger Branch of the Wentworths of
Yorkshire, had brought some Estate with him to the Court; though not enough, to
keep him up in Equipage, with so great a Title. The want whereof was supplied
in part, by the Office of Lord Chamberlain, now conferred upon him; but more by
the goodly Manours of Stebun^th (commonly called Stepney) and Hackney, bestowed
upon him by the King, in consideration of the Good and Faithful Services
before performed. For so it happened, that the D^an and Chapter of St. Paul's,
lying at the Mercy of the Times, as before was said, conveyed over to the King
the said two Manours, on the twelfth day after Christm^ss, now last past, with
all the Members and Appertenances thereunto belonging. Of which, the last named
was valued at the yearly rent of 41. pounds, 9. ^* 4* d. The other at 140.
pounds, 8* ^. 11. ^. ob. And, being thus vested in the King they were by
Letters Patents, bearing Date the sixteenth of April, then next following,
transferred upon the said Lord VV^ntworth. By means whereof, he was possessed
of a goodly Territory, extending on the Thames, from St. Katharine's near the
Tower of London, to the Borders of Essex, near Black-wall; from thence along
the River Le^ to Stratford le Bow: and, fetching a great compass on that side
of the City, contains in all no fewer, then six and twenty Town-ships, Streets,
and Hamlets; besides such Rows of Building, as have since been added in these
later Times. The like provision was made by the new Lord P^get, a Londoner by
Birth, but by good Fortune, mixed with Merit* preferred by degrees, to be one
of the Principal Secretaries to the late King Henry: by whom he was employed in
many Embassies, and Negotiations. Being thus raised, and able to set up for
himself, he had his share in the division of the Lands of Chantery,
Free-Chapels, etc. and got into his hands the Episcopal House, belonging to the
Bishop of Exeter, by him enlarged, and beautified, and called Paget-House* sold
afterward to Robert, Earl of Leicester: from whom it came to the late Earls of
Essex, and from them took the name of Essex-House, by which it is now best
known. But being a great House is no^ able to keep it self* he played his Game
so well; that he got into his possession the Manor of Beau-desart (of which he
was created Baron) and many other fair Estates* in the County of Stafford;
belonging partly to the Bishop, and partly to the Dean and Cha^ter of
Lichfield: neither of which was able to contend with so great a Courtier, who
held the Sea, and had the Ear of the Protector, An. Reg. 4o 1550.
and the King's to boot. What other Course he to^k to improve his Fortunes, we
shall see hereafter; when we come to the last part of the Tragedy of the Duke
of Sommerset.

For Sommerset, having gained his Liberty, and thereby being put into a
Capacity of making use of his Friends, found Means to be admitted to the King's
Presence: by whom he was not only welcomed with all the kind Expressions of a
Gracious Prince, and made to sit down at his own Table; but the same day (the
eighth of April) he was again sworn one of the Lords of the Privy Council. This
was enough to make Earl Dudly look about him, and to pretend a Reconciliation
with him for the present; whom he meant first to make secure, and afterward
strike the last blow at him, when he least looked for it. And, that the knot of
Amity might be tied the faster, and last the longer, (a True-Loves-Knot it must
be thought or else nothing worth) a Marriage was n^gotiated between John Lord
Viscount L'isle, the Earl's Eldest Son, and the Lady Ann Seimour, one of the
Daughters of the Duke; which Marriage was joyfully solemnized on the third of
June, at the King's Mannour-House of Sh^^e; the King himself gracing the
Nuptials with his Presence. And now, who could imagine, but that, upon the
giving of such Hostages unto one another, a most inviolable League of
Friendship had been made between them; and that, all Animosities and
Displeasures being quite forgotten, they would more powerfully Cooperate to
the public Good? But, leaving them, and their Ad^erents, to the dark
Contrivances of the Court, we must leave England for a time, and see how our
Affairs succeeded on the other side of the Sea. Where, in the middle of the
former Dissensions, the French had put us to the Worst in the way of Arms, and
after got the Better in a Treaty of Peace.

They had, the last year, taken in all the Outworks, which seemed the
strongest Rampar^s, of the Town of Bulloign; but had not strength enough to
venture on the Town it self; provided plentifully of all necessaries to endure
a Siege, and bravely Garisoned by men of too much Courage, and Resolution, to
give it up upon a Summons. Besides, they came to understand, that the English
were then Practicing with Charles the Emperor, to associate with them in the
War, according to some former Capitulations made between those Crowns. And, if
they found such D^ffi^ulties, in maintaining the War against either of them,
when they fought singly by themselves, there was no hope of any good Success
against them, should they unite, and pour their Forces into France. Most true
it is; that, after such time, as the French had bid Defiance to the King; and
that the King, by reason of the Troubles and Embroilments at home, was not in a
Condition to attend the Affairs of France, Sir William Paget was sent
Ambassador to Charles the Fifth to desire Succor of Him, and to lay before
Him the Infancy, and several Necessities of the young King, being then in the
twelfth year of His Age. This desire when the Emperor had refused to hearken
to, they besought Him; that he would, at the least, be pleased to take into His
Hands, the keeping of the Town of Bulloign: and that, for no longer time, then
until King EDWARD could make an End of the Troubles of His Subjects at home*
and compose the Discords of the Court, which threatened more Danger then the
other. To which Request He did not only refuse to hearken; except the King
would promise to restore the Catholic Religion as He called it, in all His
Dominions; but expressly commanded, that, neither His Men, no^ Ammunition,
should go to the Assistance of the English. An Ingratitude not easy to be
marked with a fitting Epithete: considering what fast Friends the Kings of
England had always been to the House of Burgundy, the Rights whereof remained
in the person of Charles; with what sums of Money they had helped them; and
what sundry Way^ they had made for them, both in the Nether-Lands to maintain
their Authority, and in the Realm of France it self, to increase their Power.
For, from the Marriage of Maximilian, of the Family of Austri^, with the Lady
Mary of Burgundy, (which happened in the year 1478.) unto the Death of Henry
the Eight, (which fell in the year 1546) are just threescore and eight years.
In which time only, it was found, on a just account, that it had cost the
Kings of England, at the least, six Millions of Pounds, in the mere Quarrels of
that House.

But the French, being more assured, that the English held some secret Practice
with the Emperor, then certain what the Issue thereof might be, resolved upon
a Peace with EDWARD: in hope of getting more by Treaty, then he could by
Force. To this end one Guidolti, a Florentine, is sent for England: by whom
many Overtures were made to the Lords of the Council; not as from the King, but
from the Constable of France. And spying with a nimble Eye, that all Affairs
were governed by the Earl of Warwick, he resolved to buy him to the French, at
what price soever: and so well did he ply the Business; that, at the last, it
was agreed, that four Ambassadors should be sent to France from the King of
England; to treat with so many others of that Kingdom, about a Peace between
the Crowns: but that the Treaty it self should be held in Guisnes, a Town
belonging to the English, in the Marches of Calice. In pursuance whereof, the
Earl of Bedford, the new Lord Paget, Sir William Peter, Principal Secretary of
Estate, and Sir John Mason, Clerk of the Council, were, on the twenty first of
January, dispatched for France. But no sooner were they come to Calice, when
Guidol^i brings a Letter to them from Mounsieur d' Rochpot, one of the four,
which were appointed for that Treaty, in behalf of the French. In which, it was
desired, that the English Ambassadors would repair to the Town of Bulloign,
without putting the French to the Charge, and Trouble, of so long a Journey, as
to come to Guisnes. Which being demurred on by the English, and a Post sent
unto the Court, to know the pleasure of the Council in that particular: they
received word, (for so the Oracle had directed) that they should not stand upon
Punctilioes, so they gained the point; nor hazard the Substance of the Work, to
preserve the Circumstances. According whereunto, the Ambassadors removed to
Bulloign, and pitched their Tents without the Town, as had been desired, for
the Reception of the French: that so they might enter on the Treaty, for which
they came. But then a new D^fficulty appeared: for the French would not cross
the Water, and put themselves under the Command of Bulloign; but desired
rather, that the English would come over to them, and fall upon the Treaty in
an House, which they were then preparing for their Entertainment. Which being
also yielded to, after some Disputes: the French grew confident, that, after so
many Condescensions on the part of the English, they might obtain from them
what they li^ted, in the main of the Business. For, though it cannot otherwise
be, but that in all Treaties of this Nature, there must be some Condescendings
made by the one, or the other: yet he, that yields the first inch of Ground,
gives the other Party a strong Hope of obtaining the rest.

These Preparations being made, the Commissioners, on both sides, begin the
Treaty: where, after some Expostulations, touching the Justice, or Injustice of
the War, on either side, they came to particular Demands. The English required
the payment of all Debts, and Pensions, concluded on between the two Kings
deceased: and, that the Queen of Scots should either be delivered to their
Hands, or sent back to Her Kingdom. But unto this the French replied; That the
Queen of Scots was designed in Marriage to the Daulphin of France: and, that
She looked upon it, as an high Dishonor, that their King should be esteemed a
Pensioner, or Tributary to the Crown of England. The French, on the other side,
propounded: That, all Arrears of Debts, and Pensions, being thrown aside, as
not likely to be ever paid, they should either put the higher Price on the Town
of Bulloign; or else prepare themselves to keep it, as well as they could. From
which Proposals when the French could not be removed, the Oracle was again
consulted: by whose Direction, it was ordered in the Council of England* That
the Commissioners should conclude the Peace, upon such Articles, and
Instructions, as were sent unto them: Most of them ordinary, and accustomed, at
the winding up of all such Treaties. But that of most Concernment was; That,
all Titles, and Claims on the one side, and Defenses on the other, remaining to
either Party, as they were before, the Town of Bulloign, with all the Ordnance
found there at the taking of it, should be delivered to the French, for the Sum
of four hundred thousand Crowns of the Sun. Of which four hundred thousand
Crowns, (each Crown being valued at the Price of six Shillings, and six Pence,)
one Moity was to be paid, within three days after the Town should be delivered,
and the other at the end of six Months after; Hostages to be given in the mean
time for the payment of it. It was agreed also, in relation to the Realm of
Scotland; That, if the Scots razed Louder, and Dowglass, the English should
raze Rox-borough, and Aymouth; and no Fortification in any of those places to
be afterward made.

Which Agreement being signed by the Commissioners of each side, and Hostages
mutually delivered for performance of Covenants, Peace was Proclaimed between
the Kings on the last of March: and the Town of Bulloign, with all the Forts
depending on it, delivered into the power of the French, on the twenty fifth
day of April, then next following. But they must thank the Earl of Warwick, for
letting them go away with that commodity at so cheap a Rate: for which the two
last Kings had bargained for no less, then two Millions of the same Crowns, to
be paid unto the King of England, at the end of eight years; the Towns, and
Territory, in the mean time to remain with the English. Nor was young Edward
backward in rewarding his Care, and Diligence, in expenditing the Affair. Which
was so represented to him, and the extraordinary Merit of the Service so highly
magnified; that he was made General Warden of the North, gratified with a
thousand Marks of good Rent in Land, and the Command of an hundred Hors-men at
the King's Charge. Such is the Fortune of some Princes, to be most Bountiful
to those, who are falsest to them. Guidolti also was rewarded with Knighthood,
a Present of a thousand Crowns, and an Annual Pension of as much, to maintain
his Honor; besides a Pension of two hundred and fifty Crowns per annum, which
was given to his Son. What R^compense he had of the Crown of France I have no
where found; but have good Reason to believe, that he did not serve their Turn
for nothing. Great Care was also taken, for the preventing of such Disorders,
as the dissolving of great Garrisons, and the disbanding of Armies, do for the
most part carry with them. And to this end the Lord Clinton, Governor of the
Town, and Territo^y of Bulloign, was created Lord Admiral; the Officers, and
Captains, rewarded with Lands, Leases, Offices, and Annual Pensions; all
foreign Forces satisfied, and sent out of the Kingdom; the Common Soldiers,
having all their Pay, and a Moneths-Pay over, dismissed into their several
Countries, and great Charge given, that they should be very well observed, till
they were quietly settled at home* the Light-Hors-men, and Men-at-Arms, put
under the Command of the Marquess of North hampton, then being Captain of the
Band of Pensioners; and finally some of the Chief Captains, with six hundred
Ordinaries, disposed of on the Frontiers of Scotland.

All Things thus quieted at Home, and composed Abroad, in reference to the
Civil State; we must next see how Matters went, which concerned Religion: all
Parties making use of the Public Peace for the advancing of their Private, and
particular Ends. And the first Matter of Remark, which occurs this year, is the
Burning of John Butcher, (by others called John Knell, but generally best known
by the Name of Joan of Kent) condemned for Heresy in the year last past, about
the time, that so many Anabaptists were convented in the Church of Saint Paul,
before Archbishop Cranmer, and his Assistants: whereof mention has been made
already. Her Crime was, That she denied Christ to have taken Flesh from the
Virgin Mary; affirming (as the Valentinians did of old) that he only passed
through her Body, as Water through the Pipe of a Conduit, without participating
any thing of that Body, through which He passed. Great Care was taken, and much
Time spent, by the Archbishop to persuade her to a better sense: but, when all
failed, and that he was upon the Point of passing Sentence upon her, for
persisting obstinate in so gross an Heresy, she most maliciously reproached
him, for passing the like Sentence of Condemnation on another Woman, called Ann
A^kew, for denying the Carnal Presence of Christ in the Sacrament* telling him,
That he had condemned the said Ann A^kew not long before for a piece of Bread,
and was then ready to condemn her for a piece of Flesh.

But being convicted, and delivered over to the Secular Judges, she was by them
condemned to be burnt; but no Execution done upon it, till this present year.
The Interval was spent in using all Means for her Conversion, and amendment;
which as it only seemed to confirm her in her former Obstinacy: so it was
found to have given no small encouragement to others, for entertaining the like
dangerous, and un-Christian Errors. His Majesty was therefore moved to sign
the Warrant for her Death. To which when the Lords of the Council could by no
means win Him: the Archbishop is desired to per^wade Him to it. The King
continued both in Reason, and Resolution, as before He did, notwithstanding all
the Archbishop's Arguments to persuade the contrary: the King affirming, that
He would not drive her headlong to the Devil, and thinking it better to
cha^tise her with some corporal Punishment. But, when the Gravity, and
Importunity of the Man had prevailed at last, the King told him, as He signed
the Warrant, that upon him He would lay all the Charge thereof, before God.
Which Words of His declare sufficiently His Aversness from having any hand in
shedding of that Woman's Blood, how justly soever she deserved it. But that the
Archbishop's Earnestness, in bringing her to exemplary Punishment, should
contract any such guilt in the sight of God, as to subject him to the like
cruel Death, within few years after (as some would bear the World in hand) is a
Surmise, not to be warranted by any Principle of Piety, or Rule of Charity. The
Warrant being signed, and the Writ for Execution Sealed; she was kept a whole
Week before her Death, at the Lord Chancellour's House, daily resorted to, both
by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London; who spared no pains
to bring her to a ^ight belief in that Particular. But the same Spirit of
Obstinacy still continued with her, and held her to the very last. For, being
brought to the Stake in Smithfield, on the second of May, Dr. Sco^y (not long
after made Bishop of Rechester) was desired to Preach unto the People; who
insisting on the proof of that Point, for denial whereof the obstinate Wretch
had been condemned, she interrupted him, and told him with a very loud Voice;
that, He lied like etc. And so, the Sermon being ended, the Executioner was
commanded to do his Office, which he did accordingly. And yet this terrible
Execution did not so prevail, as to extirpate, and exterminate the like impiou^
Do^ages; though it suppressed them for a time. For, on the twenty ^ourth of
April, in the year next foll^wing* I find one George Paris, a Dutch man, to
have been burnt for Arianism in the very same place.

Better Success had John a Lasco, a Polonian born, with his Congregation of
Germans, and other Strangers, who took Sanctuary this year in England; hoping,
that here they might enjoy that Liberty of Conscience, and Safety for their
Goods, and Persons, which their own Country had denied them. Nor did they fall
short in any thing, which their Hopes had promised them. For the Lords of the
Council looking on them, as affl^cted Strangers, and persecuted for the same
Religion, which was here professed, interceded for them with the King. And He
as Gracio^sly vouchsafed to give them, both Entertainment, and Protection;
assigned them the West-part of the Church, belonging to the late dissolved
House of Augustine^ Friars, for the Exercise of Religious Duties: made them a
Corporation, consisting of a Super-intendent, and four other Ministers; with
power, to fill the vacant Places by a new Succession, whenever any of them
should be void by Death, or otherwise the Parties by them chosen to be approved
by the King, and Council. And this he did, with a Command to the Lord M^your of
London, the Alderme^, and Sheriffs thereof; as also to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and all other Bishops of this Realm not to disturb them, either in
the Free Exercise of their Religion, and Ecclesi^stical Government;
notwithstanding, that they differed from the Government, and Forms of Worship,
Established in the Church of England. All which, and more, He grants by His
Letters Patents, bearing Date at L^ez (the Lord Chancellour's House) on the
twenty fourth of July, and the fourth year of His Re^gn. Which Grant, though in
it self an Act of most (...) Compassion, in respect of those Strangers, yet
proved the occasion of no small disturbance to the Proceedings of the Church,
and the quiet ordering o^ the State; for, by suffering these men, to live under
another kind of Government, and to Worship God after other Forms, then those
allowed of by the Laws, proved in effect the (...) up of one Altar against
another in the midst of the Church, and the erecting ^f a Commonwealth in the
midst of the Kingdom. So much the more unfortunately pe^^itted in this present
Conjuncture, when such a Rep^ure began to appear amongst our selves, as was
made wider by the coming in of these Dutch Reformer^, and the Indulgence
granted to them: as will appear by the foll^wing Story of John Hooper, designed
to the Bishopric of Gloucester; which in br^ef was this.

John Hooper* the designed Bishop of Gloucester, being bred in Oxford, studious
in the Holy Scriptures, and well-affected unto those Beginnings of the
Reformation, which had been countenanced by King Henry, about the time of the
Six Articles, found himself so much in danger, as put upon him the necessity of
forsaking the Kingdom. Settling himself at Zurich, a Town of Switzerland, he
acquaints himself with Bulli^ger, a Scholar, in those Times, of great Name* and
Note: and, having stai^d there, till the Death of King Henry, he returned into
England; bringing with him some very strong Affections to the Nakendness of the
Zuinglian, or Helvetian Churches: though differing in Opinion from them in some
Points of Doctrine; and more especially in that of Predestination. In England,
by his constant Preaching, and learned Writings, he grew into great Favor, and
Esteem, with the Earl of Warwick; by whose procurement, the King most
Graciously bestowed upon him, without any seeking of his own, the Bishopric of
Gloucester; which was then newly void, by the Death of Wakeman, the last Abbot
of (...), and the first Bishop of that See. Having received the King's Letters
Patents for his Preferment to that Place, he applies himself to the Archbishop
for his Consecration: concerning which there grew a difference between them.
For the Archbishop would not Consecrate him* but in such an Habit, which
Bishops were required to wear by the Rules of the Church: and Hooper would not
take it, upon such Conditions. Repairing to his Patron, the Earl of Warwick, he
obtains from him a Letter to the Archbishop; desiring a forbearance of those
things, in which the Lord Elect of Gloucester did crave to be forborne at his
hands; implying also, that it was the King's desire, as well as his, that such
forbearance should be used. It was desired also, that he would not charge him
with any Oath, which seemed to be burthenous to his Conscience. For the El^ct
Bishop, as it seems, had boggled also at the Oath of paying Can^nical Obedience
to his Metropolitan; which by the Laws, then, and still in force, he was bound
to take. But the Archbishop still persisting in the Denial, and being well
seconded by Bishop Ridley of London, (who would by no means yield unto it) the
King himself was put upon the business by the Earl of Warwick; who thereupon
wrote to the Archbishop this ensuing Letter.

RIght-Reverend Father, and Right-Trusty, and VVell-Beloved, We Greet you
well. Whereas We, by the Advice of Our Council, have Calaen, and Chosen Our
Right-VVell-Beloved, and VVell-VVorthy, Mr. John Hooper, Professor of
Divinity, to be Our Bishop of Gloucester: as well for his Great Learning, Deep
Judgment, and Long Study, both in the Scriptures, and other Profound Learning;
as also for his Good Discretion, Ready Utterance, and Honest Life for that kind
of Vocation; etc. From Consecrating of whom We understand you do stay, because
he would have you omit, and let pass certain Rights, and Ceremonies, offensive
to his Conscience* whereby you think you should fall in Praemunire of Our Laws:
We have thought Good, by Advice aforesaid, to dispense, and discharge you of
all manner of Dangers, Penalties, and Forfeitures, you should run into, and be
in, in any manner of way, by omitting any of the same. And this Our Letters
shall be your sufficient Warrant, and Discharge therefore.

Given under Our Signet, at Our Castle of Windsore, the fifth day of August, in
the fourth year of Our Reign.

This Gracious Letter notwithstanding, the two Bishops, wisely taking into
consideration, of what Danger, and Ill Consequence, the Example was, humbly
craved leave, not to obey the King against his Laws: and the Earl, finding
little hope of prevailing in that suit, which would not be granted to the King,
leaves the new Bishop to himself; who, still persisting in his Obstinacy, and
wilful Humor, was finally for his Disobedience, and Contempt, committed
Prisoner; and, from the Prison, writes his Letters to Martin Bucer, and Peter
Martyr, for their Opinion in the Case. From the last of which, who had declared
himself no friend to the English Ceremonies, he might presume of some
Encouragement; but, that he had any from the first, I have no where found. The
contrary whereunto will appear by his Answer unto John a Lasco* in the present
Case; whereof more anon.

In which condition of Affairs, Calvin addresseth his Letters to the Lord
Protect^ur, whom he desires to lend the man an Hominem hortatus sum; ut
Hoppero Manum
helping hand, and extricate him out of those Perplexities, into which he was
cast. So that, at last, the Differences were thus compromised; that is to say,
That Hooper should receive his Consecration, attired in his Episcopal Robes;
that he should be dispensed withal* from wearing it at ordinary times,
Porrigeret.
as his daily Habit: but that he should be bound to use it, when soever he
Preached before the King, in his own Cathedral, or any other place of like
Public Nature. According to which Agreement, being appointed to Preach before
the King, he showed himself apparelled in his Bishop's Robes: namely, a long
Scarlet Chimere, reaching down to the ground, for his upper Garment, (changed
in Queen Elizabeth's Time, to one of Black Satin) and under that a white Linen
Rochet, with a Square Cap upon his head; which Fox reproacheth by the name of a
Popish Attire, and makes to be a great cause of Shame, and Contumeli^, to that
Godly man. And possibly it might be thought so, at that time, by Hooper
himself; who from thenceforth carried a strong Grudg against Bishop Ridley, the
principal man, as he conceived, (and that not untruly) who had held him up so
closely to such hard Conditions: not fully reconciled unto him, till they were
both ready for the Stake; and then it was high time to lay aside those
Animosities, which they had hereupon conceived on against another. But these
things happened not, (I mean his Consecration, and his Preaching before the
King) till March next following; and then we may hear further of him.

And thus we have the first beginning of that Opposition, which has continued
ever since against the Liturgy it self, the Cap, and Surplice, and other
Rites, and Vsages of the Anglican Church.

Which Differences, being thus begun, were both fomented, and increased, by the
Pragmaticalness of John a Lasco, Opposite, both in Government, and Forms of
Worship, (if not perhaps in Doctrine also) to the Church of England. For John a
Lasco not content to enjoy those Privileges, which were intended for the use of
those Strangers only, so far abused His Majesty's goodness, as to appear in
favor of the Zuinglian, or Calvinian Faction, which then began more openly to
show it self, against the Orders of the Church. For, first* he publishes a
Book, entitled, Forma, and ratio totius Ecclesiastici Ministerii: Wherein he
maintains the Use of Sitting at the Holy Communion; contrary to the Laudable
Custom of the Church of England, but much to the Encouragement of all those,
who impugned her Orders. A Controversy, unhappily moved by Bishop Hooper,
concerning the Episcopal Habit, was presently propagated amongst the rest of
the Clergy, touching Caps, and Surplices. And in this (...) John a La^co must
needs be one: not only countenancing those, who refused to wear them; but
writing unto Martin Bucer, to declare against them For which severely
reprehended by that Moderate and Learned Man* and all his Cavils, and
Objections very solidly Answered; which being sent to him, in the way of
Letter, was afterward Printed, and dispersed, for keeping down that Opposite
Humor, which began then to overswell the Banks, and threatened to bear all
before it. And by this Passage we may rectify a Mistake, or a Calumny rather,
in the Altar Damascenum. The Author whereof makes Martin Bucer Peremptory, in
refusing to wear the Square Cap, when he lived in Cambridg; and to give this
simple Reason for it; That he could not wear a Square Cap, since his Head was
Round. But I note this only by the way, to show the Honesty of those men,
which erected that Altar: and return again to John a Lasco; who, being born in
Poland* where Sitting at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper had been used by
the Arians; (who looking no otherwise on Christ, then their Elder Brother,
might think it was no Robbery at all to be equal with Him, and sit down with
Him at His Table) what he learned there, he desired might be Practiced here,
the better to conform this Church to the Polish Conventicles.

As for the other Controversy about Caps, and Surplices; though it found no
Encouragement from Martin Bucer; yet it received no small countenance from
Peter Martyr. For in a Letter of his, of the first of July, inscribed Unto a
nameless Friend, who had desired his Judgment in it, he first declares,
according to the very Truth; That, being indifferent in themselves, they could
make no man, of themselves, to be either Godly* or Ungodly, by the use, or
forbearance of them: but then he adds, That, ( Magis exped^re judico; ut
e^vestis, and alia, id genus, plura, cum fieri commode posuit, auferantur, etc.
) He thinks it most Expedient to the Good of the Church; that they, and all
others of that kind, should be taken away, when the next convenient Opportunity
should present it self. And then he gives this Reason for it: That, Where such
Ceremonies were so stiffly contended for, which were not warranted, and
supported, by the Word of God; there commonly men were less sollicitous of the
Substance of Religion, then they were of the Circumstances of it. But he might
well have spared his Judgment, which had so visibly appeared in his daily
Practice. For he has told us of himself, (in one of his Epistles, bearing Date
at Zurick, the fourth of November, 1559. being more then five years, after he
had left this Kingdom;) That, ( Ego, com essem Oxonii, vestibus illis albis, in
Choro, nunanam nil volti;quam^^^ e^sem Canonicus.
) He had never used the Surplice, when he lived in Oxford, though he were then
a Canon of Christ-Church, and frequently present in the Quire. So that, between
the Authority of Peter Martyr on the one side, and the Pragmaticalness of John
a Lasco on the other, many were drawn from their Obedience to the Rules of the
Church, for the time then present, and a ground laid for more Confusions, and
Disturbances in the time to come.

The Regular Clergy, in those days, appeared not, commonly, out of their own
Houses; but in their Priests Coats, with the Square Cap upon their Heads; and,
if they were of Note, and Eminency, in their Gowns, and Tippets. This Habit
also is decryed for Superstitious; affirmed to be a Popish Attire, and
altogether as unfit for Ministers of the Holy Gospel, as the Chimere, and
Rochet* were for those; who claimed to be the Successors of the Lord's
Apostles, So Tyms replied unto Bishop Gardener, when, being asked, Whether a
Coat, with Stockings of diverse Colors, the upper part White, and the
nether-stock Russet, (in which Habit he appeared before him) were a fit Apparel
for a Deacon: (which Office he had exercised in this Church) he sawcily made
Answer, That his Vesture did not so much vary from a Deacon's, as his Lordships
did from that of an Apostle. The less to be admired in Tyms, in that I find
the like aversness from that Grave, and Decent Habit, in some other men: who
were in Parts and Place above him* For, while this Controversy was on Foot,
between the Bishops and Clergy, about wearing Priests-Caps, and other Attire,
belonging to their Holy Order, Mr. John Rogers, one of the Prebends of Saint
Paul's, and Divinity-Reader of that Church, then newly returned from beyond the
Seas, could never be persuaded to wear any other, then the Round Cap, when he
went abroad. And, being further pressed unto it, he declared himself thus, That
he would never agree to the point of Conformity: but on this Condition, that,
if the Bishops did require the Cap, and Tipper, etc. then it should also be
decreed, that all Popish Priests (for a Distinction between them* and others)
should be constrained to wear upon their Sleeves a Chalice, with an Host upon
it. The like aversness is by some ascribed also to Mr. John Philpot,
Archdeacon of Winchester, not long before returned from beyond the Seas* as
the other was, and s^ffering for Religion in Queen Marie's Days, as the other
did. Who, being by his place a Member of the Convocation, in the first of Queen
Mary, and required by the Prol^cutour to come apparelled, like the rest, in his
Gown and Tippet, or otherwise to forbear the House, chose rather to accept of
the last Condition, then to submit unto the former. But there was some thing
else in the first Condition, which made him unwilling to accept it, and that
was, That He must not speak, but when he was commanded by the Prolocutour.
Which being so directly against the Customs of the House, and the Privileges
of each Member of it* he had good reason, rather to forbear his Presence; then
to submit himself, and consequently all the rest of the Members, to so great a
Servitude.

Such were the Effects of Calvin's Interposings in behalf of Hooper; and such
the Effects of his Exceptions against some Ancient Usages in the Public
Liturgy; and such the Consequents of the Indulgence granted to John a Lasco,
and his Church of Strangers, opposite, both in Practice, and point of Judgment,
to the established Rules, and Orders of the Church of England. For what did
follow hereupon, but a continual multiplying of Disorders in all Parts of this
Church? What from the Sitting at the Sacrament, used, and maintained by John a
Lasco: but first Irreverence in receiving, and afterward a Contempt and
dep^aving of it? What from the crying down of the Sacred Vestments, and the
Grave Habit of the Clergy: but first a Disesteem of the men themselves, and by
Degrees a Vilifying and Contempt of their Holy Ministry? Nay, such a p^ccancy
of Humor began then manifestly to break out; that it was Preached at Paul's
Cross by one Sir Steven, (for so they commonly called such of the Clergy, as
were under the Degree of Doctor) the Curate of Saint Katharine-Christ Church,
That, it was fit the Names of Churches should be altered, and the Names of the
Days in the Week changed; That F^sh-days should be kept on any other days, then
on Fridays, and Saturdays, and the Lent at any other time, except only between
Shrove^tide, and Easter. We are told also by John Stow, that he had seen the
said Sir Steven to leave the Pulpit, and Preach to the People out of an high
Elm, which stood in the midst of the Churchyard; and, that being done, to
return into the Church again; and leaving the High Altar, to sing the
C^mmunion-Service upon a Tomb of the Dead, with ^is Face toward the North.
Which is to be Observed the rather; because Sir Steph^n has found so many
Followers in these later Times. For, as some of the (...) sort have left the
Church, to Preach in Woods, and Barns, etc. and, instead of the Names of the
Old Days, and Months, can find no other s^itle for them, then the First,
Second, or Third Month of the Year, and the First, Second, or Third Day of the
Week, etc. so was it propounded, not long since, by some State-Reform^rs: That
the Lenten^Fast should be kept no longer, between Shrovetide and Ealster; but
rather (by some Act or Ordinance, to be made for that purpose) b^^wixt Easter
and* Whitsuntide. To such wild Fancies do men grow, when once they break those
Bonds, and neglect those Rules, which wise Antiquity ordain^d, for the
preservation of Peace, and Order.

If it be asked, What, in the mean time, was become of the Bishops, and, Why no
Care was taken for the purging of these Peccant Humors: It may be Answered;
That the Wings of their Authority had been so clipped that it was scarce able
to fly ab^oad: the Se^t^nce of Excommunication* wherewith they formerly kept in
Aw both Priest, and People no^ having been in Use, and Practice, since the
first of this King. Whether it were, that any Command was laid upon the
Bishops; by which they were restrained from the Exercise of it: Or, that some
other Course was in Agitation for drawing the Cognizance of all Ecclesiastical
Causes to the Courts at Westminster: Or, that it was thought inconsistent with
that Dreadful S^ntence, to be issued in the King's Name: (as it had lately been
appointed by Act of Parliament,) it is not easy to determine. Certain it is,
that, at this Time, it was in an Abeya^ce, (as our Lawyers Phrase it) either
Abolish^d for the present, or of none Effect: not only to the cherishing of
these Disorders, amongst the Ministers of the Church; but to the great increase
of Vic^ousness in all sorts of Men. So that it was not without cause* that it
was called for so earnestly by Bishop Latimer, in a Sermon Preached before the
King, where he thus presses for the Restitution of the Ancient Discipline;
Lechery (says he) is used in England, and such Lechery, as is used in no other
Part of the World. And yet it is made a matter of Sport, a matter of Nothing, a
Laughing matter, a Trifle, not to be Passed-on* nor Reformed. Well, I trust it
will be amended one day, and I hope to see it mended, as old as I am. Ana here
I will make a Suit to your Highness, to restore unto the Church the D^scipline
of Christ, in Excommunicating such, as be notable Offenders. Nor, never devise
any other Way: for no man is able to devise any better, then that God has
done, with Excommunication to put them from the Congregation, till they be
con^ounded. Therefore Restore Christ's Discipline, for Excommunication: and
that shall be a mean, both to pacify Go^'s Wrath, and Indignation; and also,
that less Abomination shall be used, then in Times past has been, or is at
this day. I speak this of a Conscience, and I mean to move it, of a Will, to
Your Grace, and Your Realm. Bring into the Church of England, the Open
Discipline of Excommunication; that open Sinners may be stricken with all.

No^ were these all the Mischiefs, which the Church suffered at this Time. Many
of (...) Nobility, and Gentry, which held Abbey-Lands, and were charged with
Pensions to the Monks, out of a covetous Design to be freed of those Pensions,
o^ to discharge their Lands from those Encumbrances, which by that means were
la^'d upon them, had placed them in such Benefices, as were in their Gifts.
This fi^led the Church with ignorant and illiterate Priest^: few of the Monks
being Learned beyond their Mass Book, utterly unacquainted with the Art of
Preaching, and otherwise not well-affected to the Reformation. Of which Abuse,
Complaint is made by Calvin to Archbishop Cranmer: and P^ter Martyr ( (...)
) much bemoaneth the miserable Condition of the Church, for want of Preachers;
though he touch not at the Reasons, and Causes of it. For the rem^dy whereof
(as Time, and Leisure would permit) it was Ordained, by the Advice of the Lo^ds
of the Council; That, of the King's (...), Cha^lains, which attended in
Ordinary, two of them should be always abo^t the Court, and the other four
should Travail in Preaching abroad. The first year, two in Wales, and two in
Lincolnshire; the second year, two in the Marches of Scotland, and two in
Yorkshire; the third year, two in Devonshire, and two in Hampshire; the fourth
year, two in Norfolk, and two in Essex; the fi^th year, two in Kent and two in
Sussex: and so throughout all the Shires in England. By which means it was
hoped, that the People might, in time, be well instructed in their Duty to God,
and their Obedience to the Laws: in which they had not showed themselves so
forward; as, of right, they ought. But this Course being like to be long in
running, and subject to more Heats and Co^ds, then the nature of the Business
could well comport with; the next ca^e was, to fi^l the Church with Abler, and
more Orthodox Clarks, as the Cures fell void. And, for an Example to the rest,
it was Ordered; That none should be presented unto any Benefice in the King's
Donation; either as in the Right of His Crown or by Promotion. Wardship, Lapse,
etc. till he had Preached before the King; and thereby passed H^s Judgment, and
Approbation. And it was much about this time, that Sermons at the Court were
increased also. For whereas formerly there were no Sermons at the Court, but in
time of Lent; and possibly on some ^ew of the greater Festivals; in which
re^pect six Chaplains were sufficient to attend in Ordinary: it was now
Ordered; That, from thenceforth, there should be Sermons every Sunday, for all
such as were so disposed, to resort unto.

But the Great business of this Year was the taking down of Altars, in many
places, by the Public Author^ty; which in some few had formerly been pulled
down, by the irregular forwardness of the Common People. The Principal Motive
whereunto was, in the first place, the Opinion of some d^slikes, which had been
taken by Calvin, against the Liturgy; and the desire of those of the Zuinglian
Faction, to reduce this Church unto the Nakedness and Simplicity, of those
Transmarine Chu^ches, which followed the H^lve^ian, or Calvinian Forms. For the
Advancement of which Work, it had been Preached by Hooper, abovementioned,
before the King, about the b^ginning of this year; That, It would be very well,
that it might please the Magistrate, to tu^n the Altars into Tables: according
to the first Institution of Christ; and thereby to take away the fal^e
persw^sion of the People, which they have of Sacrifices to be done upon the
Altars. Because (said he) as long as Altars remain, both the ignorant People,
and the ignorant, and evill-perswaded Pri^st, will dream always of Sacrifice.
This was enough* to put the thoughts of the Alteration into the Head of some
Great Men about the Court, who thereby promised themselves no small Hopes of
Profit, by the disfurnishing of the Altars of the Hangings, Palls, Plate, and
other Rich Vtensils; which every Parish, more, or less, had provided for them.
And that this Consideration might prevail upon them, as much, as any other, (if
perhaps not more) may be collected from an E^quiry* made about two years after.
In which, it was to be interrogated; What Jewels of Gold, and Silver, or Silver
Crosses, Candl^sticks, Censers, Chalices, C^pes, and other V^stments, were then
remaining, in any of the Cathedral, or Parochial Churches; or otherwise had
been embezelled, or taken away: the leaving ^f one Chalice to every Church,
with a Cloth, or Covering, for the C^mmunion-Table, being thought sufficient.

The matter being thus resolved on, a Letter comes to Bishop Ridley, in the
name of the King, Signed with His Royal Signet, but Subscribed by Sommerset,
and other of the Lords of the Council, concerning the taking down of Altars,
and setting up Tables in the stead thereof. Which Letter, because it relates to
somewhat, which was done before, in some of the Churches, and seems only to
pretend to an Uniformity in all the rest, I shall here subjoyn; that b^ing the
Chief Ground, on which so great an Alteration must be supposed to have been
raised. Now the Tenor of the said Letter is, as follows.

RIght-Reverend Father in God, Right-Trusty, and Well-Beloved; We Greet You
well: Whereas it is come to ^ur Kn^wl^dge; that being the Altars within the
more part of the Churches of the Realm, upon Good and Godly Considerations, are
taken down, there does yet remain Altars, standing in diverse other Churches; by
occasion whe^eof ^uch Vari^nce, and Contention, arises amongst sundry of Our
Subjects; which, if good Fo^e-sight were not had, might perhaps engen^er great
Hurt, and Inconvenience: We let you wit; that, minding to have all ^ccasions of
(...) taken away, which many times grows by th^se, and such l^ke Diversities
and considering, that, amongst other things, belongi^g to Our (...), an^ Care,
We do account the greatest to be, to m^intain the c^mmon Quiet of Our Re^lm; We
have thought Good, by the Advice of Ou^ C^urcil, to req^ire You, and
nevertheless especially to Charge, and C^mm^nd You, for the avoidi^g of all
m^tters of further (...) about the standing, or ta^ing away of the said (...),
to give (...) Order th^^ughout all Your Diocese; that, with al^ Dil^gence, all
the Altars, in every Church, or Chapel: as well in places Exempted* as not
Exempted, within Your said Dioce^s, be taken ^own; and in stead of them, a
Table to be set up, in some conven^ent part of the Chancel* within every such
Church, or Ch^p^l, to serve for the Ministration ^f the Bl^sted Communion. And,
to the intent, the same may be done, without the Offense of such Our Loving
Subjects, as be not, yet, so well persuaded in that behalf, as We ^ould wish,
We send unto You herewith certain Considerations, Gathered, and Collected, that
mak^ for the purpose. The which, and such others, as You shall think meet, to
be set forth to persuade the weak, to embrace Our Proc^edings in this part, We
pray You cause to be declared to the People by some discreet Preachers, in such
places, as You shall think ^eet, before the taking down of the said Altars: so,
as both the weak Consciences of others may be instructed, and satisfied, as
much as may be* and this Our Pleasure the more quietly Executed. For the better
doing whereof, We require You to open the fore^said Considerations, in that Our
Cathedral Church in Your own Person if You conveniently may; or, otherw^^e by
Your Chancellor or other Grave Preacher, both there, and in such other
Mark^t-Towns, and most Notable Places, of Your Diocese, as You may think most
requisite.


Which Letter, bearing Date on the twenty fourth of November, in the fourth
year of the King, was Subscribed by the Duke of Sommerset, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Admiral Clinton, the Earls of Warwick, Bedford, and
Wiltshire; the Bishop of Ely, the Lords Wentworth, and North.

Now the Effect of the said Reasons, mentioned in the last part of this Letter,
were; First, ^o move the People, from the Superstitions Opinions of the Popish
Mass, unto the right Use of the Lora's Supper. The Use of an Altar being, to
Sacrifice upon; and the Use of a Table, to Eat upon: and therefore a Table to
be f^r more (...) for Our feeding on Him* who was once only Crucified, and
Offered for us. Secondly, That, in the Book of Common Prayer, the name of
Alta^, the Lord's Board, and Table, are used indifferently, without presc^ibing
any thing in the Form thereof. For as it is called a Table, and the Lord's
Board, in reference to the Lord's Supper, which is there Administered, so it is
called an Altar also, in reference to the Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving, which is there ^ffer^d unto God. And so the changing the Altars
into Tables not to be any way repugnant to the Rules of the Liturgy. The third
Reason seems to be no other then an Illustration of the First, for taking away
the superstitious Opinion out of the Minds of the People, touching the
Sacrifice of the Mass, which was not to be Celebrated, but upon an Altar. The
Fourth, That the Altars were Erected for the Sacrifices of the Law; which being
now ceased, the Form of the Altar was to cease together with them. The Fifth,
That, as Christ did Institute the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, at a Table,
and not at an Altar, (as appears by the three Evangelists) so it is not to be
found, that any of the Apostles did ever use an Altar in the Ministration. And
finally, That, it is declared in the Preface to the Book of Common Prayer,
That, If any Doubt arise in the Use, and Practicing, of the said Book, that
then, to appease all such Diversity, the Matter shall be referred unto the
Bishop of the Diocese; who, by his Discretion, shall take Order for the
quieting of it.

The Letter with these Reasons being brought to Ridley, there was no time for
him to dispute the Commands of the one, or to examine the Validity, and
Strength of the other. And thereupon, proceeding shortly after to his first
Visitation, he gave out one Injunction, amongst others, to this Effect, That
Those Churches in his Diocese, where the Altars do remain, should conform
themselves unto those other Churches, which had taken them down; and that,
instead of the multitude of their Altars, they should set up one decent Table
in every Church. But this being done, a question afterward did arise, about
the Form of the Lords Board; some using it in the Form of a Table, and others
in the Form of an Altar. Which being referred unto the Determination of the
Bishop, he declared himself in favor of that Posture, or Position of it; which
he conceived most likely to procure an Uniformity in all his Diocese, and to be
more agreeable to the King's Godly Proceedings, in abolishing diverse vain, and
superstitious Opinions, about the Mass, out of the Hearts of the People. Upon
which Declaration, or Determination, he appointed the Form of a Right Table, to
be used in his Diocese; and caused the Wall standing on the back side of the
Altar, in the Church of Saint Paul's, to be broken down, for an Example to the
rest. And being thus a leading Case to all the rest of the Kingdom, it was
followed, either with a swifter, or a slower Pase; according as the Bishops in
their several Diocesses, or the Clergy in their several Parishes, stood
affected to it. No Universal Change of Altars into Tables, in all parts of the
Realm, till the Repealing of the First Liturgy, in which the Priest is
appointed, To stand before the midst of the Altar, in the Celebration; and
the establishing of the Second, in which it is required, That The Priest shall
stand on the North- side of the Table, had put an end to the Dispute.

Nor, indeed, can it be supposed, that all, which is before affirmed of Bishop
Ridley, could be done at once, or acted in so short a Space, as the rest of
this year: which could not give him time enough, to Warn, Commence, and carry
on a Visitation; admitting, that the Inconveniency of the Season might have
been dispensed with. And therefore I should rather think, that the Bishop,
having received His Majesty's Order in the end of November, might cause it to
be put in Execution in the Churches of London, and Issue out his Mandates to
the rest of the Bishops, and the Archdeacons of his own Diocese, for doing the
like i^ other Places within the compass of their several and Respective
Jurisdictions. Which being done, as in the way of Preparation, his Visitation
might proceed in the Spring next following; and the whole Business be
transacted, in Form, and M^nner, as before laid down. And this may be believed
the rather; because the changing of Altars into Tables is made by Holinshead, (
Fol. 1062.
) (a Diligent and Painful Writer) to be the Work of the next year: as,
questionless it needs must be, in all Parts of the Realm; except London, and
Westminster, and some of the Towns, and Villages, adjoining to them. But, much
less can I think, that the Altar-wall, in Saint Paul's Church, was taken down
by the Command of Bishop Ridley, in the Evening of Saint Barnaby's- Day this
present year; as is affirmed by ( Fol. ^ 604.
) John Stow. For then it must be done five Months, before the coming out of
the Order from the Lords of the Council. An. Reg. 5o. 1551.
Assuredly, Bishop Ridley was the Master of too great a Judgment, to run before
Authority, in a Business of such Weight, and Moment. And he had also a more
high Esteem of the Blessed Sacrament; then, by any such unadvised, and
precipitate Action, to render it less Venerable in the Eyes of the Common
People. Besides, whereas the taking down of the said Altar Wall is said to have
been done ^n the first Saint Barn^^y's- Day* which was kept Holy with the
Church: that Circumstance is alone sufficient, to give some Light to the
Mistake. The Liturgy, which appointed Saint Barnaby's- Day to be kept for an
Holy Day, was to be put in Execution in all parts of the Realm, at the Feast of
Whitsun-tide, 1549* and had actually been Officiated in some Churches, for some
Weeks before. So, that the first Saint Barnaby's Day, which was to be kept Holy
by the Rules of that Liturgy, must have been kept in that year also; and
consequently the taking down o^ the said Altar-Wall, being done ^n the Evening
of that day, must be supposed to have been done above ten Months, before
Bishop Ridley was Transl^ted to the Sea of London. Let therefore the keeping
Holy of the first Saint Barnaby's- Day be placed in the year 1549, the Issuing
of the Order from the Lords of the Council in the year 1550, and the taking
down of the Altar-Wall, on the Evening of Saint Barnaby's- Day, in the year
1551. And then all Inconveniences, and Contradictions, will be taken away,
which otherwise cannot be avoided.

No change this year amongst the Peers of the Realm, or Principal Officers of
the Court: but in the Death of Thomas Lord Wriothesly, the first Earl of
Southhampton* of that Name* and Family; who died at Lincoln-Place, in Hol^born,
on the thirtieth day of July: leaving his Son Henry, to succeed him in his
Lands, and Honors. A Man Unfortunate in his Relations to the two Great Persons
of that Time; deprived of the Great Seal by the Duke of Sommerset; and removed
from his Place at the Council Table by the Earl of Warwick: having first served
the Turns of the one, in lifting him into the Saddle; and of the other, in
dismounting him from that High Estate. Nor find I any great Change thi^ year
amongst the Bishops: but that Doctor Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of Rechester, was
Transloted to the Sea of London, on the twelfth of April; and Docto^r John
P^ynet, Cons^crated Bishop of Rochester, on the twenty sixth of June. By which
Account he must needs be the first Bishop* which received Episcopal
Consecration according to the Fo^m of the English Ordinal: as Farrars was the
first, who was advanced, unto that Honor, by the King's Letters Paten^s. As
for Ridley, we have spoke before; and as for Poynet, he is affirmed to have
been a Man of ver^ good Learning, with Reference to his Age, and the Time he
lived in: well studied in the Greek Tongue, and of no small Eminence in the
Arts, and Mathematical Sciences. A Change was also made in Cambridg by the
Death of Bucer: which I find placed, by F^x, on the twenty third of December;
by others, with more Truth, on the nineteenth of January (both in the Compass
of this year) and by some others, with less Rea^^n, on the tenth of March. But,
at wh^t time sover he died, certain it is, that he was most Solemnly Interred
in Saint Marie's- Church attended to Fu- his ^rave by all the Heads, and most
of the Graduates in that University: his ne^al Sermon Preached by D^ct^ur
Par^er, ^he first Archbishop of Canterbury in Queen Eliz^beth'^ Time: the
Panegyric made by one of the Haddons* a Man of a mo^^ Fluen^, and Rhetorical
S^yle: all that pretended to the Muses, in both Vniver^ities, setting forth his
great Worth, and their own Loss in him, with the best of their Poetry.

Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 5o. An. Reg. 5.o 1550/51
An. Dom. 1550, 1551.
WE must begin this year with the Deprivation of Bishop Gardener, whom we left
committed to the Tower the last of June in the year 1548. There he remained
almost two years, without being pressed to any particular Point: the yielding
unto which might procure his Liberty: or the Refusal justify such a long
Imprisonment. On the tenth of June, this year the Public Liturgy, now being
generally executed in all Parts of the Kingdom, was offered to his
Consideration; that some Experiment might be made, whether he would put his
Hand unto it, and promise to advance the Service. Upon the fourth day after,
the Duke of Sommerset, with five other of the Lords of the Council, was sent
unto the Tower to receive his Answer. Which he returned to this effect; That he
had deliberately considered of all the Offices contained in the
Common Prayer Book, and all the several Branches of it: That, Though he could
not have made it, in that Manner, had the Matter been referred unto him; yet,
that he found such things therein, as did very well satisfy his Conscience:
and therefore that he would, not only execute it in his own Person; but cause
the same to be Officiated by all those of his Diocese. But this was not the
Answer which the Courtiers looked for. It was their Hope, they should have
found him more averse from the King's Proceedings; that, making a Report of his
Perverseness, he might be lifted out of that Wealthy Bishopric: which, if it
either were kept Vacant, or filled with a more Tractable Person, might give
them opportunity to enrich themselves by the Spoil thereof. Therefore to put
him further to it, the Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Warwick; Sir William
Herbert, Master of the Horse; and Mr. Secretary Petre, are sent upon the ninth
of July, with certain Articles: which, for that end, were Signed by the King,
and the Lords of the Council. According to the Tenor hereof, he was not only
to testify his Consent to the Establishing of the Holy Days, and Fasting-Days,
by the King's Authority, the Allowance of the Public Liturgy, and the
Abrogating of the Statute for the Six Articles, etc. but to Subscribe to the
Confession of his Fault in his former Obstinacy, after such Form and Manner, as
was there required. To which Articles he Subscribed without any great
Hesitancy: but refused to put his Hand to the said Confession; There being no
reason, (as he thought; and so he answered those, which came unto him from the
Court on the Morrow after) that he should yield to the Conf^ssion of a Guilt,
when he knew himself Innocent.

He is now fallen into the Toil, out of which he finds but Little Hope of being
set free. For presently, on the neck of this, a Book of Articles is drawn up,
containing all the Alteration made by the King, and His Father, as well by Acts
of Parliament, as their own Injunctions, from the first Suppression of the
Monasteries, to the coming out of the late Form for the Consecration of
Archbishops, Bishops* etc. Of all which Doings he is required to signify his
Approbation, to make Confession of his Fault, with an Acknowledgment, that he
had deserved the Punishment, which was aid upon him. Which Articles (being
tendered to him by the Bishop of London, the Master of the Horse, Mr. Secretary
Petre, and Goodrick* a Counselor at Law) appeared to him, to be of such an
hard Digestion: that he desired first to be set at Liberty, before he should be
pressed to make a particular Answer. This being taken for a Refusal, and that
Refusal taken for a Contempt: the Profits of his Bishopric are Sequestered
from him, for three Months, by an Order of the Council Table, bearing date the
nineteenth of the Month, the said Profits, in the mean time, to be collected,
or received, by such Person, or Persons, as the King should thereunto appoint:
with this Intimation in the Close; that if he did not tender his Submission, at
the end of that Term, he should be taken for an Incorrigible Person, and unmeet
Minister of this Church, and, Finally to be procceeded against to a Deprivation.

The Term expired, and no such humble Submission, or Acknowledgment, made, as
had been required at his Hands; a Commission is directed to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Ely, and Lincoln, Sir William Peter, etc.
authorized thereby to proceed against him, upon certain Articles in the same
contained. Convented before whom at Lambeth, on the fifteenth of December, he
received his Charge. Which being received, he used so many Shifts, and found so
many Evasions to elude the Business; that, having appeared six Days before
them, without coming to a plain and Positive Answer, he was, upon the
fourteenth of February, Sentenced to a Deprivation, and so remitted to the
Tower. But Gardener did not mean to die so tamely, and therefore had no sooner
heard the Definitive Sentence; but presently he Protests against the same,
makes his Appeal unto the King; and causes both his said Appeal, and
Protestation, to be Registered in the Acts of that Court. Of all which he will
find a time to serve himself, in the Al^eration of Affairs.

It was presumed, that the Report of this Severity against a Man, so eminent
for his Parts and Place, would either bring such other Bishops, as had yet
stood out, to a fit Conformity; or otherwise expose both them, and their
Estates, to the like Condemnation. But some there were, so stiff in their old
Opinions: that neither Terror, nor Persuasion, could prevail upon them; either
to give their Approbation of the King's Proceedings; or otherwise to advance
the Service. And some there were; who, though they outwardly complied with the
King's Commands, yet was it done so coldly, and with such Reluctance, as la^'d
them open to the Spoil, though not to the Loss, of their Bishoprics. Of which
last Sort were; Kitching Bishop of Landaff, Salcot (otherwise called Capon)
Bishop of Salisbury, and Sampson of Coventry and Lichfield. Of which, the last,
to keep his ground, was willing to fling up a great part of his Lands; and, out
of those, which either belonged unto his See, or the Dean and Chapter, to raise
a Baron's Estate (and the Title of the Baronie too) for Sir William Paget, not
born to any such fair Fortunes, as he thus acquired. Salcot of Salisbury,
knowing himself obnoxious to some Court-Displeasures, redeems his Peace, and
keeps himself out of such Danger, by making long Leases of the best of his
Farms and Manours; known afterward most commonly by the Name of
Capons-Feathers. But none of them more miserably Dilapidated the Patr^mony of
his See, then Bishop Kitching of Landaff. A Church so liberally endowed by the
Munificence, and Piety, of some Great Persons in those Times; that if it were
possessed but of a tenth Part of what once it had, it might be reckoned (as is
affirmed by Bishop Godwine, one of Kitching's Successors) amongst the Richest
Churches in these Parts of Christendom. But whatsoever Kitching found it, it
was made poor enough, before he left it: so poor, that it is hardly able to
keep the Pot boiling for a Parson's Dinner.

Of the first Rank, I reckon Voysie of Exeter, Heath of Worcester, and Day of
Chichester; for the Province of Canterbury: together with Bishop Tonstal (...)
Durham, in the Province of York. The first, once Governor to the Princess
Mary, Preferred afterward, by King Henry, to the Lord-President-ship of Wales,
and the Sea of Exeter. Which See he found possessed, at his coming to it, of
twenty two goodly Manours, and fourteen Mansion-Houses, Richly furnished. But
the Man neither could approve the Proceedings of the King in the Reformation;
nor cared, in that respect, to Preserve the Patrimony of the Church, for those,
who might differ in Opinion from him. And being set upon the Pin, he made such
Havoc of his Lands, before he was brought under a Deprivation: that he left,
but seven or eight of the worst Manours, and those let out into long Leases,
and charged with Pensions; and not above two Houses, both bare and naked.
Having lost so much Footing within his Diocese, it is no marvail, if he could
no longer keep his Standing. For, being found an open Hinderer of the Work in
hand, and secretly to have fomented the Rebellion of the Devonshire-Men, in the
year 1549* he either was deprived of, or (as some say) resigned his Bishopric,
within few Months after the Sentence passed on Gardener: but lived to be
restored again, (as Gardener also was) in the Time of Queen Mary. Of Day, and
Heath, I have nothing to remember more particularly; but, that they were both
Deprived on the tenth of October, and lived both to a Restitution in Queen
Marie's Reign: Heath, in the mean time, being Liberally, and Lovingly
entertained by the Bishop of London, and afterward Preferred to the
Archbishopric of York, and made Lord Chancellor of England. Nor shall I now
say more of Tonstal; but, that, being cast into the Tower on the twentieth day
of December, he was there kept, until the Dissolution of his Bishopric by Act
of Parliament: of which we shall speak more at large, in its proper place.

We must not leave these Churches vacant; considering, that it was not long,
before they were supplied with new Incumbents. To Gardener, in the Sea of
Winton succeeded Doctor John Poynet, Bishop of Rochester: a better Scholar
then a Bishop; and purposely Preferred to that Wealthy Bishopric, to serve
other Men's Turns. For, before he was well warm in his See, he dismembered from
it the Goodly Palace of Marwel, with the Manours and Parks, of Marwel and
Twiford, which had before been seized upon by the Lord Protector, to make a
Knight's Estate for Sir Henry Seimour, as before was signified. The Palace of
Waltham, with the Park and Manor belonging to it, and some good Farms
depending on it, were seized into the hands of the Lord Treasurer Pawlet, Earl
of Wiltshire: who, having got into possession so much Lands of the Bishopric*
conceived himself in a fit Capacity to affect (as shortly after he obtained)
the Title of Lord Marquess of Winchester. But this, with many of the rest of
Poynet's Grants, Leases, and Alienations, were again recovered to the Church,
by the Power of Gardener; when, being restored unto his See, he was by Queen
Mary made Lord Chancellor. To Voysie, in the Sea of Exeter, succeeded Doctor
Miles Coverdale: one, who had formerly assisted Tyndal, in Translating the
Bible into English, and for the most part, lived at Tubing, an University
belonging to the Duke of Saxony; where he received the Degree of Doctor.
Returning into England, in the first year of King Edward, and growing into
great Esteem, for Piety, and Diligent Preaching, he was Consecrated Bishop of
this Church, the thirtieth of August: the Bones whereof were so clean picked,
that he could not easily leave them with less Flesh, then he found upon them.
Nor have we more to say of Scory, who succeeded Day: but, that being
Consecrated Bishop of Rochester, in the place of Poynet, on the thirtieth of
August also, he succeeded Day, at Chichester, in the year next following. Of
which Bishopric he was deprived of, in the Time of Queen Mary; and afterward
preferred by Queen Elizabeth to the Sea of H^reford, in which place he dyed. To
Heath, at Worcester, no Successor was at all appointed: that Bishopric being
given in Commendam to Bishop Hooper; who, having been Consecrated Bishop o^
Gloucester on the eighth of March, was made the Commendatory of this See: to
which he could not legally be Translat^d (as the Case then stood) both Latimer,
and Heath being st^ll alive, and both reputed Bishops of it, by their several
Parties. And here we have a strange Conversion of Affairs: for whereas
heretofore, the County of Gloucester was a part of the Diocese of Worcester, out
of which it was taken by King Henry, when first made a Bishopric; the Diocese
of Worcester was now laid to the Sea of Gloucester Not, that I think, that
Hooper was suffered to enjoy the Temporal Patrimony of that Wealthy Bishopric:
but that he was to exercise the Jurisdiction, and Episcopality, with some short
Allowance for his Pains. The Pirates of the Court were too intent on all
Advantages, to let such a Vessel pass untouched; in which they might both find
enough to enrich themselves, and yet leave that, which was sufficient to
content the Merchant. An^ this perhaps may be one Reason, why Latimer was not
restored unto his Bishopric, upon this Avoydance: not in regard of any
sensible Dislike, which was taken at him by the Court, for his downright
Preaching, or that the Bishops feared from him the like Disturbances, which
they had met withal in Hooper. But, I conceive, the Principal Reason of it
might proceed from his own Unwillingness, to cumber his old Age with the
Trouble of Business, and to take that Burden on his Shoulders; which he had,
long before, thrown off, with such great Alacrity And possible enough it is:
that, finding his Abilities more proper for the Pulpit, then they were for the
Consistory; he might desire to exercise himself in that Employment, in which he
might appear most serviceable, both to God, and his Church. For, both before,
and after this, we find him frequent in the Pulpit before the King, and have
been told of his Diligent and Constant Preaching in other places. His Sermons,
for the most part (as the use then was) upon the Gospels of the Day: by which
he had the Opportunity of Opening, and Expounding a greater Portion of the Word
of God; then if he had confined his Meditations to a single Text. His
Entertainment generally with Archbishop Cranmer; where he found all necessary
Accommodation: and so extremely honored by all sorts of People, that he never
lost the Name of Lord; and was still looked on, as a Bishop, though without a
Bishoptick.

But, notwithstanding the Remove of so many Bishops, there still remained one
Rub in the Way; which did as much retard the Progress of the Reformation, as
any of the rest, if not altogether. The Princess Mary, having been bred up,
from Her Infancy, in the Romish Religion* could not be won, by any Arguments,
and persuasions, to change Her Mind, or permit that any Alteration should be
made in those Public Offices; to which She had so long been used. The King had
writ many Letters to Her, in hope to take Her off from those Affections, which
She carried to the Church of Rome. The like done also by the Lords of the
Council, and with like Success. For, besides that She conceived Her Judgment
built on so good a Foundation, as could not easily be subverted; there were
some Politic Considerations: which possibly might prevail more with Her* then
all other Arguments. She was not to be told, That, by the Religion of the
Protestants, Her Mother's Marriage was Condemned; That by the same She was
declared to be Illigitimate; and Consequently, made incapable to succeed in the
Crown, in Case She should survive Her Brother. All which She must acknowledge,
to be legally and justly determined. Upon these Grounds, She holds Her self to
Her first Resolution, keeps up the Mass, with all the Rites, and Ceremonies
belonging to it, and suffers diverse Persons, besides her own Domestic
Servants, to be present at it. The Emperor had so far mediated in Her behalf,
that Her Chaplains were permitted to Celebrate the Mass in Her Presence: but
with this Cautio^ and Restriction; That, they should Celebrate the same in Her
Presence only. For the transgressing of which Bounds, Mallet, and Barkley, Her
two Chaplains were Committed Prisoners in December last: of which She makes
Complaint to the Lords of the Council; but finds as cold Return from Them, as
they did from Her.

A Plot is thereupon contrived: for conveying Her out of the Realm by Stealth,
to transport Her from Essex, where She then lay, to the Court of the Queen
Regent in Flanders; some of Her Servants sent before, Flemish Ships ready to
receive Her, and a Commotion to be raised in that County; that in the Heat, and
Tumult of it She might make Her Escape. The King is secretly advertised of this
Design, and presently dispatcheth certain Forces under Sir John Gates, then
newly made Lieutenant of the Band of Pensioners, to prevent the Practice,
secures His Coasts, orders His Ships to be in Readiness, and speeds away the
Lord Chancellor Rich, with Sir William Peter* to bring the Princess to the
Court. Which being effected at the last, though not without extreme
Unwillingness on Her part to begin the Journey; Inglesfield, Walgrave, and
Rochester, being all of Principal place about Her, on the thirtieth of
October* were commi^ted to Custody; which adds a new Affliction to Her, but
there was no Remedy. The Lords of the Council being commanded by the King to
attend upon Her, declared in the name of His Highness, how long He had
permitted Her the Mass; that, finding how unmovable She was from Her former
Courses, He resolved not to endure it longer, unless He might perceive some
hope of Her Conformity, within short time after. To which the Princess
Answered; That Her Soul was Goa's; and for Her Faith, that as She could not
change, so She would not d^ssemble it. The Council thereunto rejoyn; That the
King intended not to Constrain Her Faith* but to restrain Her in the outward
Profession of it: in regard of those many dangers, and inconveniences, which
might ensue on the Example. Which enterchange of words being passed, She is
appointed, for the present, to remain with the King: but neither Mall^t, nor
any other of Her Chaplains, permitted to have speech with Her, or access unto
Her.

The Emperor, being certified how all things passed, sends an Ambassador to
the King, with a Threatening Message: even to the Denouncing of a W^r; in case
his Cousin, the Princess Mary, were not permitted to enjoy the exercise of Her
own Religion. To Gratify whom in His desires, the Lords of the Council
generally seemed to be very inclinable; they well considered of the Prejudice,
which must fall upon the English Merchants, if they should lose their Trade in
Fl^^ders; where they had a whole year's cloth, beside other Goods. And they
knew well, what inconvenience must befall the King, who had there 500. Quintals
of Powder, and good store of Armor; which would be seized into the Emperor's
hands, and employed against Him, if any Breach should grow between them. The
King is therefore moved, with the joint Consent of ^he whole Board, to grant
the Emperor's Request: and to dispense with the utmost Rigor of the Law, in
that particular; for fear of drawing upon Himself a greater mischief. But they
found Him so well Studied in the Grounds and Principles of His Religion; that
no Consideration, drawn from any Reason of State, could induce Him to it. It
was thereupon thought fit, to send the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishop of London, being both Members of that Body, to try what they could do
upon Him, in the way of Argument. By them, the Point being brought unto such an
Issue* as might give them some hopes of being admited, it was Propounded to
Him, as their Opinion, (after some Progress made in the Disputation,) that,
Though it were a sin, to give License to sin; yet a connivance of it might be
allowed: in case it neither were too long, nor without some probable hope of a
Reformation. With which Nicety the young King was so unsatisfied, that he
declared a Resolution, rather to venture Life, and all things else, which were
dear unto Him: then to give way to any thing; which He knew to be against the
Truth. Upon which words, the King expressed His inward Trouble by a flood of
Tears; and the Bishops, on the sight thereof, wept as fast as He: the King
conceiving Himself wronged, in being so unreasonably pres^'d; and the Bishops
thinking themselves neglected, because unseasonably denied. Thus stood they
si^ent for a time: each Party looking sadly on the apprehension of those
Extremities, which this Dispute had brought upon them: as certainly, the
Picture of Unkindness is never represented in more lively Colors; then when it
breaks out betwixt those, who are most tenderly affected unto one another. The
Bishops thereupon withdrew, admiring at such great Abilities in so young a
King; and magnified the Name of God, for giving them a Prince of such Eminent
Piety.

This being made known unto the Council, it was thought necessary to dismiss
the Emperor's Ambassador with such an Answer; as should both give the English
time to fetch off their Goods, and let his Master have the ^^st of the Winter
to allay his Heats. It was therefore signified unto him; That, The King would
shortly send an Age^t to reside with the Emperor, Authourised, and ^^str^cted
in all particulars, which might beget a right Understanding between both
Princes. Thus answered, he returns to the Emperor's Court: whom Wotton shortly
after follows, ^ufficiently Instructed; To desire the Emperor to be less
violent in his requests; and to Advertise him, That, The Lady Mary, as She was
His Cou^sin, so She was the King's Sister, and, which is more, His Subject ^
That seeing the King was a Sovereign Prince, without dependency upon any but
God, it was not reason, that the Emperor should intermeddle, either with
Ordering His Subjects, or directing the Affairs of His Realm. But so far he was
Authourised to offer; That whatsoever favor the King's Subjects had in the
Emperor 's Dominions, for their Religion, the same should the Emperor 's
Subjects receive in England. Further then this, as the King, his Master, would
not go, so it would be a l^st labor to desire it of him. This was enough to
let the Emperor see, how little his Threats were feared, which made him the
less forward in sending more. Which Passages, relating to the Princess Mary, I
have laid together, for the better understanding, how all matters stood about
this time, betwixt Her, and the King; though possibly the sending of Wotton to
the Emperor might be the Work of the next year, when the King's Affairs were
better settled, then they were at the present.

For the King, finding the extraordinary Coldness of the Emperor, when his
assistance was required, for Defense of Bulloign, and the hot Pursuit of his
Demands of a Toleration, for the Family of the Lady Mary, conceived it most
expedient, for His Affairs, to unite Himself more strongly, and entirely, in a
League with France. For entrance whereunto, an Hint was taken from some Words,
which fell from Guidolti at the Treaty of Bulloign: when he propounded; That,
in stead of the Queen of Scots, whom the English Commissioners demanded for a
Wife to their King, a Daughter of the French King might be joined in Marriage
with Him: affirming merrily. That, If it were a dry Peace, it would hardly be
durable. These Words, which then were taken only for a Slight, or Diversion,
are now more seriously considered: as Many times the smallest Overtures produce
Conclusions of the greatest Consequence. A Solemn Embassy is thereupon
directed to the Court of France: the Marquess of Northhampton nominated for the
Chief Ambassador, associated with the Bishop of Ely; Sir Philip Hobby,
Gentleman Usher of the Order; Sir William Pickering; Sir Thomas Smith,
Principal Secretary of State, and Sir John Mason, Clerk of the Council; as
Commissioners with him. And, that they might appear in the Court of France with
the greater Splendor, they were accompanied with the Earls of Arundel,
Rutland, and Ormond; and the Lords, L'isle, Fitz-water, Abergavenny, Bray* and
Evers, with Knights, and Gentlemen of Note, to the number of six and twenty, or
thereabouts. Their Train so limited* for avoiding of contention amongst
themselves, that no Earl should have above four Attendants, no Baron above
three; nor any Knight, or Gentleman, above two a piece; the Commissioners not
being limited to any number, as the others were. Setting forwards in the Month
of June, they were met by the Lord Constable Chastition, and by him Conducted
to the Court, lying at Chasteau Bryan: the nearer to which as they approached,
the^ greater was the concourse of the French Nobility, to attend upon them.
Being brought unto the King, then being in his Bedchamber, the Marquess first
presented him, in the name of his King, with the Order of Saint George, called
The Garter: wherewith he was presently Invested by Sir Philip Hobby; who, being
an Officer of the Order, was made Commissioner (as it seemed) for that purpose
chiefly; rewarded for it by that King with a Chain of Gold, valued at two
hundred pounds* and a Gown, richly trimmed with Ayglets, which he had then upon
his back.

This Ceremony being thus performed; the Bishop of Ely, in a short Speech
Declared, How desirous his Master was, not only to continue, but to increase
Amity with the French King; that for this end He had sent the Order of The
Garter, to be both a Testimony, and Tie of Love between them; to which purpose
principally, those Societies of Honor were first devised: Declaring, that they
had Commission to make Overtures of some other matters, which was like to make
the Concord betwixt the Kings, and their Realms, not only more durable, but in
all expectation perpetual; and thereupon desired the King to appoint some
persons, enabled with Authourity, to Treat with them. To which it was Answered,
by the Cardinal of Lorrain, in the name of that King; That his Master was ready
to apprehend and embrace all Offers, tending to increase of Amity; and the
rather, for that long Hostility had made their new Friendship both more weak in
it self* and more obnoxious unto Jealousies, and Distrusts: and therefore
promised on the King's behalf, that Commissioners should be appointed to Treat
with them about any matters, which they had in Charge. In pursuance whereof,
the said Cardinal, the Constable Chastilion, the Duke of Guise, and others of
like Eminent note, being appointed for the Treaty; the English Commissioners
first prosecute their Old Demand for the Queen of Scots. To which it was
Answered by the French, That they had parted with too much Treasure, and spent
too many Lives, upon any Conditions, to let Her go: and that Conclusion had
been made, long before, for her Marriage with the Daulphin of France. The
English, upon this, proposed a Marriage between their King, and the Lady
Elizabeth, the Eldest Daughter of France (who after was Married to Philip the
Second) to which the French Commissioners seemed very inclinable; with this
Proviso notwithstanding, That neither Party should be bound, either in
Conscience, or Honor, until the Lady should accomplish twelve years of Age.

And so far Matters went on smoothly: but, when they came to talk of Portion,
there appeared a vast difference between them. The English Commissioners ask no
more, then fifteen hundred thousand Crowns; but fell, by one hundred thousand
after another, till they sunk to eight. The French on the other side began as
low, at one hundred thousand; but would be drawn no higher, then to Promise
two: that being (as they affirmed) the greatest Portion, which ever any of the
French Kings had given with a Daughter. But, at the last, it was accorded, that
the Lady should be sent into England at the French King's Charges, when She was
come within three Months of the Age of Marriage; sufficiently appointed with
Jewels, Apparel, and convenient Furniture for Her House; That, at the same
time, Bonds should be delivered for Performance of Covenants, at Paris by the
French, and at London by the King of England; and That, in case the Lady should
not consent, after She should be of Age for Marriage, the Penalty should be one
hundred and fifty thousand Crowns. The perfecting of the Negotiation, and the
settling of the Lady's Jointure referred to such Ambassadors, as the French
King should send to the Court of England. Appointed whereunto were the Lord
Marshal of France, the Duke of Guise, the President Mortuillier, the Principal
Secretary of that King, and the Bishop of Perigeux; who, being attended by a
Train of 400. men, were conducted from Graves-end by the Lord Admiral Clinton,
welcomed with Great Shot from all the Ships, which lay on the Thames, and a
Vollie of Ordnance from the Tower, and lodged in Suffolk-Place in South-wark.
From whence attended the next day to the King's House at Richmond: His Majesty
then remaining at Hampton Court, by reason of the Sweating Sickness (of which
more anon) which at that time was at the Highest.

Having refreshed themselves that night, they were brought the next day before
the King, to whom the Marshal presented, in the name of his Master, the Collar,
and Habit of St. Michael, being at that time the Principal Order of that Realm:
in testimony of that dear Affection, which he did bear unto him; greater then
which (as he desired him to believe) a Father could not bear unto his Natural
son. And then, Addressing himself in a short Speech unto His Highness, he
desired him, amongst other things, not to give entertainment to Vulgar Rumors,
which might breed Jealousies, and Distrusts, between the Crowns; and, that if
any difference did arise between the Subjects of both Kingdoms, they might be
ended by Commissioners, without engaging either Nation in the Acts of
Hostility. To which the King returned a very favorable Answer, and so
dismissed them for the present. Two, or three days being spent in Feasting, the
Commissioners on both sides settled themselves upon the matter of the Treaty;
confirming what had passed before, and adding thereunto the Proportioning of
the Lady's Jointure. Which was accorded at the last, to the yearly value of
ten thousand Marks English; with this Condition interposed, that, if the King
died before the Marriage, all her Pretensions to that Jointure should be buried
with him. All Matters being thus brought unto an happy Conclusion, the French
prepared for their Departure: at which Time the Marshal presented Monsieur
Boys, to remain as Legier with the King, and the Ma^quess presented Mr.
Pickering, to be his Majesty's Resident in the Court of France. And so the
French take leave of England, rewarded by the King in such a Royal and
Munificent Manner, as showed, he very well understood what belonged to a Royal
Suitour: those, which the French King had designed ^or the English
Ambassadors, (not actually bestowed, till all things had been fully settled,
and dispatched in England) hardly amounting to a fourth part of that
Munificence, which the King had showed unto the French.

Grown confident of his own Security, by this new Alliance, the King not only
made less Reckoning of the Emperor's Interposings in the Case of Religion; but
proceeded more vigorously, then before, in the Reformation: the Building up of
which upon a surer, and more durable Bottom, was contrived this year, though
not established till the next. Nothing as yet had been concluded positively,
and Dogmatically, in Points of Doctrine, but as they were to be collected from
the Homilies, and the Public Liturgy; and those but few, in Reference to the
many Controversies, which were to be maintained against the Papists,
Anabaptists, and other Sectaries of that Age. Many Disorders had grown up in
this little time; in the Officiating the Liturgy, the Vestures of the Church,
and the Habit of Churchmen, began by Calvin, prosecuted by Hooper, and
countenanced by the large Immunities, which had been given to John a Lasco, and
his Church of Strangers. And unto these, the change of Altars into Tables gave
no small Increase: as well by reason of some Differences, which grew amongst
the Ministers themselves upon that Occasion; as in regard of of that
Irreverence, which it ^bred in the People, to whom it made the Sacrament to
appear less Venerable, then before it did. The People had been so long
accustomed to receive that Sacrament upon their Knees; that no Rule, or Canon,
was thought necessary to keep them to it: which thereupon was not imprudently
omitted in the Public Rubricks. The Change of Altars into Tables, the Practice
of the Church of Strangers, and John a Lasco's Book in Maintenance of sitting
at the Holy Table, made ma^y think that Posture best, which was so much
countenanced. And, what was like to follow upon such a Liberty, the Proneness
of those Times to Heterodoxies, and Profaneness, gave just cause to fear.
Somewhat was therefore to be done to prevent the Mischief: and nothing could
prevent it better, then to reduce the People to their Ancient Custom by some
Rule, or Rubric, by which they should be bound to receive it kneeling.

So for the Ministers themselves, they seemed to be as much at a Loss in their
Officiating at the Table, as the People were in their Irreverences to the
Blessed Sacrament. Which cannot better be expressed, then in the words of some
Popish Prelates, by whom it was objected unto some of our chief Reformers. Thus
White of Lincoln charge it upon Bishop Ridley (to omit his profane calling
of the Lord's Table, in what Posture soever situated, by the Name of an
Oyster-Board) Acts and Mon.
That, when their Table was Constituted, they could never be content i^placing
the same; now East, now North, now one way, now another: until it pleased God,
of his Goodness, to place it quite out of the Church. The like did Weston (the
Prolocutour of the Convocation, in the first of Queen Mary) in a Disputation
held with Latimer; telling him with Reproach, and Contempt enough, that the
Protestants, having tur^ed their Table, were like a Company of Apes, that knew
not which way to turn their Tails* looking one day East, and another West; one
this way, and another that way, as their Fancies lead them. Thus finally, one
Miles Hubbard, in a Book, called The Display of Protestants Printed 1556. page
81.
does report the Business, How long (say they) were they learning to set their
Tables to minister the Communion upon? First they placed it aloft, where the
High Altar stood, then must it be removed from the Wall, that one might go
between: the Ministers being in Contention on whether part to turn their faces,
either toward the West, the North, or South; some would stand Westward, some
Northward, some Southward. It was not to be thought, but that the Papists would
much please themselves in these Disorders; and that this Difference, and
Diversity, though in Circumstance only, might draw contempt upon the Sacrament
it self, and give great Scandal unto many Moderate, and well meaning Men. A
Rubric therefore is resolved on, by which the Minister, which officiates,
should be pointed to a certain Place; and, by the Rubric then devised, the
North-side was thought fitter, then any other.

But the main Matters, which were now brought under Consideration, were the
reviewing of the Liturgy, and the Composing of a Book of Articles: this last
for the avoiding diversities of Opinions, and for the stablishing of Consent
touching true Religion; the other for removing of such Offenses, as had been
taken by Calvin, and his Followers, at some parts thereof. For Calvin, having
broke the Ice, resolved to make his way through it to the Mark he aimed at,
which was to have this Church depend upon his Direction, and not to be less
estimable here, then in other places. To which end, as he formerly had applied
himself to the Lord Protector, as appears by his Letter of the year An. 1549.
So now he sets upon the King, the Council, and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
in hope to bring them to his Bent. In his Letters to the King, and Council, (as
himself signified to Bullinger, on the 29th. of August) he exciteth them to
proceed to a Reformation; that is to say, to such a Reformation Vt eos
incitaremus ad pergendum. etc. page 98.
as he had projected, and without which his Followers would not be contented.
In his Letters to the King alone, he lets him know In statu Regni multa adhuc
desiderantur. page 384.
that many things were still amiss in the State of the Kingdom, which stood in
need of Reformation. And finally in those to Cranmer, he certifies him, that in
the Service of this Church, as then it stood, there remained a whole Mass of
Popery, which did not only Quae non obseuret modo, etc.
darken, but destory God's Holy Worship. But fearing he might not edify with
so wise a Prince, assisted by such a Prudent Council, and such Learned Prelates,
he has his Agents in the Court, the Country, and the Universities, by whom he
drives on his Design, in all parts at once. And so far he prevailed in the
first two years, that in the Convocation, which began in the former year, An.
1550, the first Debate amongst the Prelates was of such Doubts, as had arisen
about some things contained in the Common Prayer Book and more particularly
touching such Feasts, as were retained, and such, as had been abrogated by the
Rules thereof; the Form of Words used at the giving of the Bread, and the
different Manner of Administering the Holy Sacrament. Which being signified unto
the Prolocutour, and the rest of the Clergy, who had received somewhat in
Charge about it the day before; Answer was made, that they had not yet
sufficiently considered of the Points proposed, but that they would give their
Lordships some account thereof in the following Session. But what account was
given, appears not in the Acts of that Convocation; of which there is nothing
left upon Record, but this very Passage.

For the avoiding of these Doubts, the satisfying of the Importunities of some,
and rectifying the Disorders of Others, rather then in regard of any Impiety,
or Impertinency in the Book it self, it was brought under a Review; and being
so reviewed was ratified, and confirmed by Act of Parliament, in the following
year. By the Tenor of which Act it may appear, First, That there was nothing
contained in the said First Book, but what was agreeable to the Word of God,
and the Primitive Church, very comfortable to all good People, desiring to live
in Christian Conversation, and most profitable to the Estate of this Realm.
Secondly, That such Doubts, as had been raised in the use and exercise thereof,
proceeded rather from the Curiosity of the Minister, and Mistakers, then of any
other Worthy Cause. And therefore Thirdly, That^ it was found expedient, that
the said Bo^k should be faithfully perused, explained, and made fully perfect
in all such places, in which it was necessary to be made more earnest, and fit
for the stirring up of all Christian people, to the true honoring of Almighty
God. So far we are directed by the Light of this Act of Parliament, 5. 6. Edw.
6. cap. 1. But, if we would desire to know the Names of those good and Godly
Men, by whom it was so explained, and altered, in that it leaves us in the
dark: none of them being named, nor any way la^d open for the finding of them.
So that the most, that can be done* is to go by Conjecture, and to ascribe it
to those Men; who had first composed it, and who were afterward Authorized,
for drawing up the Form of Consecration, etc. annexed to this new Book, as a
part thereof, and so adjudged to be by two Acts of Parliament.

For the avoiding of Diversities of Opinions, and for stablishing Consent,
touching true Religion, it was thought necessary to compose a Book of Articles:
in which should be contained the Common Principles of the Christian Faith, in
which all Parties did agree; together with the most material Points, in which
they differed. For the better performing of which Work, Melancthon's Company,
and Assistance, had been long desired. That he held Correspondence once with
the King, and Archbishop Cranmer, appears by his Epistles of the year 1549,
1550, and 1551. but that he came not over, as had been expected, must be
imputed, either to our homebred Troubles, or the great Sickness of this year,
or the deplorable Death of the Duke of Sommerset, on whose Integrity, and
Candor, he did most rely. Yet the best was, that, though Erasmus was dead, and
Melancthon absent, yet were they to be found both alive, and present in their
learned Writing^. By which, together with the Augustan Confession, the
Composers of those Articles were much directed; not, that they looked upon them
as the Rule, or Canon, but only as subservient helps to promote the Service.
But, who they were, that labored in this weighty Work, and made it ready for
Debate, and Conference, in the next Convocation; as I have no where found, so I
cannot conjecture: unless perhaps, we may attribute the Honor of it to those
Bishops, and the other Learned Men; before remembered, whose Hands and Heads had
before been exercised in the public Formulas. That Cranmer had a great hand in
them, is a thing past question; who therefore takes upon himself, as the
Author of them: for which Consult the Acts and Mon. fol. 1704. In which, we
are to understand him, as the principal Architect, who contrived the Building,
and gave the inferior Workmen their several parts, and Offices, in that great
Employment; and not, that it was the sole work of his Hands, or had been
agitated and debated in no Head, but his. So did the Emperor Justinian, in the
Book of Institutes, and Theodosins in the Code, Bo^iface in the Decretals, and
John the 22th. in that part of the Canon Law, which they call the Extravagants:
the honor of which Works was severally arrogated by them; because performed by
their Encouragement, and at their Appointment. But whosoever labored in the
Preparation of these Articles, certain it is, that they were only a Rude
Draught, and of no signification* till they had passed the V^te of the
Convocation; and there we shall hear further of them.

In Reference to the Polity, and good Order of the Commonwealth, there were
two things done of great Importance: the one redounding to the Present, the
other to the Future Benefit of the English Nation. Of which last sort, was the
suppressi^g of the Corporation of Merchant-Strangers, the Merchants of the
Steel-Yard, as they commonly called them. Concerning which we are to know, that
the English, in the Times foregoing, being neither strong in Shipping, nor much
accustomed to the Seas, received all such Commodities, as were not of the
growth of their own Country, from the hands of Strangers, resorting hither,
from all Parts, to upbraid our Laziness. Amongst which, the Merchants of the
East-Land ^arts of Almain, or High Germany, (well known in former Stories by
the Name of Easterlings,) used to bring hither, yearly, great quantities of
Wheat, Rye, and other Grain, as also Cables, Ropes, Masts, Pitch, Tar, Flax,
Hemp, Linen Cloth, Wain^coats, Wax, Steel, and other profitable Merchandises,
for the use of this Kingdom. For their Encouragement wherein they were amply
Privileged, exempt from many Impositions, which Merchant-Strangers use to pay
in all other Countries, erected into a Corporation by King Henry the Third,
commonly called Guilda Aula Theutonicorum; permitted first to carry out Wools
unwrought, and afterward a certain number of Clothes, when the English were
grown skillful in that Manufacture. Their Court kept in a fair large House
built near the Thames, which from an open place, wherein Steel had formerly
been sold, took the Name of the Steel-Yard. Grown Rich, and driving a great
Trade, they drew upon themselves the Envy (as all other Merchant-Strangers did)
of the Londoners chiefly, but generally of all the Port Towns of England, who
began now to think the Seas as open to them, as to any others. It was
considered also, by the Lords of the Council, that by suffering all Commodities
of a Foreign growth, and a great part of the Commodities of the growth of
England, to be imported, and exported in Outlandish Bottoms, the English
Merchants were discouraged from Navigation, whereby the Shipping of the Realm
was kept low, and despicable. It was therefore thought expedient, in Reason of
State, to make void their Privileges, and put the Trade into the hands of the
English Merchant. For the doing whereof, the Easterlings, or Merchants of the
Steel-Yard, had given cause enough. For, whereas they had anciently been
permitted to ship away but eighty Clothes, afterward one hundred, and at last
one thousand; it was found, that, at this time, they had transported, in their
own Bottoms, 44000 English Cloat^^, there being but 1100 shipped away, by all
Strangers else. It was also found, that, besides the Native Commodities of
their own growth, they had brought in much Strangers goods, of other Count^ies,
contrary to their agreement, made with King Edward the F^urt^; and that, upon a
further search, their Corporation was found imperfect, their Numbers, Names,
and Nations not sufficiently known. This gave the Council ground enough for
seizing all their Liberties into the hands of the King, and never after to
restore them; notwithstanding the great Embassies and Solicitations of the
Cities of Hamborough, and Lubeck, and many other of the Hans-Towns in Germany,
who had seen their Factories, and Factours. And hereunto the seasonable coming
of Sebastian Cabot (of which more anon) gave no small Advantage: by whose
Encouragement, and Example, the English Nation began to fall in Love with the
Seas, to try their Fortunes in the Discovery of unknown Regions, and
consequently to increase their Shipping; till by degrees, they came to drive a
wealthy Trade in most parts of the World, and to be more considerable for their
Naval Power, then all their Neighbors.

But because all things could not be so well settled at the first, as not to
need the Help, and Correspondencies of some foreign Nations, it was thought fit
to ^earken to an Intercourse with the Crown of Sweden; which was then
Opportunely offered by Gustavus Ericus, the first of the Family now reigning.
By which it was agreed,

First, That, if the King of Sweden sent Bullion into England, He might carry
away English Commodities without Custom.

Secondly, That He should carry Bullion to no other Prince.

Thirdly, That, if He sent Ozimus, Steel, Copper, etc. He should pay Custom for
English Commodities, as an Englishman.

Fourthly* That, if He sent other Merchandise, He should have free Intercourse;
paying Custom, as a Stranger.

Wh^reupon the Mint was set on work, which brought the King, for the first
year, the sum of twenty four thousand Pounds; of which the sum of fourteen
thou^and pounds was designed for Ireland, and the rest laid up in the
Exchequer: some other ways were devised also, that the Mint might be kept
going, and some agreement made with the Mint-Masters, in the Point of Coynage:
which proved more to the Advantage of the King, then the present profit of the
Subject. For, hereupon, on the ninth of July, the base Money, Coined in the
time of the King deceased, was publicly decryed by Proclamation* the Shilling
to go for Nine Pence only, and the Groat for Three Pence. And, on the
seventeenth of August then next following, the Nine-Peny-piece was decryed to
Six Pence, the Groat to Two Pence, the Half-Groat to a Penny. By means whereof,
he, that was worth one thousand pound on the eighth of July, without any
ill-husbandry in himself, or diminution of his stock, was found, before the
eighteenth day of August, to be worth no more then half that Sum; and so
proportionably in all other Sums, both above, and under* Which, though it
caused many an heavy heart, and much repining at the present, amongst all
those, whose Wealth lay most especially in Trade, and Money; yet proved it by
degrees a chief Expedient, for reducing the Coin of England to it is ancient
Value. For, on the thirtieth of October, the Subjects had the taft of the
future benefit, which was to be expected from it; there being then some Coyns
Proclaimed, both in Gold, and Silver: Pieces of thirty shillings, ten
shillings, and five shillings, of the finest Gold; pieces of five shillings,
two shillings six pence, one shilling six pence, etc. of the pure^t Silver.
Which put the Merchant in good hope, that he should drive as rich a Trade under
this young King, as in the happiest days of his Predecessors, before the Money
was debased.

And now we come to the great Troubles in the Court, began in the Destruction
of the Duke of Sommerset: but ending in the untimely death of this Hopeful
King; so signified (as it was thought, upon the Post-Fact) by two strange
Presages within the compass of this year, and one, which followed in the next.
The first, of this year, was a great and terrible Earthquake, which happened on
the twenty fifth of May, at Croydon, and some other Villages thereabouts, in
the County of Surrey. This was conceived to have Prognosticated those
Concussions, which afterward happened ^n the Court, to the fall of the Great
Duke of Sommerset, and diverse Gentlemen of Note, and Quality, who perished in
the same ruin with him. The last was of six Dolphins, taken up in the Thames,
three of them at Queen Borough, and three near Grenwich; the least as big as
any Horse. The Rarity whereof occasioned some Grave men to dispense with their
Prudence, and some Great Persons also to put off their State, that they might
behold a Spectacle, so unusual to them. Their coming up so far, beheld by
Mariners, as a Presage of foul weather at Sea; but afterward by Statesmen, of
those Storms, and Tempests, which afterward befell this Nation, in the Death
of King Edward, and the Tempestuous Times of Queen Marie's Reign.

But the most sad Presage of all was the Breaking out of a Disease, called the
Sweating Sickness; appearing first at Shrewsbury, on the fifteenth of April,
and after spreading by degrees over all the Kingdom; ending its Progress in the
North, about the beginning of October. Described by a very Learned Man, to be a
new, strange, and violent Disease: wherewith if any man were attached, he dyed,
or escaped within nine hours, of ten at most; if he slept, (as most men desired
to do) he dyed within six hours, if he took cold, he dyed in three. It was
observed to Rage chiefly amongst men of strongest Constitution, and years: few
aged Men, or Women, or young Children, being either subject to it, or dying of
it. Of which last sort, those of most Eminent Rank, were two of the Sons of
Cha^ls Brandon: both dying at Cambridg, both Dukes of Suffolk (as their Father
had been before;) but the youngest following his dead Brother so close at the
Heels, that he only outlived him long enough to enjoy that Title. And, that,
which was yet most strange of all, no Foreigner, which was then in England
(four hundred French attending here, in the Hottest of it, on that King's
Ambassadors) did perish by it. The English being singled out, tainted, and
dying of it in all other Countries, without any danger to the Natives; called
therefore, in most Latin Writers, by the name of Sudor Anglicus, or The
English Sweat. First known amongst us, in the beginning of the Reign of King
Henry the Seventh; and then beheld, as a Presage of that troublesome, and
Laborious Reign, which after followed: the King being for the most part in
continual Action; and the Subjects, either sweating out their Blood, or
Treasure. Not then so violent, and extreme, as it was at the present; such
infinite Multitudes being at this time swept away by it, that there died eight
hundred in one week in London only.

These being looked on as Presages, we will next take a view of those sad
Events, which were supposed to be prognosticated by them; beginning first with
the Concussions of the Court by open Factions, and ending in a Sweating
Sickness; which drew out some of the best Blood, and most Vital Spirits of the
Kingdom. The Factions Headed by the Duke of Sommerset, and the Earl of Warwick:
whose reconciliation, on the Earl's part, was but feigned, and counterfeit;
though he had both given, and taken Pledges for a faster Friendship. The good
success he found in his first attempt against the Duke, when he degraded him
from the Office of Lord Protector, emboldened him to make some further trial
of his Fortune; to which there could not be a stronger Temptation, then the
Servility of some Great Men about the Court, in prostituting their affection to
his Pride, and Tyranny. Grown absolute in the Court (but more by the weakness
of others, then any virtue of his own he thought it no impossible matter, to
make that Weakness an improvement of his strength, and Power. And, passing from
one Imagination to another, he fixed at last upon a Fancy of transferring the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, from the Royal Family of the Tudors, unto that of
the Dudlies. This to be done, by Marrying one of his Sons to the Lady Jane, the
eldest Daughter of Henry, Lord Marquess Dorset, and of the Lady Francis his
Wife, one of the Daughters, and Coheirs of Charles Brandon, the late Duke of
Suffolk, by Mary, Dowager of France, and the be^t-beloved Sister of King Henry
the Eighth. In order whereunto, he must first oblige the Marquess by some
signal favor; advance himself to such a Greatness, as might render any of his
Sons an agreeable match for either of the Marquess's Daughters; and finally
devise some means, by which the Duke of Sommerset might be took out of the way:
whose life he looked on, as the principal Obstacle to his great Aspirings. By
this Design, he should not only satisfy his Ambition, but also sacrifice to
Revenge. The Execution of his Father, in the first year of the Reign of the
late King Henry, would not out of his mind; and by this means he might have
opportunity to execute his just vengeance on the King's Posterity, for the
unjust Murder (as he esteemed it) of his innocent Father. Confirmed in these
Resolves by Sir John Gates, Lieutenant of the Band of Pensioners; who was
reported afterward to have put this Plot into his Head at the first, as he
stood to him in the prosecution of it to the very last.

The Privy Council of his own thoughts having thus advised, the Privy Council
of the King was in the next place to be made sure to him; either obliged by
Favors, or gained by Flatteries: those of most Power to be most Courted,
through a smooth Countenance, fair Language, and other thriving Acts of
insinuation, to be made to all. Of the Lord Treasurer Paulet he was sure
enough: whom he had found to have so much of the Willow in him, that he could
bend him how he pleased. And being sure of him, he thought himself as sure of
the Public Treasure, as if it were in his own Pockets. The Marquess of
North-hampton was Captain of the Band of Pensioners, increased in Power, though
not in Place; by ranging under his Command, as well the Light Horse, as the Men
at Arms, which had served at Bulloign. With him the Earl had peeced before,
drew him into his first Design, for bringing down the Lord Protector to a
lower Level: but made him faster then before, by doing so many good Offices to
Sir William Herbert, who had Married his Sister. Which Herbert, being son of
Richard Herbert of Ewias, one of the Bastards of William Lord Herbert of
Ragland, the first Earl of Pembroke of that House, was, of himself, a Man of a
daring Nature, Boisterously bold, and, upon that account, much favored by King
^enry the Eighth growing into ^ore Credit with the King, in regard of the Lady
Ann his Wife, the Sister of Queen Kat^^in Par, and having mightily raised
h^ms^lf in the fall of Abbeys, he was made chief Gentleman of the
Privy-Chamber, and by that Title ra^ked amongst the Executours of the King's
last Will, and then appointed to be one of the Council to the King now
Reigning. Being found by Dudly, a fit man to advance his ends, he is by his
Procurement grat^fi^d (for I know not what Service, unless it were for
furthering the Sale of Bulloign) with some of the King's Lands, amounting to
five hundred pounds in yearly Rents, and made Lord Pr^sident of Wales, promoted
afterward to the place of Master of the Horse, that he might be as
considerab^e in the Court, as he was in the Country. It was to be presumed,
that he would not be wanting unto him, who had so preferred him. By these three
all Affairs of Court were carried: plot^ed by Dudley, smoothed by the Courtship
of the Marquess, and executed by the bold hand of the new Lord President.

Being thus fortified, he revives his former Quarrel with the Duke of
Sommerset; not that he had any just ground for it, but that he looked upon him
as the only Block, which lay in the way of his Aspirings, and therefore was to
be removed by what means soever. Plots are laid therefore to entrap him,
Snares to catch him, Reports raised him, as a Proud, and Ambitious Person, of
whose Aspirings there would be no other end, then the Crown it self, and common
Rumors spread abroad, that some of his Followers had Proclaimed him King in
several places, only to find how well the People stood affected to it. His
Doors are watched, and Notice took of all, that went in and out, his Words
observed, made much worse by telling, and aggravated with all odious
Circumstances to his Disadvantage. No way untravailed in the Arts of Treachery,
and Fraud, which might bring him into Suspicion with the King, and Obloquie
with the common People. The Duke's Friends were not ignorant of all these
Practices, and could not but perceive, but that his Ruin, and their own, was
projected by them. The Law of Nature bound them to preserve themselves: but
their Adversaries, were too cunning for them at the Weapon of Wit, and had too
much Strength in their own Hands, to be easily overmastered in the way of
Power. Some dangerous Counsels were thereupon infused into him, (more likely by
his Wife, then by any other) to invite these Lords unto a Banquet, and either
to kill them as they sat, or violently to drag them from the Table, and cut of
their Heads; the Banquet to be made at the Lord Page^'s Horse, near Saint
Clement's Church, and one hundred stout Men to be lodged in Sommerset-Place,
not far off, for the Execution of that M^rther. This Plot confessed (if any
Credit may be given to such Confessions) by one Crane, and his Wife, both great
in the Favor of the Duchess, and with her committed. And after just^fied by
Sir Thomas Palmer, who was committed with the Duke, in his Examination taken by
the Lords of the Council. There were said to be some Consultations also, for
raising the Forces in the North, for setting upon the Gens'd arms, which served
in the Nature of a Lifeguard (as before was said) upon some day of
General-Muster: two thousand Foot, and one hundred Horse of the Duke's being
designed unto that Service; and that, being done, to raise the City, by
Proclaiming Liberty. To which it was added by Hammond, one of the Duke's false
Servants, That his Chamber at Greenwich had been strongly guarded by Night, to
prevent the Surprisal of his Person.

How much of this is true, or whether any of it be true or not, it is not easy
to determ^ne, though possibly enough it is, that all this Smoke could not be
without some Fire: which whosoever kindled first, there is no doubt, but that
Earl Dudly blew the Coals, and made it seem greater then it was. Of all these
Practices, and Designs (if such they were) the Earl is con^tantly advertised by
his Espials, whom he had among^^ them; and gave them as much Lin^, and Leisure,
as they could desire, till he had made all things ready for the Executing of
his own Projectments. But first there must be a great day of bestowing Honors:
as well for gaining the more Credit unto him, and his Followers; as, by the
jollity of the Time, to take away all Fear of Danger from the Opposite Party.
In Pursuit whereof, Henry Lord Gray, Marquess of Dorset, descended from
Elizabeth, Wife of King Edward the Fourth, by Her former Husband, is made Duke
of Suffolk: to which he might pretend some Claim* in Right of the Lady Frances,
his Wife* the eldest Daughter of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, and Sister of
Henry an^ Charles, the two late Dukes thereof, who dyed a few Months since, at
Cambridg, of the Sweating Sickness. The Earl himself, for some Reasons very
well known to himself, and not unknown to many others, is made Duke of
Northumberland: which Title had lain Dormant, ever since the Death of Henry
Lord Percy, the sixth Earl of that Family, who dyed in the year 1537. or
thereabouts: of whom more anon. The Lord Treasurer Pawlet, being then Earl of
Wiltshire, is made Marquess of Winchester: Sir William Herbert created at the
same time Lord Herbert of Cardiff, and E^rl of Pembroke. Some make Sir Thomas
Darcie, Captain of the Guard, to be advanced unto the Title of Lord Darcy of
Chich on the same day also: which others place, perhaps more rightly, on the
fifth of April. The Solemnity of which Creations being passed over, the Order
of Knighthood is conferred on William Cecil Esquire, one of the Secretaries of
Estate; John Cheek, Tutour, or Schole-Master to the King; Henry Dudley, and
Henry Nevil, Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber. At, or about which time, Sir
Robert Dudley, the third Son of the new Duke of N^rthumberland, (but one, which
had more of the Father in him, then all the rest) is sworn of the Bed^Chamber
to the King; which was a place of greatest Trust, and Nearness to His
Majesty's Person.

The Triumphs of this Day, being the eleventh day of October, were but a
Porlogue to the Tragedy, which began on the fifth day after. At what time the
Duke of Sommerset, the Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Palmer, Sir Ralph Vane, Sir Thomas
Arundel, together with Hammond, Newdigate, and two of the Seimours, were seized
on, and committed to Custody; all of them, except Palmer, Vane, and Arundel,
being sent to the Tower. And these three kept in several Chambers, to attend
the pleasure of the Council, for their Examinations. The Duchess of Sommerset,
Crane, and his Wife, abovementioned, and one of the Gentlewomen of her
Chamber, were sent unto the Tower on the morrow next; followed not long after
by Sir Thomas Holdcroft, Sir Miles Partridg, Sir Michael Stanhop, Wingfield,
Banister, and Vaughan, with certain others: for whose Commitment there was
neither cause known, nor afterward discovered. Only the greater Number raised
the greater Noise, increased the Apprehension of the present Danger, and served
to make the Duke more Criminal in the Eyes of the People, for drawing so many
of all sorts into the Conspiracy. Much time was spent in the Examination of
such of the Prisoners, as either had before discovered the Practice (if any
such Practice were intended) or were now fitted, and instructed, to betray the
Duke into the Power, and Malice of his Enemies. The Confessions which seemed of
most importance, were those of Palmer, Crane, and Hammond; though the Truth,
and Reality, of the Depositions may be justly questioned. For, neither were
they brought, face to face, before the Duke, at the time of his Trial; as in
ordinary course they should have been: nor suffered loss of Life, or Goods, as
some others did, who were no more guilty then themselves. And yet the Business
stai*d not here; the Earl of Arundel, and the Lord Paget, and two of the Earl
of Arundel's Servants, being sent Prisoners after the rest, upon Crane's
detection. It was further added by Palmer, that, on the last St. George's-Day,
the Duke of Sommerset, being upon a journey into the North, would have raised
the People; if he had not been assured by Sir William Herbert, that no Danger
was intended to him.

Six Weeks there passed between the Commitment of the Prisoners, and the Duke's
Arraignment: which might have given the King more, then leisure enough to find
the depth of the Design; if either he had not been directed by such, as the new
Duke of Northumberland had placed about him, or taken by a Solemnity, which
served fi^ly for it. For so it happened, that the Queen Regent of Scotland,
having been in France to see Her Daughter, and being unwilling to return by
Sea, in that cold time of the year, obtained leave of the King (by the
mediation of the French Ambassador) to take Her journey through England. Which
leave being granted, She put Her self into the Bay of Portsmouth, where She was
Honorably received, and conveyed toward London. From Hampton Court She passed
by Water, on the second day of November, to St. Paul's- Wharf. From whence She
rode, accompanied with diverse Noble Men, and Ladies of England, besides Her own
Train of Scotland, to the Bishop's-Palace. Presented at Her first coming
thither, in the name of the City, with Muttons, Beefs, Veals, Poultry, Wine,
and all other sorts of Provisions, necessary for Her Entertainment, even to
Bread, and Fuel. Having reposed Her self two days, She was conveyed in a
Chariot to the Court at White Hall, accompanied with the Lady Margaret
Douglass, Daughter of Margaret, Queen of Scots, by Her second Husband; together
with the Duchesses of Richmond, Suffolk, and Northumberland; besides many other
Ladies of both Kingdoms, which followed after in the Train. At the Court-Gate
She was received by the Dukes of Suffolk, and Northumberland, and the Lord
High-Treasurer, the Guard standing on both sides, as She went along; and being
brought unto the King, whom She found standing at the end of the Great Hall,
She cast Her self upon Her knees, but was presently taken up, and Saluted by
Him, according to the Free Custom of the English Nation. Leading Her by the
Hand to the Queen's Chamber of Presence: He Saluted in like manner all the
Ladies of Scotland, and so departed for a while. Dinner being ready, the King
conducted Her to the Table prepared for them, where they dined together, but
had their Services apart. The Ladies of both Kingdoms were fea^ted in the
Queen's Great Chamber, where they were most Sumptuously Served. Dinner being
done, that Her Attendants might have time to partake of the Entertainment, the
King showed Her His Gardens, Galleries, etc. and, about four of the clock, He
brought Her down by the Hand into the Hall, where He Saluted Her, and so She
departed to the Bishop's-Pa^ace, as before.

Departing toward Scotland, on the sixth of that Month, She rode through all
the Principal Streets of London; betwixt the Bishop's House, and the Church in
Shore-ditch, attended by diverse Noble Men, and Women, all the way She went. But
more particularly the Duke of Northumberland showed himself with one hundred
Horse, each having his Javelin in his hand; and forty of them apparelled in
Black Velvet, Guarded with White and Velvet Caps, and White Feathers, and
Chains of Gold about their Necks. Next to these stood one hundred and twenty
Horsemen, of the Earl of Pembroke's, with black Javelins, Hats, and Feathers.
Next to them one hundred of the Lord Treasurer's Gentlemen, and Yeomen, with
Javelins. These ranks of Horsemen reaching, from the Cross in Cheap Side, to
the end of Birching-Lane in Cornhill. Brought as far as Shoreditch-Church, She
was committed to the care of the Sheriffs of London, by whom She was attended
as far as Wal^ham. Conducted in like manner by the Sheriffs of all the
Counties, through which She passed, till She came unto the Borders of Scotland:
Her Entertainment being provided by the King's appointment, at the Charge of
the Counties. Which Passages, not being otherwise Material in the Course of
this History, I have adventured to lay down; the better to express the
Gallantry, and Glory of the English Nation, before Puritanism, and the Humor
of Parity, occasioned the neglect of all the laudable Solemnities, which
anciently had been observed, both in Church, and State.

The Discourse, raised on this Magnificent Reception of the Scottish Queen, so
filled all Mouths, and entertained so many Pens, that the Danger of the Duke of
Sommerset seemed for a time to be forgotten; but it was only for a time. For,
on the first of December, the Duke being brought by water to Westminster Hall,
found all things there prepared for his Arraignment. The Lord High-Steward, for
the time, was the Marquess of Winchester, who took his place under a Cloth of
Estate, raised three steps higher, then the rest of the Scaffold. The Peers, to
the number of twenty seven, sitting one step lower. Amongst these were the Duke
of Northumberland, the Marquess of North-hampton, and the Earl of Pembroke:
who, being Parties to the Charge, ought, in all Honesty, and Honor, to have
excused themselves, from sitting in Judgment on him, at the time of his Trial.
But no Challenge, or Objection, being made, or allowed against them, they took
place with the rest. The Court being sat, and the Prisoner brought unto the
Bar, the Charge against him was divided into five Particulars: viz. Fir^^, His
design of Raising men in the North- Parts of the Realm, and of assembling men
at his House, to kill the Duke of Northumberland. 2. A resolution to assist his
Attachment. 3. The Plot for killing the Gens d' Arms. 4. His intent for raising
London. 5. His purpose of assaulting the Lords, and devising their Deaths. The
whole Impeachment managed in the name of Treason, and Felony: because in all
Treasons the intent, and purpose is as Capital, as the Act it self, if once
discovered, either by word, or deed, or any other material Circumstance, though
it go no further. But, though Treason made the loudest noise, it was the
Felony, which was especially relied upon, for his Condemnation. Two Statutes
were pretended for the Ground of the whole Proceedings. The first made in the
time of King Henry the Seventh, by which it was Enacted, to be Felony, for any
inferior Person, to contrive the death of a Lord of the Council. The second,
that of the last Session of Parliament, By which it was Declared, to be
Treason, for any Twelve Persons, or more, to Assemble together, with an intent
to murder any of the Lords of the Council: if, after Proclamation made, they
dissolved not themselves, within the space of an hour.

The Indictment being Read, and the Confessions of Palmer, and the rest, being
produced, and urged by the King's Council, (who spared not to press them, as is
accustomed in such Cases) to the best advantage. The Duke, though much
dismayed, returned this Answer to the Branches of his Accusation: viz. That He
never intended to raise the North- Parts of this Realm; but that, upon some
bruits, he apprehended a Fear, which made him send to Sir William Herbert, to
remain his Friend; That He determined not to kill the Duke of Northumberland,
nor any other Lord: but spoke of it only, and determined the contrary; That It
had been a mad enterprise, with his hundred men, to assail the Gens d' Arms,
consisting of nine hundred: which, in case he had prevailed, would nothing have
advanced the pretended purpose; That Therefore this b^ing senseless, and
absurd, must needs discredit other matters: which otherwise might have been
believed; That At London he never projected any stir: but ever held it a good
place for his security; That, For having men in his Chamber at Greenwich, it
was manifest, that he meant no harm: because, when he might have done it, he
did not. And further, against the persons of them, whose Examinations had been
read, he objected many things; desiring, that They might be brought to his
face: which, in regard of his Dignity, and Estate, he conceived to be
reasonable. And so it happened unto him, as with many others; that, hoping to
make his fault seem less, by a fair Confession, he made it great enough to
serve for his Condemnation.

For, presently upon these words, the Council, thinking they had matter enough,
from his own Confession, to convict him of Felony, insisted chiefly on that
Point, and flourished out their Proofs upon it, to their best Advantage. But
so, that they neglected not to aggravate his Offense in the Treason also: that
his Peers might be under some necessity of finding him guilty in the one; if
they should find themselves unsatisfied, for passing their Verdict in the
other. And though neither the one, nor the other, were so clear in Law, as to
make him liable to a Sentence of Condemnation: if either the Statute in the
Contents had been rightly opened, or the Opinion of the Judges demanded in
them; yet what cannot the Great Wit of some Advocates do, when they have a mind
to serve their Turn upon a Stat^te, contrary to the Mind and Meaning of them
that made it. The Duke of Northumberland, thereupon, with a Counterfeit Modesty
(conceiving that he had him fast enough, in Respect of the Felony) desired
their Lordships, that no Act against his life might be brought within the
Compass of Treason; and they who understood his meaning at half a Word, after a
full hearing of the Evidence, withdrew themselves into a Room appointed for
them: and after some Conference amongst themselves, acquitting him of Tre^son,
they pronounced him guilty of the Felony only; which being returned for their
Verdict, by all the Lords one after another, in their Rank and Order, and
nothing objected by the Duke, that Judgment should not pass upon him, the Lord
High Steward, with a seeming Sorrow, gave Sentence, That he should be had to
the Place from whence he came, from thence to the Place of Execution, and there
to hang while he was dead; which is the Ordinary Form of condemning Felons. A
Matter not sufficiently to be admired, that the Duke should either be so
ignorant, or ill advised, so destitute of present Courage, or so defective in
the Use of his Wit, and Judgment, as not to crave the common Benefit of his
Clergy; which had he done, it must have been allowed him by the Rules of the
Court: whether it were, that of his own Misfortunes might render him incapable
of laying hold on such Advantages, as the Laws admitted; or that he thought it
better to die once for all, then living in a perpetual Fear of dying daily by
the malicious Practices and Devises of his powerful Adversaries; or that he
might presume of a Pardon of Course, in regard of the nature of the Offense, in
which neither the King, nor the Safety of the Kingdom was concerned, and that
the Law, by which it was found guilty of Felony, had never been put in
Execution upon a man of his Quality, if perhaps at all; or finally, whether it
were some secret Judgment on him from above (as some men conceived) that he who
had destroyed so many Churches, invaded the Estate of so many Cathedrals,
deprived so many Learned Men of their Means, and Livelihood, should want, (or
rather not desire) the Benefit of the Clergy, in his greatest extremity. In
stead whereof he suffered Judgment of death to pass upon him, gave thanks unto
the Lords for his gentle Trial* craved Pardon of the Duke of Northumberland,
the Marquess of North-hampton, and the Earl of Pembroke, for his ill Meaning
toward them; concluding with an humble Suit for his Life, and Pity to be
showed to his Wife and Children.

It is an ancient Custom in the Trial of all great Persons accused of
Treason, that the Ax of the Tower is carried before them to the Bar, and
afterward at their Return from thence, on the Pronouncing of the Sentence of
Condemnation. Which Ceremony not being performed at his going thence, in regard
he was condemned of the Felony only, gave an occasion unto such as had
thronged into the Hall, and knew not otherwise how things passed, to conceive
that he had been acquitted absolutely of the whole Indictment. And thereupon so
loud a Shout was made in the lower end of the Hall, that the noise thereof was
heard beyond Charing Cross, to the great Terror and Amazement of his guilty
Adversaries. But little pleasure found the Prisoner in these Acclamations, and
less, the People, when they understood of his Condemnation: so that departing
thence with grief, they left the way open for the Prisoner to be carried by
water, to the Cranes in the Vi^etry, and from thence peaceably conveyed to the
Tower again. Not long after followed the Arraignment of Sir Michael Stanhop,
Sir Thomas Arundel, Sir Ralph Vane, and Sir Miles Partridge, on whom also
passed the Sentence of Death; but the certain Day and Time of their Trial. I
have no where found. Most probable it is, that they were not brought to their
Trial, till after the Ax had done its part on the Duke of Sommerset, which was
on the twenty third of January, because I find they were not brought to their
Execution till the twenty sixth of February then next following, the two first
being then beheaded, and the two last hanged, at what time they severally
Protested, (taking God to witness) that they never practiced Treason against
the King, or against the Lives of any of the Lords of his Council; Vane adding
after all the rest, that his Blood would make Northumberland's Pillow uneasy
to him. None of them less lamented by the Common People, then Sir Miles
Partridge, against whom they had an old Grudge, for depriving them of the best
Ring of Bells, which they had at that time, called Jesus-Bells; which winning
of King Henry at a Cast of Dice, he caused to be taken down, and sold, or
melted for his own Advantage. If any Bell tolled for him when he went to his
Death, or that the sight of an Halter made him think of a Bell-Rope, it could
not but remember him of his Fault in that Particular, and mind him of calling
upon Christ Jesus, for his Grace and Mercy.

But in the mean time, Care is taken, that the King should not be too
apprehensive of these Misfortunes into which his Uncle had been cast; or enter
into any Enquiries, whether he had been cast into them by his own Fault, or the
Practices of others. It was therefore thought fit to Entertain him frequently
with Masks, and Dancings, brave Challenges at Tilts, and Barriers, and
whatsoever Sports and Exercises, which they conceived most pleasing to him. But
nothing seemed more delightful to him, then the appearing of His Lords, and
others in a General Muster, performed on the twenty third of December, in Saint
James his Fields. At what time sitting on Horseback with the Lords of His
Council, the Band of Pensioners in complete Arms, with four Trumpeters, and the
King's Standard going before them, first appeared in sight: each Pensioner
having two Servants waiting on him with their several Spears. Next followed, in
distinct Companies of one hundred apiece, the Troops of the Lord Treasurer
Paulet, the Duke of Northumberland, the Lord Privy Seal, the Marquess of
North-hampton, the Earl of Pembroke, and the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports: a
Trumpet and a Standard carried before each Troop; forty of the Duke of
Northumbeland's Men, and as many of the Earl of Pembroke's, having Velvet Goats
upon their Harness; with these were mingled in like Equipage, (as to the
Trumpets, and the Standards) the distinct Troops of the Earls of Rutland, and
H^ntington, and the new Lord Darcy, consisting each of fifty Horse, and Rancked
according to the Order, and Precedence of their several Lords. All which rode
twice before the King, by five in a Rank, all excellently well Armed, and
bravely Mounted, to the great Contentment of the King, the Delight of the
People, and as much to the Honor of the Nation, in the Eye of all such
Strangers, as were present at it. But then the Lords of England, were Lords
indeed, and thought it not consistent with a Title of Honor, to walk the
Streets, attended by a Lacquie only, and perhaps not that, The Particulars of
which Glorious Muster had not been specified, but for supplying the Place of
Music, (as the Solemn Reception of the Queen Regent did before) betwixt the
two last Acts of this Tragedy, to the last whereof we shall now come, and so
end this year.

Two Months had passed since the Pronouncing of the Fatal Sentence of
Condemnation, before the Prisoner was brought out to his Execution. In all
which time it may be thought, that he might easily have obtained his Pardon of
the King, who had passed the first years of His Reign under his Protection, and
could not but behold him with the Eye of Respect, as his^nearest Kinsman by the
Mother, But first his Adversaries, had so possessed the King with an Opinion of
his Crimes, and Misdemeanors, that he believed him to be guilty of them: as
appears by his Letter to Fitz-Patrick, (for which Consult the Church Historian.
Lib. 7. fol. 409, 410.) wherein he Summarily repeateth the Substance of the
Charge, the Proofs against him, the Proceedings of the Lords in the
Arraignment, and his Submiss Carriage, both before, and after the Sentence.
They also filled his Ears with the Continual Noise of the Unnatural Prosecuting
of the late Lord Admiral; inculcating, how unsafe it was to trust to the
Fidelity of such a Man, who had so lately washed his Hands in the Blood of his
Brother. And, that the King might rest himself upon these Persuasions, all ways
were stopped, and all the Avenues blocked up, by which it might be possible for
any of the Duke's Friends to find access, either for rectifying the King's
Opinion, or obtaining his Pardon. So that at last, upon the twenty second of
January before-remembred (the King not being sufficiently possessed before of
his Crimes, and Cruelties) he was brought to the Scaffold on Tower Hill. Where
he avouched to the People: That, His In^tentions had been not only harmless,
in regard of particular Persons, but driving to the Common Benefit, both of the
King, and of the Realm. Interrupted in the rest of his Speech, upon the sudden
^ear of a Rescue, by the coming in of the Hamlets on the one side, and the
Hopes of a Pardon, which the People conceived to have been brought him by Sir
Anthony Brown, who came speedily galloping on the other, he composed himself at
last to make a Confession of his Faith, heartily praying for the King,
exhorting the People to Obedience, and humbly craving Pardon both of God, and
Man. Which said, he cheerfully submitted his Head to the stroke of the Ax, by
which it was taken off at a Blow; putting an end thereby to his Cares and
Sorrows.

Such was the End of this Great Person, whose Power and Greatness may be best
discerned by this following Style, used by him in the Height of his former
Glories: that is to say, Edward, by the Grace of God, Duke of Sommerset, Earl
of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp, Baron Seimour, Uncle to the King's Highness of
England, Governor to the King's Highness Person, Protector of all his Realms,
Dominions, and Subjects, Lieutenant General of His Majesty's Armies, both by
Sea, and Land, Lord High Treasurer, and Earl Marshal of England, Captain of
Isles the of Garnsey, and Jarsey, and Knight of the most Honorable Order of
the Garter. As to his Parts, Person, and Ability, there needs no other
Character of him, then what was given in the beginning, and may be gathered
from the Course of this present History. More Moderate in carrying on the Work
of Reformation, then those, who after had the Manageing, and Conduct of it, as
one, that, in himself, was more inclinable to the Lutheran (but where his
profit was concerned in the spoil of Images) then th^^ Zuinglian Doctrines: so
well beloved in general by the Common People, that diverse dipped their
Handkerchiefs in his Blood, to keep them in perpetual Remembrance of him. One
of which, being a sprightly Dame, about two years after, when the Duke of
Northumberland was led through the City, for his opposing the Title of Queen
Mary, ran to him in the Streets, and, shaking out her bloody Handkerchief
before him, Behold (said she) the Blood of that worthy man, that good Uncle of
that Excellent King, which shed by thy malicious Practice, does now begin
apparently to revenge it self on thee. The like Opinion also was conceived of
the business by the most understanding men in the Court, and Kingdom; though
the King seemed for the present to be satisfied in it. In which opinion they
were exceedingly confirmed by the Enlargment of the Earl of Arundel, and
restoring of Crane, and his Wife, to their former Liberty; but most especially
by the great Endearments, which afterward appeared between the Duke of
Northumberland and Sir Thomas Palmer, and the great confidence, which the Duke
placed in him for the Advancement of his Projects, in behalf of the Duke of
Suffolk: of which more hereafter.

But the Malice of his Enemies stayed not here, extending also to his Friends,
and Children, after his Decease: but chiefly to the eldest Son by the second
Wife; in favor of whom, an Act of Parliament had been passed in the thirty
second year of the late King Henry, for the entailing on his Person all such
Lands, Estates, and Honors, as had been, or should be purchas^d by his Father,
from the twenty fifth day of May, then next foregoing. Which Act they caused to
be repealed, at the end of the next Session of Parliament (which began on the
morrow after the Death of the Duke) whereby they stripped the young Gentleman,
being then about thirteen years of Age, of his Lands, and Titles; to which he
was in part restored by Queen Elizabeth: who, in pity of his Father's
Suff^rings, and his own Misfortunes, created him ^arl of Hertford, Viscount
Beauchamp, etc. Nor did the Duke's Fall end it self in no other ruin, then that
of his own house, and the Death of the four Knights, which suffered on the same
account; but drew along with it the ^emoval of the Lord Rich, from the Place,
and Office, of Lord Chancellor. For so it happened, that the Lord Chancellor,
commiserating the Condition of the Duke of Sommerset, though formerly he had
showed himself against him, dispatched a Letter to him, concerning some
Proceedings of the Lords of the Council, which he thought fit for him to know.
Which Letter being hastily superscribed, To the Duke, with no other Title, he
gave to one of his Servants, to be carried to him. By whom, for want of a more
particular direction, it was delivered to the hands of the Duke of Norfolk.
But, the Mistake being presently found, the Lord Chancellor knowing into what
hands he was like to fall, makes his Address unto the King, the next morning
betimes; and humbly prays, that, in regard of his great Age, he might be
discharged of the Great Seal, and Office of Chancellor. Which being granted by
the King, though with no small difficulty; the Duke of Northumberland, and the
Earl of Pembroke, (forward enough to go upon such an Errand) are sent, on the
twenty first of December, to receive the Seal; committed on the morrow after to
Doctor Thomas Goodwin, Bishop of Ely, and one of the Lords of the Privy
Council. Who afterward, that is to say, on the two and twentieth of January,
was sworn Lord Chancellor; the Lord Treasurer Paulet giving him the Oath, in
the Court of Chancery.

Next followed the Losses, and Disgraces, suffered by the Lord Paget, on the
Duke's account. To whom he had continued faithful in all his Troubles; when
Sir William Cecil, who had received greater Benefits from him, and most of the
Dependants on him, had either deserted, or betrayed him. His House designed to
be the place, in which the Duke of Northumberland, and the rest of the Lords
were to be murdered at a Banquet: if any credit may be given to the
Informations; for which Committed to the Tower, as before is said. But having
no sufficient Proof, to warrant any further Proceeding to his Condemnation, an
Enquiry is made not long after into all his Actions. In the return whereof, it
was suggested; That he had sold the King's Lands, and Woods, without
Commission; That he had taken great Fines for the King's Lands, and applied
them to his proper use; and That he had made Leases in Reversion, for more then
one and twenty years. Which Spoil is to be understood of the Lands and Woods of
the Duchy of Lancaster, of the which he was Chancellor; and for committing
whereof, he was not only forced to resign that Office, but condemned in a fine
of six thousand pounds; not otherwise to be excused, but by paying of four
thousand pounds within the year. This Punishment, was accompanied with a
Disgrace, no less grievous to him, then the loss both of his Place, and Money.
He had been chosen into the Society of the Garter, An. 1548. when the Duke of
Sommerset was in Power, and so continued, till the fifteenth of April, in the
year next following, Anno 1552. At what time Garter, King of A^ms, was sent to
his Lodging in the Tower, to take from him the Garter, and the George,
belonging to him, as a Knight of that most Noble Order. Which he suffered
willingly to be done, because it was His Majesty's Pleasure, that it should so
be. More sensible of the Affront, without all question, then otherwise he would
have been, because the said George, and Garter, were presently after sent, by
the King to John, Earl of Warwick, the Duke of Northumberland's eldest Son,
Admitted thereupon into that Society. So prevalent are the Passions of some
Great Persons; that they can neither put a measure upon their Hatred, nor an
end to their Malice. Which two last Passages, though more properly belonging to
the following year, I have thought fit to place in this; because of that
dependence, which they have on the Fall of Sommerset.

The like Ill-Fortune happened, at the same time also* to Doctor Robert
Farrar, Bishop of St. David's; who, as he had his Preferments by him, so he
suffered also in his Fall: not because Guilty of the Practice, or Conspiracy
with him, as the Lord Paget, and the rest, were given out to be; but because he
wanted his Support, and Countenance, against his Adversaries. A Man he was of
an unsociable disposition, rigidly self-willed: and one, who looked for more
Observance, then his place required; which drew him into a great disl^ke with
most of his Clergy, with none more, then the Canons of his own Cathedral. The
Faction headed, amongst others, by Doctor Thomas Young, then being the
Chantour of that Church, and afterward advanced by Queen Elizabeth to the Sea
of York; as also Doctor Rowland Merick, preferred by the same Queen to the Sea
of Bangor: though they appeared not visibly in the Information, which was made
against him. In which I find him charged amongst other things, for Celebrating
a Marriage, without requiring the Married Persons to receive the Communion,
contrary to the Rubric in the Common Prayer Book; for going ordinarily abroad
in a Gown, and Hat, and not in a Square Cap, as did the rest of the Clergy; for
causing a Communion Table, which had been placed, by the Official of
Caer-marthen, in the middle of the Church, (the High Alltar being then
demolished) to be carried back into the Chancel, and there to be disposed of,
in, or near the place, where the Altar stood; for suffering many Superstitious
U^ages to be retained amongst the people, contrary to the Laws in that behalf:
But chiefly for exercising some Acts of Episcopal Jurisdiction, in his own
name, in derogation of the King's Supremacy; and grounding his Commissions, for
the exercise thereof, upon foreign, and usurped Authority. The Articles, fifty
six in number; but this last, as the first in Rank, so of more Danger to him,
then all the re^t, preferred against him, but not prosecuted, as long as his
great Patron, the Duke of Sommerset, was in place, and Power. But, he being on
the sinking hand, and the Bishop too stiff to come to a Compliance with those,
whom he esteemed beneath him; the Suit is followed with more noise, and
violence, then was consistent with the credit of either Party. The Duke being
dead, the four Knights Executed, and all his Party in Disgrace, a Commission is
Issued, bearing Date the ninth of March, to enquire into the Merit of the
Articles, which were charged against him. On the return whereof, he is Indicted
of a Pr^^munire, at the Assizes held in Caer-marthen, in the July following;
committed thereupon to Prison, where he remained all the rest of King Edward's
time; never restored to Liberty, till he came to the Stake* when all his
Sufferings, and Sorrows, had an end together. But this Business has carried us
too far into the next year of this King: to the beginning whereof we must now
return.

Anno Regni Edw. Sexti 6o. An. Dom. 1551, 1552. An. Reg. 6o. 1552.

WE must begin the sixth year of the King with the fourth Session of
Parliament, though the beginning of the fourth Session was some days before;
that is to say, on the twenty third day of January, being the next day after
the Death of that Great Person. His Adversaries possibly could not do it
sooner, and found it very unsafe to defer it longer, for fear of being
overruled in a Parliamentary way, by the Lords, and Commons. There was Summoned
also a Convocation of the Bishops, and Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, to
begin upon the next day after the Parliament. Much business done in each, as
may appear by the Table of the Statutes made in the one, and the passing of the
Book of Articles as the Work of the other. But the Acts of this Convocation
were so ill kept, that there remains nothing on Record, touching their
Proceedings, except it be the names of such of the Bishops, as came thither to
Adjourn the House. Only I find a Memorandum, that, on the twenty ninth of
this present January, the Bishopric of Westminster was dissolved, by the
King's Letters Patents; by which the County of Middlesex, which had before been
laid unto it, was restored unto the Sea of London: made greater then in former
times, by the Addition of the Arch-Deaconry of St. Alban's; which, at the
dissolution of that Monastery, had been laid to Lincoln. The Lands of
Westminster so dilapidated by Bishop Thirlby, that there was almost nothing
left to support the Dignity; for which good service, he had been preferred to
the Sea of Nor^ich, in the year foregoing. Most of the Lands invaded by the
Great men of the Court, the rest laid out for Reparation to the Church of St.
Paul; pared almost to the very quick, in those days of Rapine. From hence first
came that significant Byword (as is said by some) of Robbing Peter, to pay
Paul. But this was no Business of that Convocation, though remembered in it.

That which most specially does concern us in this Convocation, is the
settling, and confirming of the Book of Articles, prepared by Archbishop
Cranmer, with the assistance of such Learned men, as he thought fit to call
unto him, in the year last past; and now presented to the consideration of the
rest of the Clergy. For, that they were debated, and agreed upon in that
Convocation, appears by the Title of the Book, where they are called, A^ticuli,
de quibus in Synodo Londinensi, An. Dom. 1552, etc. that is to say, Articles,
Agreed upon in the Synod of London, An. 1552. And it may be concluded from that
Title also, that the Convocation had devolved their Power on some Grand
Committee, sufficiently Authourised to Debate, Conclude, and Publish what they
had Concluded in the name of the rest. For there it is not said, as in the
Articles Published in Queen Elizabeth's time, An. 1562. That they were agreed
upon by the Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole-Clergy,
in the Convocation holden at London; but that they were agreed upon, in the
Synod of London* by the Bishops, and certain other Learned Men; inter
Episcopos, and ^lios Eruditos viros, as the Latin has it. Which seems to make
it plain enough, that the debating, and concluding of the Articles, contained
in the said Book, was the Work only of some Bishops, and certain other Learned
men: sufficiently empowered for that end, and purpose. And being so empowered
to that end and purpose, the Articles, by them concluded, and agreed upon, may
warrantably be affirmed, to be the Acts, and Products of that Convocation;
Confirmed, and Published for such by the King's Authority (as appears further
by the Title Regia Authoritate in lucem Ed^ti.
in due form of Law. And so it is resolved by Philpot, Archdeacon of
Winchester, in behalf of the Catechism, which came ^ut An. 1553. with the
Approbation of the said Bishops, and Learned men. Against which, when it was
objected by Doctor Weston, Prolocutour of the Convocation, in the first of
Queen Mary; that the said Catechism was not set forth by the Agreement of that
House; it was Answered by that Reverend, and Learned man; That The said House
had gran^ed the Authority, to make Ecclesiastical Laws, unto certain Persons,
to be appointed by the King's Majesty; and therefore, whatsoever Ecclesiastical
Laws* they, or the most part of them did set forth, (according to the Statute
in that behalf provided) might be well said to be done in the Synod of London.

And this may also be the Case of the Book of Articles, which may be truly, and
justly said to be the Work of that Convocation: though many Members of it never
saw the same, till the Book was published; in regard (I still use Philpot's
words in the Acts and Mon. Fol. 1282.) that they had a Synodal Authority unto
them committed, to make such Spiritual Laws, as to them seemed to be n^c^ssary,
or convenient for the use of the Church. Had it been otherwise, King Edward, a
most Pious, and Religious Prince must needs be looked on, as a Wicked and most
Lewd Impostour, in putting such an horrible Cheat upon all His Subjects, by
Fathering these Articles on the Convocation, which begat them not, nor ever
gave consent unto them. And yet it is not altogether improbable, but that these
Articles being debated, and agreed upon, by the said Commitee, might also pass
the Vote of the whole Convocation, though we find nothing to that purpose in
the Acts thereof, which either have been lost, or were never Registered.
Besides, it is to be observed that the Church of England, for the first five
years of Queen Elizabeth, retained these Articles, and no other, as the public
Tenants of the Church in point of Doctrine; which certainly She had not done,
had they been commended to Her by a less Authority, then a Convocation.

Such hand the Convocation had in canvasing the Articles, prepared for them,
and in concluding, and agreeing to so much, or so many of them, as afterward
were published by the King's Authority in the name thereof. But whether they
had any such hand in Reviewing the Liturgy, and passing their Consent to such
Alterations, as were made therein, is another Question. That some necessity
appeared both for the Reveiwing of the whole, and the altering of some Parts
thereof has been showed before: And it was showed before by whose Procurement,
and Solicitation, the Church was brought to that necessity of doing somewhat
to that Purpose. But being not sufficiently Authorized to proceed upon it,
because the King's sole Authority did not seem sufficient, they were to stay
the Leisure, and Consent of the present Parliament. For being the Liturgy then
in force had been confirmed and imposed by the King in Parliament, with the
Consent, and Assent of the Lords and Commons, it stood with Reason, that they
should not venture actually on the Alteration, but by their permission first
declared. And therefore it is said expressly in the Act of Parliament made this
present year, That The said Order of Common Service, Entitled The Book of
Common Prayer, had been Perused, Explained, and made fully perfect: not single
by the King's Authority, but by the King, with the Assent of the Lords and
Commons. More then the giving of their Assent, was neither required by the
King, nor desired by the Prelates; and less then this could not be fought, as
the Case then stood. The signifying of which Assent enabled the Bishops, and
the rest of the Clergy, whom they had taken for their Assistants, to proceed to
the Digesting of such Alterations, as were before considered, and resolved on,
amongst themselves; and possibly might receive the like Authority from the
Convocation, as the Articles had, though no such thing remaining upon Record in
the Registers of it. But whether it were so, or not, certain it is, that it
received as much Authority, and Countenance* as could be given unto it by an
Act of Parliament; by which imposed upon the Subject under certain Penalties
(Imprisonments, Pecuniarie Mulcts, etc.) which could not be inflicted on them
by Synodical Acts.

The Liturgy being thus Settled, and Confirmed in Parliament, was by the
King's Command translated into French, for the Use of the Isles of Guernsey,
and Jersey, and such as lived within the Marches, and Command of Calais. But no
such Care was taken for Wales, till the fifth year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth: nor of the Realm of Ireland, from that time to this. King Henry had
so far prepared the Way to a Reformation, as His own Power, and Profit was
concerned in it; to which Ends he excluded the Pope's Authority, and caused
Himself to be declared Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of Ireland, by Act
of Parliament. And by like Acts he had annexed to the Crown the Lands of all
Monasteries, and Religious Orders: together with thetwentieth Part of all the
Ecclesiastical Promotions within that Kingdom; and caused the like Course to be
settled for the Electing, and Consecrating of Archbishops, and Bishops, as had
been done before in England. Beyond which, as he did not go; so, as it seems,
King Edward's Council thought not fit to adventure further. They held it not
agreeable to the Rules of Prudence, to have too many Irons in the Fire at once:
nor safe, in Point of Policy, to try Conclusions on a People in the King's
Minority, which were so far tenacionsly addicted to the Superstitions of the
Church of Rome, and of a Nature not so tractable, as the English were. And yet
that Realm was quiet, even to Admiration, notwithstanding the frequent
Embroilments, and Commotions, which so miserably disturbed the Peace of
England: which may be reckoned for one of the greatest Felicities of this
King's Reign, and a strong Argument of the Care, and Vigilance of such of His
Ministers, as had the chief Direction of the Irish Affairs. At the first
Payment of the Money for the Sale (rather then the Surrendry) of Bulloign:
eight thousand pounds was set apart for the Service of Ireland; and shortly
after out of the Profits, which were raised from the Mint, four hundred men
were Levied, and sent over thither also; with a Charge given to the Governors,
that the Laws of England should be Carefully, and Duly administered, and all
such as did oppose, suppressed: by Means whereof great Countenance was given to
those, who embraced the Reformed Religion there: especially within those
Counties, which are called commonly by the name of the English Pale. The
Common Prayer Book of England, being brought over thither, and used in most of
the Churches of the English Plantation, without any Law in their own
Parliaments to impose it on them. But nothing more conduced to the Peace of
that Kingdom, then that the Governors for the most part were men of such
Choice; that neither the Nobility disdained to endure their Commands, nor the
inferior sort were oppressed, to supply their Wants. Besides which, as the
King drew many men from thence to serve him in his Wars against France, and
Scotland, which otherwise might have disturbed the common Peace; so, upon
notice of some great Preparations, which were made in France for the Assistance
of the Scots, he sent over to guard the Coast of Ireland, four Ships, four
Barks, four Pinnaces, and twelve Victuallers. By the Advantage of which
Strength, He made good three Havens, two on the South Side toward France, and
one toward Scotland; which afterward made themselves good Booties out of such
of the French, as were either cast away on the Coast of Ireland, or forced to
save themselves in the Havens of it. For the French making choice rather of
their Passage by Saint George's Chanel, then by the ordinary Course of
Navigation, from France, to Edenborough, fell from one Danger to another; and,
for fear of being intercepted, or molested by the Ships of England, were
Shipwracked, as before was said, on the Coast of Ireland. Nothing else
Memorable in this King's Reign, which concerned that Kingdom; and therefore I
have laid it altogether in this Place, and on this Occasion.

But we return again to England, where we have seen a Reformation made in Point
of Doctrine, and settled in the Forms of Worship; the Superstitions and
corruptions of the Church of Rome entirely abrogated, and all things rectified,
according to the Word of God, and the Primitive Practice: nothing defective in
the Managing of so great a Work, which could have been required by equal, and
impartial Men, but that it was not done, as they conceived it ought to have
been done, in a General Council. But first we find not any such Necessity of a
General Council, but that many Heresies had been suppressed, and many
Corruptions removed out of the Church, without any such Trouble. Saint
Augustine Paucas fuisse Haereses, ad qu^s superandas necessarium fuerit
Consilinm plenarium Occidentis, and Orientis, lib. 4 cap. 12.
in his fourth Book against the two Epistles of the Pelagians, cap. 12. speaks
very plainly to this Purpose, and yet the Learned Cardinal, though a great
Stickler in behalf of General Councils, speaks more plain then he. By whom it
is affirrmed, that for seven Heresies condemned in seven General Councils
(though by his leave the seventh did not so much suppress, as advance an
Heresy) an huudred had been quashed in National and Provincial Councils. The
Practice of the Church in the several Councils of Aquilia, Carthage, Gangra,
Milevis, etc. make this plain enough; all of them being Provincial, or at least
but National, and doing their own Work without Help from others. The Church had
been in an ill Condition, had it been otherwise; especially under the Power of
the Heathen Emperors; when such a Confluence of the Prelates, from all Parts of
the World, would have been construed a Conspiracy against the State, and drawn
Destruction on the Church, and the Persons both. Or granting, that they might
assemble without any such Danger, yet being great Bodies, moving slowly, and
not without long time, and many Difficulties, and Disputes to be rightly
Constituted: the Church would suffer more under such Delay, by the spreading of
Heresy, then receive Benefit by this Care to suppress the same. So that there
neither is, or can be, any such Necessity, either in Order to the Reformation
of a National Church, or the Suppressing of particular Heresies, as by the
Objectours is supposed.

Howsoever taking it for granted, that a General Council is the best and safest
Physic, that the Church can take, on all Occasions of Epidemical Distempers;
yet must it be granted at such times, and in such Cases only, when it may
conveniently be had. For where it is not to be had, or not had conveniently, it
will either prove to be no Physic, or not worth the taking. But so it was, at
the time of the Reformation, that a General Council could not conveniently be
assembled, and more then so, it was impossible, that any such Council should
assemble: I mean, a General Council rightly called, and constituted, according
to the Rules laid down by our Controversers.

For first they say, It must be called by such as have Power to do it.

Secondly, That it must be intimated to all Christian Churches, that so no
Church, nor People may plead Ignorance of it.

Thirdly, That the Pope, and the four chief Patriarchs, must be present at it,
either in person, or by Proxy.

And lastly, That no Bishop be excluded, if he be known to be a Bishop, and not
E^xcommunicated.

According to which Rules, it was impossible, I say, that any General Council
should be assembled at the time of the Reformation o^ the Church of England. It
was not then, as when the chief four Patriarchs, together with their
Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops, were under the Protection of the Christian
Emperors, and might without Danger to themselves, or to their Churches, obey
the Intimation, and attend the Service, the Patriarchs, with their
Metropolitans and Suffragans, both then and now languishing under the Power and
Tyranny of the Turk: to whom so general a Confluence of Christian Bishops must
needs give matter of Suspicion of just Fears and Jealousies, and therefore not
to be permitted (as far as he can possibly hinder it) on good Reason of State.

And then besides, it would be known by whom such a General Council was to be
assembled: if by the Pope, as generally the Papists say, He, and his Court were
looked on, as the greatest Grievance of the Christian Church, and it was not
probable, that he should call a Council against himself, unless he might have
leave to pack it, to govern it by His own Legates, fill it with Titular Bishops
of His own creating, or send the Holy Ghost to them in Cloak-Bag, as he did to
Trent. If jointly, by all Christian Princes which is the Common Tenent of the
Protestant; Schools: what Hopes could any man conceive (as the Times then were)
that they should lay aside their particular Interesses, to enter all together
upon one design? Or, if they had agreed about it, what Power had they to call
the Prelates of the East, to attend the Business, and to protect them for so
doing at their going home? So that I look upon the hopes of a General Council.
I mean a General Council rightly called, and constituted, as an empty Dream.
The most, that was to be expected, was but a meeting of some Bishops of the
West of Europe, and those but of one Party only: as such were excommunicated,
(and that might be as many as the Pope should please) being to be excluded by
the Cardinal's Rule. Which how it may be called an Ecumenical, or General
Council, unless it be a Topical-Oec^menical, a Particular-General (as great an
Absurdity in Grammar, as a Romaeu-Catholick) I can hardly see: Which being so,
and so no question, but it was, either the Church must have contin^ed without
Reformation, or else it must be lawful for National particular Churches to
Reform themselves. And in that case the Church may be Reformed per parts, part
after part; Province after Province, as is said by Gerson. Further then which,
I shall not enter into this Dispute, this being enough to Justify the Church
of England from doing any thing Unadvisedly, Unwarrantably, or without Example.

That which remains, in Reference to the Progress of the Reformation, concerns
as well the Nature as the Number of such Feasts and Fast^, as were thought fit
to be retained, Determined and Concluded on, by an Act of Parliament; to which
the Bishops gave their Vote: but whether Predetermined in the Convocation, must
be left as doubtful. In the Preamble to which Act, it is Declared; That, At
all times men are not so mindful of performing those Public Christian Duties,
which the true Religion does require, as they ought to be; and therefore it
has been wholesomly provided, that, for calling them to their Duties and for
helping their Infirmities, that some certain Times, and Days should be
appointed, wherein Christians should cease from all other kind of Labors, and
apply themselves only, and wholely unto such Holy Works, as properly pertain
to True Religion; that the said Holy Works, to be performed upon those Days,
are more particularly to hear, to learn, and to remember Almighty God's great
Benefits, his manifold Mercies, his inestimable Gracious Goodness, so
plentifully poured upon all his Creatures; rendering unto him for the same our
most hearty thanks; That the said Days, and Times, are neither to be called, or
accounted Holy: neither in the Nature of the time, or day, nor for any of the
Saints sakes, whose Memories are preserved by them; but for the Nature, and
Condition, of those Godly, and Holy Works, with which only God is to be
Honored, and the Congregation to be Edified; That the Sanctifying of the said
Days consists in separating them apart from all profane uses, and Dedicated
not to any Saint, or Creature, but only to the Worship of God; That there is
no certain time, nor definite number of days appointed by Holy Scripture: but,
that the appointment of the time, as also of the days, is left to the Liberty
of Christ His Church by the Word of God; That the days, which from thenceforth
were to be kept as Holy days in the Church of England, should be all Sundays in
the Year; the Feast of the Circumcision, the Epiphany, the Purification of the
Blessed Virgin, etc. with all the rest, recited at the end of the Calender, in
the public Liturgy; That the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. shall have Authority
to punish the Offenders, in all, or any of the Premises, by the usual censures
of the Church, and to impose such penance on them, as to them, or any of them
shall seem expedient; and finally, that, notwithstanding any thing before
declared, it shall, and may be lawful, for any Husbandman, Labourer,
Fisherman, etc. to labor, ride, fish, or work any kind of work, on the
foresaid Holy days, not only in the time of Harvest, but at any other time of
the year, when need shall require; with a Proviso for the Celebrating of St.
Georg's Feast, on the two and twenty, three and twenty, and four and twentieth
Days of April yearly, by the Knights of the Right Honorable Order of the
Garter, or by any of them. Which Declaration, as it is agreeable in all points
to the Tenor of approved Antiquity; so can there nothing be more contrary to
the Doctrine of the Sabbatarians, Which of late time has been Obtruded on the
Church.

Then for the number of the Fasts, It is Declared, that from that time
forwards, every Even, or Day, going before any of the aforesaid Days of the
Feasts of the Nativity of Our Lord, of Easter, of the Ascension of our Lord,
Pentecost. of the Purification, and the Annunciation of the aforesaid Blessed
Virgin; of All Saints, of all the said Feasts of the Apostles, (other then of
St. John the Evangelist, and of St. Philip and Jacob) shall be fasted, and
Commanded to be kept, and observed, and that none other Even, or Day, shall be
Commanded to be Fasted. For Explication of which last Clause, it is after
added, that the said Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to
abrogate, or take away the Abstinence from Flesh in Lent, or on Fridays, and
Saturdays: or any other appointed pointed to be kept for a Fasting-Day, but
only on the Evens of such other Days, as formerly had been kept, and observed
for Holy, and were now abrogated by this Act. And for the better suppressing,
or preventing of any such Fasts, as might be kept upon the Sunday, it was
Enacted in the same (according to the Practice of the Elder Times) that, when
it shall chance any the said Feasts, (the Eves whereof are by this Statute to
be kept for Fasting-Days) to fall upon the Monday; that then the Saturday next
before shall be Fasted, as the Eve thereof, and not the Sunday. Which Statute,
though repealed in the first of Queen Mary, and not revived till the first year
of the Reign of King James: yet in Effect it stood in Force, and was more
punctually observed in the whole time of Queen Elizabeth 's Reign, then after
the Reviver of it.

Such course being taken for the due observing of Days, and Times; the next
care was, that Consecrated Places should not be Profaned by Fighting, and
Quarrelling, as they had been lately, since the Episcopal Jurisdiction, and the
Ancient Censures of the Church were lessened in Authority, and Reputation. And
to that end it was Enacted in this present Parliament, that if any Persons
whatsoever, after the first day of May then next following, should quarrel,
chide, or brawl, in any Church, or Churchyard, he should be suspended ab
ingressu Ecclesiae, if he were a Layman; and from his Ministration, if he were
a Priest; that if any Person after the said time should smite, or lay violent
hands upon another, he should be deemed to be Excommunicate, ipso facto, and be
excluded from the Fellowship, and Company of Christ's Congregation; and
finally, that if any Person should strike another with any weapon, in the
Church, or Churchyard, or draw his sword, with an intent to strike another
with the same, and thereof be lawful convicted, he should be punished with the
loss of one of his Ears, etc. A seasonable severity, and much conducing to the
Honor both of Church, and State. There were some Statutes also made for taking
away the benefit of Clergy in some certain Cases; for making such, as formerly
had been of any Religious Order, to be Heritable to the Lands of their
Ancestors, or next of Kindred, to whom they were to have been Heirs by the
Common Law; for Confirming the Marriages of Priests, and giving them, their
^ives, and Children, the like Capacities, as other Subjects did enjoy, whereof
we have already spoke in another place. There also passed another Act, that no
Person, by any means, should lend, or forbear any Sum of Money, for any manner
of Usury, or increase to be received, or hoped for, above the sum lent, upon
pain to for^eit the sum so lent, and the increase, and to suffer imprisonment,
and make fine at the King's pleasure. But this Act being found to be
prejudicial to the ^rade of the Kingdom, first discontinued of it self, and was
afterward repealed in the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth.

This Parliament ending on the fifteenth of April gave time enough for
Printing, and Publishing the Book of Common Prayer, which had been therein
Authorized; the time for the Officiating of it, being fixed on the Feast of
All Saints, then next ensuing. Which time being come, there appeared no small
Alteration in the outward Solemnities of Divine Service, to which the people
had been formerly so long accustomed. For, by the R^brick of that Book, no
Copes, or other Vestures were required, but the Surplice only; whereby the
Bishops were necessitated to forbear their Crosses, and the Prebends of St.
Paul's, and other Churches, occasioned to leave off their Hoods. To give a
beginning hereunto, Bishop Ridley, then Bishop of London (obediently conforming
unto that, which he could not hinder) did the same day Officiate the Divine
Service of the Morning in his Rochet only, without Cope, or Vestment; he
Preached also at St. Paul's Cross in the afternoon, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Companies, in their best Liveries, being present at it; the Sermon tending
for the most part to the setting forth of the said Book of Common Prayer, and
to acquaint them with the Reason of such Alterations, as were made therein. On
the same day the New Liturgy was executed also in all the Churches of London.
And not long after (I know not by what strange forwardness in them that did it)
the Upper Quire in St. Paul's Church, where the High-Altar stood, was broken
down, and all the Qui^e thereabout; and the Communion Table was placed in the
Lower Part of the Qui^e, where the Priest sang the Daily Service. What hereupon
ensued of the Rich Ornaments, and Plate, wherewith every Church was furnished
after its proportion; we shall see shortly, when the King's Commissioners shall
be sent abroad to seize upon them in His Name, for their own Commodity.

About this time the Psalms of David did first begin to be Composed in English
Meeter, by one Thomas Sternhold, one of the Grooms of the Privy-Chamber; who,
Translating no more then thirty seven, left both Example, and Encouragement to
John Hopkins, and others, to dispatch the rest. A Device first taken up in
France, by one Clement Marot, one of the Grooms of the Bedchamber to King
Francis the First: who, being much addicted to Poetry, and having some
acquaintance with those, which were thought to have inclined to the
Reformation, was persuaded by the Learned Vatablus (Professor of the Hebrew
Tongue in the University of Paris) to exercise his Poetical Fancies, in
Translating some of David's Psalms. For whose satisfaction, and his own, he
Translated the first fifty of them: and after, flying to Geneva, grew
acquainted with Beza who, in some tract of time, Translated the other hundred
also; and caused them to be fitted unto several Tunes; which ^ hereupon began
to be Sung in private houses, and by degrees to be taken up in all the Churches
of the French, and other Nations, which followed the Genevian Platform.
Marot's Translation said by Strada, to have been ignorantly, and perversely
done: as being but the Work of a man, altogether unlearned; but not to be
compared with that Barbarity, and Botching, which every where occurreth in the
Translation of Sternhold, and Hopkins. Which notwithstanding being first
allowed for private Devotion, they were by little, and little, brought into the
use of the Church: Permitted rather, then Allowed to be Sung before, and after
Sermons; afterward Printed, and bound up with the Common Prayer Book, and at
last added by the Stationers at the end of the Bible. For, though it be
expressed in the Title of those Singing Psalms, that they were set forth, and
allowed to be Sung in all Churches; before, and after Morning, and Evening
Prayer: and also before, and after Sermons; yet, this Allowance seems rather to
have been a Connivance, then an Approbation: No such Allowance being any where
found, by such as have been most Industrious, and concerned in the search
thereof. At first it was, pretended only that the said Psalms should be Sung
before, and after Morning, and Evening Prayer, and also before, and after
Sermons: which shows, they were not to be intermingled in the Public Liturgy.
But, in some tract of time, as the Puritan Faction grew in strength, and
confidence, they prevailed so far in most places, to thrust the Te Deum, the
Benedictus, the Magnificat, and the Nunc Dimittis, quite out of the Church. But
of this more perhaps hereafter, when we shall come to the Discovery of the
Puritan Practices, in the Times succeeding.

Next to the business of Religion, that which took up a great part of the
Public Care, was the Founding, and Establishing of the new Hospital in the
late dissolved House of Grey-Friers, near Newgate, in the City of London; and
that of St. Thomas in the Borough of So^thwark. Concerning which we are to
know, that the Church, belonging to the said House, together with the
Cloisters, and almost all the Public Building, which stood within the
Liberties, and Precincts thereof, had the good Fortune to escape that Ruin,
which Generally befell all other Houses of that Nature. And standing
undemolished, till the last Times of King Henry, it was given by him, not many
days before His Death, to the City of London: together with the late dissolved
Priory, called Little St. Bartholomew's; which, at the Suppression thereof, was
valued at 305. pounds, 6. s. 7. d. In which Donation, there was Reference had
to a Double End. The one for the Relieving of the Poor, out of the Rents of
such Messuages, and Tenements, as in the Grant thereof are contained, and
specified. The other for Constituting a Parish Church, in the Church of the
said dissolved Grey-Friers: not only for the use of such, as lived within the
Precincts of the said two Houses; but for the Inhabitants of the Parishes of
Saint Nicholas in the Shambles, and of Saint Ewines, situate in
Warwick-Lane-end, near Newgate Market. Which Churches, with all the Rents, and
Profits, belonging to them, were given to the City at the same time also, and
for advancing the same ends, together with five hundred Marks by the year for
ever; the Church of the Grey-Friers to be from thenceforth called
Christ-Church, Founded by King Henry the Eighth. All which was signified to the
City in a Sermon Preached at Saint Paul's- Cross, by the Bishop of Rochester,
on the thirteenth of January; being no more then a Fortnight before the death
of the King: so that He wanted not the Prayers of the Poor, at the Time of His
Death, to serve as a Counter-Ballance for those many Curses, which the poor
Monks, and Friars had bestowed upon Him in the Time of His Life.

In pursuance of this double Design, the Church of the said Friars (which had
before served as a Magazine, or Storehouse for such French-Wines, as had been
taken by Reprise) was cleansed, and made fit for Holy uses, and Mass again sang
in it on the thirteenth day of January before remembered, resorted to by such
Parishioners as were appointed to it by the King's Donation. After which
followed (in the first years of King Edward the Sixth) the taking down of the
said two Churches, and building several Tenements, on the Ground of the
Churches, and Churchyards, the Rents thereof to be employed for the further
maintenance, and Relief of the poor, living and loytering in, and about the
City, to the great Dishonor of the same. But neither the first Grant of the
King, nor these new Additions, being able to carry on the work to the end
desired, it happened, that Bishop Ridley, preaching before the King, did much
insist upon the settling of of some constant course for Relief of the Poor.
Which Sermon wrought so far upon Him, that He caused the Bishop to be sent for,
gave him great Thanks for his good Exhortation; and thereupon entered into
Communication with him, about the devising of some Co^rse, by which so great,
and good a Work should be brought to pass. His Advice was, That Letters should
be written to the Lord Mayour, and Aldermen, for taking the Business into
Consideration, in Reference to such Poor, as swarmed in great numbers about the
City. To which the King so readily hearkened, that the Letters were dispatched,
and Signed, before He would permit the Bishop to go out of His Presence.
Furnished with these Letters, and Instructions, the Bishop calls before him Sir
Richard Dobbs, then Lord Mayour of London, with so many Aldermen, as were
thought fit to be advised with in the present Business. By whom it was agreed
upon, That a General Contribution should be made by all wealthy, and
well-affected Citizens, toward the Advancement of a work so necessary for the
public good. For the effecting whereof, they were all called to their
Parish-Churches, where by the said Lord Mayour, their several Aldermen, and
other grave Citizens, they were by Eloquent Orations, persuaded, how great* and
how many Commodities, would ensue unto them, and their City; if the Poor of
diverse sorts were taken from out their Streets, Lanes, and Allies, and were
bestowed, and provided for in several Hospitals. It was therefore moved, that
every man would signify what they would grant, toward the preparing, and
furnishing of such Hospitals, as also, what they would contribute weekly
toward their Maintenance until they were furnished with a more Liberal
Endowment. Which Course prevailed so far upon them, that every man subscribed,
according to his Ability, and Books were drawn in every Ward of the City,
containing the Sum of that Relief: which they had contributed. Which being
delivered unto the Mayour, were by Him humbly tendered to the King's
Commissioners on the seventeenth of February.

This good Foundation being laid, a Beginning was put to the Reparation of the
decayed Buildings, in the Gray-Friers, on the twenty sixth of July, for the
Reception of such poor, fatherless Children, as were then to be provided for at
the public Charge. The like Reparation also made of the Ruinous Buildings
belonging to the late dissolved Priory of Saint Thomas in the Burough of
Southwark; which the Citizens had then newly bought of the King, to serve for
an Hospital of such Wounded, Sick, and Impotent Persons, as were not fit to be
intermingled with the Sound. The Work so diligently followed in both places at
once, that on the twenty third of November, the sick and maimed People were
taken into the Hospital of Saint Thomas, and into Christ-Hospital to the number
of four hundred Children; all of them to have Meat, Drink, Lodging, and Cloths,
at the Charge of the City, till other means could be provided for their future
Maintenance.

And long it was not, before such further Means was provided for them, by the
Bounty, and Piety of the King; then drawing as near unto his End, as his Father
was, when he laid the first Foundation of that Pious Work. For ^earing with
what cheerfulness the Lord Major, and Aldermen, had conformed themselves to the
effect of His former Letters, and what a great advance they had made in the
Work, commanded them to attend Him on the tenth of April, gave them great
thanks for their Zeal, and forwardness, and gave for ever to the City his
Palace of Bridewel (erected by King Henry the Eight) to be employed as a
relieving house for such Vagabounds, and thriftless Poor, as should be sent
thither to receive Chastisement, and be forced to labor. For the better
maintenance whereof, and the more liberal Endowment of the other Hospitals
before remembered, it was suggested to him; that the Hospital founded in the
Savoy by King Henry the seventh, for the Relief of Pilgrims, and Travelers,
was lately made the Harbor, or relieving Place for Loytere^s, Vagabonds, and
Strumpets, who sunned themselves in the Fields all Day, and at Night found
entertainment there. The Master and Brethren of the House are thereupon sent
for to the King, who dealt so powerfully and effectually with them, that they
resigned the same into His Hands, with all the Lands, and Goods thereunto
belonging. Out of which He presently bestowed the Yearly Rent of Seven Hundred
Marks, with all the Beds, Bedding, and other Furniture, which he found therein,
toward the maintenance of the said Workhouse, and the Hospital of St. Thomas
in Southwark. The Grant whereof He confirmed by His Letters Patents, bearing
Date the 26th of June; adding thereunto a Mort-Main for enabling the City to
purchase Lands, to the value of four thousand Marks per annum, for the better
maintenance of those, and the other Hospitals. So that by the Donation of
Bridewel, which He never built, and the suppression of the Hospital in the
Savoy, which He never endowed, He was entitled to the Foundation of Bridewel,
St. Bartholomew's, and St. Thomas, without any charge unto himself.

But these last Passages concerning the Donation of Bridewel, the suppression
of the Hospital in the Savoy, and the Endowment of the said three Houses with
the Lands thereof, happened not till the year ensuing, Anno 1553. though laid
unto the rest in the present Narrative, in regard of the Dependence, which it
has on the former Story. Nothing else memorable in the course of this present
Year, but the coming of Cardanus, the death of Leland, and the preferment of
Doctor John Tailor to the Sea of Lincoln. The Sea made void by the death of
Doctor Henry Holbeach, about the beginning of August, in the former year, and
kept void, by some powerful men about the King, till the 26th of June, in the
year now present. At what time, the said Doctor Tailor, who before had been
Dean of that Church, was Consecrated Bishop of it. During which interval, the
Patrimony of that great and wealthy Bishopric (one of the richest in the
Kingdom) was so dismembered in it self, so parcelled, and marked out for a Prey
to others, that when the New Bishop was to be restored unto his Temporals,
under the Great Seal of England, (as the Custom is) there was none of all his
Maours reserved for him, An. Reg 7. 1553.
but his Manor of Bugden, together with some Farms and Impropriations, toward
the support of his Estate: The rest was to be raised out of the profits,
perquisits, and emoluments of his Jurisdict ^ on; yet so, that nothing was to
be abated in his Tenths, and first fruits, which were kept up according to the
former value.

As for John Leland; for whose death I find this year assigned: he had his
Education in Christ's College in Cambridg. Being a man of great parts, and
indefatigable industry, he was employed by King Henry the Eight to search into
the Libraries, and Collect the Antiquities of Religious Houses, at such time,
as they lay under the fear of suppression. Which work as he performed with more
then Ordinary Diligence, so was he encour^ged thereunto by a very Liberal
Exhibition, which he received annually from the late King Henry. But the King
being dead, his Exhibition, and encouragments, dyed also with him. So that the
Lamp of his life being destitute of the Oil, which fed it, after it had been in
a lang^ishing condition all the rest of h^s King's Reign was this year
unfortunately Extingu^shed: unfortunately, in regard that he dyed distr^cted to
the great Grief of all that knew him, and the no small sorrow of ma^y, who
never saw him, but only in his painful, and labo^ious Writings. Which
Writ^ngs, being by him Presented to the hands of King Henry, came a^terwards
into ^he power of Sr. John Che^k, Schole-master, and Secretary for the L^tine
tongue to the King now Reigning. And though coll^cted Principally for the u^e
of the Crown, yet, on the death of the young King, his Tu^our kept them to
himself as long as he lived, and left them at his death to Henry his Eldest
Son, Secretary to the Council Established at Yo^k for the N^r^hern parts. From
Che^k, but not without some intermediate conveyances, four of them came into
the possession of William (...) of Leic^s^e shi^e; who having served his turn
of them as well as he could, in his d^scription of that County, bestowed them,
as a most choice Rarity upon Oxford Library, where the O^^ginals ^t^ll ^emain.
Out of this Treasury, whilst it remained entire in the hands of Cheek, the
learned Campden was supplied with much Excellent matter toward the making up of
his description of the ^sles of Britain; but not without all due acknowledgment
to his Benefactour, whom he both frequent cite^h, and very highly commends
for his pains* and industry.

In the last place comes in Cardanus, an eminent Philosopher, born in Italy,
and one not easily over matched by the then supposed Matchless Sc^liger, having
composed a Book, Entitled ^ De varietate Rerum* with an Epistl^ Dedicatory to
King Edward the Sixth he came over this year into England to present it to him;
which gave him the Occasion of much conference with ^^m. In which he found ^uch
dexterity in Him for Encountering many of his Paradoxes in natural Philosophy*
that he seemed to be astonished between Admiration, and Delight, and divulged
his Abilities to be miracul^u^. Some Passages of which discourse Cardanus has
left upon Record in these words ensu^ng. Decim^^m quintum, adhuc ag^bat Annum,
cum interrogobat Latin etc. Being yet (says he) but of the age of fifteen
years he asked me in Latin (in which tongue he utterred his mind no less
eloquently, and readily, then I could do my self) what my Book^ which I had
dedicated unto him. De varietate Rerum, did contain? I answered* that in the
first Chapter was showed the cause of Com^ts, or blazingstars* which has been
long sought for* and hitherto scarce fully found. What cause (said he) is that?
The concour^e or meeting of the light of the wandering Planets, or stars. To
this the King thus replied again. For as much (said he) as the motion of the
stars keeps not one course, but is diverse and variable by continual
Alteration, how is it then that the cause of these Comets does not quickly
v^de* or vanish, or that the Comet does not keep one certain and uniform
course, and motion, with the said stars, and Planets? Whereunto I an^wered,
that it ^oved indeed, but with a far swifter motion then the Planets, by reason
of the diversity of Aspects, as we see in Crystal, and the Sun, when a Rainbow
rebounds on a Wall, for a little change makes a great difference of the place.
The King rejoyned, How can that be done without a subject? as the Wall is the
Subject to the Rainbow. To which I answered, That as in the Galaxia, or Via
lactea, and in the Reflection of Lights, when many are set near one another,
they do produce a certain Lucid and bright Mean. Which Conference is thus shut
up by that Learned Men, That he began to favor Learning, before he could know
it; and knew it, before he could tell what use he had of it: And then bemoans
his short life, in these words of the Poet,

Immodic^s brevis est Aetas, and rara Senectus.

Anno Reg. Edw. Sexti 7o Anno Dom. 1552, 1553.
SUch being the excellent Abilities of this hopeful Prince in Matters of
Abstruser Learning, there is no question to be made, but that he was the Master
of so much Perspicacity in his own Affairs, (as indeed he was, which might
produce both Love, and Admiration in the Neighboring Princes: Yet such was the
Rapacity of the Times and the Unfortunateness of his Condition, that his
Minority was abused to many Acts of Spoil, and Rapine (even to an high degree
of Sacrilege) to the raising of some, and the enriching of others, without any
manner of improvement to his own Estate. For, notwithstanding the great and
most inestimable, Treasures which must needs come in, by the spoil of so many
Shrines, and Images, the sale of all the Lands belonging to Chanteries,
Colleges, Free Chapels, etc. And the Dilapidating of the Patrimony of so many
Bishoprics, and Cathedral Churches; he was not only plunged in Debt, but the
Crown Lands were much diminished, and impaired, since his coming to it. Besides
which spoils, there were many other helps, and some great ones too, of keeping
him both before^hand, and full of Money, had they been used to his Advantage.
The Lands of diverse of the Halls, and Companies in London, were charged with
Annual Pensions, for the finding of such Lights, Obits, and Chantry-Priests, as
were founded by the Donours of them. For the redeeming whereof, they were
constrained to pay the sum of Twenty Thousand Pounds to the use of the King, by
an Order from the Council Table; not long before the payment of the first Money
for the sale of Boloign Anno 1550. And somewhat was also paid by the City, to
the King, for the Purchase of the Borough of Southwark, which they bought of
him the next year. But the main glut of Treasure was that of the four hundred
thousand Crowns, amounting in our Money to 133333 l. 13 s. 4 d. paid by the
French King, on the s^rrendry of the Town, and Territory of (...), before
remembered Of which vast sum, (but small, in reference to the loss of so great a
strength) no less then fourscore thousand pounds was laid up in the Tower; the
rest assigned, to public uses, for the peace and safety of the Kingdom. Not to
say any thing of that great Yearly Profit, which came in from the Mint, after
the intercourse settled betwixt Him and the King of Sweden, and the decrying so
much Base Money, had begun to set the same on work. Which great Advantages
notwithstanding, He is now found to be in Debt to the Bankers of An^we^p and
elsewhere, no less then 251000 l, of English money. Toward which, the sending
of his own Ambassadors into France, and the entertainment of the French, when
they were in England, (the only two great Charges, which we find Him at in
the whole course of His Reign) must be inconsiderable.

It was to no purpose for Him to look too much backward, or to trouble Himself
with enquiring after the ways, and means, by which He came to be involved in so
great a Debt. It must be now his own care, and the endeavors of those, who
plunged Him in it, to find the speediest way for His getting out.

And first they fall upon a course to l^ssen the Expenses of His Court and
Family, by suppressing the Tables formerly appointed for young Lords, the
Masters of the Requests, Sergeant at Arms, etc. which thought it saved some
money, yet it brought in none. In the next place, it was resolved, to call such
Officers to a present and public Reckoning, who either had embezelled any of
the Crown Lands, or inverted any of the King's Money to their private use. On
which course they were the more intent, because they did both serve the King*
and content the People: but might be used by them as a Scourge, for the
whipping of those, against whom they had any cause of quarrel. Amongst which I
find the new Lord Paget to have been fined six thousand pound (as before was
said) for diverse Offenses of that nature, which were charged upon him B^aumont,
then Master of the Rolls, had purchased Lands with the King's Money, made
longer Leases of some other Crown Lands, then he was authorized to do by his
Commission, and was otherwise gu^lty of much corrupt and fraudulent dealing.
For expiating of which Crimes, he surrendered all his Lands and Goods to the
King, and seems to have been well befriended, that he sped no worse. The like
Offenses proved against one Whaley, one of the King's Receivers for the County
of York; for which he was punished with the loss of his Offices, and adjudged
to ^tand to any such Fine, as by his Majesty* and the Lords of h^s Council
should be set upon him. Which manner of proceeding, though it be for the most
part pleasing to the Common People, and profitable to the Commonwealth; yet
were it more unto the honor of a Prince, to make choice of such Officers, whom
He thinks not likely to offend, then to sacrifice them to the People, and His
own Displeasures having thus offended.

But the main Engine at this time for advancing Money, was the speeding of a
Commission into all parts of the Realm under pretense of selling such of the
Lands and Goods of Chanterys, etc as remained unsold; but, in plain truth, to
seize upon all Hangings* Altar-Cloths, Fronts, Parafronts, Copes of all sorts,
with all manner of Plate, which was to be found in any Cathedral, or Parochial
Church. To which Rapacity the demolishing of the fo^mer Altars, and placing the
Communion Table in the middle of the Quires, or Chancels of every Church, (as
was then most used) gave a very good h^^t, by rendering all such Furnitures,
rich Plate, and other costly Utensils, in a manner useless. And that the
business might be carried with as much advantage to the King as might be, He
gave out certain Inst^uct^ons under his Hand, by which the Commissioners were
to regulate themselves in their Proceedings, to the advancement of the service.
Amongst which pretermitting those, which seem to be Preparatori^s only unto
all the rest, I shall put down as many* as I think material: And that being
done, it shall be left to the Reader's Judgment, whether the King, being now in
the sixteenth year of his Age, were either better studied in his own
Concernments or seemed to be worse principled in Ma^ters, which concerned the
Church. Now the most Material of the said Instructions were these, that follow.

1. The said Commissioners shall, upon their view and survey taken, cause due
Inventories to be made by Bills or Book^ indented, of all manner of Goods,
Plates, Jewels, Bells, and Ornaments, as yet remaining, or any wise
forthcoming, and belonging to any Churches, Chapels, Fraternities, or Gilds;
and one part of the said Inventories to send and return to (...) Privy Council,
and the other to deliver to them, in whose hands the said Goods, Plate, Jewels,
Bells, and Ornaments, shall remain, to be kept* and preserved. And they shall
also give good Charge and Order, that the same Goods, and every part thereof,
be at all times forthcoming to be answered; leaving nevertheless in every
Parish Church or Chapel, of common resort, one, two, or more Chalices, or Cups,
according to the multitude of People, in every such Church, or Chapel; and also
such other Ornaments as by their discretion shall seem requisite for the Divine
Service* in every such place for the time.

2. That because Information has been made, that in many Places great
quantities of the said Plate, Bells, Jewels, Ornaments, has been embezelled by
certain private men, contrary to his Majesty's express Commandment in that
behalf, the said Commissioners shall substantially, and justly enquire, and
attain the knowledge thereof: by whose default the same is, or has been, or in
whose hands any part of the same is come. And in that point, the said
Commissioners shall have good regard that they attain to certain Names, and
dwelling Places of every person, or persons, that has sold, alienated,
embezelled, taken, or carried away; or of such also, as have counseled,
advised, and commanded any part of the said Goods, Plate, Jewels, Bells,
Vestments, and Ornaments, to be taken, or carried away* or otherwise
embezelled. And these things they shall as certainly, and duly, as they can,
cause to be searched, and understood.

3. That upon full search and enquiry thereof, the said Commissioners, four, or
three of them, shall cause to be called before them all such persons, by whom
any of the said Goods, Plate Jewels, Bells, Ornaments, or any other the
Premises, have been alienated, embezelled, and taken away; or by whose means,
and procurement, the same, or any part thereof has been attempted, or to whose
hands, or use, any of the same, or any profit for the same has grown. And by
such means, as to their discretions shall seem best, cause them to bring into
these the said Commissioners hands, to Our use, the said Plate, Jewels, Bells,
and other the Premises so alienated, for the true and full value thereof:
certifying unto Our Privy Council the Names of all such as refuse to stand to,
or obey their Order touching their delivery, or restitution of the same, or the
just value thereof. To the intent, that, as cause and reason shall require,
every man may answer to his doings in this behalf.

4. To these another Clause was added, touching the moderation, which they were
to use in their Proceedings; to the end, that the effect of their Commission
might go forward with as much quiet, and as little occasion of trouble, or
disquiet to the Multitude, as might be; using therein such wise persuasions, as
in respect of the place, and disposition of the People, may seem to their
Wisdoms most expedient: yet so, that they take care for giving good and
substantial Order to stay the inordinate and greedy Covetousness of such
disordered People, as should go about to alienate any of the Premises; or
otherwise to let them know, that according to Reason, and Order, such as have,
or should contemptuously offend in that behalf, should receive such punishment,
as to the quality of their doing should be thought most requisite.

Such were the Faculties, and Instructions, wherewith the Kings Commissioners
were empowered and furnished. And doubt we not, but that they were as punctual
and exact in the execution: which cannot better be discerned, then by that,
which is reported of their doings generally in all parts of the Realm, and more
particularly in the Church of St. Peter in Westminster, more richly furnished,
by reason of the Pomps of Coronations, Funerals, and such like Solemnities,
then any other in the Kingdom. Concerning which I find, in an old Chapter-Book
belonging to it, that on May the 9. 1553. Sir Roger Cholmley Knight, Lord Chief
Justice, and Sir Robert Bows Knight, Master of the Rolls, the King's
Commissioners, for gathering Ecclesiastical Goods, held their Session at
Westminster, and called before them the Dean of that Cathedral, and certain
others of the same House, and commanded them, by virtue of their Commission, to
bring to them a true Inventory of all the Plate, Cups, Vestiments, and other
Ecclesiastical Good^, which belonged to their Church. Which done, the Twelfth
Day of the same Month, they sent John Hodges, Robert Smalwood, and Edmund
Best, of the City of Westminster, (whom the said Commissioners had made their
Collectours) with a Commandment to the Dean and Chapter, for the delivery of
the said Goods; which were by Robert Crome Clerk, Sexton of the said Church,
delivered to the said Collectors, who left no more unto the Church, then two
Cups, with the Covers all gilt; One white Silver Pot, Three Herse-Cloths,
Twelve Cushions, One Carpet for the Table, Eight Stall-Cloths for the Quite,
Three Pulpit-Cloths, Nine little Carpets for the Dean's Stall, Two
Table-Cloths: the rest of all the rich Furniture, massy Plate, and whatsoever
else was of any value, (which questionless must needs amount to a very great
Sum) was seized on by the said Collect^urs, and clearly carried away by Order,
from the said Commissioners. The l^ke done generally in all the other parts of
the Realm, into which the Commissioners began their Circuits in the Month of
April, as soon as the ways were open, and fit for Travail. Their business was
to seize upon all the Goods remaining in any Cathedral, or Parish-Churches, all
Jewels of Gold, and Silver, Crosses, Candlesticks, Censers, Chalices, and such
like; with their ready Money: As also, all Copes* and Vestments of Cloth of
Gold, Tyssue, and Silver; together with all other Copes, Vestments, and
Ornaments, to the same belonging. Which general seizure being made, they were
to leave one Chalice, with certain Table-Cloths, for the use of the
Communion-Board, as the said Commissioners should think fi^: the Jewels Piate,
and ready Money, to be delivered to the Master of the King's Jewels in the
Tower of London; the Cope of Cloth of Gold, and Tyssue, to be brought into the
King's Wardrobe; the rest to be turned into ready Money, and tha^ Money to be
paid to Sir Edmond Peckam, the King's Cofferer, for the defraying of the
Charges of H^s Majesty's Household.

But notwithstanding this great Care of the King on the one side, and the
double-diligence of his Commissioners on the other, the Booty did not prove so
great, as the Expectation. In all great Fairs, and Markets, there are some
Forestallers, who get the b^st Peny-worths to themselves, and suffer not the
Richest and most gainful Commodities to be openly sold. And so it fared also in
the present Business, there being some, who were as much beforehand with the
King's Commissioners in embezelling the said Plate* Jewels, and other
Furnitures, as the Commissioners did intend to be with the King, in keeping
always most part unto themselves. For when the Commissioners came to execute
their Powers in their several Circuits, they neither could discover all, or
recover much of that, which had been pur^oined; some things being utterly
embezelled by Persons not responsible; in which Case, the King, as well as the
Commiss^oners, was to lose his Right: but more concealed by Persons not
detectable; who had so cunningly carried the stealth, that there was no tracing
of their ^oot-step^. And some there were, who, being known to have such Goods
in the^r possession, conceived themselves too Great to be called in question;
connived at will^ngly by these, who were but their Equals, and either were, or
meant to b^ Offend^urs in the very same kind. So that although some Profit was
hereby raised to the King's Exchequer; yet the far greatest part of the Prey
came to other hands: Insomuch, that many private men's Parlours were hung with
Altar-Cloths, their Tables, and Beds covered with Copes, instead of Carpets,
and Cove^lids; and many made Carousing Cups of the Sacred Chalices, as once
^elsh^zzar celebrated his Drunken Feast in the Sanctified Vessels of the
Temple. It was a sorry House, and not worth the naming, which had not somewhat
of this Furniture in it, though it were only a fair large Cushion made of a
Cope, or Altar-Cloth, to adorn their Windows, or make their Chairs appear to
have somewhat in them of a Chair of State. Yet how contemptible were these
Trappings, in comparison of those vast su^s of Money, which were made of
Jewels, P^ate, and Cloth of Tyssue, either conveyed beyond the Seas, or sold at
home, and good Lands purchased with the Money; nothing the more blessed to the
Poster^ty o^ them, that b^ught them, for being purchased with the Consecrated
Treasures of so many Temples.

But as the King was plunged in Debt, without being put to any extraordinary
Charges in it, so was He decayed in his Revenue, without selling any part of
His Crown Lands toward the payment of His Debts. By the suppressing of some,
and the surrendering of other Religious Houses, the Royal Intrado was so much
increased in the late King's time; that, for the better managing of it, the
King erected first the Court of Augmentation, and afterward the Court of
Surveyours. But in short time, by His own Profuseness, and the Avaritiousness
of this King's Ministers, it was so retrenched, that it was scarce able to
find Work enough for the Court of Exchequer. Hereupon followed the dissolving
of the said two Courts in the last Parliament of this King, beginning on the
first, and ending on the last day of March. Which, as it made a loud noise in
the Ears of the People, so did it put this Jealousy into their Minds. That, if
the King's Lands should be thus daily wasted without any recruit, He must at
last prove burthensom to the common Subject. Some course is therefore to be
thought on, which might pretend to an increase of the King's Revenue, and none
more easy to be compassed, then to begin with the suppression of such
Bishoprics, and Collegiate Churches, as either lay ^urthest off, or might best
be spared. In reference whereunto, it was concluded, in a Chapter held at
Westminster, by the Knights of the Garter, That from thenceforth the said most
noble Order of the Garter should be no longer ent^tuled by the Name of St.
George, but that it should be called the O^der of the Garter only; and that
the Feast of the said Order should be celebrated upon Whitson-Eve, Whitson-day,
and Whitson-Monday, and not on St. George's day, as before it was. And to what
end was this concluded; and what else was to follow upon this Conclusion, but
the dissolving of the Free-Chapel of St. George in the Castle of Windsor, and
the transferring of the Order to the Chapel of King HENRY the Seventh, in the
Abbey of Westminster? Which had undoubtedly been done, and all the Lands
thereof converted to some powerful Courtiers, under pretense of laying them to
the Crown, if the King's Death, which happened within four Months after, had
not prevented the Design, and thereby respited that Ruin, which was then
intended.

The like preservation happened, at the same time also, in the Church of
Durham, as liberally endowed as the most, and more amply privileged, then the
best in the King's Dominions. The Bishops hereof by Charter, and long
Prescription, enjoyed and exercised all the Rights of a County Palatine in that
large Tract of Ground, which lies between the Tees, and the Tine, best known in
those Parts by the Name of the Bishopric; the Diocese containing also all
Northumberland, of which the Bishops, and the Percies, had the greatest shares.
No sooner was Bishop Tonstal committed to the Tower, which was on the Twentieth
of December, 1551. but presently an Eye was cast upon his Possessions. Which,
questionless, had followed the same fortune with the rest of the Bishoprics,
if one, more powerful then the rest, had not preserved it from being parcelled
out as the others were, on a ^^rong Confidence of getting it all unto himself.
The Family of the Percies was then reduced to such a point, that it seemed to
have been quite expired; a Family which first came in with the Norman
Conqueror, by whom enriched with most of the forfeited Estates of Morchar,
Gospatrick, and Waltheof, the three last Earls of Northumberland, of the Saxon
Race. But, this Line ending in the latter times of King HENRY the First,
Josseline of Lorain, descended from the Emperor CHARLES the Great, and one of
the younger Brothers of Adeliza, the last Wife of the King, enriched himself by
Marriage with the Heir-General of this House, upon condition, that keeping to
himself the Arms of his own Family, he should assume the Name of Percy, to
remain always afterward unto his Posterity. Advanced in that respect, by the
Power and Favor of John of Gaunt, to the Rank and Title of the Earls of
Northumberland, at the Coronation of King Richard the Second. They held the
same with great Power, and Honor, (the short interposing of the Marquess
Mountacute excepted only) till toward the latter end of King Henry the Eighth.
At what time it happened* that Henry Lord Peircy, the sixth Earl of this House,
had incurred the heavy displeasure of that King: First, for an old affection to
the Lady Ann Bollein* when the King began first to be enamoured of her
excellent Beauties; and afterward for denying to confess a Precontract to have
been formerly made between them; when the King (now as weary of her, as before
he was fond) was seeking some fair Pretenses to divorce himself from her,
before she was to lose her Head. He had no Children of his own; and Th^mas his
Brother, and next Heir, was, to his greater grief, attainted of Treason, for
being thought to have a chief hand i^ the Northern Rebellion, Anno 1536. In
both respects, he found himself at such a loss, and the whole Family without
hope of a Restitution to its ancient splendor; that, to preserve himself from
running into further danger, he gave unto the King the greatest part of that
fair Inheritance; and, dying not long after, left his Titles also to the King's
disposing.

The Lands, and Titles, being thus fallen into the Crown, continued undisposed
of, till the falling of the Duke of Somerset; when Dudley, Earl of Warwick,
having some projections in his Head beyond the greatness of a Subject* advanced
himself unto the Title of Duke of Northumberland; not doubting, but he should
be able to possess himself in short time also of all the Land^ of that Family,
which were then remaining in the Crown. To which Estate, the Bishopric of
Du^ham, and all the Lands belonging to it, could not but be beheld as a fair
Addition, if at the least it might be called an addition, which was of more
value, then the Patrimony, to which it was to have been added.

He had long Reigned without a Crown, suffering the King for some years to
enjoy that Title, which was to be transferred (if all Contrivances had held
good) upon one of his Sons, whom He designed in Marriage to the eldest Daughter
of the House of Suffolk. And then how easy was it for him, having a King of
his own begetting, a Queen of his own making, the Lords of the Council at his
beck, and a Parliament to serve his turn for all occasions, to incorporate both
the Lands of the Peircies, and the Patrimony of that Church, into one Estate,
with all the Rights, and Privileges of a County Palatine. Count Palatine of
Durham, Prince Palatine of Northumberland, or what else he pleased, must be the
least he could have aimed at, in that happy Conjuncture; happy to him, had the
Even been answerable unto his Projections; but miserable enough to all the rest
of the Kingdom, who should not servilely submit to this Glorious Upstart. Upon
which Grounds, as the Bishopric of Durham was dissolved by Act of Parliament,
under pretense of patching up the King's Revenue; so the greatest part of the
Lands thereof had been kept together, that they might serve for a Revenue to
the future Palatine. But all these Projects failing in the death of the King,
and his own Attaindure, not long after the Peircies were restored by Queen Mary
to their Lands, and Honors, as the Bishop was unto his Liberty, and to most of
his Lands; it being almost impossible, that such a fair Estate should fall into
the hands of the Courtiers, and no part of it be left sticking in those
Glutinous Fingers.

For to begin the Year withal, the King was taken with a very strong Cough in
the Month of January, which at last ended in a Consumption of the Lungs; the
Seeds of which Malignity were generally supposed to have been sown in the last
Summer's Progress, by some over-heatings of himself in his Sports, and
Exercises. But they, that looked more narrowly into the matter, observed some
kind of decayings in him from the time that Sir Robert Dudley* the third Son of
Northumberland, was admitted into a place of ordinary attendance about his
Person, which was on the same Day, when his Father was created Duke* For
whereas most men gave themselves no improbable hopes, that betwixt the Spring
time of his life, the Growing season of the year, and such Medicinal
applications as were made unto him, the disease would wear it self away, by
little and little, yet they found the contrary. It rather grew so fast upon
him, that when the Parliament was to begin on the first of March, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, were Commanded to attend him at White Hall, instead of
waiting on him from thence to Westminster, in the usual manner. Where being
come, they found a Sermon ready for them (the Preacher being the Bishop of
London) which otherwise was to have been Preached in the Abby-Church; and the
Great Chamber of the Court accomodated for an House of Peers to begin the
Session. For the opening whereof, the King then sitting under the Cloth of
State, and all the Lords, according to their Ranks, and Orders, he declared by
the Lord Chancellor Goodrick* the causes of his calling them to the present
Parliament, and so dismissed them for that time. A Parliament which began, and
ended in the Month of March, that the Commissions might the sooner be
dispatched to their several Circuits, for the speedier gathering up of such of
the Plate, Copes, Vestments, and other Furnitures, of which the Church was to
be spoiled, in the time of his sickness,

Yet in the midst of these disorders there was some care taken for advancing
both the honor and the interest of the English-Nation, by furnishing Sebastian
Cabol for some new discoveries. Which Sebastian, the Son of John Cabol a
Venetian born, attended on his first employment under Henry the seventh, Anno
1497. At what time they discovered the Barralaos, and the Coasts of Caenada:
now called New-France, even to the 67. degree of Northern Latitude. Bending his
Course more toward the South, and discovering a great part of the shoars of
Florida, he returned for England; bringing with him three of the Natives of
that Country, to which the name of New Foundland has been since appropriated.
But finding the KING unhappily Embroyled in a War with Scotland, and no present
Encouragements to be given for a further Voyage, he betook himself into the
service of the KING of SPAIN, and after forty years and more, upon some
distaste, abandoned SPAIN, and offered his service to this KING. By whom, being
made Grand Pilot of England, in the year 1549. he animated the
English-Merchants, to the finding out of a passage by the North-East Seas to
Cathay, and China; first enterprised under the Conduct of Sr. Hugh Willoughby,
who unfortunately Perished in the Action; himself, and all his Company, being
Frozen to Death (all the particulars of his Voyage being since committed to
Writing) as was certified by the Adventures in the year next following. It was
upon the twentieth of May in this present year that this Voyage was first
undertaken, three great Ships being well manned, and fitted for the Expedition;
which afterward was followed by Chancelour, Burrought, Jackman, Jenkinson, and
other noble Adventurers, in the times Succeding. Who though they failed of
their Attempt in finding out a shorter way to Cathay, and China; yet did they
open a fair Passage to the Bay of S. Nicholas, and thereby laid the first
foundation of a Wealthy Trade betwixt us, and the Muscovites.

But the KING'S Sickness still increasing, who was to live no longer then might
well stand with the designs of the DVKE of Northumber-land; some Marriages are
resolved on, for the Daughters of the DVKE of Suffolk, in which the KING
appeared as forward, as if he had been one of the Principalls in the Plot
against him. And so the matter was Contrived, that the Lady JANE the eldest
Daughter to that DVKE, should be Married to the Lord Guilford Dudly, the fourth
Son (then living) of Northumberland, all the three Elder Sons having Wives
before, that Katherine the second Daughter of Suffolk, should be Married to the
Lord Henry Herbert, the Eldest Son of the Earl of Pembrock, whom Dudly had made
privy to all his Counsels; and the third Daughter, named Mary, being
Crook-Backed, and otherwise not very taking, affianced to Martin Keys, the
KING'S Gentleman-Porter. Which Marriages together with that of the Lady
Katherine, one of the Daughters of Duke Dudly, to Henry Lord Hastings, Eldest
Son of the Earl of Huntington, were celebrated in the end of May, or the
beginning of June (for I find our Writers differing in the time thereof) with
as much Splendor and solemnity, as the KING'S weak Estate, and the sad
Condition of the Court could be thought to bear. These Marriages all solemnized
at D^rham. House in the Strand, of which Northumberland had then took
possession in the name of the Rest, upon a Confidence of being Master very
shortly of the whole Estate. The noise of these Marriages bred such Amazement
in the Hearts of the common People, apt enough in themselves to speak the worst
of Northumberland's Actions; That there was nothing left unsaid, which might
serve to show their hatred against him, or express their Pity toward the KING.
But the DVKE was so little troubled at it, that on the contrary he resolved to
Dissemble no longer, but openly to play his Game, according to the Plot and
Project; which he had been Hammering ever ^ince the Fall of the DVKE of
Somerset, whose Death he had Contrived on no other Ground, but for laying the
way more plain, and open to these vast ambitions.

The KING was now grown weak in Body, and his Spirits much decayed by a
languishing Sickness; which Rendered him more apprehensive of such fears and
Dangers, as were to be presented to him, then otherwise he could have been in a
time of strength.

In which Estate, Duke Dudly so prevailed upon him, that he con^ented at the
last to a transposition of the Crown from his natural sisters, to the Children
of the Duchess of Suffolk; Confirming it by Letters Patents, to the Heirs
Males of the Body of the said Duchess. And for want of such Heirs Males to be
Born in the lifetime of the KING, the Crown immediately to descend on the Lady
JANE (the eldest Daughter of that House) and the Heirs of her Body, and so with
several Remainders, to the rest of that Family. The carriage of which Business,
and the Rubs it met with in the way, shall be reserved to the particular story
of the Lady JANE when she is brought unwilling upon the Stage, there on to Act
the part of a Queen of England. It suffices in this place to note, that the
KING had no sooner caused these Leters Patents to pass the Seal, but his
Weakeness more visibly increased, then it did before. And as the KING'S
Weakeness did increase, so did the DVKE of Northumberland's Diligence about
him; for he was little absent from him, and had always some well-assured, to
Epy how the State of his Health changed every Hour; And the more joyful he was
at the Heart, the more Sorrowful appearance did he outwardly Make. Whither any
tokens of Poison did Appear, reports are various. Certainly his Physicians
discerned an invincible Malignity, in his disease; and the Suspicion did the
more increase, for that the Complaint proceeded chiefly from the Lights; a part,
as of no quickness, so no seat for any sharp Disease. The Bruit whereof being
got amongst the People, they break out into immoderate Passions; Complaining
that, for this cause, his two Uncles had been taken away; that for this cause
the most Faithful of his Nobility, and of his Council were disgraced, and
removed from Court; that this was the reason why such were placed next his
Person, who were most assuredly disposed, either to commit,. or permit, any
Mischief; that now it did appear, that it was not vainly conjectured some years
before, by Men of Judgment and Foresight, that after Sommerset's Death the King
should not long Enjoy his Life. But the DVKE regarded not much the muttering
Multitude, knowing full well, that Rumors grow Stale, and Vanish with Time;
and yet, somewhat to abate, or Delay them for the present, He caused speeches
^o be spread abroad that the KING began to be in a Recovery of his Health,
which was the more readily Believed, because most desired it to be true. To
which Report the General Jugdment of his Physicians gave no little Countenance,
by whom it was affirmed, that they saw some hopes of his Recovery, if he might
be removed to a Better, and more Healthful Air. But this, DVKE Dudly did not
like of, and therefore he so dealt with the LORDS of the Council, that they
would by no means yield unto it, upon pretense of his Inability to endure any
such Remove.

And now, the time being near at hand, for the last Act of this Tragedy, a
certain Gentlewoman, accounted a fit Instrument for the purpose, offered her
Service for the Cure; giving no small assurance of it, if He might be committed
wholly to her disposing. But from this Proposition the KING'S Physicians showed
themselves to be very averse, in regard, that as she could give no reason,
either of the nature of the Disease, or of the part afflicted; so she would not
declare the means, whereby she intended to work the Cure. Whose Opposition
notwithstanding, it was in time resolved by the Lords of the Council, that the
Physicians should be discharged, and the Ordering of the King's Person
committed unto her alone. But she had not kept Him long in hand, when He was
found to have fallen into such Desperate Extremity, as manifestly might
Declare, that His Death was hastened, under pretense of finding out a more
quick way for restoring of His Health. For now it visibly appeared, that His
Vital Parts were mortally stuffed. Which brought Him to a difficulty of speech,
and breathing; that His Legs* swelled, his Pulse failed, and his Skin changed
color; with many other horrid Symptoms of approaching Death. Which being
observed, the Physicians were again sent for, when it was too late; and sent
for (as they gave it out) but for Fashion only; because it was not thought fit
in Reason of State, that a King should by, without having some Physicians in
attendance of him, by some of which it was secretly whispered. That neither
their Advice nor Applications, had been at all regarded in the course of his
Sickness, That the King had been ill dealt with, more then once, or twice; and
that, when by the Benefit, both of his Youth, and of careful Means, there were
some fair hopes of his Recovery, He was again more strongly Over-laied then
ever. And for a farther proof, that some undue Practices had been used upon
him, it is Affirmed by a Writer of the Popish Party, who could have no great
cause to pity such a Calamitous End, not only that the Apothecary, who
poisoned him, as well for the Horror of the Offense, as the Disquietness of
his Conscience, did not long after drown himself; but that the Landress, who
washed his Shirts, lo^t the Skin of her fingers. Against which general
apprehensions of some ill Dealing toward this unfortunate Prince, it can be no
sufficient Argument (if any Argument at all) that Queen Mary caused no Enquiry
to be made about it, as some supposed She would have done, if the suspicion had
been raised upon any good Grounds, For it may easily be Believed, that She who
afterward admitted of a Consultation for Burning the Body of Her Father, and
cutting off the Head of Her Si^ter, would not be over-Careful in the search,
and pun^shment of those, who had precipitated the Death of her Brother.

The differences which were between them in the point of Religion, and the
King's forwardness in the Cause of the Lady Jane; His rendering Her uncapaable,
as much as in Him was, to succeed in the Crown; and leaving Her in the Estate
of Illegitimation, were thought to have enough in them of a Supersedeas unto
all Good Nature. So that the King might dye by such sinister Practices, without
putting Queen MARY to the trouble of enquiring after them; who thought Her Self
to have no Reason of being too sollicitous in searching out the secret Causes
of His Death, who had been so injurious to Her in the time of His Life. A Life,
which lasted little, and was full of trouble; so that Death could not be
unwelcome to Him, when the hopes of His Recovery began to fail Him. Of which if
He desired a Restitution, it was rather for* the Church's sake, then for His
own. His dying Prayers not so much aiming at the prolonging of His Life, as the
Continuance of Religion: Not so much at the freeing of Himself from His
Disease, as the preserving of the Church from the danger of Popery. Which dying
Prayer, as it was taken from His Mouth, was in these words following:

Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable, and wretched life, and take me
among thy Chosen. Howbeit, not my Will, but Thine be done. Lord, I commit my
Spirit to Thee. O Lord, Thou know, how happy it were for Me, to be with
Thee: Yet, for thy Chosen's sake, send me Life, and Health, that I may truly se
ve Thee. Oh my Lord God! bless my People, and save Thine Inheritance. O Lord
God, save thy Chosen People of England. Oh Lord God! defend this Realm from
Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion, that I, and my People, may praise thy
Holy Name, for Jesus Christ his sake.

With this Prayer, and other Holy Meditations, He prepared that Pious Soul for
God; which He surrendered into the Hands of His Creatout, on the sixth of July,
toward Night, when He had lived fifteen Years, eight Months, and four and
twenty Days: Of which, He had Reigned six Years, five Months, and eight Days
over. His Body, kept a while at Greenwich, was, on the eight of August, removed
to Westminster, and, on the morrow after, solemnly Interred amongst His
Ancestors, in the Abbey Church. In the performance whereof, the Lord Treasure
Paulet, with the Earls of Shrewsbury and Pembroke, served as principal
Mourners; the Funeral Sermon Preached by Doctor Day* then shortly to be
re-established in the Sea of Chichester. And, if the Dead ^e capable of any
Felicity in this present Woald, He might be said, to have had a special part
thereof, in this particular. viz. That, as He had caused all Divine Offices to
be Celebrated in the English Tongue, according to the Reformation, which was
made in the time of His Life; so the whole Service of the Day, together with
the Form of Burial, and the Communion following on it. were Officiated in the
English Tongue, (according to the same Model) on the Day of his Obsequies. But
whilst these things were Acting on the Church of Westminster, Queen Mary held
a more beneficial Obsequie for Him, (as She then imagined) in the Tower of
London, where She caused a Solemn Dirige, in the Latin Tongue, to be Chanted
in the Afternoon; and, the next Day, a Mass of Requiem, to be sung for the good
of His Sonl: At which, both She, and many of Her Ladies, made their accustomed
Offerings, according to the Form, and Manner of the Church of Kome.

Such was the Life, and such the Death of this Excellent Prince, whose
Character I shall not borrow from any of our own English Writers, who may be
thought to have been biased by their own Affections, in speaking more, or
less, of Him, then He had deserved. But I shall speak Him in the words of that
Great Philosopher Hierome Cardanus, an Italian born; and, who professing the
Religion of the Church of Rome, cannot be rationally accused of Partiality in
his Character of Him.

There was in Him (says he) a towardly Disposition, and pregnancie, apt to all
Humane Literature: as who, being yet a Child, had the knowledge of diverse
Tongues: First, of the English, His own Natural Tongue; of the Latin also, and
of the French: Neither was He ignorant (as I hear) of the Greek, Italian, and
Spanish Tongues, and of other Languages, peradventure, more. In His own, in the
French, and in the Latin Tongue, singularly perfect; and, with the like
facility, apt to receive all other. Neither was He ignorant in Logic, in the
Principles of Natural Philosophy, or in Music. There was in Him, lacking
neither Humanity, a Princely Gravity, and Majesty, for any kind of
towardliness, beseeming a Noble King. Briefly, it might seem A Miracle of
Nature, to behold the Excellent Wit, and Forwardness, that appeared in Him,
being yet but a Child. And this (says he) I speak not Rhetorically, to
amplify things, or to make them more, then Truth is; nay, the Truth is more,
then I do utter. So He, in reference to His Per^onal Ab^lities and
Qualifications: And for the rest, that is to say, His Piety to Almighty God,
His Zeal to the Reformation of Religion, His Care for the well-ordering of the
Commonwealth, and other Qualities belonging to a Christian King, (so far as
they could be found in such tender years,) I leave them to be gathered from the
Passages of His Life, as before laid down: Remembering well, that I am to play
the Part of an Historian, and not of a Panegyrist, or Rhetorician.

As for the manner of His Death, the same Philosopher leaves it under a
suspicion, of being like to fall upon Him, by some dangerous Practice. For,
whether He divined it by his ART in Astrology (having Calculated the Scheme of
His Nativity) or apprehended it by the Course, and Carriage of Business, he
made a dangerous Prediction; when he foresaw, that the KING should shortly dye
a violent Death; and (as he reports) fled out of the Kingdom, for fear of
further danger, which might follow on it.

Of any Public Works of Piety, in the Reign of this KING, more then the
Founding and Endowing of the Hospitals before-remembred, I find no mention in
our Authors; which cannot be affirmed of the Reign of any of His
Predecessors, since their first receiving of the Gospel. But their Times were
for building up, and His unfortunate Reign was for pulling down. Howsoever, I
find His Name remembered amongst the Benefactours to the University of Oxford,
and, by that Name, required to be commemorated in all the Prayers before such
Sermons; as were Preached ordinarily by any of that Body, in Saint Marie's
Church, or at Saint Paul's Cross, or finally in the Spittle without
Bishops-Gate, on some solemn Festivals. But, possibly it is, that his
Beneficence did extend no further, then either to the Confirmation of such
Endowments, as had been made unto that University by King Henry the Eight, or,
to the excepting of all Colleges in that, and the other University, out of the
Statute, or Act of Parliament, by which all Chantries, Colleges, and
Free-Chapels, were conferred upon Him. The want of which Redemption, in the
Grant of the said Chantries, Colleges, Free-Chapels to King Henry the Eight,
struck such a Terror unto the Students of both Universities, that they could
never think themselves secure, till the Expiring of that Statute by the Death
of the King; notwithstanding a very Pious and Judicious Letter, which had been
written to the King in that behalf, by Doctor Richard Cox, then Dean of
Christ-Church, and T^^our to His Son, Prince Edward.

But, not to leave this Reign, without the Testimony of some Work of Piety, I
cannot but remember the Foundation of the Hospital of Christ in Abindon, as a
Work, not only of this Time, but the King's own Act. A Guild, or Brotherhood,
had been there founded in the Parish Church of Saint Hellens, during the Reign
of King Henry the Sixth, by the procurement of one Sir John Gollafrie (a near
Neighboring Gentleman) for Building, and Repairing certain Bridges, and
Highways, about the Town; as also, for the Sustenance, and Relief of thirteen
poor People, with two, or more Priests, for performing all Divine Offices, unto
those of the Brotherhood. Which being brought within the Compass of the Act of
Parliament, by which all Chantries, Colleges, and Free-Chappels, were conferred
on the Crown: the Lands hereof were seized on, to the use of the King; the
Repairing of the Ways, and Bridges, turned upon the Town, and the Poor left
Destitute* in a manner, of all Relief. In which Condition it remained, till the
last Year of the King, when it was moved by Sir John Mason, one of the Masters
of Requests (a Town-born Child, and one of the poorest men's Children in it) to
erect an Hospital in the same, and to Endow it with such of the Lands,
belonging to the former Brotherhood, as remained in the Crown, and to charge
it with the Services, and Pious Uses, which were before incumbent on the old
Fraternity. The Suitour was too powerful to be denied, and the Work too
Charitable in it self to be long demurred on, so that he was easily made Master
also of this Request. Having obtained the King's Consent, he caused a handsome
Pile of Building to be Erected near the Church, distributed into several
Lodgings, for the Use of the Poor, and one convenient Common Hall, for dispatch
of Business: to which he laid such Farms, and Tenements in the Town, and
elsewhere, as had been vested in the Brotherhood of the Holy-Cross, before
remembered; and committed the Care, and Governance of the whole Revenue, to a
Corporation of twelve Persons, by the Name of the Master, and Governors of the
Hospital of Christ in Abindon. All which he fortified, and assured to the Town
for ever, by Virtue of this His Majesty's Letters Patents, ^earing Date the
nineteenth of May, in the seventh and last Year of His Reign, Anno 1553. And
so I conclude the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, sufficiently remarkable for
the Progress of the Reformation; but otherwise tumultuous in it self, and
defamed by Sacrilege, and so distracted into Sides, and Factions; that, in the
end, the King Himself became a Prey to the strongest Party: which could not
otherwise be safe, but in His Destruction, contrived on Purpose, as it was
generally supposed) to smooth the Way to the Advancement of the Lady Jane Gray
to the Royal Throne. Of whose short Reign, Religious Disposition, and
Calamitous Death, We are next to speak.

AN APPENDIX TO THE FORMER BOOK, Touching the Interposings made in Behalf of
the Lady JANE GRAY, Publicly Proclaimed QUEEN of ENGLAND.

Together with the History of Her Admirable Life, Short Reign, and most
Deplorable Death.

Prove. xxxi. 29. Many Daughters have done virtuously; but thou excellest them
all.

Vell. Paterc. lib. 2. Genere, Probitate, Forma, Romanorum Eminentissima, and,
per omnia, Deis, quam hominibus, similior Foemina.

Cambd. in Reliquiis. Miraris Janam Graio Sermon loquutam?
Quo primum nata est tempore, Graia fuit.
LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1660.

THE LIFE and REIGN OF QUEEN JANE.
Anno Domini 1553. An. 1553.

THE Lady JANE GRAY, whom King EDWARD had Declared for His next Successor, was
Eldest Daughter of HENRY Lord GRAY, Duke of Suffolk, and Marquess Dorset,
descended from THOMAS Lord GRAY, Marquess Dorset, the Eldest Son of Queen
ELIZABETH, the only Wife of EDWARD the Fourth, by Sir JOHN GRAY, Her former
Husband. Her Mother was the Lady Frances's Daughter; and in fine, one of the
Coheirs of Charles Brandon, the late Duke of Suffolk, by Mary* His Wife, Queen
Dowager to Lewis the Twelfth of France, and youngest Daughter of King HENRY the
Seventh, Grandfather to King EDWARD now Deceased. Her High Descent, and the
great Care of King HENRY the Eighth, to see Her happily, and well bestowed in
Marriage, Commended Her unto the Bed of Henry, Lord Marquess Dorset,
before-remembred; A man of known Nobility, and of Large Revenues; possessed not
only of the Patrimony of the Grays of Groby, but of the whole Estate of the
Lord Harrington, and Bonvile: which descended on him in the Right of his
Grandmother, the Wife of the first Marquess of Dorset, of this Name, and
Family. And it is little to be doubted, but that the Fortunes of the House had
been much increased, by the especial Providence, and Bounty of the said Queen
Elizabeth; who cannot be supposed to have neglected any Advantage, in the Times
of Her Glory, and Prosperity, for the Advancement of Her Children by Her former
Husband. In these Respects, more then for any Personal Abilities, which he had
in himself, he held a very fair Esteem amongst the Peers of the Realm: rather
Beloved, then Reverenced by the Common People. For, as he had few Commendable
Qualities, which might produce any High Opinion of his Parts, and Merit: so was
he guilty of no Vices, which might blunt the Edg of that Affection in the
Vulgar sort; which commonly is born to Persons of that Eminent Rank. His W^fe,
as of an Higher Birth, was of greater Spirit: but one, that could accommodate
it to the will of Her Husband. Pretermitted in the Succession to the Crown, by
the last Will, and Testament of King Henry the Eighth: not out of any
Disrespect, which that King had of Her; but, because he was not willing to
think it probable, that either She, or the Lady Ellanor, Her younger Sister,
(whom he had pretermitted also in that Designation) could live so long* as to
Survive His own three Children, and such, as, in the course of Nature, should
be issued from them.

Of this Marriage there were born three Daughters, that is to say, Jane,
Katharine, and Mary. Of which, the Eldest, being but some Months older then
the late King Edward, may be presumed to have took the name of Jane, from the
Queen Jane Seimour; as Katharine, from Queen Katharine Howard, or Queen
Katharine Parr; and Mary, from the Princess Mary, the eldest Daughter of King
Henry, or in Relation to Her Grandmother, His youngest Sister. But the great
Glory of this Family was the Lady Jane, who seemed to have been born with those
Attractions, which seat a Sovereignty in the face of most beautiful Persons;
yet was Her mind endued with more Excellent Charms, then the Attractions of Her
face: Modest, and Mild of Disposition, Courteous of Carriage, and of such
Affable Deportment, as might Entitle Her to the Name of Queen of Hearts, before
She was Designed for Queen over any Subjects. Which Native, and Obliging
Graces, were accompanied with some more profitable ones, of Her own Acquiring;
which set an higher Value on them, and much increased the same, both in Worth,
and Luster. Having attained unto that Age, in which other young Ladies used to
apply themselves, to the Sports, and Exercises of their Sex: She wholly gave
Her mind to good Arts, and Sciences; much furthered in that pursuit, by the
care, and diligence of one Mr. Elmer, who was appointed for Her Tutour; the
same (if my Conjecture deceive me not) who afterward was deservedly Advanced,
by Queen Elizabeth, to the Sea of London. Under his charge She came to such a
large Proficiency, that She spoke the Latin, and Greek Tongues, with as sweet
a fluency, as if they had been Natural, and Native to Her; Exactly skilled in
the Liberal Sciences, and perfectly well Studied in both kinds of Philosophy.

For Proof whereof, there goes a Story, that Mr. R^ger Ascham (being then
Tutour to the Princess Elizabeth) came to attend (...) once at Broadgates, a
House of Her Father's, neighboring to the Town of Leicester: where he found
Her in Her Chamber, reading Phaedon Platonis in Greek, with as much delight, as
some Gentlemen would have read a Merry Tale in Geoffery Cha^cer. The Duke, Her
Father, the Duchess, and all the rest of the Household, were at that time
hunting in the Park: which moved him to put this Question to Her, How She could
find in Her Heart to loose such Excellent Pastimes? To which She very
cheerfully returned this Answer, That all the Pastimes in the Park were a
Shadow only of the Pleasure, and Contentment, which She found in that Book;
adding moreover, That one of the greatest blessings God ever gave Her, was in
sending Her sharp Parents, and a gentle Schole-Master, which made Her take
delight in nothing so much, as in Her Study. By which agreeableness of
Disposition, and eminent Proficiency in all parts of Learning, she became very
dear to the young King Edward; to whom Fox not only makes Her equal, but does
acknowledge her also to be His Superior in those Noble Studies. And for an
Ornament superadded to Her other Perfections, she was most zealously affected
to the true Protestant Religion, then by Law established; which She embraced,
not out of any outward compliance with the present current of the Times; but
because Her own most Excellent Judgment had been fully satisfied in the Truth,
and Purity thereof. All which together did so endear her to the King, that he
took great Delight in Her Conversation, and made it the first step to that
Royal Throne, to which He afterward designed Her in the Time of His Sickness.

Thus lived she in these sweet Contentments, till she came unto the years of
Marriage, when she, that never found in Her self the least Spark of Ambition,
was made the most unhappy Instrument of another man's. Dudly of Warwick, a
Person of a proud, deceitful, and aspiring Nature, began to entertain some
Ambitious thoughts, when Edward first began to Reign: but kept them down, as
long as his two Uncles lived together, in Peace, and Concord. But, having found
a means to dissolve that knot, occasioned by the Pride, and Insolency of the
Duchess of Sommerset, one as ill-Natured as himself, he first made use of the
Protector to destroy the Admiral, and after served himself by some Lords of
the Court, for humbling the Lord Protector to an equal Level with the rest of
the Council. Finding by this Experiment, how easy a thing it was to serve his
Turn by them on all other Occasions, he drew unto himself the managing of all
Affairs; none being so hardy, as to question any of his Actions, and much less
to cross them. But not content with being looked on as the Chief in Power, he
is resolved to make himself the first in Place; thinking no private Greatness
to be answerable to so great a Merit, as he had fancied in himself. Thus
busying his unquiet thoughts upon new Designs, and passing from one imagination
to another, he fixed at last upon a purpose of Husbanding the Opportunities to
his best Advantage; in transferring the Crown into his own Family, which he
thought Capable enough of the highest Honors.

For why (said he) within himself, should not the Son of a Dudly, being the
more Noble House of the two, be thought as Capable of the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, as the Son, or Grandchild of a Seimour. Though I pretend not to
be born of the Race of Kings; yet I may give a King to England of my Race and
Progeny, on as good ground, as any, which derive themselves from Owen Tudor,
the Ancestour of the Boy now reigning. That Family pretended only from a
Daughter to the House of Sommerset, and there are now some Daughters of the
House of Suffolk, which may pretend as much as she. If by a Match into that
House, I can find a way to bring the Crown into mine own; I shall want no
Presidents at home, and find many abroad. Some Dangers may present themselves
in the Pursuit of this Enterprise: but Dangers are to be despised, as in all
great Actions; so chiefly, when a Crown is aimed at. It is resolved, that I
will try my Fortune in it: which if it prosper to my wish, I shall live
Triumphantly; if I sink under the Attempt, I shall perish Nobly. Which being
concluded* and resolved on, he first insinuates himself into the good
affections of the Marquess of Dorset; whom he assisteth in his Suit for the
Title of Suff^lk, which without him was not to be gained: exalts himself to the
like Glorious Title of Duke of Northumberland, that he might stand on equal
^round with the proudest of them: and in a word so cunningly prepares his
Toils for the Duke of Sommerset, that at the last he fell into them, never to
be set free again, until Death released him; all which Particulars have been
at large laid down in the former History. And this being done, he suffered the
young King to wear out all the following year, the better to avoid all Popular
suspicion, that His Uncle's Death was only hastened to make way for His. And
possible it is, that he might have tired it out a little longer; but for a
smart Jest, which He put upon this Ambi^ious Minister. The King took great
delight in his Bow, and, Arrows: and shooting one day at the Butt (as He used
to do) hit the very White. Well aimed, my Liege, said Merrily the Mighty Duke:
But you aimed better, said the King, when you shot off the head of My Uncle
Sommerset: which words so stang the Conscience of the guilty man, that he could
not think himself secure, but by accelerating his Design, for settling the
Crown upon the Head of one of his Children, according to the Plot, which he had
hammered in the Forge of his Wretched Brain.

For now, the King beginning sensibly to decay, he takes his time* to enter
into Communication with the Duke of Suffolk, about a Marriage to be made
betwixt the Lord Guilford Dudly, his fourth Son, and the Lady Jane Gray, the
Duke's eldest Daughter: which, with the rest of the Marriages beforementioned,
being propounded and concluded, (for he was grown too great, and known to be
too dangerous to be denied in any reasonable Suit) a day was set, in which this
Excellent Lady was to be transplanted into the Family of the Dudlies. A day,
which she expected with a Virgin Modesty, and, after the Solemnity of the
Nuptial Rites, delivers Her pure Body to the chaste Embraces of a Virtuous
Con^ort; who, of all Dudlie's Brood, had nothing of the Father in him. All
which succeeding to his wish, he sets himself to the accomplishing of that
Project, which he had long before designed. The King was now grown weak in
Body, and decayed in Spirits, and in that weak Estate he takes his
Opportunities to inculcate to Him, what infinite Blessings had been derived
from Him on this Church, and Nation, by the Blessed Reformation of Religion, so
happily began, and brought to such Perfection by Him: That it must therefore be
His Care so to provide for the Continuance of those infinite Blessings, that
Posterity might enjoy the Benefit, and Comfort of it, which would gain Him a
more precious Memory amongst His Subjects, then all His other Princely Virtues;
That nothing was more feared by all Sorts of People, then that the Crown
Imperial (if it should please Almighty God to call Him to a Crown of Gl^ry)
would fall upon the Head of the Lady Mary, a Princess passionately affected to
the Interess of the Church of Rome, and one, who by Her Marriage with some
Potent Prince of that Religion, might Captivate the Freeborn English Nation to
a Foreign Servitude; That both His Sisters, being born of disputed Marriages,
and howsoever being but his half Sisters only, and by several Ventures* could
neither be Heirs to Him, nor to one another, by the known Laws of the Land:
which neither Acts of Parliament, nor the last Will, and Testament of the King
Deceased, were of power to alter; That the young Queen of Scots was an Alien
born, by Consequence incapable of any Inheritance in the Realm of England, and
had besides preferred the Alliance of the French before that of His Majesty,
which rendered Her as unworthy, as she was incapable; That, for the better
carrying on of that Blessed Work of Reformation, the Peace, and Happiness of
His People, the preventing of all Emergent Mischiefs, and His own everlasting
Fame, it was not possible to make a more happy Provision, then by transferring
the Crown to the Lady Jane, a Lady of such Excellent Virtues, as were
sufficient to adorn the Richest Diadem; That there was no Question to be made,
but that His Majesty knew, as well as any, the admirable qualities of that
Matchless Lady, Her Zeal to the Religion, here by Him established, the
agreeableness of Her Conversation with His own Affections, and could not but
conceive that Nation to be infinitely happier then all others, which might fall
under the Command of so mild a Government; And finally, That he was bound by
His Duty to God, the Light of His own Conscience, and the Love He had to all
His Subjects, to lay aside all Natural Affections to His Father's House, in
respect of that great Obligation, which He had to God's Glory and the true
Religion; following therein the Example of our Lord, and Savior, who looked
both for his Brothers, and Sisters, amongst his Disciples, without relating to
his nearest Kindred by Joseph, or Mary.

By these Suggestions, and Inducements, he much inclined the King to hearken to
his Propositions. For furtherance whereof he caused such, as were about Him, to
entertain Him with continual Discourses of the Divine Perfections, and most
Heavenly Graces of the Lady Jane; the high Esteem, in which She was with all
the Subjects, for Her Zeal, and Piety; the everlasting Fame, which would wait
upon Him, by providing such a Successor to enjoy the Crown, in whom Virtues
would survive to succeeding Ages. Then which, no Music could sound sweeter in
the Ears of the King, whom he knew to have an affectionate Sympathy with that
Excellent Lady; as being much of the same Age, brought up in the same Studies;
as near to Him in the sweetness of Her Disposition, as She was in Blood; and of
a Conversation so agreeable to Him, as if They had been but the same Person in
diverse Habits. And they all plied their Game so cunningly, that the weak King,
not being able to withstand so many Assaults, did at last condescend to that,
which he found not only most conformable to their Importunities, but to His
own Affections also. Order was taken thereupon, that an Instrument should be
drawn in due Form of Law, for the transposing of the Crown to the Children of
the Lady Frances, Duchess of Suffolk, and Daughter to Mary, the French Queen,
one of the Sisters of King Henry, His Maje^tie's ^^ther. In which Instrument,
nothing was to be defective, which either could be drawn from the Grounds of
Law, or the Rules of Polity, to justify, and endear the Action. In drawing up
whereof, there was none thought fitter to be used, then Sir William Cecil, one
of the Chief Secretaries of Estate, who having before served Dudlie's Turn
against his old Master, the Duke of Sommerset, was looked on, as the Readiest
Man for the present Service.

The Pretensions, taken from the Law, for excluding the King's two Sisters from
the Right of Succession, were grounded; First, Upon the Invalidity of their
Mother's Marriage: both being made void by Legal Sentences of Divorce, and
those Divorces ratified by Acts of Parliament. In which the said two Sisters
were declared to be illegitimate, and consequently incapable of any of those
Favors, which were intended to them by the Act of Succession, made in the
thirty fifth year of the late King Henry, or by the last Will, and Testament,
of that King, which was built upon it. In the next Place it was pretended, that
the said two Sisters, Mary, and Elizabeth, being but of half Blood to the King
now Reigning (admitting them to have been born in lawful Wedlock) were not in
any Capacity by the Common Law, (the old good Law of England) to be Heirs unto
Him, or to Succeed in any Part of that Inheritance, which came unto Him by His
Father. It was considered also, that by the known Rules, and Principles of the
Common Law, no manner of Person was Inheritable to any Estate of Lands, or
Tenements, in the Realm of England, who was not born under the King's
Allegiance, as King of England, but in the case of Naturalization by Act of
Parliament. Which seemed to be a sufficient Bar against all Titles, and
Demands, for the Line of Scotland, although derived from Margaret, the Eldest
Daughter of King Henry the Seventh. And whereas the Lady Frances, Duchess of
Suffolk, might seem both by the Law of Nature, and the Right of Succession, to
have precedence in Title before her Daughter; yet was no Injury offered to her:
in regard, that she was willing to pass by all her Personal Claims, for the
Preferment of her Children. Which Pretermissions of the Mother were neither
new, nor strange in the Succession to the Crown of this Kingdom. Not new;
because the like was done by Maud the Emperess, for the Advancement of her Son
King Henry the Second: nor strange; because it h^d been lately practiced in the
Person of the Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond, in giving Way to the
Preferment of King Henry the Seventh, the first King of the House now Regnant.

The Reasons, or Pretexts, which seemed to be built on Polity, and Point of
State, were: first, the unavoydable Danger of Reducing this Free, and Noble
Realm, under the Vassalage, and Servitude, of the Bishop of Rome; if either of
the King's two Sisters, in their several Turns, should marry with a Foreign
Prince of that Religion; or otherwise, by the Transport of their own
Affections, submit their Scepters to the Pope.

It was considered also, That, by such Marriages, not only many Foreign
Customs, and Laws, would be introduced: but that there might follow an
Abolishment of those Ancient Laws, upon which the Native Rights, of all the
Subjects, seemed to have dependence. Besides, that possibly the Realm might
hereby be annexed to some greater Kingdom: of which, in time, it would be
reckoned for a Member, and consequently be reduced unto the Form of a Province,
to the utter Subversion of the Ancient Dignity, and Estate thereof. Which
whenever it should happen* it was neither impossible, nor improbable, that
the People, upon a just Sense of the Indignities, and Pressures might elect
some popular and seditious man to be their King, who, to countenance his own
unworthiness, and obscurity, would little regard, what Contumely he cast upon
the falling Family of the Kings before him. To which, perchance some further
Countenance might be added from the Holy Scripture: where Solomon is found to
be preferred unto the Throne by David, before Adonijah; the youngest Son,
before the eldest; a Child, before a Man experienced, and well grown in years.
And some Examples also might be had of the like Transpositions, in the Realm of
Scotland, in Hungary, Naples, and else where: enough to show, that nothing had
been done in this great Transaction, which was not to be presidented in other
Places. Upon all which Considerations, it was thought most agreeable to the
Rules of Polity, that the King by Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of
England, should so dispose of the Possession of the Crown, (with such
Remainders, and Reversions, as to him seemed best) as might prevent such
Inconveniences, and Emergent Mischiefs, as might otherwise happen: which could
not better be effected, then by setting the Crown on the Head of the Lady Jane;
a Lady of a Royal Blood, born in the Realm, brought up in the Religion now by
Law established; Married already to a Person of Desert, and Honor; and such an
one, in whom all those Graces were concentred, which were sufficient to adorn
all the rest of Her Sex.

Thus Reason being thus prepared, the next Care was, to have the Instrument so
contrived in due form of Law, that nothing might be wanting in the Style and
Legalities of it, which might make it any way obnoxious to Disputes, and
Questions. For the doing whereof, it was thought necessary to call in the
Assistance of some of the Judges, and others of His Majesty's Council learned
in the Laws of this Realm; by whose Authority it might be thought more passable
amongst the People. Of all which Rank, none was thought fitter to be taken into
the Consultation, then Sir Edward Montague; not only as Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, and very well experienced in His own Profession: But because, he
being one of the Executours of the King deceased, his concurrence with the rest
of the Council, seemed the more considerable. A Letter is therefore sent unto
him on the eleventh of June, subscribed by the Lord Treasurer, the Duke of
Northumberland, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Bedford, and Pembroke, the Lord
Admiral Clinton, the Lord Darcie, Sir John Gale, Sir William Peter, Sir William
Cecil, and Sir John Cheek. By the Tenor whereof, he was commanded to attend
upon their Lordships the next day, in the Afternoon, and to bring with him, Sir
John Baker, Chancellor of the First Fruits and Tenths, Master Justice
Bromeley, together with the Attorney, and Sollicitour General. Being brought
into the King's Presence, at the time appointed* whom they found attended by
the Lord Treasurer, and some others of those, who had subscribed the former
Letter: the King declared Himself with a weak Voice to this Effect; viz. That
He had considered, in His Sickness, of the Estate of His Realm; which, if it
should descend on the Lady Mary, who was then unmarried, it might so happen,
that She might marry a Stranger born, whereby not only the Laws of the Realm
might be changed and altered; but all His own Proceedings in Religion, might be
also reversed; That it was His Pleasure therefore, that the Crown should
Descend, after His Decease, unto such Persons, and in such Form, as was
contained in certain Articles, then ready to be showed unto them, to be by them
digested, and disposed of, in due Form of Law.

These Articles, when they had Perused, and Considered of, they signified unto
the King, that they conce^ved them to be contrary to the Act of Succession;
which, being made in Parliament, could not be Frustrated, or made Ineffectual
but by Parliaments only. Which Answer notwithstanding, the King* without
allowing further time, or deliberation, commanded them to take the Articles
along with them, and give the Business a Dispatch, with all speed as might be.
But finding greater Difficulties in it, then had appeared unto their Lordships,
they made a Report unto them at their next Attendance, that they had Considered
of the King's Articles, and the Act of Succession; whereby it appeared
man^festly, that, if they should make any Book concerning the King's
Commandment they should not only be in danger of Treason, but their Lordships
also. The sum of which Report being cer^ifi^d to the Duke of Northumberland,
(who, though absent, was not out of Call) he came in great Rage, and Fury, to
the Council Chamger, called the Chief Justice Traitor; affirmed, that he would
fight in his Shirt, in that Quarrel, against any man living; and behaved
himself in such an outrageous manner, as put both Mountague, and Justice
Bromely, in a very great fear, that he would have struck them. Cal^ed to the
Court again by a Letter of the fourteenth of the same Month, they found the
King more earnest in it, then He was before; requiring them, with a sharp
Voice, and a displeased Countenance, to dispatch the Book, according to the
Articles delivered to them; and telling them, that He would have a Parliament
shortly to Confirm the same. When nothing else would serve the turn, Answer was
made, That His C^mmandment should be obeyed; upon Condition, that they might be
Commissionated so to do by His Majesty's Warrant, under the Great Seal of
England, and have a General Pardon for it, when the Deed was done.

Not daring longer to resist, and having made as good Provision, as they could,
for their own Indemn^ty, they betook themselves unto the Work, digested it in
form o^ Law, caused ^t to be Engrossed in Parchment, and so dispatched it for
the Seal, to the Lord Chancellor Goodrick, sufficiently prepared beforehand
not to stick upon it. B^t then appeared another Difficulty amongst the Lords of
the Council: some of which not well satisfied with these Proceedings, appeared
as backward in Subscribing to the Instrument, before it went unto the Seal; as
the Great Lawyers had done at the first, in being brought to the Employment.
But such was the Authority, which Dudley, and his Party, had gained amongst
them, that some for fear, and some for favor, did Subscribe at last: a Zeal to
the Reformed Religion prevailing in it upon some; a doubt of loosing their
Church Lands more powerfully over-swaying others; and all in fear of getting
the displeasure of that Mighty Tyrant, who, by his Power, and Practices,
carried all before him. The last, that stood it out, was Archbishop Cranmer.
Who, being sent for to the Court, when all the Lords of the Council, and most
of the Judges of the Realm had subscribed the Instrument, refused to put his
hand unto it, or to consent to the Disherison of the late King's Daughters.
After much Reasoning of the Case, he requires a longer time of deliberation;
consults about it with some of the most Learned Lawyers, and is finally sent
for by the King: who, having fully set his heart upon the Business, did use so
many Reasons to him, in behalf of Religion, and plied him with such strong
Persuasions in pursuance of them; that at the last he suffered himself to be
overcome by His Importunities, and so Subscribed it with the rest. Only Sir
James Hales, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, carried the Honor of a
Resolute, and Constant Man: not only from those of his own Rank, but even from
all the Lords of the Council, and almost all the Peers of the Realm to boot;
who, being a man observed to be both Religious, and upright, did very worthily
refuse to Subscribe, and was afterward as unworthily requited by Queen Mary
for it.

Yet, notwithstanding all these Rubs, the Project was driven on so f^st by the
ha^ty Duke, that, by the one and twentieth of June, the Letters Patents were
made ready to pass the Seal: which was about a fortnight before the Death of
the King. During which Interval, he had another Game to Pay: which was the
getting into his Power the Princess Mary, whom, of all others, he most feared,
as the most likely Person to destroy his whole Contrivance. For well he knew,
that, if She stood upon Her Right, as no doubt She would, She was not only
sure of a strong Party in the Realm, who still remained in good Affections to
the Church of Rome; but, that Her Party he^e would be Backed, and Countenanced
by Her Alliances ab^^ad w^o c^^ld ^ot but Prefer, and Support Her Interess
against all Pretenders. (...) ^ust make sure of Her, or else account all Void,
and Fr^stiate, which was done already. And* that he might make sure of Her, he
so prevailed, that Letters were directed to ^er, in the King's Name, from the
Lords of the Cou^cil: Willing Her fo^l w^^h to resort to the King; as well to
be a comfort to Him in His (...), as to see all Matters well Ordered about Him.
The Lady, suspecting to (...) Mischief, addressed Her Self with all spend to
the (...) g^ea^ Joy, that either Her Company, or Her Service* should be
esteemed Needful to the King. But, as She was upon the way; and (...) half a
Da^'s Journey of the Court, She received Advice, both of the King's desperate
Estate, and of the Duke's Designs against Her: whereupon She (...) in ha^t to
Her House at Hoveden; where, in a very short time, She h^ard the Sad N^ws of
Her Brother's Death: who dyed upon the sixth of July* as before was sa^d. Which
being the same day of the Month, on which King Henry ^ad taken off the Head of
Sir Thomas More, for his Adhesion to the Pope, the Interess of Queen Katharine
Dowager, and the Princess Mary, gave an occasion unto those of the R^mish
Party, to look upon it, as a Piece of Divine Retr^bution, in taking away the
(...) of His only Son, on the same day also.

Two days the Death of the King was by Special Order kept so secret, that it
was known to very f^w about the Court. And it concerned them so to do; partly
in expectation of the coming of the Princess Mary wh^m they kn^w to be upon the
way: and partly to make sure of the City of London; the Favor, and Fidelity
whereof, was of great Importance for the carrying on of the Design. But,
understanding by their Espi^ls, that the Princess Mary was retired; a Message
was sent on Saturday, the eighth of July, to Sir George Barns, the Lord Mayour
of London; requiring him, in the Name of the Lords of the Council, to give his
Attendance at the Court, and bring with him six of the Principal Aldermen, six
Merchants of the Staple, and as many of the Company of Merchant-Adventurers. No
haste was wanting on their parts. And coming at the time appointed, they were
privily informed by some of the Council (but in the Name of all the rest) that
the King was dead, and that He had Declared by His Letters Patents, under the
Great Seal of England, subscribed by all the Lords of the Council, and almost
all the Peers of the Realm, that His Cousin, the Lady Jane Gray, was to Succeed
Him in the Crowns of England, and Ireland; as the most True, Certain, and
Undoubted Heir of all His Dominions. Which being signified unto them, it was no
hard matter to obtain their Consent to that, which they were not able to deny.
And so, upon a Promise of their best Assistance to Promote the Cause, and to
keep secret the King's Death, until further Order, they were dismissed unto
their Houses.

It is an Ancient Custom of the Kings of England, immediately on the Death of
their Predecessors, to provide their Lodgings in the Tower. Taking possession,
as it were, by that Royal Fortress, of the rest of the Kingdom; and from thence
passing, in a Solemn, and Magnificent manner, through the Principal Streets of
London, to their Coronation. According to which Ancient Custom, the Lodgings in
the Tower being fitted, and prepared, for the Queen's Reception: the Lords of
the Council passed over from Greenwich on Monday, the tenth of the same Month.
A Letter had been brought the night before from the Princess Mary, who had
received Advertisement of Her Brother's Death: notwithstanding all their Care,
and Diligence, in laboring to conceal it from His nearest Servants; which made
them meet the earlier, and in greater numbers, to return an Answer thereunto.
The Princess knew Her own Right, and the Wrong, which was intended to Her: both
which She signified unto Them, in these following words.

My LORDS,
WE Greet You well; and have received sure Advertisement, that Our Dearest
Brother, the King, Our late Sovereign Lord, is departed to God's Mercy. Which
News how woeful they be unto Our Heart, He only knows, to whose Will, and
Pleasure, We must, and do humbly submit Us, and Our Wills. But, in this so
lamentable a Case, that is, to wit, after His Majesty's Departure, and Death,
concerning the Crown, and Governance of this Realm of England, with the Title
of France, and all things thereto belonging; what has been provided by Act of
Parliament, and the Testament, and Last Will of Our Dearest Father; besides
other Circumstances Advancing Our Right; You know, the Realm, and the whole
World knows: the Rolls, and Records appear, by the Authority of the King, Our
said Father, and the King, Our said Brother, and the Subjects of this Realm. So
that We verily trust, that there is no good true Subject, that is, can, or
would pretend to be ignorant thereof: And of Our part, We have of Our Selves
caused, and as God shall aid, and strengthen Us, shall cause, Our Right, and
Title in this behalf, to be Published, and Proclaimed accordingly. And albeit
this so Weighty a Matter seems strange, that the Dying of Our said Brother,
upon Thursday at night, last past, We hitherto had no knowledge from You
thereof; yet We consider Your Wisdom, and Prudence to be such, that having
eftsoons amongst You Debated, Pondred, and well Weighed this present Case, with
Our Estate, Your Own Estate, the Commonwealth, and all Our Honors; We shall,
and may conceive Great Hope, and Trust, with much assurance in Your Loyalty,
and Service; and therefore for the time interpret, and take things, not to the
worst, that Ye yet will, like Noble Men, Work the best. Nevertheless We are not
ignorant of Your Consultations, to Undo the Provisions made for Our Preferment;
nor of the Great Hands, and Provisions forcible, wherewith You be Assembled,
and Prepared: by whom, and to what end, God, and You know; and Nature cannot,
but fear some Evil. But be it, that some Consideration Politic, or whatsoever
thing else, has moved You thereto; yet, doubt ye not, My Lords, but We can
take all these Your doings, in Gracious Part; being also Right-Ready to remit,
and fully Pardon the same; and that to Eschew Bloodshed, and Vengeance, against
all those, that can, or will intend the same; trusting also assuredly, that Ye
will take, and accept this Grace, and Virtue, in Good Part, as appertains;
and that We shall not be Enforced to use the Service of other Our True
Subjects, and Friends: which, in this Our Just, and Right Cause, Go^, in whom
all Our affiance is shall send Us. Wherefore, My Lords, We require You, and
charge you, and every of You, of Your Allegiance, which You ow to God, and Us,
and to none other: for Our Honor, and the Surety of Our Person, only employ
Your Selves; and forthwith, upon receipt hereof, cause Our Right, and Title to
the Crown, and Governance of this Realm, to be Proclaimed in Our City of
London, and other places, as to your Wisdoms shall seem Good, and as to this
Case appertains; not failing hereof, as Our very Trust is in You. And this
Our Letter, Signed with Our Hand, shall be your sufficient Warrant in that
behalf.

Given under Our Signet, at Our Manor of Kenning-Hall, the ninth of July,
1553.

This Letter seemed to give their Lordships no other trouble, then the
returning of an Answer. For well they knew, that She could do no less, then put
up Her Claim; and they conceived that She was not in a condition for doing
more. Only it was thought fit to let Her know, what She was to trust to: the
better to prevent such Inconveniences, as might otherwise happen. And to that
end an Answer was presently dispatched, under the Hands of the Arch^Bishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor Goodrich, Bishop of Ely, the Dukes of
Northhumberland, and Suff^lk; the Marquesses of Winchester, and North-hampton;
the Earls of Arundel, Shrewsbury, Huntington, Bedford, and Pembroke; the Lords
Cobham, and Darcie; Sir Thomas Cheny, Sir Robert Cotton, Sir William Peter, Sir
William Cecil, Sir John Cheek, Sir John Mason, Sir Edward North, Sir Robert
Bows. The Tenor whereof was as follows.

MADAM,
WE have received Your Letters the ninth of this Instant, Declaring Your
Supposed Title, which You Judge Your Self to have to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, and all the D^minions thereunto belonging. For Answer whereof this is to
Advertise You, that for as much as Our Sovereign Lady Queen Jane is, after the
Death of Our Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth (a Prince of most Noble
Memory) Invested, and Possessed with the just, and Right Title, in the Imperial
Crown of this Realm; not only by Good Order of Old Ancient Laws of this Realm;
but also by Our late Sovereign Lord's Letters Patents, Signed with His Own
Hand, and Sealed with the Great Seal of England, in presence of most part of
the Nobles, Counselors, Judges, with diverse others Grave, and Sage
Personages, Assenting, and Subscribing the same: We must therefore, as of most
Bound Duty, and Allegiance, and Assent unto Her said Grace, and to none other:
except we should (which Faithful Subjects cannot) fall into grievous, and
unspeakable Enormities. Wherefore We can no less do, both for the quiet of the
Realm, and You also; to advertise you, that for as much as the Divorce, made
between the King of Famous Memory, King Henry the Eighth, and the Lady
Katharine Your Mother, was necessary to be had, both by the Everlasting Laws of
God, and also by the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the most part of the Noble, and
Learned Universities in Christena^m, and Confirmed also by the sundry Acts of
Parliaments, remaining yet in Force, and thereby You justly made Illegitimate,
and Vn-heritable to the Crown Imperial of this Realm, and the Rules, and
Dominions, and Possessions of the same; You will upon just consideration
hereof, and of diverse other Causes, Lawful to be Alleged for the same, and
for the just Inheritance of the Right Line, and Godly Order, taken by the late
King, Our Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth, and agreed upon by the Nobles,
and Greatest Personages aforesaid; Surcease by any pretents, to vex, or molest,
any of Our Sovereign Lady Queen Jane Her Subjects, from their True Faith, and
Allegiance, due unto Her Grace; assuring You, that if you will, for Respect,
show Your Self Quiet, and Obedient (as You ought) You shall find Us all, and
several, ready to do You any Service, that We with Duty may; and be glad with
Your quietness to preserve the Common State of this Realm, wherein You may be
otherwise grievous Us, to Your Self, and to them.

And thus We bid You most Heartily well to fare, etc.


These Letters being thus dispatched, and no further danger seeming to be
feared on that side, all things are put in Readiness against the coming of the
Queen; who the same day, about three of the Clock in the Afternoon, was brought
by water to the Tower; attended by a Noble Train, of both Sexes, from Durham
House in the Strand, where She had been entertained, as a part of Dudley's
Family, ever since Her Marriage. She could not be ignorant of that, which had
been done in Order unto Her Advancement to the Royal Throne; and could not but
conceive, that Her being Conducted to the Tower, in that Solemn manner, did
portend somewhat, which looked toward a Coronation. But still She hoped, that
either She should hear some Good News of the King's Recovery, or of the
Altering of His Purpose; and that She might be suffered to enjoy those Divine
Contentments, which she had found in the Repose of a Studious Life. But when
She came into the presence of the two Dukes, Her Father, and Her Father-in-Law:
She observed their Behavior toward Her, to be very different from that, which
they had used before. To put Her out of which Amazement, it was signified to
Her by the Duke of Northumberland; That The King was Dead, and that He had
Declared Her for His next Successor in the Crown Imperial; That This
Declaration was Approved by all the Lords of the Council, most of the Peers,
and all the Judges of the Land, which they had Testified by the Subscription of
their Names, and all this Ratified, and Confirmed by Letters Patents, under the
Great Seal of England; That The Lord Mayour, the Aldermen, and some of the
Principal Citizens had been spoke withal, by whom they were assured of the
Fidelity of the rest of the City; That There was nothing wanting, but Her
Grateful Acceptance of the High Estate, which God Almighty, the Sovereign
Disposer of all Crowns, and Scepters, (never sufficiently to be thanked by Her,
for so great a Mercy) had advanced Her to; That Therefore She should cheerfully
take upon Her, the Name, Title, and Estate of Queen of England, France, and
Ireland, with all the Royalties, and Preheminencies to the same belonging;
Receiving at their hands the First Fruits of the Humble Duty (now tendered by
them on their Knees) which shortly was to be paid to Her, by the rest of the
Kingdom.

This Speech being ended, the poor Lady found Her Self in a great Perplexity,
not knowing whether she Should more lament the Death of the King, or Her
Adoption to the Kingdom: the first Loss not to be repaired, the next Care
possible to be avoided. She looked upon the Crown, as a great Temptation; to
resist which, She stood in need of all the Helps, which both Philosophy, and
Divinity, could suggest unto Her. And She knew also, that such Fortunes, seldom
knocked twice for entrance at the same Man's Gate: but that, if once refused,
they are gone for ever. Taking some time therefore of Deliberation, She
summoned a Council of Her purest Thoughts; by whose Advice, half drownned in
Tears, (either as sorrowing for the King's Death, or foreseeing Her own) She
returned an Answer in these Words, or to this Effect; That The Laws of the
Kingdom, and Natural Right, standing for the King's Sister, She would beware of
burthening Her weak Conscience with a Yoke, which did belong to them; That She
understood the Infamy of those, who had permitted the violation of Right to
gain a Scepter; That it were to mock God, and deride Justice, to scruple at the
stealing of a Shilling, and not at the Usurpation of a Crown.

Besides (said She) I am not so young, nor so little read in the Guils of
Fortune, to suffer my self to be taken by them. If she enrich any, it is but to
make them the Subject of her Spoil; If she raise others, it is but to pleasure
her Self with their Ruins. What she adored but yesterday, is to day her
Pastime. And, if I now permit her to adorn, and Crown me, I must to Morrow
suffer her to crush, and tear me in pieces. Nay with what Crown does she
Present me. A Crown, which has been Violently and Shamefully wrested from
Katharine of Arragon; made more unfortunate by the Punishment of Ann Bulloign,
and others, that wore it after Her. And why then would you have me add my Blood
to theirs, and to be the third Victime, from whom this Fatal Crown may be
ravished with the Head that wears it? But in Case it should not prove Fatal
unto me, and that all its Venom were consumed; if Fortune should give me
Warranties of her Constancy; Should I be well advised to take upon me these
Thorns, which would dilacerate, though not kill me outright; to burden my self
with a Yoke, which would not fail to torment me, though I were assured not to
be strangled with it? My Liberty is better, then the Chain you proffer me, with
what precious stones soever it be adorned, or of what Gold soever framed. I
will not exchange my Peace for Honorable and precious Jealousies, for
Magnificent, and Glorious Letters. And, if you love me sincerely, and in good
earnest, you will rather wish me a secure, and quiet Fortune, though mean, then
an exalted Condition exposed to the Wind, and followed by some dismal Fall.

It had been happy for Her self, Her Fathers, and their several Families, if
they had suffered themselves to be overcome by such powerful Arguments: which
were not only persuasive, but might seem convincing; had they not all been
fatally hurried unto their own Destruction. But the Ambition of the two Dukes
was too Strong, and Violent, to be kept down by any such prudent
Considerations. So that being wearied at the last with their Importunities, and
overcome by the entreaties of Her Husband, whom She dearly loved, She submitted
unto that necessity, which She could not vanquish; yielding her Head with more
unwillingness to the Ravishing Glories of a Crown, then afterward She did to
the Stroke of the Ax. The Point being thus concluded on, the two Dukes, with
all the rest of the Lords of the Council, swore Allegiance to her. And on the
same day, about five of the Clock in the afternoon, they caused Her Solemnly to
be Proclaimed Queen of England, France, and Ireland, etc. in many of the
principal Streets in London; and after by Degrees, in most of the Chief Cities,
Towns, and Places of greatest Concourse, and Resort of People. In which
Proclamation it was signified, That, by the Letters Patents of the late King
Edward, bearing Date the twenty first of June last past, the Lady Jane Gray,
Eldest Daughter to the Duchess of Suffolk, had been declared His true and
lawful Successor to the Crown of England, the same to be enjoyed after Her
Decease, the Heirs of Her Body, etc. as in the said Letters Patents, more
especially did at large appear. Which Proclamation, though it was published in
the City with all due Solemnities, and that the Concourse of People was
exceeding great, yet their Acclamations were but few; which served as a
sufficient Argument to the Friends and Followers of the Princess Mary, that
they were rather drawn together out of Curiosity to behold some unusual
Spectacle; then out of any purpose to congratulate at the Queen's Advancement.
And so far some of of them declared their dislike thereof; that, the next Day,
one Gilbert Pot was set on the P^llory in Che^pside, his Ears first nailed, and
afterward cut off, for certain words, which he had spoken at the Publishing of
the Proclamation; a Trumpet sounding at the Time of the Execution, and an
Herald in his Coat of Arms publicly noting his Offense in a Form prescribed. A
Severity neither safe, nor necessary (the party being of no better Condition,
then a Vintner's Boy) as the Case then stood.

For the next day the Lords received Advertisement from diverse hands, that many
persons of Quality were drawn together at Kenning-Hall^Castle in Norfolk to
offer their Service and assistance, to the Princess Mary; who finding, by the
Answer which She had received from the Lords of the Council, that no good was
otherwise to be be done, resolved not to be wanting to Her own Pretensions, and
to that end gave cheerful Entertainment to all comers, which either favored
Her Title, or embraced Her Religion. Amongst such Gentlemen, as were certified
to the Lords of the Council; I find the names of the Earl of Bath Sir Thomas
Wharton, son to the Lord Wharton, Sir John Mordant, Son to the Lord Mordant,
Sir William Drury, Sir John Shelton, Sir Henry Bedingfield, Mr. Henry
Jenningham, Mr. John Sulierd, Mr. Richard Higham of Lincoln's End. It was
advertised also, that the Earl of Sussex, and Mr. Henry Ratcliff his Son, were
coming toward Her with their Forces: which last Advertisement gave the
Business some appearance of Danger; for what else was to be expected, but that
the Countenance and Encouragement of so great a Person might draw many more
unto the side; who otherwise would have been content to be lookers on, in case
they had not moved against Her. Prevention, in such Cases, was the wholesomest
Physic: which therefore was to be administered, with all speed that might be,
before those Companies increased, and were united under some Commander, which
might gain them the Reputation of a little Army little at first, but like
enough to become so midable to their Enemies, if not broken in time. Some
Forces therefore to be sent under the Conduct, and Command, of some Person who
was well affected to the Cause, to scatter those small Companies, before they
grew unto an Head, to seize upon the Lady Mary, and bring Her with him to the
Court, where they knew well enough how to make sure of her. For which
Employment none more fit, then the Duke of Suffolk, who had the greatest Stock
going in the present Adventure, and whose affection to the Queen, being raised
out of the Bowels of Nature, would prompt him to dispatch the Service, with his
utmost Diligence. And because possibly the Lady Mary, hearing of these
Preparations, might fly for safety into Flanders, and create more Trouble to
them there, then She could at home; it was thought necessary, that such Ships,
as lay upon the Downs, should be Commanded to attend on the Coast of Norfolk,
to intercept Her on the Way; if peradventure she should think of flying to the
Emperor's Court.

So was it Counseled, and Concluded. But the matter could not be carried so
close, as not to come to the Queen's Knowledge; to whom the least Drop of Her
Father's Blood was far more precious, then all the Kingdoms in the World: so
that, with Tears in Her Eyes, and Voice as mournful as Her Face, She besought
such of the Lords, as She conceived to be most tenderly affected toward Her,
to be Her Mediators to the rest of the Council, that Her Father might be
suffered to remain with Her; and that some other Man, more exercised in Deeds
of Arms, might be sent out on that Employment. Nor was the Motion made in vain.
For some there were, who secretly had as great a Mind to put Northumberland
upon the Service; as She could be to have Her Father excused from it. They saw
how things were like to go, and how generally the People were inclined to King
Henrie's Children, and could not promise to themselves any long Securi^y under
that Power, which they had put into the hands of a weak young Lady, who must be
altogether Governed by Duke Dudlie's Coun^els. Of whom they stood in so great
Fear, that none of them durst oppose his Doings, or stear their Course unto
that Point, which most they aimed at, and which they doubted not to gain, if
they could find a Way to send him from the Council Table. No way more
probable, then this, and this they meant to husband to the best advantage,
using their best Endeavors to persuade him to the Understanding of the present
Service; For who, said they, can be so proper, as Tour Grace, to undertake this
Expedition into Norfolk, where Your late Victories has made Your Name so
Terrible to all Sorts of People, is may disperse them without Battle. For
should the Matter come to Blows, (which God prohibit) what man so able as Your
Self in the Art of War, the Order of Encamping, the putting of Your Men into
such a Figure, as may best suit with the Advantages, which are offered to You;
and animating the m^st Cowardly So^ldiers, not only by Your own Exemplary
Valor, but by strong Persuasions? Whom have we in the Realm so dexterous in
Point of Treaty, so able to persuade the ^nemy to lay down Arms (which is the
Noblest Way of conquering the t^ue-born English) if once it came unto Parle, as
they hoped it would. Besides the Queen had made it Her most earnest Suit, that
Her Father might be spared to stay with Her, till those Terours, and Affrights,
were over; and had moreover pointed out His Grace, as the abler Man, and more
fit for Action; then which what can be further said, to prompt Your Grace to
lay fa^^ hold upon all opportunities, for obliging Her, who may hereafter find
so many Ways for obliging You.

Swelled with vain Glory, and tickled with the frequent mention of his dear
Abilities, he suffered Himself to be entreated to an Action of such Fame, and
Merit, as that, which they presented to ^im. And signifying his Assent, with a
feigned Unwillingness, he told them; That He would make Ready his own Power on
the morrow after, not doubting, but They would send Theirs with him, or speed
them after him; That He must recommend the Queen unto Their Fidelity: of whose
Sacred Person he desired Them to be very tender. All which they Promised him to
do. And, having thus settled the Affairs, they made the Queen acquainted, in
Northumberland's Presence, with how great readiness he had took the danger of
that Action upon himself, to give Her the Contentment of e^joying Her Father's
company, till the present storm was over-blown; who humbly thanked the Duke for
so great a favor, and cheerfully desired him not to be wanting to the Public
and his personal safety. That evening, and the greatest part of the next day,
being spent in Raising men, and making other neces^ary preparations for the
Expedition; he repairs again to the Court, and once more putting them in mind
of hasting their Forces; and, appointing New Market for the place of their
Rendez-vous, he took his Leave of them, in these Words, or to this Effect. My
Lords (said he) I, and these other Noble Personages, with the whole Army, that
now goes forth* as well for the behalf of You, and Yours, as for the
Establishing of the Queen's Highness, shall not only a^venture our Bodies, and
Lives, amongst the Bloody Strokes, and Cruel Assaults, of our Adversaries in
the open Fields: but also we do leave the Conservation o^ our Selves* Children,
and Families, at home here with You, as altogether committed to your Trust, and
Fidelity. Wh^m, if we thought You would, through Ma^ice, Conspiracy, or
Dissension, leave us, Your Fri^nds, in the Briars, and betray us; we could as
well sundry ways fore see, and provide for our own safe-guards* as any of You,
by betraying us, can do for Yours. But now, upon the only Trust, and
Faithfulness of Your Honors, whereof we think our selves most assured* we do
hazard our ^ives: which Trust, and Promise, if You shall Violate, hoping
thereby of Life, and Promotion; yet shall not God count You inn^cent of our
Bloods, neither acquit You of the Sacred Holy Oath of Allegiance, made freely
by You to this Virtuo^s Lady, the Queen's Highness:
Who, by Your, and Our Enticement, is rather of force placed therein, then by
Her own seeking, and Request. Consider also, that God's Cause, which is the
Prefe^ment of His Word, and the fear of the return of Popery, has been (as Ye
have heretofore always said) the Original cause, whereupon Ye (even at the
first motion) granted Your good Wills, and Consents thereunto, as by Your
Handwriting appears. And think not otherwise, but that, if You mean deceit,
though not forthwith, yet hereafter* God will revenge the same. I can say no
more, but in this troublesome time with You to use constant hearts; abandoning
all Malice, Envy, and private Affections.

Which said, and having paused a little, he shut up his Address in these
following Words. I have not spoken to You, my Lords, in this sort, upon any
mistrust I have of Your Fidelities; of which, always, I have ever hitherto,
conceived a trusty Confidence: but I have only put You in Remembrance thereof,
what chance of Variance soever might grow amongst You in my absence. And this I
pray You, that You would not wish me less good speed in this Journey, then You
would have to Your selves. To which last words, one of them is reported to have
thus replied. My Lord, If You mistrust any of Us in this matter, Your Grace is
much mistaken in us. For which of Us can wash his hands clean of the present
Business; for, if we should shrink from You, as one that is culpable, which of
Us can excuse himself, as being guiltless? Little the more assured by this
quick return, he went to take his Leave of the Queen, where he found his
Commission ready Sealed, together with certain Instructions, subscribed by all
the Lords of the Council, in which his Marches were laid out, and Limited from
one day to another. Conditions not to be imposed on any, who Commands in Chief;
nor to have been accepted by him: but that it was a matter of his own desiring.
And he desired it for these Reasons, (so strongly was he caught in a Snare of
his own devising) partly because he would be thought to have Acted nothing, but
by Authority of the Council, which he supposed might serve for his Indemnity,
if the Tide should turn; and partly* that the blame of all M^sca^riages might
be laid on them, if he were foiled in the Adventure. But so instructed, he
takes Leave, embraced by all the Lords, with great demonstrations of Affection,
according to the wonted dissimulation in Princes Courts; by none more
passionately* then by those, who most abhorred his pride, and falsehood. Amongst
which it is said of the Earl of Arundel, (upon whom he had put more Disgraces,
and Affronts, then on all the rest) that he ^eemed to express much sorrow at
the Duke's departure; in regard he was not Ordered to be one of his Company, in
whose presence he could find in his heart to spend his blood, and to lay his
life down at his feet. Accompanied with the Marquess of North-hampton, the Lord
Gray, and others, he passes by water in his Barge to Durham-Place, and from
thence to White Hall, where they Mustered their men. And the next morning being
Friday, the fourteenth of the Month, he sets f^^ward with a Body of six
hundred Horse, their Arms, and Ammunition being sent before; and Sir John Gates
(of whose Fidelity, and Adhesion, he was well assured) following not far behind
with the rest of his Company. Passing through Shore-ditch, he found the Streets
to be thronged with People, but could hear nothing of their Prayers for his
Prosperous Journey. Insomuch, that, turning to the Lord Gray, he could not
choose, but say unto him; The People press to see us: but not one bids, God
speed us. On Saturday-night he comes to Cambridg, where he assured himself of
all Obedience, and Conformity, which e^ther the University, or that Town could
give him: as being Chancellor of the one, and Seneschal, or High-Steward of
the other; two Offices incompatible in themselves, and never United in one
person before, or since. At night he sends for Doctor Edwin Sandys, Master of
Katharine-Hall, and Vice Chancellor of the University, to Supper with him:
whom he enjoins to Preach before him the next day. A service not to be
performed, and much less declined, without manifest danger. But the Good Man,
submitting to the present necessity, betakes himself unto his Study, and his
Prayers, falls on a Text exceeding proper to the present Exigent (being that of
Joshua^, chap. 1. v. 16.) but handled it so Warily* and with such Discretion,
that he much satisfied the one, without giving any just advantage against him
to the other Party. On Monday Moring, the Duke, with his whole Power, goes
forward to St. Edmond's-Bury, where he l^dged that night, But, in stead of
hearing News of those Supplies, which were to attend him at New Market, he
receives Letters from some Lords of the Council, so full of Trouble, and
D^scomfort, that he Marched back again to Cambridg, on the morrow after. And
there we will leave him for a time, betwixt Hope, and Fear, less Confident, and
worse Attended, then he was, at his first coming thither; as being not only
deserted by a great part of his company, but in a manner by himself.

In the mean time the Prince^s Mary was not idle* but served Her Self of all
Advantages, which were offered to Her. Comforted, and encouraged by so many
persons of Quality, as She had about Her. She sends unto the Mayour of Norwi^h
on the Twe^fth of July, requiring him, and the rest of the Magistrates of that
City, to Proclaim Her Queen. Which though they at that time refused to do,
because they had no certain knowledge of the Death of the King; yet, on the nex^
d^y, h^ving received good assurance of it, they did not only Proclaim Her
Queen, (as She had desired) but sent Her Men, and Ammunition to a^v^nce the
Service. Not fi^ding Norfolk Men so fo^ward as She had expected* S^e remo^^^
^ith Her small Party into Suffolk, and puts Her Self into Fra^lingham-C^stle, a
Castle Situate ^ear the Sea, from whence She might conveniently es^^pe into
Flanders, if Her Affairs succeeded not to Her Hopes, and Prayers. He^e She
first takes upon Her the Name of Queen, and by that Name dispatcheth Letters to
the Peers of the Realm; requiring Them, and all other Her faithful Subjects, to
repair unto Her Succor. And, for the first hand^el of good Fortune, it
happened, that the six ships, which were appointed to hover on the Coast of
Norfolk, were driven by ^oul weather into the Haven of Yarmouth, where
Jerningham, abovementioned, was busy in Raising men, to Maintain Her Quarrel.
By whom the Captains, and the Mariners, were so cunningly dealt with, that they
put themselves under his Command, drew all their Ordnance on shore, and left
their Ships to be disposed of at his pleasure. About which time Sir Edward
Hastings, the brother of Francis Earl of Huntington, being Commissionated by
the Duke of Northumberland to Raise four thousand men for the present Service,
passed over with his men to the other side, and joined himself to Her Party
also. The News whereof being brought unto the Lords, which remained in London,
ha^tened the Execution of that Design, which had been formerly contrived by
some amongst them.

For no sooner had the Great Duke put himself on his March toward Ca^bridg* but
some began to show themselves in favor of the Princess Mary, and to de^se how
they might extricate themselves out of those perplexities, into which they had
been brought by his Ambition. Amongst which none more forward, then the Earl of
Pembroke, in whom he had placed more Confidence, then in all the others. Who,
together with Sir Thomas Cheyny* Lord Warden of the ^inque-Ports; with diverse
others, endeavored to get out of the Tower, that they might hold some secret
Consultation with their Friends in London: but were so narrowly watched, that
they could not do it. On Sunday, the sixteenth of the Month, Doctor Nicholas
Ridley, Bishop of London, is ordered by the Lords of the Council, to Preach at
St. Paul's-Cross, and in his Sermon to Advance the Title of Queen Jane, and
show the invalidity of the Claim of the Lady Mary. Which he performed according
to such Grounds of Law, and Polity, as had been laid together in the Letters
Patents of King Edward, by the Authority* and Consent of all the Lords of the
Council, the greatest Judges in the Land, and almost all the Peers of the
Kingdom. But then, withal, he pressed the Incommodities, and Inconveniences,
which might arise, by receiving Mary for their Queen; prophesying that, which
after came to pass: Namely, that She would bring in a Foreign Power to Reign
over this Nation; and that She would subvert the True Religion, then
Established by the Laws of this Rea^m* He also showed, that, at such time as
She lived in his Diocese, he had Travailed much with Her, to reduce Her to the
True Religion; but that (though otherwise She used him with great Civility) She
showed Her self so stiff, and obstinate, that there was no hope to be
conceived, but that She would disturb, and destroy all that, which with such
great Labor had been settled in the Reign of Her Brother. For which Sermon he
incurred so much displeasure, that it could never be forgiven him, when the
rest were Pardoned: by whose Encouragement, and Command, he had undertook it.
But this Sermon did not work so much on the People, as the ill News, which came
continually to the Tower, had prevailed on many of the Lords. For presently,
upon that of the six Ships, which were Revolted from the Queen, Advertisement
is given, that the Princess Mary was Proclaimed Queen in Oxford ^Shir^ by Sir
John Williams, and others; in Buckingham-Shire by the Lord Windsore, Sir Edward
Hastings, etc. and in North-hampton-Shire by Sir Thomas Tresham. And, which was
worse then all the other, that the Noble-Mens Tenants refused to serve their
Lords against Her.

Upon the first bruit of which Disasters, the Lord Treasurer Pawlet gets out of
the Tower, and goes unto his House in Bro^d-street; which made such a powerful
apprehension of some dangerous practices to be suddenly put in Execution, that
the Gates of the Tower were locked about seven of the Clock, and the Keys
carried to the Queen. And though the Lord Treasurer was brought back about
twelve at night, yet now the knot of the Confederacy began apparently to break.
For, finding by intelligence from so many Parts of the Realm, but chiefly by
the Lord Treasurer's return, that generally the People were affected to the
Title of the Princess Mary, they thought it most expedient for them, to Declare
themselves in Her Favor also, and not to run themselves, their Friends, and
Families, on a certain Ruin. But all the Difficulty was, in finding out a way,
to get out of the Tower: the Gates whereof were so narrowly watched: that no
man could be suffered to go in, and out; but by the Knowledge, and Permission of
the Duke of Suffolk. But that, which their own Wisdom could not, the Duke of
Northumberland's Importunity effected for them; who, failing of the Supplies,
which the Lords had promised to send after him, as before is said, had pressed
them earnestly, by his Letters, not to be wanting to their own Honor, and the
Public Service. This gave them a fair Color to procure their Liberty from
that Restraint, by representing to the Queen, and the Duke Her Father, that the
Supplies expected, and all things necessary to the same, could not be raised,
unless they were permitted personally to attend the Business; both for the
Pressing of the Men, providing them of all things needful, and choosing fit
Commanders, to Conduct them in good Order to the Duke of Northhumberland. Which
seemed so reasonable to the Duke of Suffolk, a Man of no great Depth himself,
and so not like to penetrate into the bottom of a deep Design; that he gave way
to their Departure for the present: little conceiving, that they never meant to
come back again, till the State was altered.

Being thus at their desired Liberty, the Earls of Shrewsbury, and Pembroke,
together with Sir Thomas Cheyny, and Sir John Mason, betake themselves
immediately to Baynard's- Castle: an House belonging then (as now) to the Earls
of Pembroke* To which Place they were followed, not long after, by almost all
the rest of the Lords of the Council; bringing with them as many of the
Nobility, then about the Town, as they conceived to ^tand fair for the Princess
Mary. And, that the Meeting might be held with the less Suspicion, it was given
out to be upon a Conference with Laval, the French Ambassador, about Affairs
of great Importance for the Weal of both Kingdoms. No sooner had they took
their Places: but the Earl of Arundel, who had held Intelligence with the
Princess, ever since the first Extremities of Her Brother's Sickness, inveighed
most bitterly against the Duke of Northumberland. And, after he had ripped up
the Acts of his former Life, and burdened him with all, that had been done
unjustly, cruelly, or amiss, in King Edward's Time; he at last descends to the
Treacherous Act of the Disherison of the Children of the late King Henry;
professing, that he wondered, how he had so enthralled such persons, as the
Lords there present, as to make them Instruments of his Wickedness. For was it
not, says he, by Our Consent, and Suffrages; that the Duke of Suffolk 's
Daughter, the same Northumberland 's Daughter-in-Law, has took upon Her the
Name, and Title, of Queen of England: though it be nothing, but the Title; the
Sovereign Power remaining wholly in the Hands of Dudly, who contrived the Plot*
that ^e might freely exercise his Tyranny on our Lives, and Fortunes. Religion
is indeed the thing pretended. But suppose we have no regard to these
Apostolical Rules; Evil must not be done, that Good may come thereof; and, We
must obey even evil Princes; not for Fear, but for Conscience Sake: Yet, how
does it appear, that the Princess Mary intends any Alteration in Religion?
Certainly, having been lately Petitioned to in this Point by the Suffolk- men,
She gave them a very hopeful Answer. And what a mad Blindness is it, for the
avoidance of an uncertain Danger, to precipitate Our selves into a most certain
Destruction? I would we had not erred in this kind. But Errors past cannot be
recalled: some may peradventure be amended; wherein speedy Execution ^ft-times
happily supplyeth former Defects. Rec^llect Your selves then, and so make use
of Your Authority, that the Princess Mary, the undoubtedly Lawfully Heir, may
publicly be Proclaimed Queen of England, etc. No other way, but this, as the
Case now stands, to recover our lost Honors, and preserve the State.

The Earl of Pembroke was a man altogether unlettered, but so well skilled in
humouring King Henry the Eighth, that he had raised Himself to a great Estate;
for which he could not but express some sense of Gratitude, in doing good
Offices for his Children. And having formerly been suspected to have had too
great a part in Northumberland's Counsels, he conce^ved himself obliged to wipe
off that Stain, by declaring his Zeal, and Resolution in the Cause of the
Princess. And, therefore, as soon as the Earl of Arundel had concluded his
Speech, he very cheerfully professed, that he approved, and would subscribe the
Proposition, and therewithal laying his Hand upon his Sword, he signifi^d his
Readiness* and Resolution to defend the Lady Marie's Cause against all
Opponents. The rest of the Lords, encouraged by these good Examples, and seeing
nothing, but apparent Danger on all sides, if they did the contrary, came to a
speedy Conclusion with them, and bound themselves to stand together, in Defense
of the late King's Sisters, against all their Enemies. Which being thus so
generously and unanimously agreed upon, a Messenger is presently dispatched to
the Lord Mayour, requiring him to repair to Baynara'^-Castle within an hour:
and to bring with him the Recorder, and such of the Aldermen of the City, as to
him seemed best. Who being come accordingly at the time appointed; their
Lordships told them, in few words, as well their Resolution, as their Reason of
it: and so desired their Company to Cheap-side-Cross to Proclaim Queen Mary.
Which said, without any further Dispute about the Title, they rode all together
in good order* through Saint Paul's-Church-Yard; till they came to the Gate,
which opens into the Street: where they found such Multitudes, and Throngs of
People; whom the Noise of such a Confluence at Baynard's-Castle, and the going
down of the Lord Mayour, and Aldermen, had drawn together; that they could
hardly force a Way through them to come to the Cross. But being come thither at
the last, though with much ado, Sir Christopher Barker, Knight of the Bath, and
Principal King at Arms, Proclaimed, by the Sound of Trumpet, the Princess Mary,
Daughter of King Henry the Eighth, and Queen Kaharine, His Wife, to be the
Lawful, and Undoubted Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, adding thereto that Sacred Title of Supreme Head on Earth of the Church
of England: which She retained till the beginning of the following Parliament,
and then rescinded all those Acts, by which it had been formerly united to the
Crown of this Realm. The Proclamation being ended, they went together in a
Solemn Pr^cession, to Saint Pau^'s Church, where they caused the Te Deum to be
sung, with the Rights accustomed, and so dismissed the Assembly to their
several dwellings. Being returned to Baynard's-Castle, the Earl of Arundel, and
the Lord Paget, are presently dispatched to Framlingham, with thirty Horse, to
give the Queen a Narrative of their whole Proceedings. Some Companies are also
sent to assure the Tower, and to Command the Duke of Suffolk, to discharge the
Family, and Attendants, of the Lady Jane; to signify unto Her, that She must
lay aside the Name, and Title of Queen, and suffer Her Self to be reduced to
the Rank of a private Person. All which, he readily obeyed (as easily subject
to Despair, as before he had been swelled with Ambitious Hopes) and the next
day adjoyns himself to the rest of the Coun^il, subscribing amongst others to
such Instructions, as were to be dispatched to the Duke of Northumberland, for
the disbanding of his Forces; and car^ying himself like an obedient, and
dutiful Subject, as he ought to do.

But there was little need of this last Message, and none at all of the other.
For the noise of these loud Acclam^^ions, which were made at the Proclaiming of
the new Queen, passing from one Street to another, came at last to the Tower,
before the Message had been sent to the Duke of Suffolk, where they were heard
by the ^ady Jane (now no longer Queen) with such Tranquillity of M^nd, and
Composedness of Countenance; as if she had not been concerned in the
Alteration. She had before received the offer of the Crown, with as even a
Temper, as if it had been nothing, but a ^arland of Flowers: and now She lays
aside the thought thereof with as much contentedness, as She could have thrown
away that Garland, when the sent was gone. The time of her Glories was so
short, but a nine Days wonder; that it seem^d nothing but a Dream, out of which
She was not sorry to be awakened. The Tower had been to Her a Prison, rather
then a Court, and interrupted the Delights of Her former Life by so many
Terrors; that no day passed without some new Alarms to disturb Her Quiet. She
does now know the worst, that Fortune can do unto Her. And having always
feared, that there stood a Scaffold secretly behind the Throne, She was as
readily prepared to act her Part upon the one, as upon the other. If Sorrow,
and Affliction did at any time invade Her Thoughts, it was rather in reference
to Her Friends, but most of all unto Her Husband, who were to be involved in
the Calamity of Her Misfortunes; then upon any Apprehensions, which She had for
Her Self. And hereunto the bringing in of so many Prisoners, one day after
another, gave no small Increase: brought hither for no other Reason, but
because they had seemed forward in contributing toward Her Advancement. In the
midst of which Disconsolations, the restoring of the Duke, Her Father, to his
former Liberty gave some Repose unto Her Mind; whose Sufferings were more
grievous to Her, then Her own Imprisonment. And then to what a miserable
Extremity must his Death have brought Her? And though the Attainder, and Death,
of the Duke of Northumberland, which followed very shortly after, might tell
Her in Effect, what She was to trust to; yet She was willing to distinguish
betwixt his Case, and Her own; betwixt the Principal, and the Accessaries, in
the Late Design. In which Respect She gave Her self no improbable Hope^; th^^
possibly the like Mercies, which was showed to Her Father, might possibly be
extended unto others, and amongst others to Her Husband, as innocent as Her
self, from any open Practice against the Queen. And who could tell, but that it
might descend on Her self at last? whom no Ambition of Her own had tempted to
the acceptance of that Dangerous Offer, which She beheld as the greatest
Error of Her Life, and the only Stain of all ^er Actions.

But neither the Queen's Fears, nor the public Justice of the Land, could so
be satisfied. It was held Treason to accept of a Kingdom offered: to which She
could pretend no Right; whilst the Queen was living. And, if Examples of that
Nature should pass unpunished, no Prince could possibly be safe, nor Ti^les
valid, as long, as any Popular Spirit could pretend a Color to advance some
other to the Throne. Upon which Reason of State She was brought to Her Trial at
the Guild Hall in London, on the third of November, accompanied with Her
Husband, the Lord Guilford Dudly (his Company never, till that Hour, unwelcome
to Her) together with Archbishop Cranmer, the Lord Ambrose Dudly, the second
Son, then living, to the Duke of Northumberland. Sentence of Death passed upon
them all: though at that time not executed upon any of them. The Lord Ambrose
was reserved unto better Fortunes: as the Archbishop was to a more miserable,
but more Glorious Death. And for Her self, and Her dear Husband, it was
conceived; that, now the Law had done its part in their Condemnation, the Queen
in pity of their Youth, and Innocence, would have gone no further. But, as
they were first brought under this Affliction, by the inordinate Ambition of
the Duke of Northumberland; so shall they shortly find an end of all their
Troubles, by the rash and unadvised Attempts of the Duke of Suffolk. For upon
Wya^'s breaking out in Kent, and the Earl of Devon-Shire in the West, the Duke
had been prevailed with, amongst many others, to ap^ear in the Action. To which
he unadvisedly yielded, caused Proclamation to be made in some Towns of
Leichestershire, against the Queen's intended Marriage with the Prince of
Spain, and drew together many of his Friends, and followers, to oppose that
Match. And though he was discomfited, within few days after: yet the Queen saw,
that she could promise Her self neither Peace, nor Safety; as long as the Lady
Jane was preserved alive. Whose Restitution to the Throne must be the matter
chieflly aimed at, in these Insurrections; though other Colors were devised,
to disguise the Business.

Her Death is now resolved upon; but first She must be practiced with to change
Her Religion; as the Great Duke of Northumberland had done before. To which end
Fecknam is employed: not long before made Dean of Saint Paul's, and not long
after Abbot of Westminster; a Man, whose great Parts promised him an easy
Victory over a poor Lady of a broken, and dejected Spirit: but it proved the
contrary. For so well had She studied the Concernments of Her own Religion, and
managed the Conference with him, with such a readiness of Wit, such constancy
of Resolution, and a Judgment so well-grounded in all helps of Learning: that
She was able to make Answer to his strongest Arguments; as well to Her great
Honor, as his Admiration. (The Substance of which Conference he, that ^^sts to
see, may find it in the Acts, and Monuments, fol. 1290.) So that, not able to
prevail with Her in the Change of Religion, he made offer of his Service to
prepare Her for Death: which though She thankfully accepted of, as finding it
to proceed from a good Affection; yet soon he found, that She was also before
hand with him in those Preparations, which are fit, and necessary for a dying
Christian. Friday, the ninth of February was first designed for the Day of Her
Execution; but the Desire of gaining Her to the Church of Rome procured Her the
short Respite of three Days more. On Sunday^night, being the Eve unto the (...)
of Her Translation, She wrote a Letter in the Greek Tongue, at the end of the
Testament, which She bequeathed as a Legacy to Her Sister the Lady Katharine;
which being such a lively Picture of the Excellent Lady, may well deserve to be
continually kept in Remembrance of Her, and is this, that follows.

I have here sent you (Good Sister Katharine) a Book, which although it be not
outwardly trimmed with Gold, yet inwardly it is more worth, then precious
Stones. It is the Book (Dear Sister) of the Law of the Lord. It is his
Testament, and last Will, which he bequeathed unto us, Wretches; which shall
lead you to the path of eternal Joy, and, if you with a good mind read it, and
with an earnest mind do purpose to follow it, it shall bring you to an
immortal, and everlasting Life. It shall teach you to live, and learn you to
die. It shall win you more, then you should have gained by the possession of
your woeful Father's Lands. For as, if God had prospered him, you should have
inherited his Lands: so, if you apply diligently this Book, seeking to direct
your Life after it, you shall be an inheritour of such Riches; as neither the
Covetous shall withdraw from you, neither Thief shall steal, neither yet the
Moths corrupt. Desire with David (Good Sister) to understand the Law of the
Lord God. Live still to die, that you (by Death) may purchase eternal Life; and
trust not, that the tenderness of your Age shall lengthen your Life: for as
soon, if God calls, goes the young, as the old, and labor always to learn to
die. Defy the World: Deny the Devil: and Despise the Flesh; and Delight your
self only in the Lord. Be penitent for your Sins, and yet Despair not. Be
strong in Faith, and yet presume not, and desire, with Saint Paul, to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, with whom, ^ven in Death, there is Life. Be
like the good Servant, and even at Midnight be waking; lest, when Death comes,
and steals upon you, like a Thief in the night, you be with the evil Servant
^ound sleeping; and lest for lack of Oil, you be found like the five foolish
Women, and like him, that had not on the Wedding Garment; and then ye be cast
out from the Marriage Rejoice in Christ, as I do. Follow the Steps of your
Master Christ, and take upon you your Cross. Lay your Sins on his Back* and
always embrace him. And, as touching my Death, rejoice, as I do (good Sister)
that I shall be delivered of this Corruption, and put on Incorruption. For I am
assured, that I shall, for losing of a mortal Life, win an immortal one. The
which I pray God to grant you, and send you of his Grace, to live in his Fear*
and to die in the true Christian Faith: from the which in God's Name, I exhort
you, that you never swerve, neither for Hope of Life, nor for Fear of Death.
For, if you will deny his Truth, to lengthen your Life, God will deny you, and
yet shorten your Days: and if you will ^leave unto him, he will prolong your
Days to your Comfort, and to his Glory. To the which Glory God bring me now,
and you hereafter, when it pleases him to call you. Fare you well (Good
Sister) and put your only trust in God, who only must help you.

The Fatal Morning being come, the Lord Guilford earnestly desired the
Officers, that He might take His Farewell of Her. Which though they willingly
permitted; yet, upon notice of it, She Advised the contrary; assuring Him, That
such a meeting would rather add to His Afflictions, then increase that Quiet,
wherewith they had possessed their souls for the stroke of Death, that He
demanded a Lenitive, which would put fire into the Wound; and that it was to be
feared Her Presence would rather weaken, then strengthen Him that He ought to
take courage from his Reason, and derive constancy from his own heart; that if
his soul were not firm, and settled, She could not settle it by Her eyes, nor
confirm it by Her words; that He should do well to remit this Interview to the
other World, that there indeed Friendships were happy, and Unions undesolvable;
and that theirs would be Eternal, if their souls carried nothing with them of
Terrestrial, which might hinder them from rejoicing. All She could do was to
give Him a Farewell out of a Window, as He passed toward the place of His
dissolution: which He suffered on the Scaffold on Tower Hill with much
Christian meekness. His Dead body being laid in a Car, and His Head wrapped up
in a Linen-cloth, were carried to the Chapel within the Tower; in the way to
which, they were to pass under the Window of the Lady Jane, where She had given
Him His Farewell. A Spectacle sufficient to disanimate a courageous Heart, not
armed with the Constancy, and Resolution of so brave a Virtue. The Spectacle
endured by Her with the less Astonishment, because She knew, She was upon the
point of meeting with Him in a better Conjuncture; where they should never
find the like Intermission of their Joys, and Happinesses.

It was once resolved on by the Court, that She should die on the same Scaffold
with Her Husband: but it was feared, that, being both pitied, and beloved by
the common People, some sudden Commotion might be raised; if She were
publicly brought forth to Her Execution. It was therefore held the safer
course, that a Scaffold should be erected for Her within the Verge of the
Tower: on which She might satisfy the greatest severity of the Law without any
danger to the State. Toward which being to be led by Sir John Gage (who was
then Constable of the Tower) he desired Her to bestow some small Gift upon him,
to be kept as a Memorial of Her. To gratify which desire She gave him Her
Table Book: in which She had written three Sentences in Greek, Latin, and
English, as She saw Her Husband's Body brought unto the Chapel; which She
besought him to accept as Her last Bequest. The Greek to this effect: That, If
His Executed Body should give Testimony against Her before men; His most
blessed Soul should give an eternal Proof of Her Innocence in the presence of
God: the Latin added; that Humane Justice was against His Body; but the Divine
Mercy would be for His Soul: and then concluded thus in English, that, If Her
fault deserved Punishment, Her Youth, at least, and Her Imprudence, were worthy
of Excuse; and that God, and Posterity, would show Her Favor.

Conducted by Feckman to the Scaffold, She gave not much heed unto his
Discourses; but kept Her Eyes upon a Prayer Book of Her own. And, being mounted
on the Throne, from which She was to receive a more excellent Crown, then any,
which this vile Earth could give Her, She addressed Her self in some few words
to the standers by; letting them know, that Her Offense was not for having
laid Her Hand upon the Crown; but for not rejecting it with sufficient
Constancy; That She had less erred through Ambition, then out of Respect, and
Reverence to Her Parents; acknowledging nevertheless, that Her Respect was to
be accounted as a Crime, and such Reverence, to deserve a Punishment; That She
would willingly admit of Death; so to give satisfaction to the injured State;
that, by Obedience to the Laws, She might voluntarily take off the Scandal,
which She had given by Her constrained Obedience to Her Friends* and Kindred;
concluding finally, that She had justly deserved this Punishment, for being
made the instrument (thugh the unw^lli^g Instrument) of another's Ambition; and
should leave behind Her an Exampl^ that Inn^^ence excuses not great M^sdeeds;
if they any way ten^ to the Destruction of the Common^Wealth. Which said, and
desiring the people to recommend Her, in their Prayers, to the mercies of God,
She caused Her self to be disrobed by some of Her Women, who with w^^ Eyes, and
heavy Hearts, performed that Office, which was to Her no more unwelcome, then
if it had been nothing, but the preparation to the Death of Sleep, and not unto
the Sleep of Death. And being now ^eady for the Bl^ck, with the same clear, and
untroubled Countenance, wherewith She had acted all the rest of Her Tragedy,
She said aloud the Psalm of Mise^ere mei, ^eus, in the English Tongue: and so
submitted Her pure Neck to the Ex^cutioner.

Touching the Bonds, Recogn^scances, Grants, Conveyances, and other L^gal
Instruments, which ^ad been made in the short Reign of this Queen, a doubt was
ra^sed among^^ our Lawyers, whither they were good, and valid in the Law, or
not. The Reason of which Scruple was, because that Interval of time, which
passed between the Death of King Edward, on the sixth of July, and the
Proclaiming of Queen Mary in all Parts of the Realm, was in the Law to be
esteemed* as a part of Her Reign, without any notice to be taken of the
interposing of the Lady Jane: in the first year of whose Reign, the said Bonds,
Recogniscances* Grants, etc. had their several Dates. And thereupon it was
Enacted in the following Parliament* That all Statutes, Recogniscances* and
other Writings whatsoever, knoledged, or made, by, or to any Person, or
Persons, Bodies Politic, or Corporate, being the Queen's Subjects, since the
sixth day of July last past, until the first day of August then next
following, under the Name of the Reign of any other Person, then under the Nam^
of the said ^ueen's Majesty* with the Style appropriated, or united to Her
Majesty's Imperial Crown, shall be as good, and ^ffectual in the Law* to all
intents, purposes* co^structions, and meanings; as, if upon the m^king thereof*
the Name of the said Queen Mary, with Her Stile^approp^^ated, had been fully,
and plainly expressed in the same* W^^h a Proviso notwithstanding, that all
Grants, Letters Patents, and Commissions, made by the said Lady Jane to any
Person, or Persons whatsoever, should be reputed void, and of none ^ff^ct.
Which Proviso seems to have been added, not only for the making void of all
such Grants of the Crown Lands, as had passed in the Name of the said Queen
Jane (if any such Grants were ever made) but for invalidating the Commi^^^on
granted to the Duke of Northumberland for raising Arms in Her behalf. The
pleading whereof, though it could not be allowed for his Ind^mnity, when he
stood at the Bar, might possibly have raised some Reproach, or Trouble, to his
Peers, and Judges, if the Integrity of their Proceedings had been called in
Question.

Such was the end of the short Life, but far shorter Reign, of the Lady Jane.
Her Reign but of nine Days, and no more: Her Life not twice so many years, as
She Reigned days. Such was the end of all the Projects of the two great Dukes,
for Her Advancement to the Crown, and their own in Hers. To which as She was
raised without any Blows; so She might have been deposed without any Blows: if
the Ax had not been more cruel on the Scaffold, then the Sword in the Field.
The Sword had never been unsheathed: but when the Scaffold was once Erected,
and the Ax once sharpened, there followed so many Executions after one another,
till the Death of that Queen; that, as Her Reign began in the Blood of those,
who took upon them the Pu^suit of this Lady's Title; so was it stained more
foully in the Blood of (...)* as were Ma^tyred in all parts for Her Religion. To
the Relation of which (...), Deaths, and Martyrdoms, and other the Calamities
of that Tragical, and unp^^^perous Reign, we must next proceed.

The Parentage, Birth, and first Fortunes of the Princess ELIZABETH, The
second Daughter of King Henry the Eighth, before her coming to the CROWN.
With a true Narrative of the first Loves of King Henry the Eighth, to Queen
Anne Bollen. The Reasons of his alienating of his first affections, and the
true causes of her woeful and calamitous death.
ELIZABETH the youngest daughter of King Henry the 8th. was born at Greenwich
on the 7th. of September (being the Eve of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary)
1533. begotten on the body of Queen Anne Bollen, the eldest daughter of Thomas
Bollen Earl of Wiltshire, and of El^zabeth his wife, one of the daughters of
Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England. The Family of the
Bollens before this time neither great nor ancient, but highly raised in
reputation by the marriage of the Lady Anne, and the subsequent birth of Queen
Elizabeth; the first rise thereof coming out of the City in the person of Sir
Geofrey Bollen Lord Mayor of London, Anno 1457. which Geofrey being son of one
Geofrey Bollen of Sulle in Norfolk, was father of Sir William Bollen of
Blickling in the said County, who took to wife the Lady Margaret, daughter and
one of the heirs of Thomas Butler Earl of Ormond, brother and heir of James
Butler Earl of Wiltshire. Of this marriage came Sir Thomas Bollen above
mentioned, employed in several Embassies by King Henry the Eighth, to whom he
was Treasurer of the Household, and by that name enrolled amongst the Knights of
the Garter, Anno 1523. advanced about two years after (being the seventeenth of
that King) to the style and title of Viscount Rochfort, and finally in
reference to his mothers extraction created Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond, 1529.
But dying without issue male surviving, the title of Ormond was restored to the
next heir male of the Butlers in Ireland, and that of Wiltshire given by King
Edward the 6th. to Sir William Paul's, being then great Master of the Household.
And as for that of Viscount Rochfort it lay dormant after his decease, till the
6th. of July, Anno 1621. when conferred by King James on Henry Carry, Lord
Huns^on, the son of John, and Grandchild of Henry Carry, whom Queen Elizabeth in
the first year of her Reign, made Lord Carry of Hunsdon, he being the son and
heir of Sir William Carry, one of the Esquires of the body to King Henry the
8th. by the Lady Mary B^llen his wife, the youngest daughter, and one of the
Coheirs of the said Thomas Bollen, Viscount Rochfort, and Earl of Wiltshire.

Such being the estate of that Family, which became afterward so fortunate in
the production of this Princess to the Realm of England, we must in the next
place enquire more particularly into the life and story of Queen Anne her
Mother. Who in her tender years attending on Mary the French Queen to the Court
of France, was by her Father, after the return of the said Queen, placed in the
retinue of the Duchess of Alanzone, the beloved sister of King Francis, where
she not only learnt the language, but made her self an exact Mistress both of
the Gaities and Garb of the great French Ladies. She carried such a stock of
natural graces, as rendered her superlatively the most admired beauty in the
Court of France; and returned thence with all those advantages which the
civilities of France could add to an English beauty. For so it happened, that her
Father being sent with Sir Anthony Brown, Anno 1527. to take the oath of the
French King to a solemn league not long before concluded betwixt the Crowns,
resolved to bring back his daughter with him, to see what fortunes God would
send her in the Court of England. Where being Treasurer of the household, it was
no hard matter for him to prefer her to Queen Katherines service, on whom she
waited in the nature of a Maid of Honor; which gave the King the opportunity
of taking more than ordinary notice of her parts and person. Nor was it long
before the excellency of her beauty, adorned with such a gracefulness of
behavior, appeared before his eyes with so many charms, that not able to
resist the assaults of Love, he gave himself over to be governed by those
affections which he found himself unable to Master. But he found no such easy
task of it as he had done before in bringing Mrs Elizabeth Blunt, and others,
to be the subjects of his lusts; all his temptations being repelled by this
virtuous Lady, like arrows shot in vain at a rock of Adamants. She was not to
be told of the Kings loose love to several Ladies, and knew that nothing could
be gained by yielding unto such desires but contempt and infamy, though for a
while disguised and palliated by the plausible name and Courtly Title of a
Princes Mistress. The humble and modest opposition of the Lady Gray, to the
inordinate affections of King Edward the 4th. advanced her to his bed as a
lawful wife, which otherwise she had been possessed of by no better title than
that of Jane Shore, and his other Concubines. By whose example Mistress Boll^n
is resolved to steer her courses, and not to yield him any further favors,
than what the honor of a Lady, and the modesty of a virgin, might
inoffensively permit to so great a King.

But so it chanced, that before her coming back from the Court of France, the
King began to be touched in conscience about his marriage with the Queen, upon
occasion of some doubts which had been cast in the way both by the Ministers of
the Emperor, and the French King, as touching the legitimation of his daughter
Mary. Which doubts being started at a time when he stood on no good terms with
the Emperor, and was upon the point of breaking with him, was secretly
fomented by such of the Court as had advanced the party of Francis, and sought
always to alienate him from the friendship of Charles. Amongst which none more
forward than Cardinal Wolsie, who for almost twenty years together, had
governed his affairs with such power and prudence. The Emperor had disgusted
the ambitious Prelate, not only by crossing him in his suit for the Popedom*
but by denying him the Archbishopric of Toledo, of which he had once given him
no small hopes. And now the Cardinal is resolved to cry quits for both,
thinking himself as much affronted in the sailer of his expectations, as if he
had been disgracefully deprived of some present possession. No way more open to
his ends, than by working on that scruple of Conscience which had been raised
unto his hand; to the advance whereof, the reservedness of the Queens
behavior, and the inequality of her years, which rendered her the less
agreeable to his conversation, gave no small advantage. In which conjuncture it
was no hard matter to persuade him unto any way which might give satisfaction
to his conscience, or content to his fancy, especially i^ it came accompanied
with such a change as promised him the hopes of a son and heir, or at the least
of a more lawful and unquestioned issue. And then what fitter wife could be
found out for him than Madam Rheene, one of the daughters of King Lewis the
12th. and sister to the wife of the King then Reigning. By which alliance he
might be able to justify his separation from the bed of Katherine, not only
against Charles her Nephew, but against all Kings and Emperors in the Christian
world, taking the Pope into the reckoning. A proposition so agreeable to the
Kings own thoughts (who began to grow weary of his Queen) that he resolved to
buy the amity of Francis at any rate; to which end he not only made a league
with him against the Emperor, when the condition of the French was almost
desperate, but remitted unto Francis a very vast debt, to the value of 500000
Crowns, partly accruing unto him by some former contracts, and par^ly for the
payment of forfeiture incurred by Charles, with which the French had charged
himself by the capitulations.

And so far matters went on smoothly to the Cardinals wish, and possibly might
have succeeded in all particulars, had not the plot miscarried by the return of
Viscount Rochfort, and the planting of Anne Bollen in the Court. The admirable
attractions of which young Lady, had drawn the King so fast unto her, that in
short time he gave her an absolute soverainty over all his thoughts. But so
long he concealed his affections from her* that a great league and intercourse
was contracted betwixt her and the young Lord Percy, the eldest son of Henry
Lord Percy, the 5th. Earl of Northumberland of that Name and Family; who being
brought up in the Cardinals service, had many opportunities of confirming an
acquaintance with her* when either his own pleasure or his Lords affairs,
occasioned his waiting at the Court. But these compliances on both sides,
neither were, nor probably could be so closely carried as not to come unto the
knowledge of the jealous King, impatient of a Rival in his new affections, and
yet resolved to carry the business in such a manner, as to give no distaste to
her whom he so much loved. The Cardinal is therefore dealt with to remove that
obstacle, to which he readily condescended, not looking further at the present
into the design, but that the King intended to appropriate the young Lady to
his private pleasures, as he had done many others in the times foregoing. A
messenger is thereupon dispatched to the Earl of Northumberland, who at his
coming to the Court, is informed by the Cardinal, how unadvisedly the Lord
Percy had entered himself into the affections of Mrs Bollen, one of the
daughters of Viscount Rochfort, not only without his fathers privity, but
against the express will of the King, who was resolved to dispose otherwise of
her. And this he urged upon the strength of an old prerogative, both then and
after exercised by the Kings of England, in not permitting any of the Nobility
to contract marriages, and make alliances with one another, but by their
consents.

The old Earl startled at the news, and fearing nothing more than the Kings
displeasure, calls for his son, and presen^ly schools him in this manner. Son,
(quoth he) even as thou art, and ever haste been, a proud, disdainful, and very
unthtifty Master, so haste thou now declared thy self: Wherefore what joy, what
pleasure, what comfort, or what solace can I conceive in thee? that thus
without discretion have abused thy self, having neither regard to me thy
natural father, nor to thy natural Soverain Lord the King, to whom all honest
and loyal subjects bear faithful obedience, nor yet to the prosperity of thy
own estate, but have so unadvisedly ens^ared thy self to her, for whom thou
have purchased the Kings high displeasure, intolerable for any subject to
sustain. And but that the King does consider the lightness of thy head, and
wilful quality of thy person, his displeasure and indignation were sufficient
to cast me and all my posterity into utter ruin and destruction. But he being
my singular good Lord, and favorable Prince, and my Lord Cardinal my very good
friend, has and does clearly excuse me in thy lewdness, and does rather lament
thy folly than malign thee, and has advised an order to be taken for thee, to
whom both I and you are more bound than we conceive of. I pray to God that this
may be sufficient admonition to thee, to use thy self more wisely hereafter.
For assure thy self, if thou do not amend thy prodigality, thou will be the
last Earl of our house. For thy natural inclination, thou art masterful and
prodigal to consume all that thy progenitors have with so great travail
gathered and kept together with honor. But having the Kings Majesty my
singular good Lord, I trust (I assure thee) so to order my succession, that
thou shall consume thereof but a little. For I do not intend (I tell thee
truly) to make thee heir, for (thanks be to God) I have more boys that I trust
will use themselves much better, and prove more like to be wise and honest men,
of whom I will choose the most likely to succeed me.

So said the much offended father, and yet not thinking he had done enough for
his own security, a marriage is presently concluded for him to the Kings good
liking, with the Lady Mary, one of the daughters of George Lord (...), Earl of
Shrewsbury. Mrs Anne Bollen in the mean time is removed by her father from the
Court, to her no small trouble; who knowing nothing of the Kings, had willingly
admitted the Lord Percy into her affections. And understanding by him what had
past betwixt him and his father, she conceived such a mortal grudge against the
Cardinal, (whom she looked on as the only cause of this separation) that she
contributed her best assistance to his final ruin. It was about the time when
the Kings cause was to be agitated in the Legan^ine Court, that he caused her
to be sent for out of the Country, to give her attendance on the Queen as in
former times* impatient of a longer absence, and fearful of a second Rival, if
he should any longer conceal his purpose. Which having taken some fit time to
disclose unto her, he found in her a virtue of such strength against all
temptations, that he resolves upon the sentencing of the divorce, which he
little doubted, to take her to him as the last sole object of his wandering
loves. A matter not to be concealed from so many espials as Wolsie had about
the King. Who thereupon slackneth his former pace in the Kings affairs, and
secretly practices with the Pope to recall the Commission, whereby he was
empowered together with Campegius, to determine in it* Anne Bollen formerly
offended at his two great haste in breaking the compliance betwixt her and
Percy, is now as much displeased with him for his being too slow in sentencing
the Kings Divorse. On which as she had built the hopes of her future greatness,
so she wanted neither will nor opportunity to do him ill offices with the King,
whom she exasperates against him upon all occasions. The King grows every day
more open in his carriage toward her, takes her along with him in his progress,
di^es with her privately in her chamber, and causes almost all adresses to be
made by her in matters of the greatest moment.

Resolved to break through all impediments which stood betwixt him and the
accomplishment of his desires, he first sends back Campegius an alien born,
presently caused Wolsie to be indicted and attainted in a praemunire, and not
long after by the counsel of Thomas Cromwell (who formerly had been the
Cardinals Solicitor in his Legantine Court) involves the whole body of the
Clergy in the same crime with him. By the persuasions of this man, he requires
the Clergy to acknowledge him for supreme head on earth of the Church of
England, to make no new Canons and Constitutions, nor to execute any such when
made, but by his consent. And having thus brought his own Clergy under his
command, he was the less solicitous how his matters went in the Court of Rome;
to which the Pope recalled his cause, which he either quickened or retarded, as
rather stood with his own interess, 1532.
than the Kings concernments. The King being grown more confident in the equity
and justice of his cause, by the determinations of many of the Universities in
France and Italy, better assured than formerly of his own Clergy at home, and
wanting no encouragement from the French King to speed the business, advanced
the Lady Anne Bollen (for by this time her father for her sake was made Earl of
W^ltshire) to the Title, Style, and Dignity of March^oness of P^mbrook, on the
first of September, 1532. assigning her a pension of a thousand pounds per
annum out of the Bishop^ick of Durham. And now the time of the intended
interview betwixt him and the French King drawing on a pace, he takes her along
with him unto Calais, where she entertained both Kings at a curious Mask. At
what time having some communication about the Kings intended marriage, the
French encouraged him to proceed, assuring him that if the matter should be
questioned by the Pope or Emperor, (against whom this must make him sure to
the party of France) to assist him with his utmost power, what fortune soever
should be^ide him in it. On which assurance from the French, the marriage is
privately made up on the 14th. of November then next following, the sacred
Rites performed by Dr Rowland Lee, whom afterward he preferred to the Sea of
Lichfield, and made Lord President of Wales. None present at the Nuptials but
Archbishop Cranmer, the Duke of Norfolk, the Father, Mother, and Brother of the
new Queen, and possibly some other of the Confidents of either side, whom it
concerned to keep it secret at their utmost peril.

But long it could not be concealed. For finding her self to be with child, she
acquaints the King with it, who presently dispatcheth George Lord Rochfort her
only brother, to the Court of France, as well to give the King advertisement of
his secret marriage, as to desire him not to fail of performing his promises if
occasion were, and therewithal to crave his counsel and advice how it was to
be published, since it could not long be kept unknown. It is not to be doubted,
but that the French King was well pleased with the news of a marriage, which
must needs fasten England to the party of France, and that he would be forward
enough to perform those promises which seemed so visible to conduce to his own
preservation. And as for matter of advice, it appeared unnecessary, because the
marriage would discover it self by the Queens being with child, which could no
longer be concealed. And being to be concealed no longer, on Easter Eve the
twelfth of April, she showed her self openly as Queen, all necessary officers
and attendants are appointed for her; an Order issues from the Parliament at
that time sitting, that Katherine should no longer be called Queen, but
Princess Dowager. Cranmer the new Archbishop repairs to Dunstable, erects his
Consistory in the Priory there, cites Katherine fifteen days together to
appear before him, and in default of her appearance proceeds judicially to
the sentence, which he reduces into writing in due form of Law, and caused it
to be openly published (with the consent of his Colleagues) on Friday the 23d.
of May. And on the Sunday sevennight being then Whitsunday, the new Queen was
solemnly crowned by the said Archbishop; conducted by water from Greenwich to
the Tower of London, May 29. from thence through the chief streets of the City
unto Westminster Hall, May 31. and the next day from Westminster Hall to the
Abbey Church to receive the Crown, a solemn tilting before the Court gate on the
morrow after. All which was done with more magnificence and pomp, than ever had
been seen before on the like occasion; the particulars whereof, he that lists
to see, may find them punctually set down in the Annals of John Stow, fol. 563,
564, etc.

And he may find there also the solemnities used at the Christning of the
Princess Elizabeth, born upon Sunday the 7th. day of September, and Christened
on the Wednesday following, with a pomp not much inferior to the Coronation;
her Godfather being the Archbishop of Canterbury, her Godmothers the old
Duchess of Norfolk, and the old Marchioness of Dorset, by whom she was named
Elizabeth, ac^ording to the name of the Grandmothers on either side. Not long
after Christmas then next following began the Parliament in which the Kings
marriage with the Lady Katherine was declared unlawful her daughter the Lady
M^ry to be illegitimate, the Crown to be entailed on the Kings heirs males, to
be begotten on the body of the present Queen, and for default of such issue on
the Princess Elizabeth; an oath devised in maintenance of the said succession,
and not long after, Moor and Fisher executed (as before was said) for the
refusal of that oath. The Kings cause all this while depended in the Court of
Rome, not like to be determined for him, and yet the Pope not willing to
declare against him, till by the solicitation of the Emperor, and for the
vindication of the honor of the Sea Apostolic, he seemed to be necessitated
to some acts of rigor, which at last proved the total ruin of his power and
party in the Realm of England.

For the new Queen considering that the Pope and she had such different
interesses, that they could not both subsist together, resolved upon that
course which Nature and self-preservation seemed to dictate to her. But finding
that the Popes was too well entrenched to be dislodged upon a sudden, it was
advised by Cromwell (made Mr of the Rols on her commendation) to begin with
taking in the outworks first; which being gained, it would be no hard matter
to beat him out of his trenches. In order whereunto a visitation is begun in
the month of October, 1555.
1535. in which a diligent enquiry was to be made into all Abbeys, Priories,
and Nunneries within the Kingdom; Cromwell himself, Dr Lee, and others, being
named for Visitors. Who governing themselves according to certain instructions
of their own devising, dismissed all such religious persons as were under the age
of ^4. or otherwise were willing to relinquish their several houses, shutting
up such from going out, as were not willing to accept the benefit of that
permission; all such religious persons as departed thence, to be gratified by
the Abbot or Prior with a Priests Gown, and forty shillings in money; and all
Nuns to be put into a secular habit, and suffered to go where they would. They
took order also, that no men should go into the houses of women, nor women into
the houses of men, but only for the hearing of Divine Service; making thereby
that course of life less pleasing unto either Sex, than it had been formerly.
They also inventaried, or else directly ^ook away the Relicts and chief Jewels
out of most of the said Monasteries or Religious houses, pretending that they
took them for the Kings use, but possibly keeping them for their own. And
having made a strict and odious inquisition into the lives of all the Votaries
of both Sexes, they returned many of them guilty of exorbitant lu^ts, and much
carnal uncleanness; representing their offenses in such multiplying glasses, as
made them seem both greater in number, and more horrid in nature, than indeed
they were. And in the February following was held a Parliament, in which all
Monasteries, Priories, and other Religious houses under the yearly value of
200l. were granted unto the King and his heirs for ever.

The number of the Houses then suppressed were said to be 376, their yearly
Rents then valued at the sum of thirty two thousand pounds and upwards, their
movable goods, as they were sold at Robin Hood's penny-worths, amounting to one
hundred thousand pounds and more. The Religious persons thus despoiled of their
Estates, either betook themselves to some of the greater Houses of their
several Orders, or went again into the world, and followed such secular
businesses as were offered to them toward the getting of their livings. Much
lamentation made in all parts of the Country, for want of that relief and
sustenance which the poor of all sorts received daily from their hospitality,
and for the want of that employment which they found continually in and about
those Houses, in their several Trades; insomuch that it was commonly thought,
that more than ten thousand persons, as well Masters as Servants, had lost
their livelyhoods by that act of suppression. To the passing whereof, the
Bishops and the Mitred Abots, which made the prevalent part of the House of
Peers, contributed their Votes and Suffrages as the other did; whether it were
out of pusillanimity, as not daring to appear in behalf of their brethren, or
out of a weak hope, that the Rapacity of the Queen and her Ministers would
proceed no farther, it is hard to say. Certain it is, that by their improvident
assenting to the present Grant, they made a rod for their own backs, (as the
saying is) with which they were sufficiently scourged within few years after,
till they were all finally whipped out of the Kingdom, though the new Queen, for
whose sake Cromwell had contrived the plot, did not live to see it.

For such is the uncertainty of human affairs, that when she thought her self
most safe and free from danger, she became most obnoxious to the ruin prepared
for her. It had pleased God on the eighth of January to put an end unto the
calamities of the virtuous but unfortunate Queen, into whose Bed she had
succeeded; the news whereof she entertained with such contentment, that she
caused her self to be apparalled in lighter colors than was agreeable to the
season, or the sad occasion; Whereas if she had rightly understood her own
condition, she could not but have known, that the long life of Katherine was to
be her best preservative against all changes, which the Kings loose affections,
or any other alterations in affairs of State, were otherwise like to draw upon
her. But this contentment held not long, for within three weeks after she fell
in travail, in which she miscarried of a Son, to the extreme grief of the
Mother, and discontent of the Father, who looked upon it as an argument of Gods
displeasure, as being as much offended at this second Marriage as he was at the
first. He then began to think of his ill for^une with both his Wives, both
Marriages subject to dispute* and the Legitimation of his daughter Elizabeth as
likely to be called in question in the time succeeding, as that of Mary in the
former. He much therefore cast about for another wife, of whose marriage and
his issue by her there could arise no con^roversie, or else must die without an
heir of his own body, or leave the Crown to be contended for by those, who
though they were of his own body, could not be his heirs. His eye had carried
him to a Gentlewoman in the Queens attendance, of extraordinary beauty, and
superlative modesty; on the enjoying of whom he so fixed his thoughts, that he
had quite obliterated all remembrance of his former loves. As resolute, but
more private in this pursuit than he was in the former; yet not so private, but
that the Queen (so piercing are the eyes of Love and Jealousy) had took notice
of it, and signified her suspicions to him, of which, more anon.

In the mean time she was not wanting in all those honest arts of Love,
Obsequiousness, and Entertainment, which might endear her to the King, who now
began to be as weary of her gaities and jocular humor, as formerly of the
gravity and reservedness of Katherine. And causing many eyes to observe her
actions, they brought him a return of some particulars, which he conceived
might give him a sufficient ground to proceed upon. The Lord Rochfort, her own
brother, having some suit to obtain by her of the King, was found whispering to
her on her bed when she was in it; which was interpreted for an act of some
great dishonor done or intended to the King, as if she had permitted him some
farther liberties than were consistent with the innocent familiarity between
brothers and sisters: In the aggravating whereof with all odious circumstances,
none was more forward than the Lady Rochfort her self, whether out of any
jealousy which she had of her husband, or whether out of some inveterate
hatred which she had to the Queen, (according to the peccant humor of most
sisters in law) is not clearly known. It was observed also, that Sir Henry
Norris, Groom of the Stool unto the King, had entertained a very dear affection
for her, not without giving himself some hopes of succeeding in the King's bed,
(as Sir Thomas Seimer after did) if she chanced to survive him. And it appears
that she had given him opportunity to make known his affection, and to acquaint
her with his hopes, which she expressed, by twitting him in a frolic humor
with ^ooking after dead men's shoos. Weston and B^eerton, both Gentlemen of the
Privy Chamber, were observed also to be very diligent in their services and
addresses to her, which were construed rather to proceed from love than duty,
though no reciprocation could be found to proceed from her, but what was
agreeable to that affability and general debonairness which she showed to all
men.

Out of these premises, weak and imperfect though they were, the King resolves
to come to a conclusion of his aims and wishes. A solemn Tilting was maintained
at Greenwich on the first of May, at which the King and Queen were present, the
Lord Rochfort and Sir Henry Norris being principal Challengers. The Queen by
chance let fall her handkerchief, which was taken up by one of her supposed
favorites who stood under the window, whom the King perceived to wipe his face
with it. This taken by the King to be done of purpose, and thereupon he leaves
the Queen and all the rest to behold the Sports, and goe^h immediately in great
haste to Westm^^ster, to the no small amazement of all the company, 1536.
but the Queen especially. Rochfort and Norris are committed to the Tower on
the morrow after, to which unfortunate place the Queen her self, on the same
day, was conducted by Sir Thomas Audeley Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Norfolk,
Cromwell then Master of the Rolls and principal Secretary, and Kingston
Lieutenant of the Tower. Informed by them upon the way of the Kings suspicions,
she is said to have fallen upon her knees, and with dire imprecations to have
disavowed the crime (whatsoever it were) wherewith she was charged; beseeching
God so to regard her as the justness of her cause required. After which,
William Breerton Esquire, and Sir Francis West^n of the King's Privy Chamber,
together with Mark Smeton one of the King's Musicians, were committed on the
same occasion.

These persons being thus committed, and the cause made known, the next care
was to find sufficient Evidence for their condemnation. It was objected, that
the Queen growing out of hope of having any issue male by the King, had used
the company of the Lord R^chfort, Norris, B^eerton, and Weston, and possibly of
Smeton also; involving her at on^e in no smaller crimes than those of Adultery
and Incest. For proof whereof, there was no want of any artifices, in sifting,
canvasing, and intangling, not only the Prisoners themselves, but all such
Wi^nesses of either sex, as were thought fit to be examined by the King^
Commissioners; from none of which they were able to get any thing by all their
Arts, which might give any ground for her conviction; but that Ma^k Smeton had
been wrought on to make some confession of himself to her dishonor, out of a
vain hope to save his own life by the loss of hers. Concerning which, Cromwell
thus writes unto the King, after the Prisoners had been thoroughly examined in
the Tower by the Lords of the Council, Many things (says h^) have been
objected, but nothing confessed; only some circumstances have been a
knowledged by Mark. To which effect, and other the particulars before
remembered, take here a Letter written by Sir E^ward Bayn^on to Sir William
Fitswil^iams, being then Treasurer of the Household, and not long after raised
unto the style and Title of Earl of Southamp^on.

Mr. Treasurer,
THis shall be to advertise you, that here is much communication, that no man
will confess any thing against her at all, but only Mark, of any actual thing.
Wherefore in my foolish conceit it should much touch the Kings honor if it
should no further appear. And I cannot believe, but that the other two be as
far culpable as ever was he; and I think assuredly the one keeps the others
counsel, as many con^ectures in my mind causes me to think, and especially of
the communication that was last between the Queen, Mr. Norres, Mr. Amner, and
me; as I would, if I might speak with Mr. Secretary and you together, more
plainly express my mind. If the case be, that they have confessed (like
witnesses) a^l things as they should do, then the matter is at a point. I have
mused much at the manner of Mistress Margery, which has used her self so
strangely toward me of late, being her friend so much as I have been. But no
doubt it cannot be chosen but she must be of counsel therewith; for there has
been great friendship between the Queen and her of ^a^e. I hear further, that
the Queen stands stiffly in her opinion, that she will die in it, which I
think is in the trust that she has of the other two. But if your business be
such as you cannot come, I would gladly come and wait on you, if you think it
requisite.


In appears also by a Letter of Sir William Kingstons, that he had much
communication with her when she was his prisoner, in which her language seemed
to be broken and distressed betwixt tears and laughter, out of which nothing
could be gathered, but that she exclaimed against Norris, as if he had accused
her. It was further signified in that Letter, that she named some others, who
had obsequiously applied themselves to her love and service, acknowledging such
passages, though not sufficient to condemn her, as showed, she had made use of
the utmost liberty which could be honestly allowed her. Most true it is, (as
far as any truth can be collected from common and credible reports) that Norris
being much favored by the King, was offered pardon for his life, if he would
confess the crimes which he was accused of. To which he made this generous
answer, That in his conscience he thought her guiltless of the crimes
objected, but whether she were or no, he could not accuse her of any thing; and
that he had rather undergo a thousand deaths than betray the innocent. So that
upon the point there was no evidence against her, but the confession of Smeton,
and the calumnies of the Lady Rochfort, of which, the one was fooled into that
confession by the hope of life, which notwithstanding was not pardoned; and the
other most deservedly lost her head within few years after, for being accessory
to the Adulteries of Queen Katherine Howard. And yet upon this Evidence she was
arraigned in the great Hall of the Tower of London on the 15th. of May, and
pronounced guilty by her Peers, of which her own father (which I cannot but
behold as an act of the highest tyranny) was compelled to be one. The Lord
Rochfort and the rest of the prisoners were found guilty also, and suffered
death on the 17th. day of the same month, all of them standing stoutly to the
Queens and their own integrity; as it was thought that Smeton also would have
done, but that he still flattered himself with the hopes of life, till the loss
of his head disabled him from making the retractation. The like death suffered
by the Queen on the second day after, some few permitted to be present, rather
as witnesses than spectators of her final end. And it was so ordered by the
advice of Sir William Kingston, who signified in his Letters to one of the
Council, that he conceived it best, that a reasonable number only should be
present at the Execution, because he found by some discourse which he had had
with her, that she would declare her self to be a good woman, for all men, but
for the King, at the hour of death. Which declaration she made good, going with
great cheerfulness to the Scaffold, praying most heartily for the King, and
standing constantly on her innocence to the very last.

So dyed this great and gallant Lady, one of the most remarkable mockeries and
disports of fortune which these last ages have produced, raised from the
quality of a private Lady to the bed of a King, crowned on the Throne, and
executed on the Scaffold; the fabric of her power and glories being six years
at the least in building, but cast down in an instant; the splendour and
magnificence of her Coronation seeming to have no other end, but to make her
the more glorious Sacrifice at the next alteration of the Kings affections. But
her death was not the only mark which the King did aim at; If she had only
lost her head, though with the loss of her honor, it would have been no bar to
her daughter Elizabeth from succeeding her father in the Throne, and he must
have his bed left free from all such pretensions, the better to draw on the
following marriage. It was thought necessary therefore, that she should be
separated from his bed by some other means than the Axe or Sword, and to be
legally divorced from her in a Court of Judicature, when the sentence of death
might seem to have deprived her of all means, as well as of all manner of
desire to dispute the point. Upon which ground Norris is practiced with to
confess the Adultery, and the Lord Percy (now Earl of Northumberland) who was
known to have made love unto her in her former times, to acknowledge a
Contract. But as Norris gallantly denied the one, so the Lord Percy could not
be induced (though much labored to it) to confess the other. For proof whereof
we have this Letter of his own hand writing, directed to Secretary Cromwell in
these following words.

Mr Secretary,
THis shall be to signify unto you, that I perceive by Sir Raynald Carnaby,
that there is supposed to be a pre-contract between the Queen and me. Whereupon
I was not only examined upon my oath before the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, but also received the blessed Sacrament upon the same before the Duke of
Norfolk, and others of the Kings Highness Council, learned in the spiritual
Law; assuring You Mr Secretary by the said oath and blessed body which before I
received, and hereafter mean to receive, that the same may be to my damnation,
if ever there were any contract or promise of marriage betwixt her and me. At
Newington Green the 13th. of May, in the 28th year of the reign of Our Soverain
Lord King Henry the 8th.

Yours assured, H. Northumberland.


But notwithstanding these denyals, and that neither the Adultery was
confessed, not the Contract proved, some other ground was found out to dissolve
the marriage; though what it was does not appear upon Record. All which occurs
in reference to it is a solemn instrument under the seal of Archbishop Cranmer,
by which the marriage is declared (on good and valuable reasons) to be null and
void, no reason being expressed particularly for the ground thereof. Which
sentence was pronounced at Lambeth on the 17th. of May, in the presence of Sir
Thomas Hadly, Lord Chancellor, Charles Duke of Suffolk, John Earl of Oxon,
Robert Earl of Sussex, William Lord Sandys* Lord Chancellor of his Majesty's
household, Thomas Cromwell, Master of the Rolls and principal Secretary, then
newly put into the office of Vicar General, Sir William Fitzwilliams,
Treasurer, and Sir William Paulet Controller of the Kings household, Thomas
Bedil, Archdeacon of Cornwall, and John Trigunwel, Dr of the Laws, all being
of the Privy Council. Besides which, there were present also John Oliver, Dean
of Kings College in Oxon, Richard Guent, Archdeacon of London, and Dean of the
A^ches, Edmund Bonner, Archdeacon of Leicester, Richard Leighton, Arch Deacon
of Buckingham, and Thomas Lee, Doctor of the Laws; as also Dr Richard Sampson,
Dean of the Chapel Royal, who appeared as Proctor for the King, together with
Doctor Nicholas Wotton, and Doctor John Harbor, appointed Proctors for the
Queen. By the authority of which great appearance, more than for any thing
contained particularly in the act or instrument, the said sentence of Divorce
was approved by the Prelates and Clergy assembled in their Convocation on the
ninth of June, and being so confirmed by them, it received the like approbation
by Act of Parliament within few days after; in which Act there also passed a
clause, which declared the Lady Elizabeth (the only issue of this marriage) to
be illegitimate. What else concerns this unfortunate Lady, together with some
proof of diverse things before delivered, cannot be more pathetically expressed,
than by her self, bemoaning her misfortunes to the King, in this following
Letter.

Sir,
YOur Graces displeasure, and my imprisonment, are things so strange unto me,
as what to write, or what to excuse, I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you send
unto me (willing me to confess a truth, and so obtain your favor) by such a
one whom you know to be my ant^ent professed enemy, I no sooner received this
message, than I rightly conceived your meaning: And if (as you say) confessing
a truth indeed may procure my safety, I shall with all willingness and duty
perform your commands; but let not your Grace ever imagine that your poor wife
will ever be brought to acknowledge a fau^t, where not so much as a thought
ever proceeded: And to speak a truth, never Prince had never wife more loyal in
all duty, or in all true affection, than you have ever found in Anne Bollen.
With which name and place I could willingly have contented my self, if God, and
your Graces pleasure had so been pleased. Neither did I at any time forget my
self in my exaltation or received Queenship, but that I ^^oked always for such
an alteration as now I find; the ground of my preferment being on no surer
foundation than your Graces fancy, the least alteration whereof, I knew was fit
and sufficient to draw that fancy to some other subject.

You have chosen me from a low estate to be your Queen and companion, far
beyond my desert or desire. If then you find me worthy of such honor, Good
your Grace let not any light fancy or bad counsel of my enemies, withdraw your
Princely favor from me; neither let that stain, that unworthy stain of a
disloyal heart toward your Good Grace, ever cast so foul a blot on your most
dutiful wife, and the infant Princess, your daughter. Try me good King, but
let me have a lawful trial, and let not my sw^rn enemies sit as my accusers and
judges; Yea let me receive an open trial, for my t^uths shall fear no open
shames; then shall you see either my innocence cleared, your suspicion and
conscience satisfied, the ignominy and slander of the world stopped, or my
guilt openly declared. So that whatsoever God or you may determine of (...),
your Grace may be freed from an open censure; and my offense being so lawful^y
proved, your Grace is at liberty both before God and man, not only to execute
worthy punishment on me as an unfaithful wife, but to follow your affection
already settled on that party, for whose sake I am now as I am; whose name I
could somewhile since have pointed to, your Grace being not ignorant of my
suspicion therein. But if you have already determined of me, and that not only
my death, but an infamous slander might bring you the enjoying of a desired
happiness, then I desire of Go^ that he will pardon your great sin herein, and
likewise my enemies, the instruments thereof; and that he will not call you to
a strict account for your unprincely and cruel usage of me, at his general
judgment seat, where both you and my self must shortly appear, and in whose
judgment I doubt not, whatsoever the world may think of me, my innocence shall
be openly known, and sufficiently cleared.

My last and only request shall be, that my self may bear the burden of your
Graces displeasure, and that it may not touch the innocent souls of those poor
Gentlemen, who as I understand are in straight imprisonment for my sake. If
ever I have found favor in your sight, if ever the name of Anne Bollen has
been pleasing in your ears, let me obtain this last request, and I will so
leave to trouble your Grace any further, with my earnest prayers to the
Trinity, to have you in his good keeping, and to direct you in all your actions.

Your most loyal and faithful Wife, Anne Bollen.
From my doleful prison in the Tower, May the 6th. 1536.

I had not dwelt so long upon the story of this Queen, but that there is so
much which depends upon it in reference to the Honor, Birth and Title of the
Princess Elizabeth; whose Reign of 44 years, accompanied with so many signal
blessings both at home and abroad, is used by some for a strong Argument of her
mothers innocence. For further proof whereof, they behold the Kings precipitate
and hasty marriage, casting himself into the bed of a third, before the sword
was dried from the blood of his second wife. But of these miseries and
calamit^es which befell her mother, the Princess was too young (as not being
fully three years old) to take any notice. And when she came unto the years of
understanding, she had been much sweetened and repaired by her fathers goodness,
By whose last will she was assured of her turn in the succession to the Crown,
if her brother and sister died without lawful issue; allowed the same yearly
maintenance, and allotted the same portion in marriage, with the Princess Mary.
But nothing more declares his good affection to her, than the great care he
took of her education; committed to the government and tuition of Roger Ascam,
a right learned man, she attained unto the knowledge of the Greek and Latin;
and by the help of other Schoolmasters, of the Modern Languages. Insomuch that
she very well understood the Greek, and was able readily to express her self in
the Latin tongue; as appears by an Oration which she made at her entertainment
in Cambridge, and the smart answer which she gave ex tempore to a Polish
Ambassador, of which we may hear more in their proper place. And as for the
Italian and the French, she spoke them with as much facility and elegance, as
if they had been natural to her. And if some times she made use of Interpreters
when she conversed with the Ambassadors of foreign Princes, it rather was to
keep her State, than that she could not entertain discourse with them in their
proper languages. Her person may be best known by her pictures, and the
perfections of her mind by her following government. Suffice it in this place
to know, that she seemed to be made up of Modesty and Majesty in an equal
mixture; and was so moderate in the course and ca^iage of her desires, that
King Edward (who took much delight in her conversation) used commonly to call
her his Sister Temperance.

Yet notwithstanding all these personal Graces, I do not find that she was
sought in marriage in the time of King Henry; the blots of infamy which had been
laid upon her Mother, 1550.
serving as a bar to her preferment amongst foreign Princes. In the beginning of
King Edward's, she was aimed at by Sr Thomas Seymour, a brother of the Lord
Protector Sommersets, for the advancing of his lofty and ambitious projects.
1552.
And in the latter end thereof, propounded to the eldest son of the King of
Denmark. But it was propounded only and not persued, whether neglected by that
King for the former reason, or intermitted by her own aversness from marriage,
we are yet to seek. But in the first year of Queen Mary, she was desired by
Edward Courtney Earl of Devonshire, the eldest son of Henry Marquess of Exeter,
descended from a daughter of King Edward the 4th. which proved so much to the
displeasure of the Queen, that it became dangerous to both of them, as was
showed before. For notice of the Queens displeasure having been took by some of
great place about her, they were both d^awn into suspicion of being privy at
the least unto Wiat's rebellion, (raised on the noise of the Queens marriage
with the Prince of Spain) both of them clapped in prison upon that account, and
so detained for a long time, though both acquitted publicly by Wiat at the
time of his death.

But nothing so much alienated the Queens affection from her, as the difference
which was between them in the cause of Religion, occasioned and continued by
their several interests. For it concerned Queen Mary to maintain the Pope and
his Religion, her mothers marriage not being otherwise to be defended as good
and lawful but by his authority, which marriage, if by his authority made good
and lawful, then must the marriage of Anne Bollen be made unlawful, and
consequently the Princess Elizabeth must actually be made illegitimate by the
same authority. Upon which point, as the Queen labored nothing more than the
restoring of the Pope to that Supremacy of which he had been deprived by the
two last Kings; so kept she a hard hand upon her sister, as of a different
Religion from her, the visible Head of the Protestant party in the Kingdom, and
one whom she suspected to have more hearts amongst the Subjects than she had
her self. Upon the first surmise of her being privy to Wyat's conspiracy, Sir
Edward Hastings and some others were sent to bring her to the Court from her
house at Ashrsdge, where though they found her extreme sick, and unfit for
travel, yet they compelled her to go with them on the morrow after. Being come
unto the Court, she was first kept prisoner in her chamber for the space of a
fortnight, neither permitted to come to the Queens presence, nor suffered
without much difficulty to write unto her. Charged by the Bishop of Winchester
and some other Lords with Wyat's practices, she stoutly stood on the denial,
professing her fidelity and loyalty to the Queen her sister. Which
notwithstanding she was conveied by water, on the Sunday commonly called
Palm Sunday, March 18. 1553.
to the Tower of London, the people being commanded to keep their Churches, for
fear she might be rescued and took from them who were to have the conduct of
her; by whom compelled to land at the private Stairs, generally called The
Traitors Stairs, she openly affirmed, That there landed as true a Subject,
being a Prisoner, as ever landed in that place; and so was brought unto the
Lodgings appointed for her, all doors being locked and bolted on her, to her
great amazement. Gage Constable of the Tower, and at that time Lord Chamberlain
also, was her bitter enemy, but more for love to the Pope than for hate to her
person, and did not only place a strong Guard about her, but suffered none but
those of that ragged Regiment to carry up her diet to her. Of which, complaint
being made to him by some of her servants, he threatened to lay them in such a
place where they should neither see the Sun nor Moon, if they troubled him any
more about it; though afterward it was otherwise ordered by the Lords of the
Council.

Wearied with the closeness of her imprisonment, she moved the Lord Cha^dois
and the Lord Chamberlain, the one of which was Constable, and the other
Lieutenant of the Tower, that she might have the liberty of walking in the
private Garden, or at the least in the Queens Lodgings, for her better health.
In which, not able to gratify her by their own authority, the Lord Chandois
obtained leave of the Lords of the Council that she might walk in the Queens
Lodgings, himself, the Lord Chamberlain, and three of the Queens Gentlewomen
being still in her company; permitted afterward to enjoy the benefit of the
private Garden, the doors were always shut upon her, and order given, that no
Prisoners should be suffered by their Keepers to look out of the windows so
long as she was walking in it. Such care there was to hinder all access unto
her, and opportunity of conference with her, that a little Boy of four years
old was threatened to be whipped for presenting her with flowers and nosegays, and
a command given by Gage that the Boy's father should keep him at home, and not
suffer him to come thither any more. But the Tower being thought to be no safe
prison for a person of such eminent quality, by reason of its nearness to the
capital City, and the great number of prisoners which were kept therein, she
was committed to the custody of Sir Henry Bedingfield, a man of an untractable
and rugged nature, 1554.
by whom she was conducted with a guard of soldiers to the Manor of Woodstock,
which journey she began on the 19th. of May being Trinity Sunday, and ended by
short and easy stages on the Thursday after; her own servants sometimes
sequestered from her by command of her Jailer, (as she commonly called him) the
people sometimes rated and reviled by him for flocking to see her as she
passed, and the Lord Williams, though associated in Commission with him, openly
quarrelled and reproached for giving her a noble Entertainment at his house of
Ricolt. Being brought to Woodstock, she was kept under many locks and bolts, a
guard of Russians continually attending before her doors, and the keys every
night brought up to Reding field, who suffered no access unto her upon any
occasion; Which being made known to the Lord Williams, he solicited the Queen
that she might be prisoner in his house, and offered to be surety for her, and
was in such a fair way of obtaining his suit, that he caused preparations to be
made for her reception; but either by the interposition of the Bishop of
Winchester, her most mortal enemy, or the solicitation of Bedingfield, who
possibly might have some other end to work upon her, no effect followed
answerably to that expectation.

About this time she was advised by some of her friends to submit her self unto
the Queen, which they conceived would be very well taken, and redound much both
to her benefit and contentment. To which she answered, That she would never
make any submission to them against whom she never had offended in word or
deed; adding withal, that if she were guilty of any such offense, she would
crave no mercy but the Law, which she was sure she should have had before that
time, if any thing could have been proved against he^ by her greatest enemies;
only she was persuaded to make a suit to the Lords of the Council that she
might be suffered to write a Letter to the Queen* not g^atified without much
difficulty in that easy sure, nor otherwise gra^ified at all, but that
Bed^ngfiel^ was to stand by her all the time she (...), and have the keeping of
her papers till she came to an end, and to be made privy to the conveyan^e of
those Letters when they once were written. At her first coming to the Tower,
she had a Priest appointed to say Mass in her chamber; but whether the same
Priest or any other was appointed for the like office at her being at
Woodstoc^, I find not in the story of her life and troubles. Certain it is,
that she resorted to the Mass both before and after, and seemed not a little
discontented that she could not gain so much upon the Queen by her outward
conformity, as to believe that she was catholickly affected. But the Queen was
not the only one who believed so of her, though she behaved her self so warily
as not to come within the danger of the Laws, for acting any thing in
opposition unto that Religion which was then established. Concerning which
there goes a story, that when a Popish Priest had urged her very earnestly to
declare her judgment touching the Presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament;
she very cautelously resolved the point in these following Verses: 'Twas God
the word that spoke it,
He took the bread and b^ake it,
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe and take it.


But all this caution notwithstanding, her aversness from the Church of Rome
was known sufficiently, not to be altered while she lived, and therefore she to
live no longer to be the occasion of continual fears and jealousies to the
Catholic party. The times were then both sharp and bloody, and a great
persecution was designed against the Protestants in all parts of the Kingdom;
At what time Bishop Gardener was heard to say, That it was to no purpose to cut
off the boughs and branches, if they did not also lay the Ax to the root of the
Tree. More plainly the Lord Paget in the hearing of some of the Spania^ds, That
the King should never have a quiet Government in England, if her ^^ad were not
stricken off from her shoulders. With which the King being made acquainted, he
resolved to use his best endeavor, not only to preserve her life, but obtain
her liberty; For he considered with himself, that if the Princess should be
taken away, the right of the Succession would remain in the Queen of Scots, who
being married to the Daulphin of Fr^^ce, would be a means of joining this
Kingdom unto that, and thereby gain unto the French the Sovereignty or supreme
command above all other Kings in Europe. He considered also with himself, that
the Queen was no^ very healthy, supposed at that ^ime to be with child, but
thought by others of more judgment not to be like to bring him any children to
succeed in the Crown, and hoped by such a signal favor to oblige the Princess
to accept him for her husband, on the Queens decease, by means whereof, he
might still continue Master of the treasures and strength of England, in all
his wars against the French, or any other Nation which maligned the greatness
of the Austrian Family. Upon which grounds he dealt so effectually with the
Queen, that order was given about a fortnight after Easter to the Lord Williams
and Sir Henry Bedingfield to bring their prisoner to the Court; which command
was not more cheerfully executed by the one, 1555.
than stomach'd and repined at by the other. Being brought to Hampton Court,
where the Queen then lay, she was conducted by a back way to the Prince's
Lodgings, where she continued a fortnight and more without being seen or sent
to by any body, Bedingfield and his guards being still about her; so that she
seemed to have changed the place, but not the Prison, and to be so much nearer
danger, by how much she was nearer unto those who had power to work it. At
last, a visit was bestowed upon her, but not without her earnest suit in that
behalf, by the Bishop of Winchester Lord Chancellor, the Earls of Arundel and
Shrewsbery, and Sir William Peter, whom she right joyfully received, desiring
them to be a means unto the Queen that she might be freed from that restraint,
under which she had been kept so long together.

Which being said, the Bishop of Winchester kneeling down, besought her to
submit her self to the Queen, that being, as he said, the only probable
expedient to effect her liberty. To whom she answered as before, that rather
than she would betray her innocence by such submission, she would be content to
lie in prison all the days of her life. For by so doing, (said she) I must
confess my self to be an offender, which I never was against her Majesty, in
thought, word, or deed; and where no just offense is given, there needs no
submission. Some other Overtures being made to the same effect, but all unto as
little purpose, she is at last brought before the Queen (whom she had not seen
in more than one year before) about ten of the clock at night; before whom
falling on her knees, she desired God to preserve her Malesty, not doubting, as
she said, but that she should prove her self to be as good a Subject to her
Majesty, as any other whosoever. Being first dealt with by the Queen to confess
some offense against her self, and afterward to acknowledge her imprisonment
not to be unjust, she absolutely refused the one, and very handsomely declined
the other. So that no good being to be gotten on her on either hand, she was
dismissed with some uncomfortable words from the present Enterview, and about a
week after was discharged of Bedingfield and his guard of soldiers. It was
reported, that King Philip stood behind the Hangings, and hearkened unto every
word which passed between them, to the end, that if the Queen should grow into
any extremity, he might come in to pacify her displeasures, and calm her
passions. He knew full well, how passionately this Princess was beloved by the
English Nation, and that he could not at the present more endear himself to the
whole body of the people, than by effecting her enlargment; which shortly after
being obtained, she was permitted to retire to her own houses in the Country,
remaining sometimes in one, and sometimes in another, but never without fear of
being remanded unto prison, till the death of Gardener, which happened on the
12th. of November then next following. Some speech there was, and it was
earnestly endeavored by the Popish Party, of marrying her to Emanuel Philebert
Duke of Savoy, as being a Prince that lived far off, and where she could give
no encouragement to any male-contented party in the Realm of England; Against
which, none so much opposed as the King, who had a design on her for himself,
as before is said; and rather for himself than for Charles his son (though it be
so affirmed by Cambden) the Princess being then in the twenty second year of
her age, whereas the young Prince was not above seven or eight. So that a
resolution being finally fixed of keeping her within the Kingdom, she lived
afterward for the most part with less vexations, but not without many
watchful eyes upon all her actions, till it pleased God to call her to the
Crown of England. She had much profited by the Pedagogie of Ascham, and the
rest of her Schoolmasters, but never improved her self so much as in the School
of Affliction, by which she learned the miseries incident to Subjects, when
they groan under the displeasure of offended Princes; that the displeasures of
some Princes are both made and cherished by the art of their Ministers, to the
undoing of too many innocent persons who do less deserve it; that it is
therefore necessary, that the ears of Princes should be open unto all
complaints, and their hands ready to receive Petitions from all sorts of
people, to the end that knowing their grievances and distresses, they may
commiserate them in the one, and afford them remedy in the other; that a good
Prince must have somewhat in him of the Priest, who if he be not sensible of
the infirmities of his brethren, cannot be thought to intercede so powerfully
in their behalf, as when he has been touched with the true sense and feeling
of their extremities; and finally, that the School is never better governed,
than by one who has past through all the forms and degrees thereof, and having
been perfectly trained up in the ways of obedience, must know the better how to
use both the Rod and Ferula when he comes to be Master of the rest.

The first eight years of the Reign of QUEEN ELIZABETH.
An. Reg. Eliz. 1. An. Dom. 1558, 1559. An. Reg. Eliz. 1. 1558.

ELizabeth the only child then living of King Henry the 8th. succeeded her
Sister in the Throne, on the 17th. of November, Anno 1558. Ferdinand of Austria
being then Emperor, Henry the 2d. King of the French, Philip the second King
of Spain, and Paul the 4th. commanding in the Church of Rome. Queen Mary not
long before her death had called a Parliament, which was then sitting when the
news thereof was brought unto the Lords in the House of Peers. The news by
reason of the Queens long sickness, not so strange unto them, as to take them
either unresolved or unprovided for the declaring of their duty to the next
successor; though some of them perhaps had some secret wishes that the Crown
might have fallen rather upon any other, than upon her to whom it did of right
belong; so that upon a short debate amongst themselves, a message is sent to
the Speaker of the House of Commons, desiring him, and all the Members of that
House, to come presently to them, upon a business of no small importance, to
the good of the Kingdom. Who being come, the Lord Chancellor Heath, with a
composed and settled countenance, not without sorrow enough for the death of the
one, or any discontent for the succession of the other, declared unto them in
the name of the rest of the Lords, that God had taken to his mercy the late
Queen Mary, and that the succession to the Crown did belong of right to the
Princess Elizabeth, whose Title they conceived to be free from all legal
questions; that in such cases nothing was more necessary than expedition, for
the preventing of all such plots and practices of any discontented or ambitious
persons, as might be set on foot to the disturbance of the common quiet; and
therefore that there concurrence was desired in proclaiming the new Queen with
all speed that might be, they being then so opportunely convened together as
the Representees of the whole body of the Commons of the Realm of England;
Which being said, the Knights and Burgestes gave a ready consent to that which
they had no reason to deny; and they which gave themselves some thoughts of
inclining otherwise, conceived their opposition to the general Vote, neither
safe nor seasonable. So that immediately the Princess Elizabeth was proclaimed
by the King at Arms, first before Westminster Hall door in the Palace Yard, in
the presence of the Lords and Commons, and not long after at the Cross in
Cheapside, and other places in the City, in the presence of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and principal Citizens, to the great joy of all peaceable and
well-affected people.

It was not long before the Princess had advertisement of the death of her
sister, together with the general acknowledgement of her just and lawful. Title
to the Crown Imperial. The news whereof being brought unto her by some of the
Lords, she prepared for her removal from Hatfield on the Saturday after, (being
the 19th. of that month) and with a great and Royal train set forwards to
London. At Higate four miles from the City, she was met by all the Bishops then
living, who presented themselves before her upon their knees, in testimony of
their loyalty and affection to her. In which address as she seemed to express
no small contentment, so she gave to each of them particularly her hand to
kiss, except only unto Bonner of London, whose bloody butcheries had rendered
him incapable in her opinion of so great a favor. At her first coming to the
City she took her lodging in the Charterhouse, where she staid some days, till
all things in the Tower might be fitted and prepared for her reception.
Attended by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, with a stately strain of Lords and
Ladies, and their several followers, She enters by Cripple gate into the City,
passes along the wall till she came to Bishops gate, where all the Companies
of the City in their several Liveries waited her coming in their proper and
distinct rancks, reaching from thence until the further end of Mark Lane, where
she was entertained with a peal of great Ordnance from the Tower. At her
entrance into which place, she rendered her most humble thanks to Almighty God
for the great and wondrous change of her condition, in bringing her from being
a prisoner in that place, to be the Prince of her people, and now to take
possession of it as a Royal Palace, in which before she had received so much
discomfort. Here she remained till the 5th. day of December then next
following, and from thence removed by water unto Sommerset House. In each
remove she found such infinite throngs of people, who flocked from all parts to
behold her, both by land and water, and testified their public joy by such
loud acclamations, as much rejoiced her heart to hear, and could not but
express it in her words and countenance, by which she doubled their affections,
and made her self the absolute Mistress at all times of their hands and purses.
She had been forged upon the anvil of adversity, which made her of so fine a
temper, that none knew better than her self how to keep her State, and yet
descend unto the meanest of her subjects in a popular Courtship.

In the mean time the Lords of the Council had given Order for the stopping of
all Ports and Havens, that no intelligence of the Queens death might be carried
out of the Realm, by which any disturbance might be plotted or contrived
against it, till all things were settled here at home. But finding such a
general concurrence in all sorts of people, in acknowledging her just and
lawful Title, testified by so many outward signs of a public joy, that there
was no fear of any danger from abroad, that bar was speedily removed, and the
Ports opened as before to all sorts of passengers. And in the next place care
was taken for sending new Commissions unto such Ambassadors as resided in the
Courts of several Princes, both to acquaint them with the change, and to assure
those Princes of the Queens desire to maintain all former leagues between them
and the Crown of England; but more particular instructions were directed to her
Agent in the Court of Spain; to whom it was given in charge to represent unto
the King, the dear remembrance which she kept of those many humanities received
from him in the time of her troubles. Instructions are sent also to Sir Edward
Karn, the late Queens Agent with the Pope, and now confirmed by her in the same
employment, to make his Holiness acquainted with the death of Queen Mary, and
her succession to the Crown, not without out some desire that all good offices
might be reciprocally exchanged between them. But the Pope answered hereunto
(according to his accustomed rigor) That the Kingdom of England was held in
Fee of the Apostolic See; that she could not succeed being illegitimate; that
he could not contradict the declarations of Clement the 7th and Paul the 3d.
that it was a great boldness to assume the name and government of it without
him; yet being desirous to show a fatherly affection, if she will renounce her
pretensions, and refer her self wholly to his free disposition, he will do
whatsoever may be done with the honor of the Apostolic See. To the making of
which sudden answer, though there needed no other instigation of his own rough
nature, yet many thought that he was put upon it by some Ministers of the Court
of France, who fearing nothing more than that Philip will endeavor by a second
marriage, to assure himself of the possession of the Realm of England, and to
that end solicit for a dispensation to make way unto it, thought it expedient
to prevent those practices in the first beginning, by putting the Pope upon
such counsels, as would be sure to dash all his hopes that way.

But the new Queen having performed this office of civility to him, as she did
to others, expected not the coming back of any answer, not took much thought of
it when she heard it. She knew full well, that her legitimation and the Popes
supremacy could not stand together, and that she could not possibly maintain
the one, without a discarding of the other. But in this case it concerned her
to walk very warily, and not to unmask her self too much at once, for fear of
giving an alarm to the Papal party, before she had put her self into a posture
of ability to make good her actions. Many who were imprisoned for the cause of
Religion, she restored to liberty at her first coming to the Crown. Which
occasioned Rainsford, a Buffonly Gentleman of the Court, to make a suit to her
in the behalf of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, who had been long imprisoned in
a Latin Translation, that they also might be restored to liberty, and walk
abroad as formerly in the English Tongue. To whom she presently made answer*
That he should first endeavor to know the minds of the Prisoners, who perhaps
desired no such liberty as was demanded. Which notwithstanding, upon a serious
debate of all particulars, she was resolved to proceed to a reformation, as the
times should serve. In order whereunto, she constitutes her Privy Council,
which she compounds of such ingredients, as might neither give encouragement to
any of those who wished well to the Church of Rome, or alienate their
affections from her, whose hearts were more inclined to the Reformation. Of
such as had been of the Co^ncil to the Quen her sister, she retained the Lord
Archbishop of York, the Lord Marquess of Winchester, the Earls of Arundel,
Shrewsbury, Darby, and Pembrock, the Lords Clynton and Effingham, Sir Thomas
Cheiney, Sir William Petice, Sir John Mason, Sir Richard Sackvile, and Doctor
Wotton; To whom she added of her own, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of
Bedford, Sir Thomas Parre, Sir Edward Ro^ers, Sir Ambrose Care, Sir William
Cecil, and Sir Nicholas B^c^n. To which last, being then Attorney of the Duchy
of Lancaster, and one that had been much employed by her in some former
services which had relation to the Law, she committed the custody of the Great
Seal on the 22 of December, the Title of Lord Chancellor remaining to
Archbishop Heath as before it did, and that of the Lord keeper being given to
Bacon: Which being a new Title, and consequently subject unto some disputes, an
Act was passed in the second Parliament of her Reign for investing the said new
Lord Keeper, and all that should from thenceforth enjoy that Office, with all
the Powers, Privileges, and Preheminences which anciently had been exercised
and enjoyed by the Lord Chancellor of England, and for confirming of all
sentences and decrees in Chancery, which had or should be made by the said Lord
Keepers in all times to come. The like mixture she also caused to be made
amongst other her subordinate Ministers, in adding such new Commissioners for
the Peace in every County, as either were known to be of the Reformed Religion,
or to wish well to it.

The preferring of so many of the Protestant party, as well to places of
employment in their several Countries, as to the rank and dignity of Privy
Counselors, and the refusal of her hand to Bishop Bonner at her very first
coming to the Crown, were taken to be strong presumptions (as indeed they
were) that she intended to restore the Reformed Religion. And as the Papists,
in the first beginning of the Reign of Queen Mary, hoping thereby the better to
obtain her favor, began to build new Altars, and set up the Mass, before they
were required so to do by any public Authority; so fared it now with many
unadvised Zelots amongst the Protestants, who measuring the Queens affections
by their own, or else presuming that their errors would be taken for an honest
zeal, employed themselves as busily in the demolishing of Altars, and defacing
of Images, as if they had been licenced and commanded to it by some legal
warrant. It happened also, that some of the Ministers which remained at home, and
others which returned in great numbers from beyond the Seas, had put themselves
into the Pulpits, and bitterly inveighed against the superstitions and
corruptions of the Church of Rome. The Popish Preachers did the like, and were
not sparing of invectives against the others, whom they accused of Heresies,
Schisms, and Innovation in the Worship of God. For the suppressing of which
disorders on the one side, and those common disturbances on the other, the
Queen set out two Proclamations much about one time, by one of which it was
commanded, that no man, of what persuasion soever he was in the points of
Religion, should be suffered from thenceforth to preach in public, but only
such as should be licensed by her authority; and that all such as were so
licensed or appointed, should forbear preaching upon any point which was matter
of Controversy, and might conduce rather to exasperate than to calm men's
passions. Which Proclamation was observed with such care and strictness, that
no Sermon was preached at St. Paul's Cross or any public place in London, till
the Easter following: At what time the Sermons which were to be preached in the
Spittle (according to the ancient custom) were performed by Doctor Bill the
Almoner to the Queen, and afterward the first Dean of Westminster of the
Queens foundation; Doctor Richard Cox formerly Dean of Westminster, preferred
in short time after to the Sea of Ely, and Mr. Robert Horn (of whom mention
has been made before at the troubles of Franckfort) advanced not long after to
the Sea of Winchester. The Rehearsal Sermon, accustomably preached at St. Paul's
Cross on the Sunday following, was undertook by Doctor Thomas Sampson then
newly returned from beyond the Seas, and after most unhappily made Dean of
Christ-church. But so it chanced, that when he was to go into the Pulpit, the
door was locked, and the key thereof not to be found, so that a Smith was sent
for to break open the door; and that being done, the like necessity was found
of cleansing and making sweet the place, which by a long disuse had contracted
so much filth and nastiness, as rendered it unfit for another Preacher.

By the other Proclamation which was published on the 30th. of December, ^t was
enjoined, That no man of what quality or degree soever, should presume to alter
any thing in the state of Religion, or innovate in any of the rites and
ceremonies thereunto belonging, but that all such rites and ceremonies should
be observed in all Parish Churches of the Kingdom, as were then used and
retained in her Majesty's Chapel, until some further order should be taken in
it. Only it was permitted, and withal required, that the Letany, the Lords
Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments, should be said in the English
tongue, and that the Epistle and the Gospel, at the time of the High Mass,
should be read in English, which was accordingly done in all the Churches of
London on the next Sunday after, being New Years day, and by degrees in all the
other Churches of the Kingdom also. Further than this, she thought it not
convenient to proceed at the present, but that she had commanded the Priest or
Bishop (for some say it was the one, An. Reg. Eliz. 1. 1558/9.
and some the other) who officiated at the Altar in the Chapel-Royal, not to
make any Elevation of the Sacrament, the better to prevent that adoration which
was given unto it, and which she could not suffer to be done in her sight
without a most apparent wrong to her judgment and conscience; Which being made
known in other places, and all other Churches being commanded to conform
themselves to the example of the Chapel, the elevation was forborne also in most
other places, to the great discontent and trouble of the Popish party. And
though there was no further progress toward a Reformation by any public Act or
Edict, yet secretly a Reformation in the form of Worship, and consequently in
point of Doctrine, was both intended and projected. For making none acquainted
with her secret purposes but the Lord Marquis of Northampton, Francis Earl of
Bedford, Sir John Gray of Pergo, (one of the late Duke of Suffolk's brothers)
and Sir William Cecil; she committed the reviewing of the former Litutgy to the
care of Doctor Parker, Doctor Gryndal, Doctor Cox, Doctor Pilkington, Doctor
Bill, Doctor May, and Mr. Whitehead, together with Sir Thomas Smith Doctor of
the Laws, a very learned, moderate, and judicious Gentleman. But what they did,
and what preferments they attained to on the doing of it, we shall see anon,
wheu we shall find the Book reviewed, confirmed by Act of Parliament, and
executed in all parts of the Kingdom, as that Act required.

But first, some public Acts of State, and great Solemnities of Court are to
be performed. The Funeral of the Queen deceased solemnised on the 13th. of
December at the Abbey of Westminster, and the Sermon preached by Doctor White
then Bishop of Winchester, seemed only as a preamble to the like Solemnity
performed at the said place about ten days after, in the Obsequies of Charles
the 5th. which mighty Emperor having first left the world by resigning his
Kingdoms, and retiring himself into a Monastery, as before was said, did after
leave his life also in September last; and now upon the 24th. of this present
December a solemn Obsequie was kept for him in the wonted form, a rich Hearse
being set up for him in the Church of Westminster, magnificently covered with a
Pall of gold, his own Ambassador serving as the principal Mourner, and all the
great Lords and Officers about the Court attending on the same in their rancks
and orders. And yet both these, though stately and majestical in their several
kinds, came infinitely short of those Pomps and Triumphs which were prepared
and reserved for the Coronation. As a Preparation whereunto, she passed from
Westminster to the Tower on the 12th. of January, attended by the Lord Mayor,
the Aldermen, and other Citizens, in their Barges, with the Banners and
Escutcheons of their several Companies, loud Music sounding all the way; and
the next day she restored some unto their old, and advanced others to new
honors, according to her own fancy and their deservings. The Marquis of
Northampton, who had lain under an Attaindure ever since the first beginning of
the Reign of Queen Mary, she restored in blood, with all his Titles and
Estates. The Lord Edward Seimer, eldest son to the late Duke of Somerset, was
by her reconfirmed in the Titles of Viscount Bea^ch^mp and Earl of Hertford,
which had been formerly entayled upon him by Act of Parliament. The Lord Thomas
Howard, second son of Thomas the late Duke of Norfolk, and brother to Henry
Earl of Surrey, (beheaded in the last days of King Henry the Eighth) she
advanced to the Title of Viscount Howard of Bind^n. She also preferred Sir
Oliver St. John's, who derived himself from the Lady Ma^garet daughter of John
Duke of Somerset, from whom the Queen her self descended, to the dignity of
Lord St. John of Bletso; and Sir Henry Carte, son of Sir William Carry Knight,
and of Mary Bollen his wife, the only sister of Queen Anne Bollen, she
promoted to the honor and degree of Lord Carry of Hansdon.

The ordinary acts of grace and favor being thus dispatched, she prepares the
next morning for a triumphant passage through London to her Palace at
Westminster. But first before she takes her Chariot, she is said to have lifted
up her eyes to heaven, and to have used some words to this or the like effect.
O Lord Almig^^y and ever^iving (...), I give thee most hearty thanks that thou
have been so mercifu. unto me, as to spare me to see this joyful day. And I
acknowledge that thou have dealt as wonderfully and a^ mercifully with me, as
thou did with thy true and faithful servant Daniel thy Prophet, whom thou
deliveredst out of the den, from the cruelty of the raging greedy Lions; even
so was I overwhelmed, and only by thee delivere^; to thee only be thanks,
honor, and pra^se for ever. Amen. Which said, she mounted into her Chariot
with so clear a spirit, as if she had been made for that days solemnity.
Entertained all the way she went with the joyful shouts and acclamations of God
save the Queen, which she repaid with such a modest affability, and so good a
grace, that it drew tears of joy from the eyes of some, with infinite prayers
and thanksgiving from the hearts of all; but nothing more indeared her to them,
than the accepting of an English Bible richly gilt, which was let down unto her
from one of the Pageants, by a child representing Truth. At the sight whereof
she first kissed both her hands, with both her hands she received the book,
which first she kissed and after laid unto her bosom, (as the nearest place
unto her heart) giving the City greater thanks for that excellent Gift, than
for all the rest, which plentifully had been that day bestowed upon her, and
promised to be diligent in the reading of it. By which, and many other acts of
a popular piety, with which she passed away that day, she did not only gain the
hearts of all them that saw her, but they that saw her did so magnify her most
eminent Graces, that they procured the like affections in the hearts of all
others also.

On the next morning with like magnificence and splendour, she is attended to
the Church of St Peter in Westminster, where she was crowned according to the
Order of the Roman Pontifical, by Dr Owen Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlisle, the
only man among all the Bishops, who could be wrought on by her to perform that
office. Whether it were that they saw some alteration coming, to which they
were resolved not to yield conformity, so that they could not be in a worse
case upon this refusal, than they should be otherwise; or that they feared the
Popes displeasure, if they should do an act so contrary unto his pretensions,
without leave first granted; or that they had their own particular animosities
and spleens against her, (as the Archbishop of York particularly for his being
deprived of the seal) is not certainly known. None more condemned for the
refusal, than the Bishop of Ely, as one that had received his first preferments
from the King her father, and who complied so far in the time of King Edward,
as to assist in the composing of the public Liturgy, and otherwise appeared as
forward in the reformation, as any other of that Order. So that no reason can
be given either for his denial now to perform that service, or afterward for
his not complying with the Queens proceedings, but that he had been one of
those which were sent to Rome to tender the submission of the Kingdom to the
Pope still living, and could not now appear with honor in any such action, as
seemed to carry with it a repugnancy (if not a manifest inconsistency) with the
said engagement. It cannot be denied but that there were three Bishops living
of King Edward's making, all of them zealously affected to the reformation. And
possibly it may seem strange that the Queen received not the Crown rather from
one of their hands, than to put her self unto the hazard of so many denyals as
had been given her by the others. But unto this it may be answered, that the
said Bishops at that time were deprived of their Sees, (but whether justly or
unjustly, could not then be questioned) and therefore not in a capacity to
perform that service. Besides, there being at that time no other form
established for a Coronation, than that which had much in it of the Ceremonies
and superstitions of the Church of Rome, she was not sure that any of the said
three Bishops would have acted in it, without such alterations and omissions in
the whole course of that Order, as might have rendered the whole action
questionable amongst captious men, and therefore finally she thought it more
conducible to her reputation amongst foreign Princes, to be Crowned by the hands
of a Catholic Bishop (or one at least which was accounted to be such) than if
it had been done by any of the other Religion.

And now the Parliament draws on, summoned to begin on the 25th. of that month,
being the Anniversary day of St Paul's conversion; a day which seemed to carry
some good Omen in it, in reference to that great work of the Reformation which
was therein to be established. The Parliament opened with an eloquent and
learned Sermon preached by Dr Cox, a man of good credit with the Queen, and of
no less esteem with the Lords and Commons, who carried any good affection to the
memory of King Edward the 6th. The choosing of which man to perform that
service, was able of it self to give some intimation of the Queens design to
most of the Auditors; though to say truth, the Bishops refusing to perform the
Ceremony of the Coronation, had made themselves incapable of a further trust.
Nor could the Queens design be so closely carried, but that such Lords and
Gentlemen as had the managing of elections in their several Countries, retained
such men for Members of the House of Commons, as they conceived most likely to
comply with their intentions for a Reformation. Amongst which none appeared
more active than Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, whom the Queen had taken into
her Council; Henry Fitz-allen Earl of Arundel, whom she continued in the Office
of Lord Steward, and Sir William Coecil, whom she had restored to the place of
Secretary, to which he had been raised by King Edward the 6th. Besides, the
Queen was young, unmaried, and like enough to entertain some thoughts of an
husband; so that it can be no great marvel, not only if many of the Nobility,
but some even of the Gentry also, flattered themselves with possibilities of
being the man whom she might choose to be her partner in the Regal Diadem. Which
hopes much smoothed the way to the accomplishment of her desires, which
otherwise might have proved more rugged and unpassable than it did at the
present. Yet notwithstanding all their care, there wanted not some rough and
furious spirits in the House of Commons, who eagerly opposed all propositions
which seemed to tend unto the prejudice of the Church of Rome. Of which number
none so violent as Story Dr. of the Laws, and a great instrument of Bonner's
butcheries in the former Reign. Who being questioned for the cruelty of his
executions, appeared so far from being sensible of any error which he then
committed, as to declare himself to be sorry for nothing more, than that
instead of lopping off some few boughs and branches, he did not lay his axe to
the root of the tree; and though it was not hard to guess at how high a mark
the wretches malice seemed to aim, and what he meant by laying his axe to the
root of the tree; yet passed he unpunished for the present, though divine
vengeance brought him in conclusion to his just reward. Others there were, and
doubt less many others also in the House of Commons, who had as great zeal as
he to the Papal interess, but either had more modesty in the conduct of it, or
preferred their duty and allegiance to their natural Prince, before their zeal
to the concernments of the Church of Rome.

In this Parliament there passed an act for recognizing the Queens just Title
to the Crown; but without any Act for the validity of her mothers marriage, on
which her Title most depended. For which neglect most men condemned the new
Lord Keeper, on whose judgment she relied especially in point of Law; in whom
it could not but be looked on as a great incogitancy, to be less careful of her
own and her mothes honor, than the Ministers of the late Queen Mary had been
of hers. But Bacon was not to be told of an old LawMaxim, That the Crown takes
away all defects and stops in blood, and that from the time that the Queen did
assume the Crown, the fountain was cleared, and all attainders and corruption
of blood discharged. Which Maxim how unsafe soever it may seem to others, yet
since it goes for a known rule amongst our Lawyers, could not be questioned at
that present. And possible it is that he conceived it better for the marriage of
the Queens mother to pass unquestioned, as a matter justly subject unto no
dispute, than to build the validity of it on no better ground than an Act of
Parliament, which might be as easily reversed as it was agreed to. There part
an Act also for restoring to the Crown the tenths and first fruits, first
serled thereon in the time of King Henry the 8th. and afterward given back by
Queen Mary as before was said. For the better drawing on of which concession,
it was pretended, that the Patrimony of the Crown had been much dilapidated,
and that it could not be supported with such honor as it ought to be, if
restitution were not made of such rents and profits, as were of late dismembered
from it. Upon which ground they also passed an act for the dissolution of all
such Monasteries, Convents, and Religious Orders, as h^d been founded and
established by the Queen deceased. By virtue of which Act the Queen was
repossessed again of all those lands which had been granted by her sister to
the Monks of Westminster and Sheene, the Knights Hospitalers, the Nuns of S^on,
together with the Mansion Houses re-edified for the Observants at Greenwich,
and the Black Friars in Smithfield. Which last being planted in a house near
the dissolved Priory of Great St Bartholomews, had again fitted and prepared
the Church belonging thereunto for religious offices; but had scarce fitted and
prepared it, when dissolved again, and the Church afterward made a Parochial
Church, for the use of the Close, and such as lived within the verge and
precincts thereof. How she disposed of Sion House, has been shown already; and
what she did with the rich Abbey of Westminster, we shall see hereafter.

In the passing of these Acts there was little trouble, in the next there was.
For when the Act of the Supremacy came to be debated, it seemed to be a thing
abhorrent even in Nature and Polity, that a woman should be declared to be the
supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England. But those of the reformed party
meant nothing less than to contend about words and phrases, so they might gain
the point they aimed at, which was the stripping of the Pope of all authority
within these Dominions, and fixing the supreme power over all persons and
estates of what rank soever in the Crown Imperial, not by the name of Supreme
Head, which they perceived might be made liable to some just exceptions; but
which comes all to one, of the Supreme Governesse. Which when it gave occasion
of discourse and descant amongst many of the captious Papists, Queen Mary
helped her sister unto one good Argument for her justification, and the Queen
helped her self to another, which took off the cavil. In the third Session of
Parliament in Queen Mary's time, there passed an Act, declaring, That the Regal
power was in the Queens Majesty, as fully as it had been in any of her
predecessors. In the body whereof it is expressed and declared, That the Law of
the Realm is, and ever has been, and ought to be understood, that the Kingly
or Regal Office of the Realm, and all Dignities, Prerogatives Royal, Power,
Preheminences, Privileges, Authorities and Jurisdictions thereunto annexed,
united, or belonging, being invested either in Male or Female, are, be, and
ought to be, as fully, wholly, absolutely and entirely, deemed, adjudged,
accepted, invested, and taken, in the one or in the other. So that whatsoever
Statute or Law does limit or appoint that the King of this Realm may, or shall
have, execute and do, any thing as King, etc. the same the Queen, (being
Supreme Governesse, possessor and inheritor to ^he Imperial Crown of this
Realm) may by the same power have and execute, to all intents, constructions
and purposes, without doubt, ambiguity, scruple or question, any custom, use,
or any other thing to the con trary notwithstanding. By the very tenor of which
Act, Queen Mary grants unto her sister as much authority in all Church
concernments, as had been exercised and enjoyed by her Father and Brother,
according to any Act or Acts of Parliament in their several times. Which Acts
of Parliament as our learned Lawyers have declared upon these occasions, were
not to be considered as Introductory of a new power which was not in the Crown
before, but only Declaratory of an old, which naturally belonged to all
Christian Princes, and amongst others to the Kings and Queens of the Realm of
England.

And to this purpose it is pleaded by the Queen in her own behalf. Some busy
and sed^tious persons had dispersed a rumor, that by the Act for recognizing
of the Queens Supremacy, there was something further ascribed unto the Queen,
her heirs and successors, a power of administering Divine Service in the Church,
which neither by any equity or true sense of the words, could from thence be
gathered; And thereupon she makes this Declaration unto all her subjects, That
nothing was or could be meant or intended by the said Act, than was
acknowledged to be due to the most Noble King of famous memory, King Henry the
8th. her Majesty's Father, or King Edward the 6th. her Majesty's Brother. And
further she declares, That she neither does, not will challenge any other
authority by the same, than was challenged and lately used by the said two
Kings, and was of ancient time due unto the Imperial Crown of this Realm, that
is, under God to have the Soverainty and Rule over all persons born within her
Realms or Dominions, of what estate (either Ecclesiastical or Temporal) soever
they be, so as no other foreign power shall or ought to have any superiority
over them. Which explication published in the Queens Injunctions, Anno 1559.
Not giving such a general satisfaction to that groundless cavil as was expected
and intended, the Bishops and Clergy in their Convocation of the year 1562. by
the Queens authority and consent, declared more plainly, that is to say, That
they gave not to their Princess by virtue of the said Act or otherwise, either
the ministering of Gods word or Sacraments, but that only Prerog^tive which they
saw to have been given always to all godly Princes in holy Scripture by God
himself, that is to say, that they should (...) all estates and degrees
committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal,
and restrain with the Civil Sword, the stubborn and evil doers.

By all which, if the cavils of the Adversary be not fully answered, it would
be known upon what reason they should question that in a soverain Queen, which
they allow in many cases to a Lady Abbess. For that an Abbess may be capable of
all and all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, even to the d^nouncing of
that dreadful sentence of Excommunication; and that they may lawfully exercise
the same upon all such as live within the verge of their authority, is commonly
acknowledged by their greatest Canonists. First for suspension, it is affirmed
by their Gloss, that an Abbess may suspend such Clerks as are subject to her,
both from their Benefice and Office. And questionless either to suspend a
Clerk, or to bring his Church under the sentence of an Interdict, is one of the
chief parts of Ecclesiastical or spiritual Censures. Nor have they this
authority only by way of delegation from the Pope in some certain cases, as is
affirmed by Aquinas, Durandus', Sylv^ster, Dominicus Soto, and many other of
their Schoolmen, but in an ordinary way, as properly and personally invested
them, which is the general opinion of their greatest Canonists. Next for the
Sacraments, it is sufficiently known that the ministration of Baptism is
performed by Midwives, and many other women as of common course; not only as a
thing connived at in extreme necessity, but as a necessary duty, in which they
are to be instructed against all emergencies by their Parish Priests; for which
we have the testimony of the late Lord Legate, in the Articles published by him
for his visitation. And finally for excommunication, it is affirmed by
Palladanus and Navarre (none of the meanest in the Pack) that the Pope may
grant that power to a woman also; higher than which there can be none exercised
in the Church by the sons of men. And if a Pope may grant these powers unto a
woman, as to a Prioress or Abbess, or to any other; there can be then no
incapacity in the Sex, for exersing any part of that jurisdiction which was
restored unto the Crown by this Act of Parliament. And if perhaps it be
objected, that a Lady Abbess is an Ecclesiastical or spiritual person in regard
of her office, which cannot be affirmed of Queens, Pope Gregory himself will
come in to help us, by whom it was not thought unfit to commit the cognizance
of a cause concerning the purgation of a Bishop, who stood charged with some
grievous crime, to Brunichildis or Brunholi Queen of France; of which, although
the Gloss upon the Decretals be pleased to say, Fuit hic nimium popularit^r
dispeasatum
That the Pope stretched his power too far in this particular, yet Gregory did
no more therein but what the Popes may do, and have done of late times by their
own confession; so little ground there is for so great a clamor as has been
made by Bellarmine and other of the Popish Jesuits upon this occasion.

Now for the better exercising and enjoying of the jurisdiction thus recognized
unto the Crown, there are two Clauses in the Act of great importance; the first
whereof contains an Oath for the acknowledgment and defense of this Supremacy,
not only in the Queen, but her heirs and successors; the said Oath to be taken
by all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical persons, and also by
all temporal Judges, Justiciaries, Mayors, or any other temporal Officers, etc.
For the refusal whereof when lawfully tendered to them by such as were thereto
commissionated under the great Seal of England, every such person so refusing,
was actually to stand deprived of his or their E^clesiastical Preferments, or
other temporal office of what sort soever; only it was provided, that the Oath
should not be imposed on any of the temporal Peers, of whose fidelity the Queen
seemed willing to assure her self without any such tie; though this exemption
was esteemed by others but a piece of cunning, the better to facilitate the
passing of that Act amongst them, which otherwise they might have hindered. But
this provision was not made till the following Parliament, though for the
reason before mentioned it was promised now. By the last Clause it was enacted,
That it should and might be lawful to the Queen, her heirs and Successors, by
Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, to assign, name, and
authorize, when and as often as her Highness, her Heirs or Successors, should
think convenient, such persons being natural born Subjects to them, to
exercise, use, and occupy under her Highness, her Heirs and Successors, all
manner of Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Preheminences, in any wise touching or
concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, within the Realms of
England and Ireland, or any other her Highness Dominions or Countries, and to
visit, reform, repress, order, correct, and amend all such errors, heresies,
schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts and enormities whatsoever, which by any
manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction, or can
or may lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or
amended, to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of virtue, and
conservation of the peace and unity of this Realm. With a Proviso
notwithstanding, that nothing should from thenceforth be accounted for Heresy,
but what was so adjudged in the holy Scripture, or in one of the four first
General Councils, or in any other National or Provincial Council, determining
according to the word of God; or finally which should be so adjudged in the
time to come by the Court of Parliament, first having the assent of the Bishops
and Clergy in their Convocation. This was the first foundation of that famous
Court of High Commission, the principal Bulwark and Preservative of the Church
of England, against the practices and assaults of all her Adversaries, whether
Popish or Puritan. And from hence issued that Commission, by which the Queens
Ministers proceeded in their Visitation in the first year of her Reign, for
rectifying all such things as they found amiss, and could not be redressed by
any ordinary Episcopal power, without the spending of more time than the
exigencies of the Church could then admit of.

There also past another Act for recommending and imposing the Book of
Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, according to such
alterations and corrections as were made therein by those who were appointed to
revise it, as before is said. In the performance of which service, there was
great care taken for expunging all such passages in it, as might give any
scandal or offense to the Popish party, or be urged by them in excuse for their
not coming to Church, and joining with the rest of the Congregation in Gods
public Worship. In the Letany first made and published by King Henry the 8th.
and afterward continued in the two Litu^gies of King Edward the 6th. there was
a Prayer to be delivered from the tyranny and all the detestable enormities of
the Bishop of Rome; which was thought fit to be expunged, as giving matter of
scandal and dis-affection to all that party, or otherwise wished well to that
Religion. In the first Liturgy of King Edward, the Sacrament of the Lords Body
was delivered with this Benediction, that is to say, The Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ which was given for the preservation of thy body and s^ul to life
everlasting; The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Which being thought by
Calvin and his Disciples to give some countenance to the gross and carnal
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which passes by the name of
Trans^bstantiation in the Schools of Rome, was altered into this form in the
second Liturgy, that is to say, Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ
died for thee, and ^eed on him in thy heart by faith with thanksgiving. Take
and drink this, etc. But the Revisors of the Book joined both Forms together,
lest under color of rejecting a Carnal, they might be thought also to deny
such a Real Presence as was defended in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers.
Upon which ground they expunged also a whole Rubric at the end of the
Communion-service, by which it was declared, that kneeling at the participation
of the Sacrament was required for no other reason, than for a signification of
the humble and grateful acknowledging of the benefits of Christ, given therein
unto the worthy Receiver, and to avoid that profanation and disorder which
otherwise might have ensued, and not for giving any adoration to the
Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received, or in regard of any real and
essential presence of Christ's body and blood. And to come up the closer to
those of the Church of Rome, it was ordered by the Queens Injunctions, that the
Sacramental Bread (which the Book required only to be made of the finest
flower) should be made round in fashion of the Wafers used in the time of Queen
Mary. She also ordered, that the Lords Table should be placed where the Altar
stood, that the accustomed reverence should be made at the name of Jesus,
Music retained in the Church, and all the old Festivals observed with their
several Eves. By which compliances, and the expunging of the passages before
remembered, the Book was made so passable amongst the Papi^ts, that for ten
years they generally repaired to their Parish Churches, without doubt or
scruple, as is affirmed not only by Sir Edward Coke, in his speech against
G^^net, and his Charge given at the Assizes held at Norwich, but also by the
Queen her self in a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham, then being her Resident
or Leiger-Ambassador in the Court of France; the same confessed by Sanders also
in his Book de Schismate.

And that the Book might pass the better in both Houses when it came to the
Vote, it was thought requisite that a Disputation should be held about some
points, which were most likely to be checked at; the Disputants to be five
Bishops and four other learned men of the one side, and nine of the most
lear^ed men, graduated in the Schools, on the other side; the Disputation to
begin on the 30th. of March, and to be holden in the Church of Westminster, in
the presence of as many of the Lords of the Council, and of the Members of both
Houses, as were desirous to inform themselves in the state of the Questions.
The Disputation for that reason to be held in the English Tongue, and to be
managed (for the better avoiding of confusion) by a mutual interchange of
writings upon every point, those writings which were mutually given in upon one
day, to be reciprocally answered on another, and so from day to day till the
whole were ended. To all which points the Bishops gave consent for themselves,
and the rest of their party, though they refused to stand unto them when it
came to the trial. An. Reg. Eliz 1. 1559.
The points to be disputed on were three in number, that is to say, That it is
against the word of God, and the custom of the ancient Church, to use a Tongue
unknown to the people in Common-Praier, and in the administration of the
Sac^aments. 2. That every Church has authority to appoint, take away, and
change Ceremonies and Ecclesiastical Rites, so the same be to edification. 3.
That it cannot be proved by the word of God, that there is in the Mass offered
up a sacrifice propitiatory for the living and the dead. And for the Disputants
of each side, they were these that follow, that is to say, first, for the
Popish party, Dr. White Bishop of Winchester, Dr. Bayn Bishop of Lichfield, Dr.
Scot Bishop of Chester, and Dr. Watson Bishop of Linc^ln, Dr. Fecknam Abbot of
Westminster, Dr. Henry Cole Dean of St. Paul's, Dr. Harp^field Archdeacon of
Canterbury, Dr. Chadsey Prebend of St. Pa^ls, and Dr. Langdale Archdeacon of
Lewis in Sussex. For those of the Protestant persuasion appeared Dr. Scory the
late Bishop of Chichester, Dr. Cox the late Dean of Westminster, Dr. Sandys
late Master of Katherine Hal., Mr. Horn the late Dean of Durham, Mr. Elmar late
Archdeacon of Stow, Mr. Wh^tehead, Mr. Gryndal, Mr. G^est, and Mr. Jewel; all
of which, except only Whi^ehead, attained afterward to some eminent place in
the sacred Hiera^chy.

The day being come, and the place fitted and accommodated for so great an
audience, the Lord Keeper Bacon takes the Chair as Moderator, not for
determining any thing in the points disputed, but for seeing good order to be
kept, and that the Disputation might be managed in the form agreed on. When
contrary to expectation, the Bishops and their party brought nothing in writing
to be read publicly in the hearing of all the Auditors, but came resolved to
try it out by word of mouth, and to that end appointed Cole to be their
Spokesman. For which neglect, being reproved by the Lord Keeper, they promised
a conformity on the Monday following, being the second day of April; but would
not stand unto it them, because they would not give their Adversaries so much
leisure as a whole nights deliberation to return an answer. Desired and pressed
by the Lord Keeper to proceed according to the form agreed on, for the better
satisfaction and contentment of so great an Audience, it was most obstinately
denied. W^tson and White behaving themselves with so little reverence (or so
much insolency rather) as to threaten the Queen with Excommunication in that
public Audience, for which they were committed to the Tower on the fifth of
April. The rest of the Bishops were commanded to abide in London, and to give
bond for their appearance at the Council Table whenever they should be
r^quired. And so the whole Assembly was dismissed, and the conference ended
before it had been well begun, the Lord Keeper giving to the Bishops this sharp
remembrance, Sinc^ (said he) you are not w^lling that we should hear you, you
shall very shortly hear from us. Which notwithstanding produced this good
effect in the Lords and Commons, that they conceived the Bishops were not able
to defend their Doctrine in the points disputed; which made the way more easy
for the passing of the public Liturgy, when it was brought unto the Vote. Two
Speeches there were made against it in the House of Peers, by Scot and Fecknam,
and one against the Queens Supremacy by the Archbishop of York; but they
prevailed as little in both points by the power of their Eloquence, as they had
done in the first by their want of Arguments.

It gave much matter of discourse to most knowing men, that the Bishops should
so wilfully fall from an appointment to which they had before agreed, and
thereby forfeit their whole Cause to a Condemnation. But they pretended for
themselves, that they were so straightned in point of time, that they could not
possibly digest their Arguments into form and order; that they looked upon it
as a thing too much below them to humble themselves to such a Conference or
Disputation, in which Bacon, a mere layman, and of no great learning, was to
sit as Judge; and finally, that the points had been determined already by the
Catholic Church, and therefore were not to be called in question without leave
from the Pope. Which last pretense, if it were of any weight and moment, it
must be utterly impossible to proceed to any Reformation in the state of the
Church, by which the power and pride of the Popes of Rome may be any thing
lessened, or that the corruptions of the Church should be redressed, i^ it
consist not with their profit. For want of time they were no more straightned
than the opposite party, none of them knowing with what arguments the other
side would fortify and confirm their cause, nor in what forms they would
propose them, before they had perused their reciprocal Papers. But nothing was
more weakly urged, than their exception against the Presidency of Sir Nicholas
Bacon, which could not be considered as a matter either new or strange; not
strange, because the like Presidency had been given frequently to Cromwell, in
the late Reign of King Henry the 8th. and that not only in such general
Conferences, but in several Convocations and Synodical meetings. Not new,
because the like had been frequently practiced by the most godly Kings and
Emperors of the Pri^^itive times; for in the Council of Chalce^on the Emperor
appointed certain Noblemen to sit as Judges, whose names occur in the first
Action of that Coun^il. The like we find exemplified in the Ephesine Council,
in which, by the appointment of Theodosius and Vulentinian, then Roman
Emperors, Candidianus, a Count Imperial, sat as Judge or President, who in the
managing of that trust over-acted any thing which was done by Cromwell as
Vicar General to that King, or Bacon was empowered to do as the Queens
Commissioner. No such unreasonable condescension to be found in this, as was
pretended by the Bishops and the rest of that party, to save themselves from
the guilt and censure of a Tergiversation; for which, and other their
contempts, we shall find them called to a reckoning within few months after.

In the Convocation which accompanied the present Parliament, there was little
done, and that little which they did was to little purpose. Held under Bonner,
in regard of the Vacancy of the Sea of Canterb^ry, it began without the
ordinary preamble of a Latin Sermon, all preaching being then prohibited by
the Queens command. The Clergy for their Prolocutor made choice of Doctor
Nicholas Har^s^ield Archdeacon of Canterb^ry, a man of more ability (as his
works de^lare) than he had any opportunity to make use of in the present
service. The A^t of the submission of the Clergy to King Henry the 8th. and his
Successors Kings of England, had been repealed in the first year of Queen Mary,
so that the Clergy might have acted of their own authority, without any license
from the Queen; and it is much to be admired that Bonner, White, or Watson did
not put them to it; but such was either their fea^, or modesty, or a despair of
doing any good to themselves and the cause, that there was nothing done by the
Bishops at all, and not much more by the lower Clergy, than a declaration of
their judgment in some certain points, which at that time were conceived fit to
be commended to the sight of the Parliament, that is to say, 1. That in the
Sacrament of the Altar, by virtue of Christ's assisting, after the word is duly
pronounced by the Priest, the natural body of Christ conceived of the Virgin
Mary is really present under the species of Bread and Wine, as also his natural
Blood, 2. That after the C^nsecration there remains not the substance of Bread
and Wine, not any substance, save the substance of God and Man. 3. That the
true body of Christ and his Blood is offered for a propitiatory sacrifice for
the quick and the dead. 4. That the supreme power of feeding and governing the
militant Church of Christ, and of confirming their brethren, is given to Peter
the Apostle, and to his lawful Successors in the Sea Apostolic, as unto the
Vicars of Christ. 5. That the authority to handle and define such things which
belong to Faith, the Sacraments, and Discipline Ecclesiastical, has hitherto
ever belonged, and only ought to belong unto the Pastors of the Church, whom
the holy Spirit has placed in the Church, and not unto Laymen. These
Articles, they caused to be engrossed, and so commended them to the care and
consideration of the Higher House. By Bonner afterward, that is to say on the
3d. of March, presented to the hands of the Lord Keeper Bacon, by whom they
were heartily received. But they prevailed no further with the Queen or the
House of Peers, when imparted to them, but that possibly they might help
forwards the disputation, which not long after was appointed to be held at
Westminster, as before was said.

It was upon the 8th. of May that the Parliament ended, and on the 24th. of
June, that the public Liturgy was to be officiated in all the Churches of the
Kingdom. In the performan^e of which service, the Bishops giving no
encouragement, and many of the Clergy being backward in it, it was thought fit
to put them to the final test, and either to bring them to conformity, or to
bestow their places and preferments on more tractable persons. The Bishops at
that time had been reduced into a narrower number than at any other time
before. The Sees of Salisb^ry and Oxon had been made vacant in the year 1557.
by the death of Cap^n in the one, and of King in the other, neither of which
Churches had since been filled, and that of Oxon not in ten years after.
Pacefew of Hereford, Holyman of B^istow, and Glyn of Bangor, died some few
weeks before the Queen, Cardinal Po^e of Canterbury on the same day with her.
Hopton of Norwich, and Bro^ks of Gl^cester, within few weeks after. Gryssin of
Rochester departed this life about the beginning of the Parliament, about which
time also Pa^es of Worcester forsook the Kingdom, and was followed by Goldwel
of St Asaph in the end of May; so that there were no more than fifteen living
of that sacred Order. And they being called in the beginning of July by certain
of the Lords of the Council, commissionated thereunto in due form of Law, were
then and there required to take the oath of Supremacy, according to the law
made in that behalf. Kitchen of Landaff only takes it, who having formerly
submitted unto every change, resolved to show himself no Changling in not
conforming to the pleasure of the Higher Powers. By all the rest it was
refused, that is to say, by Dr Heath Archbishop of York, Bonner of London,
Tonstall of Du^ham, White of Winchester, Thirlby of Ely, Watson of Lincoln,
Pool of Pete^borough, Christopherson of Chichester, Bourn of Wels, Turbervile
of Exeter, Morgan of St David's, Bain of Lichfield, Scot of Chester, and
Oglethorp Bishop of Carlisle. And yet these men (which makes it seem the
greater wonder) had either taken the like oath as Priests or Bishops in some
part or other of the Reign of the two last Kings.

But now they had hardened one another to a resolution of standing out unto the
last, and were thereupon deprived of their several Bishoprics, as the Law
required. A punishment which came not on them all at once, some of them being
borne withal (in hope of their conformity and submission) till the end of
September. And when it came, it came accompanied with so much mercy, that they
had no reason to complain of the like extremity as they had put upon their
brethren in the late Queens time. So well were they disposed of and
accommodated with all things necessary, that they lived more at ease, and in as
prosperous a condition, as when they were possessed of their former dignities.
Archbishop He^th was suffered to abide in one of his own purchased houses,
never restrained to any place, and died in great favor with the Queen, who
bestowed many gracious visits on him during this retirement. Tonstall of Durham
spent the remainder of his t^^e with Archbishop Parker, by whom he was kindly
entertained, and honorably buried. The like civility afforded also in the same
house to ^hirlby of Ely, and unto Bourn of W^lls by the Dean of Exon, in which
two houses they both dyed about ten years after. White though at first
imprisoned for his hauts and insolences, after some cooling of himself in the
Tower of London, was suffered to enjoy his liberty, and to retire himself to
what friend he pleased. Which favor was vouchsafed unto Tu^bervile also, who
being by birth a Gentleman of an ancient Family, could not want friends to give
him honest entertainment. W^tson of Lincoln having endured a short restraint,
spent the remainder of his time with the Bishops of Rochester and Ely, till
being found practicing against the State, he was finally shut up in Wisbich
Castle, where at last he died. Oglethorp died soon after his deprivation, of an
Apoplexy, Bayne of the Stone, and Morgan of some other disease in December
following; but all of them in their beds, and in perfect liberty. Poole by the
clemency of the Queen, enjoyed the like freedom, courteously treated by all
persons amongst whom he lived, and at last died upon one of his own Farms in a
good old age. And as for Christopherson, he had been in his time so good a
Benefactor to Trinity College in Cambridge, whereof he had been sometimes
Master, that he could not want some honest and ingenuous retribution, if the
necessity of his estate had required the same. Bonner alone was doomed to a
constant imprisonment, which was done rather out of care for his preservation,
than as a punishment of his crimes; the prison proving to that wretch his
safest sanctuary, whose horrid tyrannies had otherwise exposed him to the
popular fury. So loud a lie is that of Genebrard, (though a good Chronologer)
that the Bishops were not only punished with imprisonment and the loss of their
livelihoods, but that many of them were destroyed by poison, famine, and many
other kinds of death.

The Bishops being thus put to it, the Oath is tendered next to the Deans and
Dignitaries, and by degrees also to the Rural Clergy; refused by some, and took
by others, as it seemed most agreeable to their consciences, or particular
ends. For the refusal whereof, or otherwise for not conforming to the public
Liturgy, I find no more to have been deprived of their preferments, than
fourteen Bishops, six Abbots Priors, and Governors of Religious Orders, twelve
Deans, and as many Archdeacons, fifteen Presidents or Masters of Colleges,
fifty Prebendaries of Cathedral Churches, and about eighty Parsons of Vicars.
The whole number not amounting to 200 men, which in a Realm consisting of nine
thousand Parishes, and 26 Cathedral Churches, could be no great matter. But
then we are to know withal, that many who were cordially affected to the
interess of the Church of Rome, dispensed with themselves in these outward
conformities, which some of them are said to do upon a hope of seeing the like
revolution by the death of the Queen, as had before happened by the death of King
Edward; and otherwise that they might be able to relieve their brethren, who
could not so readily frame themselves to a present compliance. Which
notwithstanding so it was, that partly by the deprivation of these few persons,
but principally by the death of so many in the last years sickness, there was
not a sufficient number of learned men to supply the cures, which filled the
Church with an ignorant and illiterate Clergy, whose learning went no further
than the Liturgy* or the Book of Homilies, but otherwise conformable (which was
no small felicity) to the Rules of the Church. And on the other side, many were
raised to great preferments, who, having spent there time of exile in such
foreign Churches as followed the platform of Geneva, returned so disaffected to
Episcopal Government, unto the Rites and Ceremonies here by law established, as
not long after filled the Church with most sad disorders; not only to the
breaking of the bond of peace, but to the grieving and extinguishing of the
spirit of Unity. Private opinions not regarded, nothing was more considered in
them, than their zeal against Popery, and their abilities in learning to
confirm that zeal. On which account we find the Queens Professor in Oxford to
pass amongst the Non-Conformists, though somewhat more moderate than the rest;
and Cartwright the Lady Margarets in Cambridge, to prove an unextinguished
firebrand to the Church of England; Whittington the chief Ringleader of the
Franckfort Schismatics, preferred unto the Deanery of Durham, from thence
encouraging Knox and Goodman, in setting up Presbytery and Sedition in the Kirk
of Scotland; Sampson advanced unto the Deanery of Christ-Church, and within few
years after, turned out again for an incorrigible Nonconformist; Hardiman one
of the first twelve Prebends of the Church of Westminster, deprived soon after
for throwing down the Altar, and defacing the vestments of the Church. Which
things I only touch at now, leaving the further prosecution of them to another
place.

Of all these traverses, the Pope received advertisement from the first to the
last. But being of a rugged humou^, he fell most infinitely short of that
dexterity which the case required, for finding out a fit expedient to prevent
the rupture. When his first sullen fits had left him, he began to treat more
seriously with the English Agent; not that the Queen should sue unto him for
the Crown, which she was possessed of, but that no alteration of Religion might
be driven at by her. To which Karn answered according to such instructions as
he had received, That he could give him no assurance in that point, unless the
Pope would first declare, that the marriage of King Henry with Queen Anne
Bollen, had been good and lawful. Which cross request so stumbled both the Pope
and the Conclave, that they made choice rather of doing nothing, than to do
that, of which they could not promise to themselves any fortunate issue. Roused
at the last by the continual alarums which came from England, he entertains
some secret practices with the French, and on the sudden signifies his commands
to Karn, that he should not depart out of R^me without his leave, and that in
the mean time he should take upon him the government of the English Hospital in
the City. In which command each of them is affirmed to have had his own proper
ends: For Karn affected that restraint, which he was thought to have procured
under hand, because he had no mind to return into England, where he was like to
find a different Religion from that which he embraced in his own particular.
And the Pope had his own ends also, in hindering as he thought ^he discovering
of that secret intelligence which he maintained with the French King, to the
Queens destruction, if his designs had took effect. But his design was carried
with so little cunning, that presently it discovered it self, without the help
of a revelation from the English Agent. For whether it were by his instigation,
or by the solicitation of the French King, or the ambition of the Daulphin, who
had then married the Queen of Scots, (as before was said) the Queen of Scots
assumes unto her self the style and title of Queen of England, quartereth the
Arms thereof upon all her Plate, and in all Armories and Escoutcheons, as she
had occasion. And this she did as Cosen and next heir to the Queen deceased;
which could not be without imputing bastardy to the Queen then living. A folly
which occasioned such displeasure in the heart of Elizabeth, that it could
neither be forgotten, nor so much as forgiven, till that unfortunate Lady was
driven out of her Kingdom, hunted into a close imprisonment, and finally
brought out to the fatal block.

This as it somewhat startled the new Queen of England, so it engaged her the
more resolutely in that Reformation which was so happily begun. And to that end
she sets out by Advice of her Council, a certain Body of Injunctions, the same
in purpose and effect, with those which had been published in the first of King
Edward, but more accommodated to the temper of the present time. Nothing more
singular in the same, than the severe course taken about Ministers Marriages,
the use of singing, and the Reverences in Divine Worship to be kept in Church,
the posture of the Communion Table, and the form of bidding Prayers in the
Congregation. This last almost the same verba^im with that which is prescribed
Can. 55. Anno 1603. and therefore not so necessary to be here repeated. The
first worn long since out ^f use, and not much observed neither when it first
came out, as if it had been published in the way of caution, to make the Clergy
men more wary in the choice of their wives, than with a purpose of persuing it
to an execution. But as for that concerning the use of singing, and the
accustomed Reverences to be kept in Churches, they are these that follow.
Touching the last it is enjoyed, That whenever the name of Jesus should be in
any Lesson, Sermon, or otherwise in the Church pronounced, that due reverence
be made of all persons, young and old, with lowliness of courtesy, and
uncovering of the heads of the men kind, as thereunto did necessarily belong,
and heretofore has been accustomed. For the encouragement of the Art, and the
continuance of the use of Singing in the Church of Eng^and, it was thus
enjoined, that is to say, That because in diverse Collegiat, as also in some
Parish C^urches, heretofore, there has been Livings appointed for the
maintenance of men and children for singing in the Church, by means whereof,
the laudable exercise of Music has been had in estimation, and preserved in
knowledge; The Queens Majesty neither meaning in any wi^e the decay of any
thing, that might conveniently tend to the use and continuance of the said
Science, neither to have the same so abused in any part of the Church, that
thereby the Common Prayer should be the worse understood by the Hearers,
wills and commands, that first no alterations be made of such assignments
of Living as heretofore has been appointed to the use of Singing or Music in
the Church, but that the same so remain. And that there be a modest and
distinct Song so used in all parts of the Common Prayers in the Church, that
the same may be as plainly understood as if it were read without singing; And
yet nevertheless, for the comforting of such as delight in Music, it may be
permitted, that in the beginning or in the end of Common Prayer, either at
morning or evening, there may be sung an Hymn or such like Song to the praise
of Almighty God, in the best Melody and Music that may be conveniently
devised, having respect that the sentence of the Hymn may be understood and
perceived. According to which order, as Plain-song was retained in most
Parish-Churches for the daily Psalms, so in her own Chapels, and in the Quire
of all Cathedrals, and some Colleges, the Hymns were sung after a more
melodious manner, with Organs commonly, and sometimes with other musical
Instruments, as the solemnity required. No mention here of singing David's
Psalms in Meeter, though afterward they first thrust out the Hymns which are
herein mentioned, and by degrees also did they the Te Deum, the Magnificat, and
the Nunc dimittis.

Concerning the Position of the holy Table it was ordered thus, viz. That no
Altar should be taken down, but by oversight of the Curat of the Church, or the
Churchwardens, or one of them at the least, wherein no riotous or diso^dered
manner was to be used; and that the holy Table in every Church be decently
made, and set in the place where the Altar stood, and there commonly covered as
thereto belongs, and as should be appointed by the Visitors, and so to stand,
saving when the ^ommunion of the Sacrament is to be administered; at which time
the same shall be so placed in good sort within the Quire or Chancel, as
whereby the Minister may be more conveniently heard of the Communicants in his
Prayer and Ministration, and the Communicants also more conveniently and in
more number communicate with the said Minister. And after the Communion done,
from time to time the said holy Table to be placed where it stood before. Which
permission of removing the Table at Communion-times is not so to be understood,
(as the most excellent King Charles declared in the case of St. Gregory's) as if
it were ever left to the discretion of the Parish, much less to the particular
fancy of any humorous person; but to the judgment of the Ordinary, to whose
place and function it does properly belong to give direction in that point,
both for the thing it self, or for the time, when, and how long, as he may find
cause.

By these Injunctions she made way to her Visitation, executed by Commissioners
in their several Circuits, and regulated by a Book of Articles printed and
published for that purpose. Proceeding by which Articles, the Commissioners
removed all carved Images out of the Church* which had been formerly abused to
superstition, defacing also all such Pictures, Paintings, and other monuments,
as served for the setting forth of feigned Miracles; and this they did without
any tumult and disorder, and without laying any sacrilegious and ravenous hands
on any of the Churches Plate, or other Utensils which had been repaired and
re-provided in the late Queens time. They enquired also into the life and
doctrine of Ministers, their diligence in attending their several Cures, the
decency of their apparel, the respect of the Parishioners toward them, the
reverent behavior of all manner of persons in Gods publi^k worship. Inquiry
was also made into all sorts of crimes, haunting of Taverns by the Clergy;
Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, amongst those of the Laity, with many other
things since practiced in the Visitations of particular Bishops; by means
whereof, the Church was settled and confirmed in so good an order, that the work
was made more easy to the Bishops when they came to govern, than otherwise it
could have been. But more particularly in Lond^^ (which for the most part gives
example to the rest of the Kingdom) the Visitors were Sir Richard Sackvile,
(father to ^homas Earl of Dorset) Mr. Robert Hern after Bishop of Winchester,
Dr. H^ick a Civilian, and one Salvage possibly a Common Lawyer; who calling
before them diverse persons of every Parish, gave them an Oath to enquire and
present upon such Articles and (...) as were given unto them. In persuance
whereof, both the Commission^rs and the People showed so much forwardness, that
on St. Bartholomews day and the morrow after, they burned in St. Paul's
Churchyard, Cheap Side, and other places of the City, all the Roods and other
Images which had been taken out of the Churches. And as it is many times
supposed that a thing is never well done if not over-done, so happened it in this
case also, zeal against superstition had prevailed so far with some ignorant
men, that in some places the Coaps, Vestments, Altar-cloaths, Books, Banners,
Sepulchers, and Roodlofts, were burned altogether.

All matters of the Church being thus disposed of, it will be time to cast our
eyes on the concernments of the civil State which occurred this year, in which
I find nothing more considerable than the overtures of some Marriages which had
been made unto the Queen. Philip of Spain had made an offer of himself by the
Count of Feria his Ambassador; but the Queen had heard so much of the
disturbances which befell King Henry, by marrying with his brothers wife, that
she had no desire to run into the like perplexities by marrying with her
sisters husband; and how he was discouraged from proceeding in it, has been
showed already. Toward the end of the Parliament the Lords and Commons made an
humble Address unto her, in which they most earnestly besought her, That for
securing the peace of the Kingdom, and the contentation of all her good and
loving subjects, she would think of marrying; not pointing her particularly
unto any one man, but leaving her to please her self in the choice of the
person. To which she answered, That she thanked them for their good affections,
and took their application to her to be well intended, the rather, because it
contained no limitation of place or person; which had they done, she must have
disliked it very much, and thought it to have been a great presumption. But for
the matter of their sure, she lets them know, That she had long since made
choice of that state of life in which now she lived, and hoped that God would
give her strength and constancy to go throw with it; that if she had been
minded to have changed that course, she neither wanted many invitations to it
in the reign of her brother, not many strong impulsions in the time of her
sister. That as she had hitherto remained, so she intended to continue by the
grace of God, though her Words, compared with her Youth, might be thought by
some to be far different from her meaning. And so having thanked them over
again, she licensed them to depart to their several businesses. And it appeared
soon after that she was in earnest, by her rejecting of a motion made by
Gustavus King of Sweden for the Prince Ericus; for the soliciting whereof, his
second son John Duke of Finland (who succeeded his Brother in that Kingdom) is
sent Ambassador into England about the end of September; Received at Harwich in
Essex by the Earl of Oxford and the Lord Robert Dudley, with a goodly train of
Gentlemen and Yeoman, he was by them conducted honorably toward London, where
he was met by the Lords and Gentlemen of the Court, attended through the City
on the 5th. of Octob^r to the Bishop of Winchesters house in Sou^hwark; there
he remained with his Train, consisting of about fifty persons, till the Easter
following; magnificently feasted by the Queen, but otherwise no farther
gratified in the bu^^ness which he came about than all the rest, who both
before and after tried their fortunes in it.

The next great business of this year was a renewing of the Peace with the
crown of France, agreed on at the Treaty near the City of Cambray; in which all
differences were concluded also between France and Spain, all other Articles
being accorded, the restitution of Calais to the Queen of England seemed the
only obstacle, by which the general peace of Christendom was at the point to
have been hindered. But the Queen, either preferring the public good before
private interest, or fearing to be left alone if she should stand too
obstinately upon that particular, came at the last to this agreement, viz. That
Calais should remain for the term of eight years then next following in the
hands of the French, that at the end of the said term it should be delive^ed
unto the English, or otherwise the French King should pay unto the Queen the
sum of 500000 Crowns. According unto which Agreement, Peace was proclaimed in
London on the 7th. of April between the Queens Majesty on the one part, and the
French King on the other; as also between her and the King Dolphin, with his
wife the Queen of Scots, and all the Subjects and Dominions of the said four
Princes; The Proclamation published by Garter and Norrey Kings at Arms,
accompanied with three other Heralds and five Trumpeters, the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen in their Scarlet Gowns being present on horseback. But long the French
King lived not to enjoy the benefit of this general Peace, unfortunately
wounded in Paris at a Tilt or Tournament by Count Mon^gomery, of which wound he
shortly after died on the 10th. of July, leaving be hind him four sons,
Francis, Charles, Henry, and another Francis, of which, the three first,
according to their seniority, enjoyed that Kingdom. And though she had just
cause to be offended with the young King Francis, for causing the Queen of
Scots his wife to take upon her self the Title and Arms of England, yet she
resolved to bestow a royal Obsequy on the King deceased, which was performed in
St. Paul's Church on the 8th. and 9th. of September in most solemn manner, with
a rich Hearse made like an Imperial Crown, sustained with eight pillars, and
covered with black Velvet, with a Valence fringed with gold, and richly hanged
with Sc^tcheous, Pennons, and Banners of the French Kings Arms; the principal
mourner for the first day was the Lord Treasurer Paulet, Marquis of Winchester,
assisted with ten other Lords Mourners, with all the Heralds in black, and
their Coat-Armours uppermost. The divine Offices performed by Doctor Matthew
Parker Lord elect of Canterbury, Doctor William Barlow Lord elect of
Chichester, and Doctor John Scory Lord elect of Hereford, all sitting in the
Throne of the Bishop of London, no otherwise at that time than in hoods and
Surplices; by whom the Derige was executed at that time in the English tongue:
The Funeral Sermon preached the next morning by the Lord of Hereford, and a
Communion celebrated by the Bishops then attired in Copes upon their Surplices.
At which time six of the chief mourners received the Sacrament, and so departed
with the rest to the Bishops Palace, where a very liberal Entertainment was
provided for them. By which magnificency and the like, this prudent Queen not
only kept ^er own reputation at the highest amongst foreign Princes, but caused
the greater estimation to be had by the Catholic party of the Religion here
established.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 2. A. D. 1559, 1560. An. Reg. Eliz. 2. 1559.

WE must begin this year with the Consecration of such new Bishops, as were
elected to succeed in the place of those which had been deprived, the first of
which was that of the most reverend Doctor Matthew Parker elected to the Sea of
Canterbury on the first of August, but not consecrated till the 17th. of
December following. That Dignity had first been offered, as is said by some, to
Doctor Nicholas Wotton Dean of Canterbury and York, who grown in years, and
still a well-willer to the Pope, desired to be excused from undertaking of a
charge so weighty. And some say it was offered unto Whitehead also, who had
been Chaplain to Anne Bollen the Queen's mother; but he returned the like
refusal, though on other grounds, as more inclined (by reason of his long abode
in Calvin's Churches) to the Presbyterians than the Episcopal form of
Government; and it was happy, for the Church might have been betrayed by his
dissaffection, that he did refuse it. The Chair being better filled by Parker
another of Queen Anne Bollen's Chaplains, but better principled, and of a far
more solid judgment in affairs of moment. The Conge^d' sleiur, which opened him
the way to this eminent Dignity, bears date on the 18th. day of July, within
few days after the deprivation of the former Bishops, to satisfy the world in
the Queens intention of preserving the Episcopal Government. And therefore why
the consecration was deferred so long maybe made a question; some think it was,
that she might satisfy her self, by putting the Church into a posture by her
Visitation, before she passed it over to the care of the Bishops; others
conceive, that she was so enamoured with the power and title of Supreme
Governess, that she could not deny her self that contentment in the exercise of
it which the present Interval afforded; For what are Titles without Power? and
what pleasure can be took in Power if no use be made of it?

And it is possible enough that both or either of these considerations might
have some influence upon her. But the main cause for keeping the Episcopal Sees
in so long a vacancy must be found elsewhere. An Act had passed in the late
Parliament, which never had the confidence to appear in print, in the Preamble
whereof it was declared, That by dissolution of Religious Houses in the time of
the late King her Majesty's father, many Impropriations, Tithes, and portions
of Tithes had been invested in the Crown, which the Queen, being a Lady of a
tender conscience, thought not fit to hold, nor could conveniently dismember
from it without compensation, in regard of the present low condition in which
she found the Crown at her coming to it; And thereupon it was enacted, that in
the vacancy of any Archbishopric or Bishopric, it should be lawful for the
Queen to issue out a Commission under the Great Seal, for taking a survey of
all Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, and all other Hereditaments to the said
Episcopal Sees belonging or appertaining* and on the return of such surveys, to
take into her hands any of the said Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, etc. as
to her seemed good; giving to the said Archbishops or Bishops as much annual
Rents, to be raised upon Impropriations, Tithes, and portions of Tithes, as the
said Castles, Manors, Lands, etc. did amount unto. The Church Lands certified
according to the ancient Rents, without consideration of the Casualties and
other Perq^isites of Court which belonged unto them; the Retribution made in
Pensions, Tithes, and portions of Tithes, extended at the utmost value, from
which no other profit was to be expected than the Rent it self. Which Act not
being to take effect till the end of that Parliament, the interval between the
end of the Parliament, the deprivation of the old Bishops, and the consecration
of the new, was to be taken up in the executing of such surveys, and making
such advantages of them, as most redo^nded to the profit of the Queen and her
Courtiers. Upon which ground, as all the Bishops Sees were so long kept vacant
before any one of them was filled, so in the following times they were kept
void one after another as occasion served, till the best Flowers in the whole
Garden of the Church had been c^lled out of it. There was another Clause in the
said Statutes, by which the patrimony of the Church was as much dilapida^ed,
sede plena, as it was pulled by this in the times of vacancy; for by that
Clause, all Bishops were restrained from making any Grants of their Farms and
Manors for more than twenty one years, or three lives at the most, except it
were unto the Queen, her Heirs and Successors. But either to the Queen, or to
any of her Heirs and Successors (and under that pretense to any her hungry
Courtiers) they might be granted in Fee farm, or for a Lease of fourscore and
nineteen years, as it pleased the Parties. By which means, Credinton was
dismembered from the Sea of Exon, the goodly manor of Sherborn from that of
Sal^sbury, many fair manors alienated for ever from the rich Sees of
Winchester, Elie, and indeed what not?

But to proceed unto the Consecration of the new Archbishop, the first thing to
be done after the passing of the Royal Assent for ratifying of the election of
the Dean and Chapter, (was the confirming of it) in the Court of the Arches,
according to the usual form in that behalf; Which being accordingly performed,
the Vicar General, the Dean of the Arches, the Proctors and Officers of the
Court, whose presence was required at this Solemnity, were ente^tained at a
dinner provided for them at the Nags head Tavern in Cheapside; for which,
though Parker paid the shot, yet shall the Church be called to an after
re^koning. Nothing remains to expedite the Consecration but the Royal Mandat,
which I find dated on the sixth of December, directed to Anthony Kt^ching
Bishop of Landaff, William Barlow late Bishop of Bath and Wells, Lord Elect of
Chichester; John Scory late Bishop of Chichester, Lord Elect of Hereford; Miles
Coverdale late Bishop of Exeter, John Hodgskins Suffragan of Bedford, John
Suffragan of Thetford, and John Bale Bishop of Osser^^ in the Realm of Ireland;
requiring them, or any of them at the least, to proceed unto the consecration
of the right reverend Matthew Parker lately elected to the Metropolitical See
of Canterbury. The first, and the two last, either hindered by sickness, or by
some other lawful impediment, were not in a condition to attend the service;
which notwithstanding was performed by the other four on Sunday the seventeenth
of that Month, according to the Ordinal of King Edward the sixth, then newly
printed for that purpose; the Ceremony performed in the Chapel at Lambeth
house, the East end whereof was hanged with rich Tapestry, and the floor
covered with red cloth; the Morning Service read by Pearson the Archbishops
Chaplain, the Sermon preached by Doctor Sc^^y Lord Elect of Hereford, on those
words of St. Peter, The Elders which are among you ^ exhort, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 1.
The Letters Parents for proceeding to the Consecration publicly read by Doctor
Dale, the Act of Consecration legally performed by the imposition of the hands
of the said four Bishops, according to the ancient Canons and King Edward's
Ordinal; and after all, a plentiful dinner for the entertainment of the company
which resorted thither, amongst whom, Charles Howard, eldest son of William Lord
Effingham, created afterward Lord Admiral and Earl of Notingham, happened to be
one, and after testified to the truth of all these particulars, when the
reality and form of this Consecration was called in question by some captious
sticklers for the Church of Rome.

For so it was, that some sticklers for the Church of Rome having been told of
the dinner which was made at the Nags head Tavern at such time as the election
of the new Archbishop was confirmed in the Arches, raised a report, that the
Nags head Tavern was the place of the Consecration. And this report was
countenanced by another slander, causing it to be noised abroad, and published
in some seditious Pamphlets, that the persons designed by the Queen for the
several Bishoprics, being met at a Tavern, did then and there lay hands upon
one another, without Form or Order. The first calumny fathered on one Keale,
once Hebrew Reader in the University of Oxford, and Chaplain unto Bishop
Bonner; which last relation were sufficient to discredit the whole tale, if
there were no other evidence to disprove the same. And yet the silence of all
Popish Writers concerning this Nags head-Consecration, during the whole Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, when it had been most material for them to insist upon it,
as much discrediteth the whole figment, as the Author of it. The other
published by Dr. Nicholas Sanders, (never more truly Dr. S^anders than in that
particular) in his pestilent and seditious Book, Entitled De Schismate
Anglicano; whose frequent falsehoods make him no fit Author to be built upon in
any matter of importance. Yet on the credit of these two, but on the first
especially, the Tale of the Nags-head-Consecration being once taken up, was
generally exposed to sale, as one of the most vendible commodities in the
writings of some Romish P^iests and Jesuits; as Champney's* Fitzsimons, Parson,
Kellison, etc. They knew right well, that nothing did more justify the Church
of England in the eye of the world, than that it did preserve a succession of
Bishops, and consequently of all other sacred Orders, in the ministration.
Without which, as they would not grant it to be a Church, so could they prove
it to be none by no stronger Argument than that the Bishops (or the pretended
Bishops rather in their opinion) were either not consecrate at all, or not
canonically consecrated as they ought to be. And for the gaining of this point,
they stood most pertina^iously on the fiction of the Nags-head Tavern, which if
it could be proved, or at least believed, there was an end of the Episcopal
succession in the Church of England, and consequently also of the Church it
self.

For the decrying of this clamor, and satisfying all opponents in the truth of
the matter, it was thought fit by Dr. George Abbot then Archbishop of
Canterbury, to call before him some of the Priests and Jesuits, that is to say,
Fairecloth, Leake, Laithwaite and Collins, being then prisoners in the Clinck.
Who being brought to Lambeth on the 12th* of May 1613. were suffered in the
presence of diverse Bishops, to peruse the public Registers, and thereby to
satisfy themselves in all particulars concerning the Confirmation and
Consecration of Archbishop Parker, according to the circumstances and
Punctillioes before laid down. This stilled the clamor for the present, though
it brake out again forty years after, and was again stilled by the care and
industry of the right Reverend Dr. B^amhall, Lord Bishop of Derry, in a Book
Entitled, The Church of England defended against some scandalous and fabulous
^^p^tations cast upon her, etc. Which cavil (for it is no better) being thus
refelled, the other objections of the Adversaries will be easily answered;
though Barlow and Scory were deprived of their Episcopal Sees, yet first the
justice and legality of their deprivation was not clear in Law; and secondly
they neither were nor could be deprived of their Episcopal character which
remained in them undefaced, as before it was. And whilst the character
remained, they were in a capacity of performing all Episcopal Offices to which
they should be called by their Metropolitan, or any higher Power directing and
commanding in all such matters as concerned the Church. And as for Suffragans,
by which title Hodgskins is Commissionated for the Consecration, they were no
other than the Chore-Ep^scopi of the Primitive times, Subsidiary Bishops,
ordained for easing the Diocesan of some part of his burden. By means whereof,
they were enabled to perform such offices belonging to that sacred function,
not limited to time and place by the ancient Canons, by which a Bishop, was
restrained in some certain acts of Jurisdiction to his proper Diocese. Of this
sort there were twenty six in the Realm of England, distinguished by the names
of such principal Towns as were appointed for their title and denomination. The
names and number whereof, together with the jurisdiction and preheminences
proportioned to them, the Reader may peruse in the Act of Parliament made in
the ^6th. year of King Henry the 8th.

No sooner was this solemnity ended, but a new mandate comes for the
Confirmation of Dr. Barlow in the Sea of Chichester, and Dr Scory to the Sea of
Hereford, to which they had been severally elected in August last. And though
the not restoring of them to their former Sees, might seem to ju^^ifie the late
Queen Mary in their deprivation, yet the Queen wanted not good reasons for
their present removal; not that she did consult therein her own power and
profit, (as is thought by some) but studied rather their content and
satisfaction, than her own concernments. For Ba^low having wasted the revenue
of the Church of Wells, could not with any comfort behold a place which he had
so spoiled; and Scory having been deprived of the Sea of Chichester, under
pretense of wanting a just title to it, desired not to be put upon the hazard
of a second ejction. But as for Coverdale, he did not only wave the acceptance
of Oxon, but of any other Church then vacant. He was now 72 years old, and
desired rather to enjoy the pleasure of a private life, than be disquieted in
his old age with the cares of Government. And somewhat might be also in it of a
disaffection, not to the Calling but the Habit, which is to be believed the
rather, because he attended not at the Consecration in his Cope and Rocher, as
the others did, but in a plain black Coat reaching down to his Ankles. And now
the rest of the Episcopal Sees begin to fill; for on the 21 of the same
December, D^. Edmond G^indall was consecrated to the Sea of London, Dr. R^chard
Cox to that of Ely, Dr. Edwin Sandys to the Church of Worcester, Dr. Rowland
Merick unto that of Bangor. On the 21 of January then next following, 1559/60.
Dr. Nicholas Bullingham was by the like consecration made Bishop of Lincoln,
the right learned Mr. John Jewel (who afterward accepted the degree of Doctor)
Bishop of Sarisbury, Dr. Thomas Young Bishop of St. David's, and Mr. R^chard
Davis Bishop of St. Asaph. The 24th. of March was honored with the
Consecration of three other Bishops, that is to say, of Mr. Thomas Bentham to
the Sea of Coventry and Lichfield, of Mr. Gilbert Barclay to the Sea of W^lls,
and of Dr. Edmund Guest to that of Rochester. On the 14th. of July comes the
consecration of Dr. William Alley to the Church of Exon, and that of Mr John
Parkhurst to the Church of Norwich, on the first of September. By which account
we find no ^ewer than sixteen Sees to be filled with new Bishops, within the
compass of the year, men of ability in matter of learning, and such as had a
good report for the integrity of their lives and conversations. Nor was it long
before the rest of the Episcopal Sees were supplied with new Pastors, as shall
be shown hereafter in due time and place. The Queens commission of sarvey had
not crossed the Trent, which possibly may be the reason why we find no new
Bishops in the Province of York, and W^nch^ster must afford one Michaelmas rent
more to the Queens Exchequer, before the Lord Treasurer could give way to a new
incumbent.

And now we may behold the face of the Church of England, as it was first
settled and established under Queen Elizabeth. 1560.
The Government of the Church by Archbishops and Bishops, according to the
practice of the best and happiest times of Christianity. These Bishops
nominated and elected according to the Statute in the 26th. of King Henry the
8th. and consecrated by the Ordinal, confirmed by Parliament, in the 5th. and
6th. years of King Edward the 6th. never appearing publicly but in their
Rochets, nor officiating otherwise than in Copes at the Holy Altar. The Priests
not stirring out of doors but in their square Caps, Gowns, or Canonical Coats,
nor executing any divine Office but in their Surplice, avestment set apart for
Religious services in the Primitive times, as may be gathered from St
Chrysostom for the Eastern Churches, and from St Hierom for the Western. The
Doctrine of the Church reduced unto its ancient purity, according to the
Articles agreed upon in Convocation Anno 1552. The Liturgy conform to the
Primitive patterns, and all the Rites and Ceremonies therein prescribed,
accommodated to the honor of God and increase of piety. The Festivals
preserved in their former dignity, observed with their distinct Offices
peculiar to them, and celebrated with a Religious cou^cu^^^ of all sorts of
people; An. Reg. Eliz. 2. 1560.
the weekly Fasts, the holy time of Lent, the Embr^^^ (...) together with the
Fast of the Rogation, severely kept by a forbearance of all ^ind of flesh, not
now by virtue of the Statute, as in the time o^ King Edward, but as appointed
by the Church in her public Calender before the Book of Common Prayer. The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper celebrated in most reverend manner, the Holy
Table seated in the place of the Altar, the people making their due reverence
at their first entrance into the Church, kneeling at the Communion, the
Confession, and the public Prayers, standing up at the Creed, the Gospels, and
the Gloria Patri, and using the accustomed reverence at the name of Jesus.
Music retained in all such Churches in which provision had been made for the
maintenance of it, or where the people could be trained up at the least to
plain-song: All which particulars were either established by the Laws, or
commanded by the Queens Injunctions, or otherwise retained by virtue of some
an^ient usages not by Law prohibited. Nor is it much to be admired, that such a
general conformity to those ancient usages was constantly observed in all
Cathedral, and the most part of the Parish Chur^hes, considering how well they
were presidented by the Court it self, in which the Liturgy was officiated
every day both morning and evening, not only in the public Chapel, but the
private Closet* celebrated in the Chapel with Organs, and other musical
inst^uments, and the most excellent voices both of men and children, that could
be got in all the Kingdom. The Gentlemen and children in their Surplices, and
the Priests in Copes as o^t as they attended the Divine Service at the Holy
Altar. The Altar furnished with rich Plate, two fair gilt Candlesticks with
Tapers in them, and a massy Crucifix of silver in the midst thereof. Which
last remained there for some years, till it was broke in pieces by Pach the
Fool (no wiser man daring to undertake such a desperate service) at the
solicitation of Sir Francis Knolles, the Queens near Kinsman by the Caries, and
one who openly appeared in favor of the Schism at Franckfort. The ancient
Ceremonies accustomably observed by the Knights of the Garter in their
adoration toward the Altar, abolished by King Edward the 6th. and revived by
Queen Mary, were by this Queen retained as formerly in her Fathers time, which
made that Order, so esteemed amongst foreign Princes, that the Emperors,
Maximilian and Rodolphus, the French Kings, Charles the 9th. and Henry the 3d.
together with Francis Duke of Mont Morency, though of a contrary Religion to
her, (not to say any any thing of diverse Lutheran Kings and P^inces) did
thankfully accept of their elections into that society. The solemn Sermons upon
each Wednesday, Friday, and Sunday in the time of Lent, preached by the
choicest of the Clergy, she devoutly heard, attired in black, according to the
commendable custom of her Predecessors, in which if any thing escaped them
contrary to the Doctrine and approved Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England. they were sure to hear of it; for which she received both thanks and
honor from her very enemies, as appears by Dr. Harding's Epistle Dedicatory
before his Answer to the Apology writ by Bishop Jewel. Particularly when one of
her Chaplains (Mr. Alexander Nowel Dean of St. Paul's) had spoke less reverently
in a Sermon preached before her of the sign of the Cross, she called aloud to
him from her closet window, commanding him to retire from that ungodly
digression, and to return unto his Text. And on the other side, when one of her
Divines had preached a Sermon in defense of the Real Presence, on the day
commonly called Good Friday, Anno 1565. she openly gave him thanks for his
pains and piety. The Bishops and the Clergy had been but ill proficients in the
school of conformity under so excellent a Mistress, if they had not kept the
Church in the highest splendour, to which they were invited by that great
example. And in this glorious posture still had lasted longer* had not her
Order been confounded, and her Peace disturbed by some factious spirits; who
having had their wills at Franckfort, or otherwise ruling the Pre^by^ery when
they were at Geneva, thought to have carried all before them with the like
facility when they were in England.

But leaving them and their designs to some other time, we must next look upon
the aid which the Queen sent to those of the reformed Religion in the Realm of
Scotland, but carried under the pretense of dislodging such French Forces as
were Garrisoned there, and might have proved bad neighbors to the Kingdom of
England. Such of the Scots as desired a Reformation of Religion, taking
advantage by the Queens absence, the easiness of the Earl of Arran, and want of
power in the Queen Regent to suppress their practices, had put themselves into
a Body; Headed by some of the Nobility, they take unto themselves the name of
the Congregation, managing their own affairs apart from the rest of the
Kingdom, and in assurance of their own strength, petition to the Queen Regent
and the Lords of the Council, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper might be
administered in both kinds, that Divine Offices might be celebrated in the
Vulgar tongue, and that they might have the choice of their own Ministers
according to the practice (as it was pretended) of the Primitive times. The
Answer hereunto was fair and gracious, but rather for the gaining of time, than
with a purpose to grant any of the points demanded. The principal Leaders of
the party, well followed by the common people, put themselves into Perth, and
there begin to stand on higher terms than before they did. The news whereof
occasioneth Knox to leave his Sanctuary in Geneva, and join himself unto the
Lords of the Congregation; At Perth he goes into the Pulpit, and falls so
bitterly on Images, Idolatry, and other superstitions of the Church of Rome,
that the people in a popular fury deface all the Images in that Church, and
presently demolish all Religious Houses within that City; This happened about the
end of May, Anno 1559. and gave a dangerous example to them of Couper, who
forthwith on the hearing of it destroyed all the Images, and pulled down the
Altars in that Church also. Preaching at Craile he inveighed sharply against
the Queen Regent, and vehemently stirred up the people to join together for the
expulsion of the French, which drew after it the like destruction of all Altars
and Images as was made before at Perth and Couper. The like followed on his
preaching at St. Andrews also, the Religious Houses being pulled down as well
as the Images, and laid so flat, that there was nothing left in the form of a
building. Inflamed by the same firebrand, they burned down the rich Monastery
of Scone, and ruined that of Camb^skenneth, demolished all the Altars, Images,
and Covents of Religious persons in Sterling, Lithgo^, Glascough, Edinburgh,
make themselves Masters of the last, and put up their own Preachers into all
the Pulpits of that City, not suffering the Queen Regent to have the use of one
Church only for her own devotions.

Nor staid they there, but being carried on by the same ill spirit, they pass
an Act among themselves for depriving the Queen Regent of all place and power
in the public Government; concerning which, the Oracle being first consulted,
returned this Answer, sufficiently ambiguous, as all Oracles are, that is to
say, That the iniquity of the Queen Regent ought not to withdraw their hearts
from the obedience due to their Sovereigns, nor did he wish any such sentence
to be pronounced against her, but when she should change her course, and submit
her self to good counsel, there should be place left unto her of regresse to
the same honors, from which, for good causes, she ought to be deprived. This
Act is intimated to the Queen Regent, who now begins as seriously to provide
for her own preservation, as she had done before in maintenance of the Queens
Authority. Some Forces had been sent from France, together with many Arms and
Ammunition in proportion to them; but these not being great enough to suppress
those insolences, she is supplied at times with 3000 Foot, beside Octavian's
Regiment sent over to make way for the rest. Some Horse were also shipped from
France, but so scattered and dispersed by tempest, that few of them came safely
thither. Yet by the terror of their coming, and the noise of more, she
recovereth Edenborough, compels the confederate Scots to go further North,
fortifies Lies the Port-Town to Edenborough, and the chief Key of all that
Kingdom, Garrisoned forthwith by the French, not only to make good their
Entrance, but second their Exit. On these discouragements, many of the Scots
soldiers drop away, and the rest refuse to stand unto their Arms, without
present pay. Had the French gone to work like soldiers, and poured such forces
into that Kingdom as the condition of affairs did require at their hands, they
might easily have suppressed that scattered Faction, before they were united
under the protection of a foreign Power; but this doing of their work by halves
proved the undoing of the whole, and only served to give the Scots sufficient
time to renew their forces, and call the English to their aid. They had all
along maintained a correspondence with some in England, but more particularly
with Crofts Governor of the Town of Barwick; To him they send for a supply in
this great necessity, by whom their Agents are dispatched with four thousand
Crowns; but the Queen Regent was so seasonably advertised of it, that she
intercepted on the way both the men and the money.

In this extremity they take counsel of despair, with Knox, by whom they are
advised to cast themselves into the arms of the Queen of England, the only
visible means then left to support the cause; to whom the neighborhood of the
French, upon just jealousies and reasons of State, was not very acceptable. No
better counsel being offered (as indeed none could) Maitland and Melvin are
dispatched ^o the Court of England, by whom the Queen is made acquainted with
the state of that Kingdom, the difficulty under which it strugled, the danger
like to fall on her own Dominions if the French should grow too strong in
Scotland; and thereupon entreat her succors and assistance for the expulsion
of that People, who otherwise might to both Realms prove alike destructive. The
business being taken into consideration, it was conceived by some of the
Council, that the Queen ought not to give ear unto their desires; that it was a
matter of dangerous consequence, and of ill example, to assist the Subjects of
that or any other Kingdom against their own natural and lawful Princes, and
that she did not know how soon it might be her own case, to have the like
troubles and commotions raised against her by those who liked not her
proceedings in the change of Religion. By others it was thought a matter of no
small impiety not to assist their brethren of the same profession* imploring
their assistance in the present exigency; that it was a work of charity to
defend their neighbors from the oppression of strangers; that the French were
always enemies to the Crown of England, and therefore that it could not be
consistent with the rules of prudence to suffer them to grow too strong upon
their borders; that the French King had already assumed the Title of England,
and it concerned them to take care that they gave him not by their improvidence
the possession also. These reasons carried it for the Scots, And so they are
dismissed with promise of such present aid, and on such conditions as should be
agreed on by Commissioners on both sides in the Town of Barwick.

About the middle of February the Commissioners meet, the Duke of Norfolk for
the Queen, the Lord James Stewart (one of the bastard brothers of the Queen of
Scots) the Lord Ruthwen, and some other principal men of the Congregation in
the name of the rest: By whom it was concluded on the 27th. of that month, That
the Queen should send sufficient forces into Scotland both by Sea and Land,
furnished with Money, Arms, and Ammunition; that she should not recall her
forces till that Kingdom was cleared of all the French; that provision of
Victuals for the Army should be made by the Scots, and that the Scots should
show themselves enemies to all such as were enemies to the Crown of England,
whether Scots or French; But by all means, that nothing should be done by
virtue of this Agreement, which might import the least withdrawing of the Scots
from that loyalty, duty, and obedience which was due unto their natural Queen,
or the King her husband. By which Agreement with the Scots the Queen abundantly
provided for her own security from all Invasions on that side; and by affording
them such succors as their wants required, but chiefly by conferring some
small annual pensions on the Chiefs amongst them, she made her self more
abso^ute on that side of the Tweed, than either the Queen of Sco^s her self, or
King James her son, or any of their Predecessors in all times before. According
to these Capitulations, an Army gallantly appointed is sent into Scotland,
consisting of 6000 Foot and 2000 Horse, and commanded by the Lord Gray a right
expert Soldier, accompanied by some Lords and Gentlemen of eminent quality;
some ships were also sent to block up the Haven, and hinder all relief which
might come by Sea to the Town of Lies, on the defense whereof depended the
whole hopes of the French, together with the interest of that Crown in the
Realm of Scotland.

It was about the beginning of April that the English Army came before it*
recruited afterward by the coming of 2000 more; which fresh supply, together
with some ill success which they found in the action, did so disanimate the
besieged, that they conceived no possibility of a long resistance; Ambassadors
are therefore sent from France to Edenborough, there to confer with such of the
same quality as should also come thither, authorized by the Queen of England,
by whom it was in fine concluded, That all the French Forces should forthwith
depart out of Scotland, except 60 only to be left in Dunbar, and as many in
the Fort of Nachkeeth; that they should be transported for their greater safety
in English Bottoms; that all matters of Religion should be referred to the
following Parliament; that an act of Oblivion should be passed for the
indemnity of all who had born Arms on either side; that a general Bond of Love
and Amity should be made betwixt the Lords and their Adherents of both
Religions; and finally, amongst many other particulars, that neither the Queen
of Scots nor the French King should from thenceforth assume the Titles and Arms
of England. Which Articles being signed and confirmed for both Kingdoms, the
French about the middle of July take their leave of Scotland, and the English
Army at the same time set forward for Barwick, being there disbanded and
dismissed to their several dwellings. Followed not long after by the Earls of
Morton and Glencarn, in the name of the rest of the Congregation, sent
purposely to render to the Queen their most humble thanks for her speedy and
prosperous assistance, and to desire the continuance of her Majesty's favors,
if the French should any more attempt to invade their Country. Assured whereof,
and being liberally rewarded with gifts and presents, they returned with joy
and glad tidings to the Congregation, whom as the Queen had put upon a present
confidence of going vigorously on in their Reformation, so it concerned them to
proceed so carefully in pursuance of it, as might comply with the dependence
which they had upon her.

First therefore, that she might more cordially espo^se their quarrel, they
bound themselves by their subscription to embrace the Liturgy, with all the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, which for a time remained the
only form of Worship for the Kirk of Scotland; when, and by whose means they
receded from it, may be shown hereafter. In the next place they cause a
Parliament to be called in the month of August, according to the Articles of
the Pacification, from which no person was excluded, who either had the right
of Suffrage in his own capacity, or in relation to their Churches, or as
returned from their Shrevalties or particular Buroughs; of which last, there
appeared the accustomed number, but of the Lords Spiritual, no more than six
Bishops of thirteen, with thirteen Abbots and Priors or thereabouts; and of the
Temporal Lords to the number of ten Earls and as many Barons: By whose
Authority and consent they passed three Acts, conducing wholly to the advantage
of the Reformation; the first whereof was for abolishing the Popes Jurisdiction
and Authority within the Realm; the second, for annulling all Statutes made in
former times for maintenance of Idolatry and Superstition; and the third, for
the punishment of the Sayers and Hearers of the Mass. To this Parliament also
some of the Ministers presented A Confession of the Faith and Doctrine to be
believed and professed by the Protestants of the Kirk of Scotland; modelled in
many places by the Principles of Calvin's Doctrine, which Knox had brought with
him from Geneva; but being put unto the Vote, it was opposed by no more than
three of the Temporal Lords, that is to say, the Earl of Atholl, and the Lords
Somervil and Borthwick, who gave no other reason for it, but that they would
believe as their fathers did. The Popish Prelates were silent in it, neither
assenting nor opposing: Which being observed by the Earl-Marshal, he is said to
have broke out into these words following; Seeing (says he) that my Lords the
Bishops (who by their learning can, and for the zeal they should have to the
truth, ought as I suppose to gainsay any thing repugnant to it) say nothing
against the Confession we have heard; I cannot think but that it is the very
truth of God, and that the contrary of it false and deceivable Doctrine.

Let us now cross over into Ireland, where we shall find the Queen as active in
advancing the reformed Religion, as she had been in either of the other
Kingdoms. King Henry had first broke the ice, by taking to himself the Title of
Supreme Head on earth of the Church of Ireland, exterminating the Popes
authority, and suppressing all the Monasteries and Religious Houses. In matters
doctrinal, and forms of Worship, as there was nothing done by him, so neither
was there much endeavored in the time of King Edward, it being thought perhaps
unsafe to provoke that people in the Kings minority, considering with how many
troubles he was elsewhere exercised. If any thing were done therein, it was
rather done by tolleration than command. And whatsoever was so done, was
presently undone again in the Reign of Queen Mary. But Queen Elizabeth having
settled her affairs in England, and undertaken the protection of the Scots,
conceived her self obliged in point of piety, that Ireland also should be made
partaker of so great a benefit. A Parliament is therefore held on the 12th. of
January, where past an Act, restoring to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction
over all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual persons. By which Statute were
established both the Oath of Supremacy and the High Commission, as before in
England. There also past an Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, etc. with
a permission for saying the same in Latin, in such Church or place, where the
Minister had not the knowledge of the English Tongue. But for translating it
into Irish (as afterward into Welsh in the 5th. year of this Queen) there was
no care taken, either in this Parliament, or in any following. For want
whereof, as also by not having the Scriptures in their native language, most of
the natural Irish have retained hitherto there old barbarous customs, or
pertinaciously adhere to the corruptions of the Church of Rome. The people by
that Statute are required under several penalties, to frequent their Churches,
and to be frequent at the reading of the English Liturgy, which they understand
no more than they do the Mass. By which means the I^ish was not only kept in
continual ignorance as to the Doctrines and Devotions of the Church of England,
but we have furnished the Papists with an excellent Argument against our
selves, for having the Divine Service celebrated in such a language as the
people do not understand.

There also past another Statute for restoring to the Crown the first fruits,
and twenty parts of all Ecclesiastical promotions within that Kingdom; as also
of all impropriat Parsonages, which there are more in number than those
Rectories which have cure of souls. King Henry had before united the first
fruits, etc. to the Crown Imperial, but Queen Mary out of her affection to the
Church of Rome, had given them back unto the Clergy, as before was said. The
like Act passed for the restitution of all such lands belonging to the Knights
of St. John of Jerusalem, as by that Queen had been regranted to the Order;
with the avoidance of all Leases and other grants, which had been made by Sir
Oswald Massingberd, the l^te Lord Prior of the same. Who fearing what was like
to follow, had voluntarily forsook the Kingdom in the August foregoing, and
thereby saved the Queen the charge of an yearly pension, which otherwise he
might have had as his Predecessors had before him in the time of King Henry.
During the Reign of which King, a Statute had been made in Ireland (as in
England also) for the electing and consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops,
repealed in the year first of Queen Mary, and now revived by her sister, in
which there is nothing more memorable, than that amongst many other Ceremonies
therein directed, there is mention of giving the Pall to a new Archbishop, that
being an Ornament or Habit peculiar only unto those of the highest rank in the
holy Hierarchy. And that she might not only take care for the good of the
Church, without consulting her own safety, she caused an Act to pass for the
recognition of her own just title to the Crown, as before in England. All which
being done, she left the prosecution of the work to her Bishops and Clergy, not
so well countenanced by power as they were by Law; and yet more countenanced by
Law than they made good use of. For many of them finding how things went in
England* and knowing that the like alterations would ensue amongst themselves,
resolved to make such use of the present times, as to enrich their friends and
kindred by the spoil of their Churches. To which end they so dissipated the
revenues of their several Bishoprics, by long Leases, see Farms, and plain
alienations, that to some of their Sees they left no more than a Rent of five
Marks per annum, to others a bare yearly Rent of 40 shillings, to the high
displeasure of Almighty God, the reproach of Religion, the great disservice of
the Church, and the perpetual ignominy of themselves for that horrible
sacrilege.

It is now time that we hoise sail again for England, where we shall find an
entertainment made ready for us in a Sermon preached by Reverend Jewel, then
newly Consecrated Bishop of the Church of Sarisbury. The Sermon preached at St.
Paul's Cross on the 30th. of March, being Passion-Sunday, or the Sunday
fortnight before Easter, the Text or Theme of his discourse being taken out of
St Paul's 1 Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 11. Ver 23. That which I
delivered to you ^ received of the Lord, etc. Which Text being opened, and
accommodated to the present times, he published that memorable Challenge, which
so much exercised the pens and studies of the Romish Clergy. By whom the Church
had been injuriously upbraided with the imputation of novelty, and charged with
teaching such opinions as were not to be found in any of the ancient Fathers,
or approved Councils, or any other Monument of true Antiquity, before Luther's
time. For the stopping of whose mo^ths for ever, this learned Prelate made this
stout and gallant challenge in these following words.

Bishop Jewel's Challenge.
If any Learned man of our Adversaries, or all the Learned men that be alive be
able to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old Catholic Doctor or
Father, or General Council, or Holy Scripture, or any one example in the
Primitive Church, whereby it may clearly and plainly be proved, during the
first six hundred years. 1. That there was at that time any private Mass in
the world. 2. Or that there was then any communion ministered unto the people
under one kind. 3. Or that the people had their Common Prayer in a strange
tongue that the people understood not. 4. Or that the Bishop of Rome was then
called an universal Bishop, or the head of the universal Church. 5. Or that the
people were then taught to believe that Christ's body is really, substantially,
corporally, carnally, or naturally in the Sacrament. 6. Or that his body is or
may be in a thousand places or more at one time. 7. Or that the Priest did then
hold up the Sacrament over his head. 8. Or that the people did then fall down
and worship it with godly honor. 9. Or that the Sacrament was then or now
ought to be hanged up under a Canopy. 10. Or that in the Sacrament after the
words of Consecration, there remain only the accidents and shows, without the
substance of Bread and Wine. 11. Or that then the Pri^sts divided the Sacrament
into three parts, and afterward received himself all alone. 12. Or that
whosoever had said the Sacrament is a figure, a pledge, a token or a
remembrance of Christ's body, had therefore been judged for an Heretic. 13. Or
that it was lawful then to have thirty, twenty, fifteen, ten, or five Masses
said in one day. 14. Or that images were then set up in the Churches, to the
intent the people might worship them. 15. Or that the lay people were then
forbidden to read the word of God in their own tongue. 16. Or that it was then
lawful for the Priest to pronounce the words of Consecration closely, or in
private to himself. 17. Or that the Priest had then authority to offer up
Christ unto his Father. 18. Or to communicate and receive the Sacrament for
another, as they do. 19. Or to apply the virtue of Christ's death and passion to
any man by the means of the Mass. 20. Or that it was then thought a sound
doctrine to teach the people, that Mass ex opere operato, that is, even for
that it is said and done, is able to remove any part of our sin. 21. Or that
any Christian man called the Sacrament the Lord his God. 22. Or that the people
were then taught to believe that the body of Christ remains in the Sacrament,
as long as the accidents of Bread and Wine remain there without corruption. 23.
Or that a mouse, or any other worm or beast, may eat the body of Christ, (for
so some of our Adversaries have said and taught.) 24. Or that when Christ said
hoc est corpus meum, the word hoc pointed not the Bread, but individuum vagum,
as some of them say. 25. Or that the Accidents, or Forms, or Shows of Bread and
Wine, be the Sacraments of Christ's body and blood, and not rather the very
Bread and Wine it self. 26. Or that the Sacrament is a sign or token of the
body of Christ that lies hidden underneath it. 27. Or that ignorance is the
mother and cause of true Devotion; the conclusion is, that I shall be then
content to yield and subscribe.


This Challenge being thus published in so great an auditory, startled the
English Papists both at home and abroad, none more than such of the fugitives,
as had retired to Lovain, Doway, or St Odomars in the Low Country Provinces
belonging to the King of Spain. The business first agitated by the exchange of
friendly Letters, betwixt the said Reverend Prelate, and Dr Henry Cole the late
Dean of St Paul's; more violently followed in a book of Rastal's who first
appeared in the lists against the Challenger. Followed therein by Dorman and
Marshal, who severally took up the cudgels to as little purpose; the first
being well beaten by Nowel, and the last by Calfhil, in their discourses writ
against them. But they were only velilations, or preparatory skirmishes in
reference to the main encounter, which was reserved for the Reverend Challenger
himself, and Dr. John Harding, one of the Divines of Lovain, and the most
learned of the College. The Combatants were born in the same County, bred up in
the same Grammar School, and studied in the same University also: So that it
may be said of them, as the Historian has of Jugurth and Sylla under Caius
Marius, that is to say, that they both learned those feats of Arms in the same
Camp, and under the same Commander, which afterward they were to exercise
against one another. Both zealous Protestants also in the time of King Edward,
and both relapsed to Popery in the time of Queen Mary; Jewel for fear, and
Harding upon hope of favor and preferment by it. But Jewel's fall may be
compared to that of St Peter, which was short and sudden, rising again by his
repentance, and fortified more strongly in his faith than before he was: But
Harding's like to that of the other Simon, premeditated and resolved on, never
to be restored again (so much was there within him of the gaul of bitterness)
to his former standing. But some former differences had been between them in
the Church of Sarisbury, whereof the one was Prebendary, and the other Bishop,
occasioned by the Bishops visitation of that Cathedral, in which as Harding had
the worst, so was it a presage of a second foil which he was to have in this
encounter. Who had the better of the day, will easily appear to any that
consults the writings. By which it will appear how much the Bishop was too hard
for him at all manner of weapons. Whose learned answers as well in maintenance
of his Challenge, as in defense of his Apology, (whereof more hereafter)
contain in them such a magazin of all sorts of learning, that all our
controversors since that time, have furnished themselves with Arguments and
Authority from it.

But these discourses came not out until some years after, though the occasion
was given now by this famous Challenge; the interval being spent in
preparations by the Romish party, before they showed themselves in public. In
the mean time, the Papists mad enough before, seemed to grow more outrageous
upon this occasion, though they were willing to impute it to some other cause.
Philip of Spain showed himself much incensed against her, as well for altering
the Religion here by him established, as for refusing him in marriage when the
offer had been made unto her by the Count of Feria; Nor was the Count less
troubled at it than the King. And in this melancholy humor he imploys all his
interess with the Pope then being, for subjecting her unto a sentence of
Excommunication. Which motion if it had been pressed on Pope Paul the 4th. who
seemed very much displeased at her for accepting the Crown without his consent,
there is no question to be made but that it had been hearkened to with a
listening ear, and executed with a rash and ungoverned hand. But Paul the 4th.
deceased about the middle of August, in the year last past, and John Angelo
Cardinal of Medices, succeeded him by the name of Pope Pius the 4th. in
December following. Who being a more moderate man, did not think fit to proceed
to such extremities. For seeing that his power was a thing rather consisting in
the conceits of men, than in truth and substance, if it should once appear that
this thunderbolt of Excommunication (whereby the world is so much terrified)
should prove ineffectual and without all power, then might this great authority
fall into contempt, and become ridiculous. Upon which ground he goes another
way to work, and is resolved to try all fair and plausible means, for gaining
her to the obedience of the Sea Apostolic. To which end he directs unto her an
affectionate Letter, in which he calls her his dearest daughter, and seems
exceeding careful of her salvation, and the prosperity of her people; not to be
found by wandering out of the Communion of the Catholic Church, to which she is
again invited with much Christian meekness. Which Letter he dispatcheth by the
hands of Vincentius Parpalia, a right trusty Minister, and one (by reason of
some former employments hither in the time of Queen Mary) not unknown to her.
Whom he had furnished also with some secret instructions to be communicated to
her at his being in England. Concerning which (for with that intimation he
concludes his Letter) the same Vincentius was to deal more largely with her,
and declare his fatherly affection toward her; She being in like sort desired
to receive him lovingly, hear to him diligently, and to give the same credit to
his speeches, as she would to the Pope himself.

This letter of the Popes bears date on the 5th. of May, Anno 1560. before
which time the Queen had caused the English Liturgy to be translated into
Latin, using therein the pen and diligence of Walter Haddon, (as some suppose)
who afterward appeared against Ossorius upon several Arguments. And being
translated into Latin, it was commended by her Letters Parents of the first of
April, not only to all Colleges and Hall^ in both Universities, but also to the
Colleges of Eaton and Winchester, to be used by them in their several and
respective Chapels. And she caused further, some selected Hymns to be added to
it for some particular occasions, but most especially to be sung in funerals
and solemn obsequies; which not being warranted by the Statute of the year
preceding, were therefore authorized with a non obstante. All which as she was
thought to do, to satisfy and instruct all foreign Princes in the form and
fashion of our Devotions; So did she so far satisfy the Pope then being, that
he showed himself willing to confirm it by his Papal power. The learned
Ca^^^den, who received all his choice intelligence from Sir William Caec^l,
(but better known in his last times by the name of Lord Rurleigh) gives us to
understand, that this Parpalio was instructed to offer in the name of his
Holiness, that the English Liturgy should be confirmed; the use of the
Communion in both kinds allowed of. And that all Sentences which had passed in
the Court of Rome against the marriage of her Mother, should be rescinded and
made void, conditioned only, that she would reunite her self to the Roman
Church, and acknowledge the Primacy of that See. For the carrying on of which
accord, the Abbot was commissionated to distribute some thousands of Crowns
amongst such men, as should be found most forward to effect the same. Sanders
makes this to be another of his secret mandates, that if she had any diffidence
in her Title to the Crown of England, either in regard of the doubtfulness of
her Legitimation, or any thing which had been done by the authority of the Pope
and Church of Rome, all matters should be cleared and sweetened to her best
advantage, by the benignity and favor of the Sea Apostolic. But for all this,
the Abbot came no nearer than B^ussels with his Bulls and Faculties, not being
suffered to set foot upon English ground, whether it were upon a probable
suspicion, that under color of such plausible and specious overtures, he was
designed to encourage a Rebellion amongst the Papists, as was thought by some;
or rather, that the Queen was grown so confident of her own just Title, and the
affections of her people, as not to be beholden to the Pope for a confirmation,
remains a matter undetermined by our best Historians. How it succeeded with
this Pope in another project for the reducing of this Kingdom under his
command, we shall see hereafter.

But all this while there was no care taken to suppress the practice of another
Faction, who secretly did as much endeavor the subver^ion of the English
Litu^gy* as the Pope seemed willing to confirm it; For whilst the Prelates o^
the Church, and the other learned men before remembered, bent all their forces
toward the confuting of some Popish Errors, another enemy appeared, which
seemed not openly to aim at the Church's Doctrines, but quarrelled rather at
some Rites and Extrinsecalls of it. Their purpose was to show themselves so
expert in the Art of War, as to take in the Outworks of Religion first, before
they levelled there Artillery at the Fort it self. The Schismatics at
Franckfort had no sooner heard of Queen Mary's death, but they made what haste
they could for England, in hope of fishing better for themselves in a troubled
water than a composed and quiet Current; Followed not long after by the
brethren of the Separation, which retired from thence unto Geneva, who having
left some few behind to complete their Notes upon the Bible, and make up so
many of the Psalms in English Meeter as had been left unfinished by S^ernhold
and Hopkins, hastened as fast homewards as the others. But notwithstanding all
their haste, they came not time enough to effect their purposes, either in
reference to the Liturgy or Episcopal Government, on which the Queen had so
resolved according to her own most excellent judgment, that they were not able
to prevail in either project. It grieved them at the heart that their own
Prayers might not be made the rule of Worship in their Congregations, and that
they might not Lord it here in their several Parish, as Calvin did in the
Presbytery of the Church of Geneva. Some friends they had about the Queen, and
Calvin was resolved to make use of all his power and credit both with her and
Cecil (as appears by his Letters unto both) to advance their ends; and he was
seconded therein by Peter Martyr, who thought his interest in England to be
greater than Calvin's, though his name was not so eminent in other places. But
the Queen had fixed her self on her resolution of keeping up the Church in such
outward splendour, as might make it every way considerable in the eye of the
world; so that they must have faith enough to remove a mountain, before they
could have hope enough to draw her to them. When therefore they saw the Liturgy
imposed by Act of Parliament, and so many Episcopal Sees supplied with able
Pastors, nothing seemed more expedient to them than to revive the quarrels
raised in King Edward's time against Capps and Surplices, and such particulars
as had then been questioned in the public Liturgy; And herein they were
seconded (as before in King Edward's time) by the same Peter Martyr, as appears
by his Letters to a nameless friend, bearing date at Zarick on the 4th. of
November 1560. to which he added his dislike in another of his Letters to the
same friend also, touching the same and other points proposed unto him, that is
to say, the Cap, the Episcopal Habit, the Patrimony of the Church, the manner
of proceeding to be held against Papists, the Perambulation used in the
Rogation weeks, with many other points of the like condition, in which his
judgment was desired.

But these helps being too far off, and not to be consulted with upon all
inconveniences, without a greater loss of time than could consist with the
impatiency of their desires, they fell upon another project, which promised
them more hopes of setting up their Discipline, and decrying the Liturgy, their
quarrels about Caps and Vestments. Some friends they had about the Court, as
before was said, and Gry^dal the new Bishop of London was known to have a great
respect to the name of Calvin, the business therefore is so ordered, that by
Calvin's Letters unto Gryndal, and the friends they had about the Queen, way
should be given to such of the French Nation, as had repaired hit^ her to enjoy
the freedom of their own Religion, to have a Church unto themselves, and in
that Church not only to erect the Genevian discipline, but to set up a form of
Prayer, which should hold no conformity with the English Liturgy. They could
not but remember those many advantages which John Alasco and his Church of
Strangers afforded to the Zuingiian Gospellers in the Reign of King Edward, and
they despaired not of the like, nor of greater neither, if a French Church were
settled upon Ca^vin's Principles in some part of London. A Synagogue had been
built for the use of the Jews Anno 1231. not far from the place in which now
stands the Hall of the Merchant -Tailors near the Royal Exchange: But the Jews
having removed themselves to some other place, the Christians obtained that it
should be dedicated to the blessed Virgin, and by that name was given unto the
Brotherhood of St. Anthony of Vienna by King Henry the 3d. After which time, an
Hospital was there founded by the name of St. Anthony, consisting of a Master,
two Priests, one Schoolmaster, and twelve poor men; Enlarged in the succeeding
times by the addition of a fair Grammar School, and other public Buildings for
the use of the Brethren. It was privileged by King Edward the 4th. to have
Priests, Clerks, Scholars, poor men, and Brethren of the same, or Laymen,
Quiristers, Proctors, Messengers, Servants in household, and other things
whatsoever, like unto the Prior and Covent of St. Anthony of V^enna, etc. and
being so privileged, it was annexed to the Collegiat Chapel of St. George in
Windsor, under whose Patronage it remained, but much impoverished by the fraud
and folly of one of its Schoolmasters, till the final dissolution of it,
amongst other Hospitals and Brotherhoods, by King Edward the sixth; so that
being vested in the Crown, and of no present use to the City, it was no hard
matter to obtain it for the use of the French, as it still continues.

And now again we have another Church in London, as different from the Church
of England in Government and forms of Worship, and some Doctrinals also, as
that of John Alasco was in the Augustine Friars. Not must we marvail if we find
the like dangerous consequents to ensue upon it: for what else is the setting
up of a Presbytery in a Church, founded and established by the Rules of
Episcopacy, than the erecting of a Commonwealth or popular Estate in the midst
of a Monarchy? Which Calvin well enough perceived, and thereupon gave Gryndal
thanks for his favor in it, of whom they after served themselves upon all
occasions. Upon the news of which success, diverse both French and Dutch
repaired into England, planting themselves in the Seatowns, and openly
professing the Reformed Religion, under which covert, they disguised their
several Heterodoxies and blasphemous Dotages, some of them proving to be
Anabaptists, others infected with unfound opinions of as ill a nature, but all
endeavoring to disperse their Heretical Doctrines, and by invenoming the good
people amongst whom they lived, to increase their Sects. Which being made known
unto the Queen, she presently commands them all by her Proclamation to depart
the Kingdom, whether they were Aliens or natural born English, and not to stay
above the term of twenty days, upon pain of imprisonment, and forfeiture or
loss of all their goods: Which Proclamation notwithstanding, too many of them
lurked in Eng^and without fear of discovery, especially after the erecting of
so may French and Dutch Churches in the Maritime parts, as at this time they
did in London, infecting the French and Dutch Churches there with some of their
frenzies, and occasione^ such disputes amongst them upon that account, that
Pe^er Mar^yr found it necessary to interpose his authority with them, to the
composing of those Heats and differences which had grown amongst them; for
which consult his Letter bearing date at Zurick on the 15th. of February, next
following after the date of the said Proclamation, and superscribed, Unto the
Church of S^rangers in the City of London.

Now for the date of the said Proclamation, it seems to have been about the
19th. of September, at which time it pleased the Queen to set forth another, no
less conducing to the honor, than did the other to the preservation of the
Churches purity. She had given command by her Injunctions in the year
foregoing, for destroying and taking away all Shrines, and coverings of
Shrines, all Tables, Candlesticks, Trindals, and Rolls of Wax, together with
all Pictures, Paintings, and other monuments of ^eigned Miracles, Pilgrimages,
Idolatry and Superstition, so that there remain no memory of the same in walls,
glass-windows, or elsewhere, whether it were in Churches or men's private
houses. But some perverting rather than mistaking her intention in it, guided
by covetousness, or overruled by some new fangle in Religion, under color of
conforming to this command, defaced all such Images of Christ and his Apostles,
all Paintings which presented any History of the holy Bible, as they found in
any windows of their Churches or Chapels. They proceeded also to the breaking
down of all Coats of Arms, to the tearing off of all the Brasses on the Tombs
and Monuments of the dead, in which the figures of themselves, their wives or
children, their Ancestors, or their Arms, had been reserved to posterity. And
being given to understand, that Bells had been bap^ized in the times of Popery,
and that even the Churches themselves had been abused to Superstition and
Idolatry, their zeal transported them in fine to sell their Bells, to turn the
Steeples into Dove-coats, and to rob the Churches of those sheets of Lead with
which they were covered. For the restraining of which Sacrilege and profane
abuses, she gave command in her said Proclamation of the 19th. of September,
That all manner of men should from thenceforth forbear the breaking or defacing
of any parcel of any Monument, or Tomb, or Grave, or other Inscription and
Memory of any person deceased, being in any manner of place; Or to break any
Image of Kings, Princes, or Nobles, Estates of this Realm, or of any other that
have been in times past erected and set up for the only memory of them to
their posterity, in common Churches, and not for any Religious honor; Or to
break down or deface any Image in glass-windows in any Church, without the
consent of the Ordinary, upon pain of being committed to the next Gaol without
Bail or Mainprize, and there to remain till the next coming of the Justices
for Jail-deliver, and then to be further punished by Fine or Imprisonment
(besides the restitution or re-edification of the thing broken) as to the said
Justices shall seem meet, and if need shall be, to use the advice of her
Majesty's Council in her Star Chamber.

It was also signified in the said Proclamation, That some Patrons of Churches
and others, who were possessed of Impropriations, had prevailed with the Parson
and Parishioners, to take or throw down the Bells of Churches or Chapels, and
the Lead of the same, and to convert the same to their private gain, by which
ensued not only the spoil of the said Churches, but even a slanderous
desolation of the places of Prayer. And thereupon it was commanded, that no
manner of person should from thenceforth take away any Bells or Lead off any
Church or Chapel, under pain of Imprisonment during her Majesty's pleasure, and
such further Fine for the contempt as shall be thought meet; With a charge
given to all Bishops and other Ordinaries, to enquire of all such contempts
done from the beginning of her Majesty's Reign, and to enjoin the persons
offending to repair the same within a convenient time, and of their doing
therein to certify the Privy Council, or the Council in the Star Chamber, that
order may be taken therein. And in persute of this most seasonable and
religions Act, she did not only sign the said Proclamation, one for all, to
authorize it for the Press, as the custom is, but signed them every one apart
(amounting to a very great number) with her own Royal Hand, that so it might be
known rather for her own proper act than an act of the council.

With like care also she provided for the honor and prosperity of her estate,
in affairs Politic and Civil. The moneys of the Realm had been much debased by
King Henry the 8th. to the great disprofit of the Merchant, and reproach of the
Kingdom, for which, no remedy had been taken by her Brother or Sister, though
they had better opportunities, and more advantages to go through with it. But
this brave Queen, endeavoring nothing more, than the restoring of her Kingdom
to its ancient splendour, first caused all such base moneys as were coined by
any of her Predecessors, to be decryed to a less value, according to the
fineness or alloy thereof; and that being done, by virtue of her Proclamation
bearing date the 28th. of September, she caused all the said base moneys, so
reduced to a lower value, to be brought in to her Majesty's Mint, for which she
gave them money of the purest silver, (such as passed commonly by the name of
Easterling or Sterling money) since which time, no base money has been coined in
England, but only of pure Gold and Silver, to pass for current in the same;
save that of late times, in relation to the necessity of poor people, a
permission has been given to the coining of Farthings, which no man can be
forced to accept in satisfaction of a Rent or Debt; which as it could not be
affirmed of England in the times preceding, so neither can it now be said of
any State or Nation in the Christian world, in all which, there are several
sorts of copper money, as current with them for public uses, as the purest
metal. She provided also in like manner for her peoples safety, and the
increase of Trade and Merchandise in English Bottoms; For toward the end of
this second year, she made great preparation of Ordinance, Arms, Munition, and
Powder of her own materials, to be in a readiness to defend her Realm in all
emergencies of danger; For the advancing of which service it so pleased the
divine Providence which watched over her actions, that a rich Mine of Brass was
found near Keswick in Cumberland, such as sufficed not only for furnishing her
own Forts and Ships with all manner of Ordinance, but for supplying other
Countries as their wants required. And to complete so great a mercy in her
preservation, the Stone called Lapis Calaminaris, exceeding necessary for all
Brass-works, was at the same time also found in England in most plentiful
manner. And whereas complaint was made unto her by the Merchants of the
Hans-towns, or Merchants of the Stilyard as then commonly called, that King
Edward had first ceized their Liberties, and that afterward Queen Mary had
raised their Customs upon all sorts of Merchandises from one to twenty in the
Hundred, her Answer was, That as she was resolved not to Innovate any thing, so
she could grant no other privileges and immunities to them than those in which
she found them when she came to the Crown. Their Trading hereupon being
intermitted, the English Merchants took the managing of it upon themselves, and
thrived therein so well after some adventures, that Cloth, and other
Manufactures, heretofore transported in the ships of those Merchants, were from
henceforth fraughted and dispersed in English Vessels; By means whereof, the
English in a very short time attained unto the reputation of being the
wealthiest Merchants, the most expert Mariners, and the ablest Commanders for
Sea Fights of any Nation in the world.

I shall conclude this year with a work of piety in the foundation of the
Collegiat Church of St. Peter in Westminster, which in the space of twenty
years had been changed from an Abbey to a Deanery, from a Deanery to a See
Episcopal, reduced unto a Deanery again, and finally restored to the state of an
Abbey. But the Abbey being dissolved in the foregoing Parliament, an offer was
made to Fecknam and the rest of the Convent (if Sanders be to be believed in
this particular) for continuing in their places and possessions as before they
did, clogged with no other conditions than the taking of the Oath of Supremacy,
and officiating all divine Offices by the English Liturgy. But this offer being
by them rejected, the Act of dissolution passed in both Houses of Parliament;
Concerning which there goes a story, that the Lord Abbot being then busied in
planting some young Elms in the Deans yard there, one that came by advised him
to desist from his purpose, telling him, That the Bill was just then passed for
dissolving his Monastery. To which the good old man replied, That he resolved
howsoever to go on with his work, being well assured, that that Church would be
always kept for an encouragement and seat of Learning. And so it proved in the
event; for the Queen having pleased her self in the choice of some of the best
Lands which remained unto it, confirmed the rest upon that Church, which she
caused to be called the Collegiat Church of St. Peter in Westminster, as
appears by her Letters Parens bearing date in the second year of her most
gracious and most prosperous Reign. A foundation of a large capacity, and as
amply privileged, consisting of a Dean, and twelve secular Canons, two School
masters, and forty Scholars, petit Canons and others of the Quire to the number
of thirty, ten Officers belonging to the Church, and as many servants
appertaining to the College diet, and twelve Alms-men, besides many Officers,
Stewards, Receivers, and Collectors, for keeping Courts, and bringing in of
their Revenue; the principal of which, called the High Steward of Westminster,
has ever since been one of the prime Nobility, and in great favor at the
Court. The Dean entrusted with keeping the Regalia, honored with a place of
necessary service at all Coronations, and a Commissioner for the Peace within
the City of Westminster and the Liberties of it by Act of Parliament. The Dean
and Chapter vested with all manner of jurisdiction both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, not only within the City and liberties of Westminster, but within the
precinct of St. Martins le grand, and some Towns of Essex, exempted in the one
from the Bishop of London, and in the other from the power of the Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Scholars annually preferred by election, either to
Christ-Church in Oxon, or Trinity College in Cambrige, each College being bound
by an Indenture made with Queen Elizabeth, to take off yearly two or three at
the least (though since, that number is extended to four or five) to be
preferred to Scholarships and Fellowships in their several Houses. A College
founded as it proved in such a happy conjuncture, that since this new
foundation of it, it hat given breeding and preferment to four Archbishops, two
Lord Chancellors, or Lord Keepers of the Great Seal of England, twenty two
Bishops, and thirteen Deans of cathedral Churches, besides Archdeacons and
Prebendaries, and other dignitaries in the Church to a proportionable number;
which is more than can be said of either of the two famous Colleges of Aeton
and Winchester, or of both together, though the one was founded 168, and the
other 114 years before it.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 3. A. D. 1560, 1561. An. Reg. Eliz. 3. 1560.

WE shall begin this third year of the Queen with the death of Francis the
second, King of the French, who deceased on the 5th. day of December, when he
had scarce lived to the end of his 17th. year, and had Reigned but one year and
five months, or thereabouts. His death much altered both the counsels and
affairs of Christendom, distracting the French Nation into schisms and
^actions, encouraging the S^ots to proceed with confidence in their
Reformation, and promising no small security to Queen Elizabeth, in regard of
the pretensions of the Queen of Scots. But so little was her condition bettered
by it, that she seemed to be in more danger by the acts of her enemies after
his decease, than formerly in the time of his life and government. Francis of
G^ise, a man of great abilities for Camp and Counsel, had made himself a very
strong party in the Court of France, which he intended to make use of for the
Queen of Scots, whose Mother, the late Queen Regent of Scotland, was his only
sister. And this he might the better do by reason of a division in the Court of
France about the government of the Kingdom, during the minority of Charles the
9th. the second brother, and next heir to the King deceased. Katherine de
Medices the Relict of Henry the 2d. and the Mother of Charles, lays claim to
the Regency; for who could have a greater care either of the young Kings person
or estate, than his natural Mother? But against her, a^ being a mere stranger
to the Nation and affairs of France, Anthony of Burbo^, Duke of Vendosme by
descent, and King of Navarr, at the least in Title, in the Right of Joan d'
Albret his wife, the sole Heir of that Crown, lays his claim unto it, as being
the first Prince of the blood, and therefore fitter to be trusted with the
Regency by the rules of that government. The Guisian faction join themselves to
that of the Queen, of whom they better knew how to make advantage than they
could of the other, and to that end endeavor by all subtle artifices, to
invest her in it.

To this end they insinuate themselves into the Duke, persuade him either to
relinquish his demands of the Regency, or to associate himself with the
Queen Mother in the public government; and to join counsels with the Catholic
party for suppressing the H^gonots. Which that they might allure him to, or at
least take him off from his first persute, they offered to procure a Divorce
from his present wife, and that instead of holding the Kingdom of Navarr in
Right of his wife, he should hold it in his own personal capacity by a grant
from the Pope, his wife being first deprived of it by his Holiness, as
suspected of Lutheranism; that being divorced from his wife, he should marry
Mary Queen of the Scots, with whom he should not only have the Kingdom of
Scotland, but of England also, of which Elizabeth was to be deprived on the
same account; that for the recovery of that Kingdom, he should not only have
the Popes authority, and the power of France, but also the forces of the King
of Spain; and finally, that the Catholic King did so much study his
contentment, that if he would relinquish his pretensions to the Crown of
Navarr, he should be gratified by him with the soverainty and actual possession
of the Isle of Sardinia, of which he should receive the Crown with all due
solemnities. By which temptations when they had rendered him suspected to the
Protestant party, and thereby settled the Queen Mother in that place and power,
which so industriously she aspired to, they laid him by as to the Title,
permitting him to live by the air of hope for the short time of his life, which
ended on the 17th. of November, Anno 1562. And so much of the game was played in
earnest, that the Duke of Guise did mainly labor with the Pope, to fulminate
his Excommunications against Elizabeth, as one that had renounced his
authority, apostated from the Catholic Religion, and utterly exterminated the
profession of it out of her Dominions.

But the Duke sped no better in this negotiation, than the Count of Feria did
before. The Pope had still retained some hope of regaining England, and meant
to leave no way unpractised by which he might obtain the point he aimed at.
When first the Sea was vacant by the death of Pope Paul the 4th. the Cardinals
assembled in the Conclave bound themselves by oath, that for the better settling
of the broken and distracted estate of Christendom, the Council formerly held
at Trent, should be resumed withal convenient speed that might be. Which being
too fresh in memory to be forgotten, and of too great importance to be laid
aside, the new Pope had no sooner settled his affairs in Rome, which had been
much disordered by the harshness and temerity of his predecessor, but he
resolved to put the same in execution. For this cause he consults with some of
the more moderate and judicious Cardinals, and by his resolution and dexterity,
surmounts all difficulties which showed themselves in the design; and he
resolved not only to call the Council, but that it should be held in (...), to
which it had been formerly called by Pope Paul the 3d. 1545. that it should
rather be a continuance of the former Council which had been interrupted by the
prosecution of the wars in Germany, than the beginning of a new; and that he
would invite unto it all Christian Princes, his dear daughter Queen Elizabeth
of England amongst the rest. And on these terms he stood when he was importuned
by the Ministers of the Duke of Gvise, to proceed against her to a sentence of
Excommunication, and thereby to expose her Kingdoms to the next Invader. But
the Pope was constantly resolved on his first intention of treating with her
after a fair and amicable manner, professing a readiness to comply with her in
all reciprocal offices of respect and friendship, and consequently inviting her
amongst other Princes to the following Council; to which if she should please
to send her Bishops, or be present in the same by her Ambassadors, he doubted
not of giving them such satisfaction, as might set him in a fair way to obtain
his ends.

Leaving the Pope in this good humor, we shall go for England, where we shall
find the Prelates at the same employment in which we left them the last year,
that is to say, with setting forth the Consecrations of such new Bishops as
served to fill up all the rest of the vacant Sees. The first of which was
Robert Horn, Dr. in Divinity, once Dean of Durham, but better known by holding
up the English Liturgy, and such a form of Discipline as the times would bear,
against the schismatics of Franckfort, preferred unto the Sea of Winchester,
and consecrated Bishop in due form of Law, on the 16th. of February. Of which
we shall speak more hereafter on another occasion. On which day also Mr. Edmond
Scambler, Bachelor of Divinity, and one of the Prebendaries of the new
Collegiat Church of St. Peter in Westminster, was consecrated Bishop of the
Church of Peterborough. During the vacancy whereof, and in the time of his
incumbency, Sir William Caecil principal Secretary of Estate, possessed himself
of the best Manors in the Soake which belonged unto it; and for his readiness
to confirm the same Manors to him, preferred him to the Sea of Norwich, Anno
1584. Next follows the translation of Dr. Thomas Young Bishop of St. David's,
to the Sea of York, which was done upon the 25th. of February in an unlucky
hour to that City, as it also proved: For scarce was he settled in that See,
when he pulled down the goodly Hall, and the greatest part of the Episcopal
Palace in the City of York, which had been built with so much care and cost, by
Thomas the elder, one of his predecessors there, in the year of our Lord 1090.
Whether it were for covetousness to make money of the materials of it, or out
of fordidness to avoid the charge of Hospitality in that populous City, let
them guess that will. Succeeded in the Sea of St. David's, by Davis Bishop of
St. Asaph, translated thither the 21 of May, 1561. as he was by another of the
same name, Dr. Thomas Davis, within few months after.

The Province of York being thus fitted with a new Archbishop, it was not long
before the consecration of Dr. James Pilkinton to the Sea of Durham, which was
performed by the hands of his own Metropolitan on the second of March, at whose
first coming to tha^ See, he found it clogged with an annual pension of 1000.
l. to be paid into her Majesty's Exchequer yearly, towa^d the maintenance of
the Garrison in the Town of Barw^ck, first laid upon this Bishopric, when that
Town seemed to be in danger of such French forces as had been brought into that
Kingdom, or otherwise might fear some practice of the popish party, for the
advancing of the interess of the Queen of Scots. The Bishops Tenants were
protected in their corn and cattle by the power of this Garrison, and
consequently the more enabled to make just payment of their rents; and it was
thought to be no reason that the Queen should be at the sole charge of
protecting his Tenants, and he enjoy the whole benefit of it without any
disbursement. But this was only a pretense for raising some revenue to the
Crown out of that rich patrimony; the pension being still ch^rged upon it,
though the Garrison was removed in the first of King James. On the same day,
that is to say the second of March, Dr. John Best was consecrated Bishop of
Carlisle, after the Sea had been refused by Bernard G^. phin, Parson of
Houghton in the Spring, betwixt D^rham and Newcastle. The offer made him with
relation to his brother George, a man much used in many employments for the
State; but on what ground declined by him, is not well assured. Whether it were
that he was more in love with the retirements of a private life, or that he
could not have the bird, without he yielded to the stripping of it of the most
part of its feathers (as it came to Best) may be sooner questioned than
resolved. And finally on the 4th of May comes in the consecration of Mr William
D^wnham (the Queens Chaplain, when she was but Princess, and afterward made
one of the Prebendaries of St Peter's in Westminster) to the Sea of Chester, by
this preferment recompensed for his former services. By which last care the
vacant Sees were all supplied with learned Pastors, except Oxon, Gloucester and
Bristol. Of which we shall speak more in the following year.

But neither this diligence and care in filling all the vacant Sees with
learned Pastors, 1561.
nor the Queens Proclamation for banishing all Anabaptists and other Sectaries
which had resorted hither out of other Countries, could either free the land
from those dangerous inmates, or preserve the Church from the con^agion of
their poisonous doctrines. Too many of those Fanatical spirits still remained
behind, scattering their tares, and dispersing their blasphemous follies
amongst simple people. In which number they prevailed so far upon More and
Geofrys, that the first professed himself to be Christ, the last believed him
to be such, and did so report him. Continuing obstinate in this frenzy, Geofrys
was committed prisoner to the Marsha^sea in the Borough of Sou^hwark, and More
to the house of mad men (commonly called Bethlem) without Bishops Gate, in the
City of London. Where having remained above a year, without showing any sign of
their repentance, Geofrys was whipped on the ^0th. of April from the said Marsha^
sea to Bethlem, with a paper bound about his head, which signified that this
was William Geofrys, a most blasphemous Heretic, who denied Christ to be in
Heaven. At Bethlem he was whipped again in the presence of More, till the lash
had extorted a confession of his damnable error. After which More was stripped
and whipped in the open streets till he had made the like acknowledgement,
confessing Christ to be in Heaven, and himself to be a vile, miserable, and
sinful man. Which being done, they were again remitted to their several prisons
for their further cure. At which the Papists made good game, and charged it on
the score of the Reformation, as if the Principles thereof did naturally lead
men to those dreams and dotages. Whereas they could not choose but know, that
Christ our Savior prophesied of the following times, that some should say l^e
here is Christ, and others would say lo there is Christ; that Simon Magus even
in the days of the Apostles, assumed unto himself the glorious Title of the
great power of God; that Menander in the age next following, did boldly
a^rogate to himself the name of Christ; and finally that Montanus, when the
Church was stored with Learned and Religious Prelates, An. Reg. Eliz. 3. 1561.
would needs be taken and accounted for the holy Ghost. Or if they think the
Reformation might pretend unto more perfection than the Primitive times, they
should have looked no farther back than to King Henry the 3d. in whose Reign
the Popes authority in England was at the highest; and yet neither the Pope by
his authority, nor by the diligence of his Preachers and other Ministers, could
so secure the Church from Mores and Geoffrys, but that two men rose up at that
very time, both which affirmed themselves to be Jesus Christ, and were both
hanged for it. And as Montanus could not go abroad without his Maximi^^a and
Priscilla to disperse his dotages, so these impostors also had their female
followers, of which the one affirmed her self to be Mary Magdalen, and the
other that she was the Virgin Mary. So that the Reformation is to be excused
from being accessory in the least degree to these men's heresies, or else the
Apostolical Age, and the Primitive times, yea and the Church of Rome it self
(which they prize much more) must needs come under the necessity of the like
condemnation.

Nor did the Zuinglian Gospellers, or those of the Genevian party, rejoice much
less at a most lamentable accident which happened to the cathedral Church of St.
Paul on the fourth of June, on which day, about four or five of the clock in
the afternoon, a fearful fire first showed it self near the top of the Steeple,
and from thence burnt down the Spire to the stone-work, and Bells, and raged so
terribly, that within the space of four hours the Timber and Lead of the whole
Church, and whatsoever else was combustible in it, was miserably consumed and
burnt, to the great terror and amazement of all beholders; Which Church, the
largest in the Christian world for all dimensions, contains in length 720 foot,
or 240 Tailors yards, in breadth 130 foot, and in height from the pavement to
the top of the roof 150 foot. The Steeple from the ground to the cross or
Weathercock contained in height 520 foo^, of which the square Tower only
amounted to 260. the Pyramid or Spire to as many more. Which Spire being raised
of ma^^ie Timber, and covered over with sheets of Lead, as it was the more apt
to be inflamed, so was the mischief more incapable of a present remedy. The
terror being over, most men began to cast about for the first occasion of such
a miserable misfortune; the generality of the Zuinglian or Genevian party
affirmed it for a just judgment of God upon an old idolatrous Fabric, not
thoroughly reformed and purged from its Superstitions, and would have been
content that all other Cathedrals in the Kingdom had been so destroyed. The
Papists on the other side ascribe it to some practice of the Zuinglian faction,
out of their hatred unto all solemnity and decency in the service of God,
performed more punctually in that Church, for examples sake, than in any other
of the Kingdom. But generally it was ascribed by the common people to a flash
of lightning, or some such sudden fire from heaven, though neither any
lightning had been seen, or any clap of thunder had been heard that day. Which
fiction notwithstanding got such credit amongst the vulgar, and amongst wiser
persons too, that the burning of St. Paul's Steeple by lightning was reckoned
amongst the ordinary Epoches or accounts of time in our common Almanacks; and
so it stood till within these thirty years now last past, when an old Plumber
at his death confessed that woeful accident to have happened through his
negligence only, in leaving carelessly a pan of coals and other fuel in the
Steeple when he went to dinner, which catching hold of the dry timber in the
Spire before his return, was grown so dangerous, that it was not possible to be
quenched, and therefore to no purpose (as he conceived) to make any words of
it. Since which discovery, that ridiculous Epoche has no more been heard of.

But the Queen quickly hearing what a great misfortune had befallen the City,
regarded not the various reports of either party, but bent her thoughts upon
the speedy reparation of those fearful ruins; And knowing right well (without
the help of an Informer) that the Patrimony of that Church had been so wasted
in these latter times, that neither the Bishop, nor the Dean and Chapter were
able to contribute any thing proportionable to so vast a charge; She directed
her Letters to the Lord Mayor and city of London to take care therein, as most
concerned in the preservation of their Mother Church, and in the honor of their
City. In obedience to whose Royal pleasure, the citizens granted a Benevolence
and three Fifteens to be speedily paid, besides the extraordinary bounty of
particular persons, or was to be issued from the chamber. And that they might
proceed therein with the greater zeal, the Queen sent in a thousand Marks in
ready money, and warrants for one thousand load of timber to be served out of
her Majesty's woods. Encouraged by which brave example, the Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury contributed toward the furtherance of the work, the
fortieth part of their Benefices which stood charged with first fruits, and the
thirtieth part of those which had paid the same. The Clergy of the Diocese of
London bestowing the thirtieth part of such of their Livings as were under the
burden of that payment, and the twentieth part of those which were not. To
which the Bishop added at several times the sum of 900 l 1 s. 11 d. the Dean
and Chapter 136 l. 13 s. 4 d. By which and some other little helps (the
benevolence, the three fifteens, and the contributions of the Bishop and
Clergy, with the aid aforesaid, amounting to no more than 6702 l. 13 s. 4 d.)
the work was carried on so fast, that before the end of April 1566. the timber
work of the roof was not only fitted, but completely covered. The raising of a
new spire was taken also into consideration, but conceived unnecessary; but
whether because it was too chargeable, or that some feared it might prove a
temptation, is not yet determined.

And now the season of the year invites the Popes Nuncio into England, advanced
already in his way as far as Flanders, and there expecting the Queens pleasure
touching his admittance; For the Pope always constant to his resolutions, could
not be taken off from sending his Nuncio to the Queen, with whom he conceived
himself to stand upon terms of amity. It had been much labored by the
Guisiards and Spanish faction to divert him from it, by telling him that it
would be an undervaluing of his power and person, to send a Nunc^o into
England, or to any other Princes of the same persuasions, who openly professed
a separation from the Sea of Rome. To which he made this prudent and pious
answer, that he would humble himself even to Heresy it self; in regard that
whatsoever was done to gain souls to Christ, did beseem that See. And to this
resolution he adhered the rather, because he had been told and assured by Karn
the old English Agent, that his Nuncio would be received by one half of the
Kingdom with the Queens consent. But as it proved, they reckoned both without
their Host and Hostess too, who desired not to give entertainment unto any such
guests. For having designed the Abbot Martiningo to this employment, and the
Abbot being advanced as far as Flanders, as before was said, he there received
the Queens command not to cross the seas. Upon advertisement whereof, as well
the King of Spain himself, as Ferdinand of Toledo Duke of Alva, (the most
powerful Minister of that King) did earnestly entreat that he might be heard;
commending the cause of his Legation, as visibly conducing to the union of all
the Christian Church in a general Council. But the Queen persevered in her
first intent, affirming she could not treat with the Bishop of Rome, whose
authority was excluded out of England by consent of Parliament. Nor had the
Popes Nuncio in France any better fortune in treating with Throgmorton the
English Agent in that Court, to advance the business; who though he did solicit
by his Letters both the Queen and the Council, to give some satisfaction in
that point to the French and Spaniards, (though not unto the Pope himself)
could get no other answer from them, but the same denial.

For so it was, that on the first noise of the Nuncio's coming, the business
had been taken into consideration at the Council Table, and strongly pleaded on
both sides, as men's judgments varied. By some it was alleged in favor of the
Nuncio's coming, that Pope Pius was nothing of so rugged a nature, as his
Predessor; that he had made a fair address unto the Queen by his last years
Letters; that his designs did most apparently tend to the peace of
Christendom; that the admitting of the Nuncio was a matter which (...)
nothing, it being ^^ill left in her Majesty's power, whether she would embrace
or reject his Overtures; but that the refusing to admit him to a public
audience, was the most ready way to disoblige all Catholic Princes, with whom
she stood at that time in terms of amity. On the other side it was alleged,
that King Henry, a most prudent Prince, had formerly protested against the
calling of this Council by Pope Paul the 3d. who did as much pretend to the
peace of Christendom, as the Pope now being; that to admit a Minister of the
Pope, in the quality or capacity of a Nuncio, inferred a ^acit acknowledgement
of that sup^emacy, whereof he had been deprived by Act of Parliament; that the
Popes of Rome have always raised great advantages by the smallest concessions,
and therefore that it was most expedient for the good of the Kingdom, to keep
him always at a distance; that Queen Mary in favor only unto P^l^, refused to
give admittance to Cardinal Peitow, though coming from the Pope in quality of a
Legate a Late^^e; that a great part of the people were in coffeehouse with
the change of Religion, and wanted nothing but such an opportunity to break out
into action, as the Nuncio's presence might afford them; and therefore that it
concerned the Queen to be as zealous for Religion and the weal of her people,
as her sister the late Queen Mary was in maintenance of Cardinal Pole and his
private authority. And to say truth, the greatest obstacle in the way of the
Nuncio's coming, was partly laid in it by the indiscretion of some Papists in
England, and partly by the precipitancy of the Popes Ministers in Ireland. For
so it was, that the only noise of the coming of a Nuncio from the Pope, had
wrought in sundry evil-disposed persons such a courage and boldness, that they
did not only break the Laws made against the Pope and his authority, with great
audacity, but spread abroad false and slanderous reports, that the Queen was at
the point to change her Religion, and alter the government of the Realm. Some
also had adventured further, even to a practicing with the Devil by
conjurations, charms, and casting of Figures, to be informed in the length and
continuance of her majesty's Reign. And on the other side, the Popes Legate
being at the same time in Ireland, not only joined himself to some desperate
Traitors, who busied themselves in stirring up rebellion there, but for as much
as in him was, had deprived her Majesty of all Right and Title to that Kingdom.
Upon which grounds it was carried clearly by the Board against the Nuncio. Nor
would they vary from the Vote upon the intercession of the French, the
Spaniard, or (whose displeasure was more dangerous) of the Duke of Alva.

Nothing discouraged with the repulse which had been given to the French and
Spaniard, the Emperor Ferdinand must make trial of his fortune also, not as
they did, in favor of the Nuncio's coming, but in persuading her to return to
the old Religion. To this end he exhorts her by his Letters in a friendly way,
not to relinquish the Communion of so many Catholic Kings and Princes, and her
own Ancestors into the bargain; nor to prefer her single judgment, and the
judgment of a few private persons, and those not the most learned neither,
before the judgment and determination of the Church of Christ. That if she
were resolved to persist in her own opinion, she should deal favorably with so
many reverend and Religious Prelates as she kept in prison, and which she kept
in prison for no other reason but for adhering unto that Religion which himself
professed; and, finally he entreats most earnestly, that she would set apart
some Churches to the use of the Catholics, in which they might with freedom
exercise their own Religion, according to the Rites and Doctrines of the Church
of Rome. To which desires she made a full and sufficient answer, by satisfying
him touching her merciful dealing with those Bishops, whom for their obstinacy
and many other weighty reasons, she had deprived of their preferments in the
Church. And to the rest she answered, That she had settled her Religion on so
sure a bottom, that she could not easily be changed; that she doubted not but
that she had many learned men in her Dominions, which were able to defend the
doctrine by them taught, against all Opponents; and that for granting any
Churches to the use of the Papists, it was a point so contrary to the polity
and good Laws of the Land, that she desired to be excused for not yielding to
it. In which last she seemed to have an eye upon the Edict of the Emperor
Constantine, touching the meetings of the Marcionites, Novatians, Valentinians,
and other Heretics of that age; In which it was enjoined, that none of them
should from thenceforth hold any assemblys, and that for the more certain
conforming unto his Decree, those Churches or other houses whatsoever they
were, in which they used to hold their Meetings, should be demolished to the
ground, to the end that there might be no place in which such men as were
devoted to their superstitious faction, might have the opportunity of
assembling together. For which the Reader may consult Eusebius in the life of
Constantine, l. b. 3. cap. 63. But that it might appear both to him and others,
that she was ready to show all just favors, she laid a most severe command
upon all her Officers, for the full payment of all such pensions, as had been
granted unto all such Abbots, Monks and Friars, in the time of her father, as
were not since preferred in the Church to cures or dignities. And this to be
performed to the utmost farthing, on pain of her most high displeasure in
neglect thereof.

It could not be but that the governing of her affairs with such an even and
steady hand, though it occasioned admiration in some, must needs create both
envy and displeasure in the hearts of other Christian Princes, from none of
which she had a juster cause to fear some practice, than the King of Spain, or
rather from the fierce and intemperate Spirit of the Duke of Alva, as appeared
afterward when he was made Lord Deputy, or Vicegerent of the Belgic
Provinces. They had both showed themselves offended, because their intercession
in behalf of the Nuncio had found no better entertainment; and when great
persons are displeased, it is no hard matter for them to revenge themselves, if
they find their adversaries either weak or not well provided. But the Queen
looked so well about her, as not to be taken tardy in either kind. For which
end she augments her store of Arms and Ammunition, and all things necessary for
the defense of her Kingdom; which course she had happily begun in the year
foregoing. But holding it a safer maxim in the Schools of Polity, not to admit,
than to endeavor by strong hand to expel an enemy, She entertains some
fortunate thoughts of walling her Kingdom round about with a puissant Navy, for
Merchants had already increased their shipping, by managing some part of that
wealthy trade which formerly had been monopolized by the Ha^se or Easterlings.
And she resolves not to be wanting to her self in building ships of such a
burden, and so fit for service, as might enable her in short time, not only to
protect her Merchants, but command the Ocean. Of which the Spaniard found good
proof to his great loss, and almost to his total ruin, in the last 20 years of
her glorious government. And knowing right well that money was the ^inew of war,
she fell upon a prudent and present course to fill her coffers. Most of the
moneys in the Kingdom were of foreign coynage, brought hither for the most part
by the Easterling and Flemish Merchants. These she called in by Proclamation,
^^ted the 15th. of November (being but two days before the end of this 3d.
year) commanding them to be brought to her Majesty's Mint, there to be coined,
and take the stamp of her Royal authority, or otherwise not to pass for current
within this Realm, which counsel took such good effect, that moneys came
flowing into the Mint, insomuch that there was weekly brought into the Tower of
London, for the space of half a year together, 8000. 10000. 12000. 16000.
20000. 22000 l. of silver plate, and as much more in Pistols, and other gold of
Spanish coins, which were great sums according to the standard of those early
days, and therefore no small profit to be growing to her by the coynage of
them.

The Genevians slept not all this while, but were as busily employed in
practicing upon the Church, as were the Romanists in plotting against the
Queen. Nothing would satisfy them, but the nakedness and simplicity of the
Zuinglian Churches, the new fashions taken up at Franckfort, and the
Presbyteries of Geneva. According to the pattern which they saw in those
mounts, the Church of England is to be modeled; nor would the Temple of
Jerusalem have served their turn, if a new Altar fashioned by that which they
found at Damascus, might not have been erected in it. And they drove on so fast
upon it, that in some places they had taken down the steps where the A^tar
stood, and brought the Holy Table into the midst of the Church; in others they
had laid aside the ancient use of Godfathers and Godmothers in the
administration of Baptism, and left the answering for the child to the charge
of the father. The weekly Fasts, the time of Lent, and all other days of
abstinence by the Church commanded, were looked upon as superstitious
observations. No fast by them allowed of but occasional only, and then too of
their own appointing. And the like course they took with the Festivals also,
neglecting those which had been instituted by the Church, as humane inventions,
not fit to be retained in a Church reformed. And finally, that they might wind
in there outlandish Doctrines with such foreign usages, they had procured some
of the inferior Ordinaries to impose upon their several Parishes, certain new
books of Sermons and Expositions of the holy Scripture, which neither were
required by the Queens Injunctions, nor by Act of Parliament. Some abuses also
were discovered in the Regular Clergy, who served in Churches of peculiar or
exempt jurisdiction. Amongst whom it began to grow too ordinary, to marry all
such as came unto them, without Bains or License, and many times not only
without the privity, but against the express pleasure and command of their
Parents. For which those Churches past by the name of Lawless Churches in the
voice of the people.

For remedy whereof it was found necessary by the Archbishop of Canterbury, to
have recourse unto the power which was given unto him by the Queens Commission,
and by a clause or passage of the Act of Parliament for the Uniformity of
Common Prayer and Service in the Church, etc. As one of the Commissioners for
Causes Ecclesiastical, he was authorized with the rest of his associates,
according to the Statute made in that behalf, To reform, redress, order,
correct and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Schisms, abuses, offenses,
con^empts and enormities whatsoever, as might from time to time arise in the
Church of England, and did require to be redressed and reformed to the pleasure
of Almighty God, the increase of virtue, and conservation of the peace and
unity of the Kingdom. And in the passage of the Act before remembered, it was
especially provided, That all such Ornaments of the Church, and of the
Ministers thereof, should be retained and be in use, as were in the Church of
England by authority of Parliament, in the second year of the Reign of King
Edward the 6th. until further Order should be therein taken by authority of the
Queens Majesty, with the advice of her Commissioners Appointed and Ordered
under the Great Seal of England for Causes Ecclesiastical, or of the
Metropolitan of this Realm. And also if there shall happen any contempt or
irreverence to be used in the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, by the
misusing of the Orders of the said Book of Common Prayer; the Queens Majesty
might by the like advice of the said Commissioners or Metropolitan, Ordain or
publish such further Ceremonies or Rites, as should be most for the advance of
Gods glory, the edifying of his Church, and the due reverence of Christ's holy
Mysteries and Sacraments.

Fortified and assured by which double power, the Archbishop by the Queens
consent, and the advice of some of the Bishops, Commissionated and instructed
to the same intent, sets forth a certain book of Orders to be diligently
observed and executed by all and singular persons whom it might concern. In
which it was provided, That no Parson, Vicar or Curate of any exempt Church,
(commonly called Lawless Churches) should from thenceforth attempt to conjoin,
by solemnization of Matrimony, any not being of his or their Parish Church,
without sufficient testimony of the Bains being asked in the several Churches
where they dwell, or otherwise were sufficiently licenced. That there should be
no other days observed for Holy days or Fasting days, as of duty and
commandment, but only such Holy days as be expressed for Holy days in the
Calendar lately set forth by the Queens authority; and none other Fasting days
to be so commanded, but as the Laws and Proclamations of the Queens Majesty
should appoint; that it should not be lawful to any Ordinary, to assign or
enjoin the Parishes to buy any Books of Sermons or Expositions in any sort,
than is already, or shall be hereafter appointed by public Authority; that
neither the Curates, or Parents of the children which are brought to Baptism,
should answer for them at the Font, but that the ancient use of Godfathers and
Godmothers should be still retained; and finally, that in all such Churches in
which the steps to the Altar were not taken down, the said steps should remain
as before they did; that the Communion Table should be set in the said place
where the steps then were, or had formerly stood; and that the Table of Gods
Precepts should be fixed upon the wall over the said Communion Board. Which
passage compared with that in the Advertisements, published in the year 1565.
(of which more hereafter) make up this construction, that the Communion Table
was to stand above the steps, and under the Commandments; and therefore all
along the wall, on which the ten Commandments were appointed to be placed,
which was directly where the Altar had stood before. Some other Innovations and
disorders had been obtruded on the Church at the same time also by those of the
Genevian faction; for the suppressing whereof, before they should prescribe to
any Antiquity, the like course was taken. But what those Innovations and
disorders were, will easily be seen by the perusal of the Orders themselves,
which were then published in Print by the Queens command; as a judicious
Apothecary is able to conjecture by the Doctors Recipe at the distemper of the
Patient, and the true quality of the disease.

Nothing else memorable in this year of a public nature, but the foundation of
the Merchant-Taylors School in London, first founded by the Master, Warden and
Assistants of the Company of Merchant-Taylors, whence it had the name, and by
them founded for a seminary to St John's in Oxon, built and endowed at the sole
costs and charges of one of their Livery. The School kept in a fair large house
in the Parish of St Laurence Poutney, heretofore called the Manor of Roose,
belonging to the Dukes of Ruckingham; toward the purchase and accommodating
whereof to the present use, five hundred pounds was given by one Richard Hills,
who had been once Master of the Company, and still lives in the charity of so
good a work. The day of the foundation is affirmed by Stow to have been the 21
of March, and so may either fall in the year 1560. or 1561. according to the
several computations which are now in use; but howsoever within the compass of
this third year of the Queen. And it is probable, that it may be fixed by him
upon that day, either because the purchase of the House does bear date upon it,
or because it was then first opened for a Grammar School. And of this kind, but
of a far more private nature, was the foundation of another Grammar School in
the Town of Sandwich, built at the charge of Sir Roger Manwood, and endowed
with 40 l. per annum, which was a very large allowance as the times then were.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 4. A. D. 1561, 1562.
GReat preparations had been made in the former year in order to the holding
and continuance of the Council of Trent, An. Reg. Eliz. 4. 1561.
many Italian Bishops (which were to be maintained at the Popes charge) being
sent before, and the Popes Legates hastening after, to be there in readiness when
the Ambassadors and Prelates of foreign Nations should give attendance on the
same; 1561/2.
After long expectation it begins at the last on the 18th. of January, the
Legates having first obtained in a private Session, that nothing should be
discussed in the Council but what should be first proposed by them; which in
effect was to subvert the whole hopes of that Reformation, which was desired by
many pious men amongst them. Which day being come, a Pro^ession was made of the
whole Clergy of the city, of the Divines and Prelates, (who besides the
Caroinals were 112 that did wear Miters) accompanied by their families, and by
many country people armed, going from St. Peter's Church to the Cathedral, where
the Cardinal of Mantua sung the Mass of the holy Ghost, and Gasparo del Fosso
Archbishop of Rheggio made the Sermon; his subject was the Authority of the
Church, Primacy of the Pope, and Power of Councils; He said, That the Church
had as much authority as the Word of God, that the Church has changed the
Sabbath ordained by God, into Sunday, and taken away Circumcision, formerly
commanded by Divine Majesty, and that these precepts are changed, not by the
preaching of Christ, but by the authority of the Church. Turning himself unto
the Fathers, he exhorted them to labor constantly against the Protestants,
being assured, that as the Holy Ghost could not err, so neither could they be
deceived. And having sung the Hymn of Come holy Ghost, the Secretary, who was
Bishop of Tilesie, read the Bull of the Convocation, and the foresaid
Archbishop propounded the Decree for opening the Council, saying, Fathers, does
it please you that the General Council of Trent should be celebrated from this
day, all suspension whatsoever being removed, to handle with due order that
which shall seem fit to the Synod, the Legates and Presidents prop^sing, to
remove the controversies of Religion, correct Manners, and reconcile the Peace
of the Church? To which they answered Placet with so full a vote, that there
were found no more than four Bishops, and those four all Spaniards, who
stumbled at the clause about discussing nothing in the time of that Council,
but what the Legates should propose; so servile were the rest, in prostituting
the Authority of the Council to the lust of the Pope.

In the first opening of the Council it was propounded by the Legates amongst
other things, Whether a safe conduct should be given unto those who were fallen
into heresy, with a large promise of great and singular clemency, so that they
would repent, and acknowledge the power of the Catholic Church. In the
discussing of which point, the Cardinal of Man^ua was for the affirmative,
seeing that it was a remedy used by all Princes, in Seditions or Rebellions, to
pardon those whom they could not overcome, because by that means, those which
were least faulty did retire, and the other did remain more weak. But as for
the safe conduct, after it had been considered of and resolved at Rome, it was
again disputed in the Council on the third of March, whether it was to be given
by name to the French, English, and Scots, and some spoke of the Greeks and
other Nations of the East. It was presently seen, that these poor men,
afflicted in servitude, could not without danger and assistance of money think
of counsels; And some said* that there being a division of the Protestants, it
was good to let them alone, and not to name them, alleging the danger of moving
ill humors in a body which was then quiet. To give a safe conduct to the
Englishmen, which neither they nor any of them did require, would be a great
indignity; they were content it should be given to the Scots, because their
Queen would demand it, but so, as that the demand should first be made. For
France there was a doubt made, An. Reg. Eliz. 4. 1560.
whether the Kings Council would take it ill or not, because it would be
thought to be a declaration that that King had Rebels. Of Germany none would
doubt, because it had been formerly granted unto them; and if it were granted
to that Nation alone, it would seem that the others were abandoned. But at the
last, all difficulties were resolved into this conclusion, that the safe
conduct should be given unto those of Germany in the same words wherein it
formerly had passed, An. 1552. and that the like conduct in the self-same words
wherein it was given to the Germans, should be given to all of every Nation,
Province, City and Place, where any thing was preached, taught, and believed,
contrary to that which was believed in the Church of Rome.

But the Legates might have spared themselves the trouble of these
considerations, the Protestant Bishops of England not being so forward to
venture themselves into that Council on such weak assurance, considering how
ill the safe conduct had been formerly kept to John Hus and Jerome of Prague at
the Council of Constance: And as for those of the Papal party, though they
might have a good will to be gadding thither, yet the Queen kept them safe
enough from going abroad. So that there was no hopes for any English Bishops of
either party to attend that service; The Queen had absolutely refused to admit
the Nunci^, when he was sent on purpose to invite them to it. And some of the
most learned of that sacred Order had shown sufficient reasons in their printed
Manifest, why no such service or attendance could be looked for from them. One
Scipio, a Gentleman of Venice, who formerly had some acquaintance with Bishop
Jewel when he was a student in Padua, had heard of Martiningo's ill success in
his Negotiation, which notwithstanding, he resolved to spend some eloquence in
laboring to obtain that point by his private Letters, which the Nuncio could
not gain as a public Minister; And to this end he writes his Letters of
expostulation to his old friend Mr. Jewel, preferred not long before to the Sea
of Salisbury, in which he seemed to admire exceedingly that England should send
no Ambassador, nor Message, or Letter, to excuse their Nations absence from the
general Appearance of Christianity in that Sacred Council, In the next place,
he highly extolled the antiquity and use of General Councils, as the only
means to decide controversies in Religion, and compose the distractions in the
Church, concluding it a superlative sin for any to decline the authority of it.
But this Letter did not long remain unanswered, that learned Prelate was not so
unstudied in the nature of ^ouncils, as not to know how little of a General
Council could be found at Trent; And therefore he returns an Answer to the
Proposition, so eloquently penned, and so elaborately digested* that neither
Scipio himself, nor any other of that party, durst reply upon him; the Answer
to be found at large in the end of the history of this Council, translated into
English by Sir Nathaniel Brent, late Warden of Merton College in Oxon, etc.
which though it were no other than the Answer of one single Prelate, and writ
on a particular occasion to ^ private friend, yet since it speaks the sense of
all the rest of the (...), and to justify the result of the Council Table on
the debate about (...) or refusing the Popes invitation, it will not be amiss
to present the sum and substance of it in a short Epitome.

In the first place he signifies to the said Scip^o, that a great part of the
world professing the name of Christ (as Greeks, Armenians, Ab^ssines, etc. with
all the Eastern Church) were neither sent ^o nor summoned to this Council.
Secondly, That England's absence was not so great a wonder, seeing many other
Kingdoms and Free states (as Denmark, Sweden, Scotland, Princes of Germany, and
Hanse-towns) were not represented in this Council by any of their Ambassadors.
Thirdly* That this pretended Council was not called according to the ancient
custom of the Church, by the Imperial Authority, but by the Papal Usurpation.
Fourthly, That Trent was a petty place, not of sufficient receipt for such
multitudes as necessarily should repair to a General Council. Fifthly, That
Pope Pius the 4th. by whose command the Council was re-assembled, purcha^^d his
place by the unjust practices of Simonie and Briberie, and managed it with
murder and cruelty. Sixthly, That repairing to Councils was a free act, and
none ought to be condemned of Contumacy, if it stood more with their
convenience to stay at home. Seventhly, That anciently it was accepted as a
reasonable excuse of holy Pis^ops, absenting or withdrawing themselves from any
Council, if they vehemently suspected ought would be acted therein prejudicial
to the truth, lest their (though not actual) included concurrence might be
interpreted a countenancing thereof. Eighthly, That our Bishops were employed
in feeding their Flocks, and governing their Churches, and could not be spared
from their charge without prejudice to their consciences. Ninthly, That the
Members of that Council of Trent, both Bishops and Abbots, were by Oath
pregaged to the Pope, To defend and maintain his authority against all the
world. And lastly, He desired to know in what capacity the English Clergy
should appear in this Council, not as free persons to debate matters therein,
in regard they had been pre-condemned as Heretics by Pope Julius the 3d. nor
as offenders to receive the sentence of condemnation, to which they had no
reason to submit themselves.

Of these refusals and the reasons of them, neither the Pope at Rome, nor the
Cardinal Leg^ts in the Council could pretend to be ignorant, yet still the
expectation of the coming of some English Bishops must be kept on foot, partly
for the encouragement of such as were there already, and partly for the drawing
on of others who came slowly forwards, and sometimes also it was used for an
artifice to divert the Prelates when any business was in agitation which seemed
dangerous to them. For so it happened, that some of the Prelates being earnest in
the point of Residence, none of the Legates could devise a better expedient to
put off that Question, than to propose that some means should be used to set at
liberty the English Bishops which were imprisoned by their Queen, that coming
to the Council it might be said, that that noble Nation was present also, and
not wholly alienated from the Church. This pleased all, but the common opinion
was, that it might sooner be desired than hoped for: They concluded, that the
Queen having refused to receive a Nuncio expressly sent from the Pope, it could
not be hoped that she would hearken to the Council; therefore all they could do
was, to persuade the Catholic Princes to mediate for them: And mediate though
they did, as before was said, both for the admitting of the Nuncio, and the
restoring of those Bishops to their former liberty, they were not able to
prevail, especially as to the licensing of any of them to attend the Council;
which if the Queen had yielded to, she must have armed so many of her enemies
to disturb her peace, who questionless would have practiced with the
Ambassadors of all Princes, and with the Prelates of all Nations whom they
found there present, to work some notable alteration in the Government and
affairs of England. Of all the Bishops which were left in England at the end of
the Parliament, I find none but Pates of Worcester and Goldnel of St. Asaph who
forsook the Kingdom, though possibly many of the rest might have done so also,
if they had not either been well watched, or trusted upon their Parol to be
forth-comming (as the phrase is) upon all occasions. And though I find the name
of Pates subscribed to some of the former Sessions, yet it is not to be found
to this, the man being of a moderate and gentle spirit, and possibly not
willing to engage himself in any Counsels which might prove detrimental to his
native country; And as for Goldnel, though his zeal to Popery was strong enough
to carry him beyond the Seas, yet it did not carry him so far as Trent, there
being so many retireing places nearer home in which he might repose himself
with more contentment.

But leaving the Fathers in Trent to expect the coming of the holy Ghost in a
cloak-bag from Rome, according to the common scorn which was put upon them, we
must prepare our selves for England, first taking in our way the affairs of
France, which now began to take up a great part of the thoughts of the Queen
and her Council. The Reformed Religion had made some entrance in that kingdom
during the Reign of king ^rancis the first, An. Reg. Eliz. 4. 1562.
exceedingly dispersed and propagated in most parts thereof, notwithstanding
the frequent Martyrdoms of particular persons, the great and terrible Massacres
of whole Townships, Commonalties, and Churches, even by hundreds and thousands
in diverse places of the Realm. To which increase, the fickle nature of the
French, the diligence of their Preachers, and the near neighborhood of Genev^,
were of great advantage; all which advantages were much improved by the
authority and reputation which Calvin carried in those Churches, and the
contentment which the people took in a form of Government, wherein they were to
have a share by the rules of their Discipline, and thereby draw the managery of
affairs unto themselves. Being grown numerous in the City of Tours, and not
permitted to enjoy the liberty of assembling within the walls, they held their
meetings, at a village not far off, for their public Devotions; the way to
which leading through the gate of St. Hugo is thought to have occasioned the
name of Hugonots, which others think to have been given them by reason of their
frequent nightly meetings, resembled by the French to the walking of a
Night-spirit which they called St. Hugh; but from what ground soever it came,
it grew in short time to be generally given as a byname to those which
professed the Reformed Religion, (whether in France or elsewhere) after
Calvin's platform. Their numbers not diminished by so many butcheries, gave
them the reputation of a party both stout and active, which rendered them the
subject of some jealousy to the Roman Catholics, and specially to those of
the House of Guise, who labored nothing more than their extirpation. But this
severity sorted to no other effect than to confirm them in their Doctrines, and
attract many others to them, who disdained to see poor people drawn every day
to the Stake to be burned, guilty of nothing but of zeal to worship God, and to
save their own souls: To whom were joined many others, who thinking the
Guisiards to be the cause of all the disorders in the Kingdom, judged it an
Heroic Act to deliver it from oppression, by taking the public Administration
out of their hands.

But nothing more increased their party than the accession of alm^st all the
Princes of the Blood of the House of Burbon, the Chiefs whereof were the Duke
of Vendosm, (who called himself King of Navarr in right of his Wife) the
Princes of Conde, the Duke of Montpensier, who finding themselves neglected by
the Queen Mother, and oppressed by the Guisiards, retired in no small
discontments from the Court, and being otherwise unable to make good their
quarrels, offered themselves as Leaders of the H^gonot-faction, who very
cheerfully submitted to their rule and conduct. The better to confirm their
minds, they caused the principal Lawyers of Germany and France, and the most
famous Protestant Divines, to publish in writing, that without violating the
Majesty of the King, and the dignity of the lawful Magistrate, they might
oppose with Arms the violent Domination of the House of Guise, who did not
only labor to suppress the true Religion, and obstruct the free passage of
Justice, but seemed to keep the King in prison. Having thus formed their Party
in the minority of King ^rancis the second, their first design was, that a
great multitude should appear before the King without Arms, to demand, that the
severity of the judgments might be mitigated, and liberty of conscience
granted; intending that they should be followed by Gentlemen, who should make
supplication against the Government of the Guisiards. But the purpose being
made known to the Court, the King was removed from Blo^s ^n open Town, to the
strong Castle of Amboise, as if he could not otherwise be safe from some
present Treason: After which followed a strict inquiry after all those who had
a hand in the design, the punishment of some, and the flight of others, with
the conclusion taken up by the Guisian faction, to settle the Spanish
Inquisition in the Realm of France. To pacify the present troubles, an Edict
is published by the King on the 18th. of March 1560, (in the French account)
for the pardoning of all, who simply moved with the zeal of Religion, had
engaged in the supposed conspiracy, upon condition that they disarmed within 24
hours; and after that another Edict, by which a general pardon was indulged to
all Reformati^^^, but so, that all assemblies under the color of Religion were
prohibited by it, and a charge laid upon the Bishops to take unto themselves
the cognizance of all causes of Heresy in their several Diocesses. But this so
little edified with those of that party, that greater tumults were occasioned
by it, in Provence, Languedock, and Poicto^. To which places the Ministers of
Geneva were called, who most willingly came. By whose Sermons the number of
Protestants so increased in those Provinces, and by their Agents in most
others, that in this year 1562. they were distributed into two thousand one
hundred and fifty Churches, as appeared upon a just computation of them.

But in the midst of these improvements, the power and reputation of the side
was shrewdly weakened by the falling off of Anthony Duke of Vendosme, and King
of (...), who did not only openly forsake the party, but afterward joined
himself in counsel and design against it with the Duke of Guise. The found^ing
of so great a pillar, threatened a quick ruin to the fabric, if some other
butteress were not found to support the same. The war was carried on from one
place to another, but seemed to aim most at the reduction of Normand^, where
the Hugono^s had possessed themselves of some Towns and Cas^les, by which they
might be able to distress the City of Paris, and thereby make a great
impression on the rest of the Kingdom. It was thereupon advised by Lewis Prince
of Co^de, the Cardinal Chastilion, and other of the principal Leaders. that
they should put themselves under the protection of the Queen of England, wh^
had not long before so seasonably relieved the Scots in the like distress. No
better counsel being offered, nor any hope of succor to be had elsewhere, the
Vidame of Chartresse, Governor at that time of the Port of Newhaven, together
with the Bayli^^ of Rowen, the Seneshal of Diep, and others, made their address
unto the Queen in the name of the Prince of Conde, and of all the rest of the
Confederates, who professed the Gospel in that Kingdom; they proffered to her
the said Towns whereof they had charge, if it would please her Majesty to
further their proceedings in defense of the Gospel (as they called it.) And
seemed to justify their offer by a public acknowledgement, that her Majesty
was not only true inheritour to those Towns, but also to the whole Kingdom of
France. But neither their coming, not their message was unknown unto her, who
had been secretly advertised of all passages there by Sir Nicholas Throgmorton,
a vigilant and dexterous man, who being her Majesty's Resident in that Kingdom,
had driven the bargain before hand, and made all things in readiness against
their coming. Nor was the Queen hard to be entreated to appear in that cause
which seemed so much to her advantage. She was not ignorant of the pretensions
of the Queen of Scots, and the practices of her Uncles of the House of Gu^se to
advance her interess. Who if they should possess themselves of all the
strengths in the Dukedom of Normandy, might from thence find an easy passage
into England, when she least looked for them.

On these and other considerations of the like importance, it was agreed upon
between them, that the Queen should supply the Prince of Conde and his
associates, with a sufficient quantity of money, corn, and ammunition, for the
service of the French King, against the plots and practices of the House of
Guise; that she should aid them with her forces both by land and sea, for the
taking in of such Castles, Towns, and Ports, as were possessed by the faction
of the said Duke; that the said Prince of Conde and his associates should not
come to any terms of peace with the opposite party, without the privity and
approbation of the Queen; and that as well for securing the payment of all such
moneys, as for the safe going in and out of all such forces as her Majesty
should supply them with, the Town and Port of Newhaven should be put unto her
Majesty's hands, to be garrisoned by English soldiers, and commanded by any
person of quality, whom her Majesty should authorize to keep and defend the
same. Immediately on which accord, a Manifest was published in the name of the
Queen; in which it was declared, how much she had preferred the peace of
Christendom before her own particular intere^s; that in persuance of that
general affection to the public peace, she had relinquished her claim to the
Town of Calais for the term of eight years, when as all other Princes were
restored by that Treaty to their lost estates; that for the same reasons she
had undertaken to preserve the Scots from being made vassals to the French,
without retaining any part of that Kingdom in her own possession after the
service was performed; that with the like bowels of commiseration, she had
observed how much the Queen Mother of France was awed, and the young King
himself inthralled by the Guisian faction, who in their names, and under
pretense of their authority, endeavored to root out the professors of the
Reformed Religion; that in persuance of that purpose, they had caused such
terrible massacres to be made at Vassey, Paris, Seen, Toulouse, ^loys, Towers,
Angier^, and other places, that there were thought to be butchered no fewer
than one hundred thousand of the natural French, between the first of March
and the 20th. of August then last past; that with like violence and injustice,
they had treated such of her Majesty's subjects as traded in the Ports of
Bretagne, whom they caused to be apprehended, spoiled, and miserably
imprisoned, such as endeavored to preserve themselves to be cruelly killed,
their goods and merchandise to be seized, without charging any other crime upon
them, but that they were H^gono^s; and finally, that in consideration of the
Premises, her Majesty could do no less than use her best endeavors for rescuing
the French King and his Mother, out of the power of that dangerous faction, for
aiding such of the French subjects as preferred the service of their King, and
the good of their Country, before all other respects whatsoever, for preserving
the Reformed Religion from an universal destruction, and the maintaining of her
own subjects and Dominions in peace and safety.

Nor did she only publish the afo^esaid Manifest, the better to satisfy all
those whom it might concern in the reasons of her taking arms upon this
occasion, but she gives a more particul^^ account of it to the King of Spain,
whom she considered as the chief Patron of the Guisian League. And knowing how
unsafe it was for her to appear alone in a cause of that nature and importance,
she deals by Knollis and other of her Agents, with the Princes of Germany, to
give their timely assistan^e to the Prince of Conde, in maintenance of that
Religion which themselves professed. But howsoever, not expecting the success
of those counsels, she proceeds to the supplying of the said Prince and his
party, with all things necessary for the war, and sends over a sufficient
strength of ships, arms, and men, as well to scour the seas, as secure the
land. The men amounting to 6000, were divided into two equal parts, of which
the one was destined to the defense of Rowen and Diepe, then being in the hands
of the Confederates; the other to take possession of the Town of Newhaven,
which by the Townsmen and Inhabitants was joyfully surrendered into the hands
of the English. The Town commodiously seated at the mouth of the Seine, and
having the command of a spacious Bay, in former times not much observed or
esteemed. But being more carefully considered of by King Francis the first, he
ca^sed the Bay to be enlarged, the passages into i^ cleared, and the entrances
of it to be strongly fortified; which falling into the hands of any enemy,
might have destroyed the trade of Rowen and Paris, being both built upon the
River. Called for this reason Franciscopolis, by our Latin Writers, Newhaven
by the English Merchant, and Haver d' Grace (by reason of the beauty of it)
amongst the French, it has been looked on ever since as a place of
consequence. For her Commander in Chief, she sends over the Lord Ambrose
Dudley, the eldest son then living of the late Duke of Northumberland, whom on
the 26th. of December, she had created Lord Lisl^, and Earl of Warwick. And he
accordingly preparing for his passage over, took shipping at Portsmouth on the
17th. of October, but was so hindered by cross winds, that he could not reach
the Town till the 29th. where he was solemnly received with a peal of Ordnance.
On the morrow after he received into the Town a Troop of Lighthorse-men, all
Scots, and of the Regiment of Count Montgomery, which were sent to him from the
Port of Diep; and the next day he took the Oath of his principal Officers, on
whose fidelity and courage the saf^ty of the place seemed most to depend. On
the 4th. of November, a Bark belonging to the Town, brought in four Merchants
Ships of Bretagne, fraughted for the most part with Gascoin Wines; as
afterward two more with the like commodity, which proved a great refreshment
to the soldiers in it. And on the 6th. the Reingrave showed himself upon the
top of the hills with two thousand foot; betwixt whom and the garrison soldiers
of Hareflew on the one side, and those of Newhaven on the other, the remainder
of the year was taken up in continual skirmishes.

Cross we next over into Scotland, that we may see in what condition our
affairs stood there. The death of the late French King had made that Kingdom so
uncomfortable to the Queen of Scots, that she desired to hasten back into her
own. And thereunto she was much animated by the Heads of either faction, but on
different ends. Her presence earnestly solicited by the Popish party, in hope
by her authority to suppress their opposites, and by the Protestants, on some
strong presumptions, that they could deal better with her when they had her
there, than when she was protected by the power of France, and governed by the
counsels of the Guisian faction. Before her leaving of that Kingdom, she had
been pressed by Throgmorton the English Resident, to ratify the Pacification
m^de at Edenborough, to which she would by no means yield, till she had advised
with the nobility, and other of her subjects of the Realm of Scotland. This
makes the Queen of England doubtful that she should be deserted by the Scots of
the Congregation, to whom she had done so many good offices in the time of
their troubles. But having dealt with some of the chief amongst them, she found
a resolution in them, for adhering to her, which so assured her on that side,
that she feared but little danger from the Queen and her party, whenever she
came. Which notwithstanding, it was held to be the safer course to intercept
her if they could in her passage thither. And to that end a squadron of ships
was sent to sea, but under color of suppressing some Pirates, by whom the
trade of merchandise was given out to be hindered. But the taking of one of the
Scottish ships, with the Earl of Eglington, and other passengers of that Nation
were making homewards, declared sufficiently that they looked for a far richer
prize. But for the Queen of Scots her self, by reason of a thick fog which hung
over the seas, she past by the English unperceived, and landed at the Port of
Leeth on the 20th. of August, Anno 1561. From thence she sends Lethington the
younger, with Letters to the Queen of England, tending especially to express
that great love and kindness which she bare to her, as to her dearest friend
and Sister, and the desire she had to continue in true and sincere friendship
with her. At what time she received letters also to the same effect from some
of the Nobility of that Kingdom. In which they signified withal, That the
surest way to continue amity and friendship betwixt them two, were to declare
the Queen of Scots to be her next and lawful heir to the Kingdom of England.

But this demand, as it was unlooked for, so was it of too high a nature to be
hastily answered. So that the Lord of Lethington could prevail no further at
that time, than to gain a promise from the Queen, that she would do nothing to
the prejudice of the Title of her Cosen of Scotland. The rest was left to be
considered of in a personal conference, appointed to be held at York in the end
of June. Which motion first proceeded from the Queen of Scots, who was thought
to have been earnest and real in it, partly for making a firm peace with her
(...) of England, and partly to make her self known to the principal subjects
of that Country. Neither was the meeting disliked of the better sort, as
thinking it would serve, besides the preservation of the common peace, to bring
her to a liking of the Reformed Religion. But they who were popishly set,
fearing greatly the conference, spoke openly against it, saying, that of such
interviews, there was never seen any good effect; and that it would not be safe
for the Queen of Scots to put he^ self into the power of her, to whose Kingdom
she had made a claim. But notwithstanding these unprofitable deliberations, the
interview was agreed upon, and the numbers on either side determined, and all
things provided for the journey, when suddenly the Queen of England by her
Letters excused her self, desiring that it might be respited till the year next
following. Which the Scots Queen was not sorry to hear upon further thoughts,
considering how much the French King and her Uncles of the House of Guise,
might have been dissatisfied on the news of that Inter-Parleance. Neither did
Queen Elizabeth want her reasons to decline the meeting, which some believe was
never really intended by her; but that she hoped the fail would have been on
(...) other side, which would have given her the same cause of quarrel against
the daughter, which King Henry took against the father, on the like
disappointment. Others conceived, that she might fear a growing less by it in
the eyes of her people, the Queen of Scots having so many advantages above her
both in youth and beauty. But it was generally concluded to be against all
reason of State, to give her Rival opportunity of growing gracious with the
Nobility and Gentry of England, and laying the foundation of a faction in the
Court it self.

But the Queen had deeper matters to take up her thoughts than any such
feminine jealousies and emulations, though these perhaps might also have their
place amongst them. A spirit of sedition had begun to show it self in the year
last past, upon the bare noise of the coming of the Nuncio hither. Not much
diminished (if it were not much increased) by the sitting of the Council of
Trent, in which it was believed that some proceedings would be had against her.
Which seeds being sown, began first to show themselves in a petit rebellion,
in Merton College in Oxon; sufficiently discovered by those small beginnings,
that some design of greater consequence was in agitation. The Wardenship of
that house being void by the death of Gervase, one Man is chosen to the place.
But his election being questioned, and his admission thereupon opposed by a
contrary faction, the government of the College devolved of course upon one
Hall a Senior Fellow, sufficiently known to be of Popish inclinations, though
for the saving of his place he had conformed as others did, to the present
time. No sooner was he in this power, but he retrives some old superstitious
hymns, which formerly had been sung on several Festivals in the times of
Popery, prohibiting the use of such as had been introduced by Gervase the late
Warden there. This gave encouragement and opportunity to the Popish party, to
insult over the rest, especially over all those of the younger sort, who had
not been trained up in their Popish principles; so that it seemed a penal
matter to be thought a Protestant. Notice whereof being given to Archbishop
Parker, (the Ordinary Visitour of that College in the Right of his See) he
summoneth Hall on the 20th. of May to appear before him, and caused the
Citation to be fastened to the Gate of the College. But his authority in that
case was so little regarded, that the seal of the Citation was torn off by some
of that party. Hereupon followed a solemn visitation of the College by the said
Archbishop. The result whereof was briefly this, that all were generally
examined; Man confirmed Warden, Hall justly expelled, his party publicly
admonished; the young scholars relieved, the Papists curbed and suppressed, and
Protestants countenanced and encouraged in the whole University.

But this was only the Essay of those greater commotions which were to have
insued upon it; though withal it proved a prognostic of their ill success,
which constantly attended the designs of the Romish faction. For presently on
the neck of this a far more dangerous conspiracy declared it self in some chief
Leaders of that party; The present sitting of the Council, the practices of
some foreign Ministers, and the Queens countenancing the French Hugo^ots, then
being in Arms against their King, might serve both as encouragements and
exasperations to put that party upon dangerous and destructive projects: And it
is possible enough that somewhat might be aimed at by them, in favor of the
Title of the Queen of Scots, or of some other of the Race of King Henry the
7th. by Margaret his eldest daughter, married to James the 4th. of Scotland;
which may the rather be supposed, because I find the Lady Margaret Countess of
Lenox, daughter of the said Queen Margaret by her second husband, and mother of
Henry Lord D^rnley (who was after married to Queen Mary of Scotland) to have
been confined unto her House with the Earl her husband, upon suspicion of some
practice against the Queen. Certain it is, that many strange whispers were
abroad, and no small hopes conceived by those of the Popish faction for
suppressing the Protestants in all parts of the Kingdom, and setting up their
own Religion as in former times; a matter neither to be entertained without
strong temptations, nor compassed without stronger forces, than they could
raise amongst themselves, but by intelligence and supply from some foreign
Princes. On which account, amongst some others which were found to be of the
Plot, Arthur Pole, granchild of Margaret Countess of Salisbury by Geofry her
third son, the younger brother unto Re^gnald Pole the late Cardinal Legate, was
apprehended and arraigned, together with his brother Geofry, Fortescue who had
married his sister, and diverse others: The substance of their Change (as it is
generally in all Treasons) was, a design of levying war against the Queen, and
otherwise entertaining many dangerous counsels against the peace and safety of
her Dominions, with a particular intention of advancing the Queen of Scots to
the Crown of England, and Pol^ himself unto the Title of Duke of Clarence. All
which they confessed upon the Indictment, and did all receive the sentence of
death; but were all afterward pardoned by the Queens great clemency, out of
that great respect which she carried to their Royal extraction.

And yet it may be possible that there was something in it of State-craft as
well as clemency, which might induce the Queen to spare them from the stroke of
the Ax, which was, to keep them for a balance to the House of Suffolk, of whom
she now began to conceive some jealousies. The Lady Katharine Gray one of the
younger daughters of Henry Duke of Suffolk, and sister to the late Queen Jane,
had been married to the Lord Henry Herbert son and heir to the Earl of
Pembrock, at such time as the said Queen Jane was married to the Lord Guilford
Dudley at Durham-House. But the old Earl seasonably apprehending how unsafe it
was to marry into that Family which had given so much trouble to the Queen,
took the advantage of the time, and found some means to procure a sentence of
Divorce, almost upon the very ins^ant of the Consummation. And knowing how well
Queen Ma^y ^^ood affected to the Earl of Shrewsbury, he presently clapped up a
marriage for his son with another Katherine, one of the daughters of that Earl,
who dying about the beginning of the Reign of this Queen, he married him as
^peedily to Mary S^d^ey the daughter of Sir Henry Sidney, and of Mary his wife,
one of the daughters of John Dudley the late Duke of Northumberland; in which
last marriage he as much endeavored to ingratiate himself with Sir Robert
D^dle^, who at that time began to grow Lord Paramount in all Court-favours, as
by the first Match to insinuate into old Duke Dudley, who did then predominate.
In the mean time the Lady Katherine Gray languisheth long under the disgrace of
this rejection, none daring to make any particular addresses to her, for fear
of being involved in the like calamities as had befallen her father and the
rest of that Family. But at the last the young Earl of Hertford contracts
himself privately unto her, and having consummated the marriage with her, gets
leave to travail into France; But long he had not left the Kingdom when the
Lady was found to be with child, and being imprisoned in the Tower she makes
known her marriage, till then kept secret by agreement; the Earl is thereupon
called home, and standing honestly to the Marriage, for which he could produce
no sufficient witness, is committed prisoner also. The Queen exceeding jealous
of all Competitors, refers the cognizance of the cause to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and some other Delegates, by whom a certain time is set for the
bringing in of Witnesses to prove the Marriage, and on default thereof, a
sentence of unlawful copulation is pronounced against them; during which
troubles and disquiets, the Lady is delivered of the Lord Edward Se^mer her
eldest son in the Tower of London, and conceived after of another by some s^oln
meetings which she had with the Earl her husband, their Keepers on both sides
being corrupted to give way unto it. Which practice so incensed the Queen, that
hurried on with jealousy, and transported with passion, she caused a fine of
five thousand pounds to be set upon him in the Star Chamber, and kept him close
prisoner for the space of nine years, at the end whereof he was restored to
liberty by the death of the Lady, who died a prisoner in the Tower. And though
the Lady Francis Duchess of Suffolk might hope to have preserved her self from
the like Court-thunder-claps by her obscure marriage with Adrian Stokes, who
had bin Gentleman of the Horse to the Duke her husband, yet neither could that
save her from abiding a great part of the tempest, which fell so heavily upon
her and all that family, that William the nephew of this Earl by Edward
Viscount Beauchamp his eldest son, was prudently advised by some of his
friends, to procure a confirmation of his grandfathers honors from the hand of
King James, which without much difficulty was obtained and granted by his
Majesty's Letters Patents, bearing date the 14th. of May in the 6th. year of
his Reign. But such was the fortune of this House, that as this Earl, being
newly restored unto the Title of Hertford, by the great goodness of the Queen,
incurred her high displeasure, and was thereupon committed prisoner for his
marriage with the Lady Katherine Gray, the only heir then living of Mary the
youngest daughter of King Henry the 7th. so William above mentioned being
confirmed in the expectancy of his grandfathers honors by the like goodness of
King James, was committed prisoner by that King for marrying with the Lady
Arabella, daughter and heir of Charles Earl of Lennox, descended from the eldest
daughter of the said King Henry.

Such were the principal occurrences of this present year, relating to the
joint concernments of Church and State; In reference to the Church alone,
nothing appears more memorable than the publishing of an elegant and acute
Discourse, entitled, The Apology of the Church of England, first wait in Latin
by the right reverend Bishop Jewel, translated presently into English, French,
Italian, Dutch, and at last also into Greek, highly approved of by all pious
and judicious men, stomached by none excepting our own English fugitives, and
yet not undertook by any of them but by Harding only, who had his hands full
enough before in beating out an answer to the Bishop^ challenge: By him we are
informed (if we may believe him) that two Tractats or Discourses had been writ
against it, the one by an Italian in the Tongue of that Country, the other in
Latin by a Spanish Bishop of the Realm of Naples; both finished, and both
stopped as they went to the Press, out of a due regard, ^orsooth, to the Church
of England, whose honor had been deeply touched, by being thought to have
approved such a lying, unreasonable, slanderous, and ungodly Pamphlet; which
were it true, the Church was more beholden to the modesty of those Spaniards
and Italians, than to our own natural English. But whether it were true or not,
or rather how untrue it is in all particulars, the exchange of writings on both
sides does most plainly manifest. In general it was objected, That the Apology
was published in the name of the Church of England, before any mean part of the
Church were privy to it, as if the Author either were ashamed of it, or afraid
to stand to it; that the Inscription of it neither was directed to Pope nor
Emperor, nor to any Prince, not to the Church, nor to the General Council then
in being, as it should have been; that there was no man's name se^ to it; that
it was printed without the privilege of the Prince, contrary to the Law in that
behalf; that it was allowed neither by Parliament nor Pro^lamation, nor agreed
upon by the Clergy in a public and lawful Synod and therefore that the Book
was to be accounted a famous Libel, and a scandal^us Writing.

To which it was answered in like Generals by that learned Prelate, That the
profession of the Doctrine contained in it was offered unto the whole Church of
God, and so unto the Pope and the Council too, if they were any part or member
of the Church; that if names be so necessary, he had the names of the whole
Clergy of England to confirm that Doctrine, and Harding's too amongst the rest
in the time of King Edward; that for not having the Princes privilege, it might
easily be disproved by the Printer; that it was not conceived in such a dark
corner as was objected, being afterward imprinted at Paris in Latin, and
having since been translated into the French, Italian, Dutch, and Spanish
Toungs; that being sent afterward into France, Flanders, Germany, Spain,
Poland, Hungary, Denmark, Sweden, Scotland, Italy, Naples, and Rome it self, it
was tendered to the judgment of the whole Church of God; that it was read and
seriously considered of in the convent of Trent, and great threats made that it
should be answered, and the matter taken in hand by two notable learned
Bishops, the one a Spaniard, and the other an Italian, though in fine neither
of them did any thing in it; and finally, that certain of the English Papists
had been nibling at it, but such as cared neither what they writ, nor was cared
by others. And so much may suffice in general for this excellent Piece, to the
publishing whereof, that learned Prelate was most encouraged by Peter Martyr,
(as appears by Martyr's Letter of the 24th. of August) with whom he had spent
the greatest part of his time when he lived in Exile: And happy had it been for
the Church of England if he had never done worse offices to it, than by dealing
with that reverend Bishop to so good a purpose. But Martyr only lived to see
the Book which he so much longed for, dying at Zurick on the 12th. day of
November following, and laid into his grave by the Magistrates and People of
that Town with a solemn Funeral.

Nothing remains for the concluding of this year, but to declare how the three
vacant Bishoprics were disposed of, if those may say to be disposed of which
were still kept vacant; Gloucester was only filled this year by the preferment
of Mr. R^cha^d Cheny Archdeacon of Hereford, and one of the Prebendaries of the
Coll^giat Church of St. Peter in Westminster, who received h^s Episcopal
consecration on the 19th. of April. Together with the Sea of Gloucester, he held
that of Bristol in commendam, as did also Bullingham his Successor, that is to
say, the Jurisdiction, with the Profits and Fees thereof, to be exercised and
enjoyed by them, but the temporal Revenue of it to continue in the hands of
some hungry Courtiers, who gnawed it to the very bone; in which condition it
remained under the two Bishops, till the year 1589. when the Queen was pleased
to bestow the remainders of it, together with the title of Bishop, on Doctor
Richard Flesher Dean of Peterborough, whom afterward she preferred to the Sea
of London. And as for Oxon, it was kept vacant from the death of King, the
first Bishop of it, who died on the 4th. of December 1557. till the 14th. of
October 1567. at which time it was conferred on Dr. Hugh Curwyn Archbishop of
Dublin, and Chancellor of the Realm of Ireland, who having held it but a year,
it was again kept vacant twenty years together, and then bestowed on Dr. John
Underhil, who was consecrated Bishop thereof in D^cember 1589. but he dying
also shortly after, viz. Anno 1592. it was once more kept void till the year
1603. and then took up by Dr. John Bridges Dean of Salisbury, rather to
satisfy the desires of others than his own ambition. So that upon the point,
this Church was filled but little more than three years in forty s^x, the
Jurisdiction of it was in the mean time managed by some Officers thereunto
authorized by the Archbishop of Canterbury, An. Reg. Eliz. 5. 1562/3;.
the Patrimony and Revenues of it remaining in the hands of the Earl of
Leicester, and after his decease of the Earl of E^^ex, by whom the Lands
thereof were so spoiled and wasted, that they left nothing to the last Bishops
but Impropriations; by means of which havoc and destruction, all the five
Bishoprics erected by King Henry the 8th. were so impoverished and destroyed,
that the new Bishops were necessitated to require the benevolence of their
Clergy at their first coming to them, to furnish their Episcopal Houses, and
to enable them to maintain some tolerable degree of Hospitality in their
several Diocesses, of which we shall hear more hereafter from the pen of an
Adversay.

An. Reg. Eliz. 5. An. Dom. 1562, 1563.
THe last years practices of the Papists, and the dangers thereby threatening
both the Queen and State, occasioned her to call a Parliament on the 12th. of
January, in which first passed an Act, For assurance of the Queens Royal power
over all Estates and Subjects within her Dominions. In the body whereof it was
provided, That no man living or residing in the Queens Dominions, under the
pains and penalties therein appointed, should from thenceforth, either by word
or writing, or any other open deed, willingly and advisedly endeavor to
maintain the Power and Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, heretofore claimed
and usurped within this Realm. And for the better discovery of all such persons
as might be popishly affected, it was enacted, That none should be admitted
unto holy Orders, or to any Degree in either of the Universities, or to be
Barrester or Bencher in any of the Inns of Court, etc. or to practice as an
Attorney, or otherwise to bear any Office in any of the Courts at Westminster
Hall, or any other Court whatsoever, till he or they should first take the Oath
of Supremacy on the holy Evangelists; With a Power given to every Archbishop
and Bishop within this Realm and the Dominions of the same, to tender or
minister the Oath aforesaid, to all and every spiritual person in their proper
Diocesses, as well in places exempt as elsewhere. Of which last clause the
Reader is to take especial notice, because of the great controversy which
ensued upon it, of which, more hereafter. And because many of the Popish party
had lately busied themselves by Conjurations, and other Diabolical Arts, to
enquire into the length or shortness of her Majesty's life, and thereupon had
caused some dark and doubtful prophecies to be spread abroad; There passed two
other Statutes for suppressing the like dangerous practices, by which her
Majesty's person might be endangered, the people stirred to rebellion, or the
peace otherwise disturbed. For which consult the Acts of Parliament, 5 Eliz. c
15, 16. By which three Acts, and one more for the better executing of the Writ
de Excommunicato capiendo, the Queen provided very well for her own security,
but more provoked the Pope and his adherents to conspire against her in the
time to come; against whose machinations, backed by the power and counsels of
foreign Princes, nothing was more conducible than her strength at Sea, for the
increase whereof, and the continual breeding of a Seminary of expert Mariners,
an Act was made for adding Wednesday to the number of the weekly Fas^s, which
from thenceforth was called Jejunium Cecilianum, as being one of the devices of
Sir William Cecil.

In reference to Religion, and the advancement of the service and worship of
God, it had been declared by the Bishops and Clergy assembled at the same time
in their Convocation, To be a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and
the custom of the Primitive Church, to have public prayer in the Church, or to
minister the Sacraments in a Tongue not understood by the people. To comply with
which pious Declaration, and take off all retortion which possibly might be
made by those of Rome, when they were charged with the administration of the
Service and Sacraments in an unknown Tongue, it was enacted, That the Bishops of
Hereford, St. David's, Bangor, Landaff, and St. Asaph, should take care amongst
them for translating the whole Bible with the Common Prayer Book into the We^ch
or British Tongue, on pain of forfeiting 40 l. a piece in default thereof. And
to encourage them thereunto it was ordered, That one Book of either sort being
so translated and imprinted, should be provided and bought of every Cathedral,
or Parish Church, as also for all Parish Churches and Chapels of Ease where the
said Tongue is commonly used; the Ministers to pay one half of the price, and
the Parishioners the other. The like care was also taken for translating the
Books of Homilies; but whether it were done by any new order from the Queen, or
the piety of the four Welsh Bishops, or that they were considered as a
necessary part of the public Litu^gy, by reason of the Rubric at the end of
the Nicene Creed, I have no wh^^e found.

As for the Convocation which accompanied the present Parliament, it began on
the 13^h. day of Ja^uary in the Cathedral of St. Pa^l, the Latin Sermon (...)
by Mr. William Day, then Provost of Eaton College, afterward (...) of (...)
also, and Bishop of Winchester; which being finished, the Bishop of L^nd^^
presents a list of the several Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, which had been
cited to appear; the catalogue of the Bishops ending with Gabriel Goodman Dean
of Westminster, that of the Deans beginning on another file with Alexander
Novel Dean of St. Paul's, elected by the Clergy for their Prolocutor. The
Convocation after this is adjourned to Westminster for the convenience of the
Prelates, by reason of their attendance on affairs of Parliament. Goodman the
Dean of Westminster had made his Protestation in the Church of St. Paul, that
by appearing as a Member of the Convocation by ve^tue of the Archbishops
Mandat, he subjected not himself nor the Church of Westminster to the authority
or jurisdiction of the Sea of Canterbury. And now on the Archbishops personal
coming to the Church of Westminster, he delivers the like Protestation in
writing for preserving the Liberties of the Church, in which it was declared,
according to the privilege and just rights thereof, that no Archbishop or Bishop
could exercise any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in it, without leave of the Dean
for the time then being; and therefore that he could not consent to the holding
of a Convocation in that place, without some Decla^ation to be made by the
Archbishops and Bishops, that their holding the Convocation in the same should
not be taken or intended for any violation of the rights and privileges that
belonged unto it, which was accordingly performed.

It was ^n the 19th. day of January that these formalities were transacted, at
wh^t time the Archbishops and Bishops having first had some secret
communication amongst themselves about the Articles of Religion established in
King (...) time, r^quired the Prolocutor and six others of the Lower H^use of
Convocation, to repair unto them; By whom it was signified unto their
Lordships, that some of the Clergy had prepared certain Bills, containing a
specification of such matters as were conceived to be amiss in the state of the
Church, and that the Articles of Religion agreed upon in the Reign of King
Edward the 6th. had been delivered unto others to be considered of, corrected,
and accommodated as they found it necessary. Being encouraged in the last, and
furthered by the diligence of some of the Bishops who were employed in the same
work, the Articles were agreed upon, publicly read before the Bishops in the
Chapter House of St. Paul, on the 29th. of the same month, and by all of them
subscribed with great unanimity. The Prelates had observed some deviation from
the Doctrine of King Edward's Reign, which had been made by the Calvini^n on
Zuinglian Gospellers, in the Articles of Predestination, Grace, Free Will, and
final perseverance: Nor could they but take notice with how little reverence
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was administered, and the Authority of the
Church despised by too many of the same party also; which they were willing to
impute to the want of some known rule amongst them, by which they were to
regulate their judgments, and conform their actions: To which end it was
thought expedient, that the Book of Articles agreed upon in Convocation, Anno
1552. should be revised and accommodated to the use of the Church, the Queens
leave being first obtained for their warrant in it. In the managing of which
great business, I know not whether I should more admire their moderation, or
their wisdom. Their wisdom eminent, in not suffering any Outlandish Divine
who might drive on a different interess from that of the Church, either to vote
amongst them, or carry any stroke in their consultations. Their moderation no
less visible, in declining all unnecessary determinations, which rather tended
to the multiplying of controversies, and ingendring strifes, than either unto
edification or increase of piety. So that they seemed to have proceeded by
those very Rules which King James so much approved of in the conference at
Hampton Court, First in not separating further from the Church of Rome in
points of Discipline or Doctrine, than that Church had separated from what she
was in her purest times; Secondly, in not stuffing the Book of Articles with
all Conclusions Theological, in which a latitude of judgment was to be
allowed, as far as it might be consistent with peace and charity; and Thirdly,
in not thrusting into it every opinion or Position negative, which might have
made it somewhat like Mr. Craiges Confession in the Kirk of Scotland, who with
his I renounce, and I abhor, his detestations and abrenunciations, did so amaze
the simple people (as the King observes) that not being able to conceive or
understand all those points, utterly gave over all, and fell back to Popery, or
else remained in their former ignorance. Upon which grounds, as they omitted
many whole Articles, and qualified the expressions of some others in King
Edward's book; so were they generally very sparing in defining any thing which
was merely matter of moduli^y, or de modo only: As namely, touching the manner
of Christ's presence in the Holy Eucharist, the manner of effecting grace by the
blessed Sacraments, or of the operation of Gods grace in a man's conversion.
Which rules being carefully observed by all the Bishops, on whose authority and
consent, the greatest part of the whole Work did seem to rest, and all
particulars agreed upon amongst themselves, it was no wonder if they passed
their Votes without contradiction.

But in taking the subscriptions of the lower house, there appeared more
difficulty. For though they all testified their consent unto them, on the said
29th. of January, either by words express, or by saying nothing to the
contrary, which came all to o^e; yet when subscription was required, many of
the Calvinians, or Zuinglian-Gospellers, possibly some also which inclined
rather to their old Religion, and who found themselves unsatisfied in some
particulars, had demurred upon it. With this demur their Lordships are
acquainted by the Prolocutor, on the 5th. of February. By whom their Lordships
were desired in the name of that House, that such who had not hitherto
subscribed the Articles, might be ordered to subscribe in their own proper
house, or in the presence of their Lordships. Which request being easily
granted, drew on the subscription of some others, but so, that many still
remained in their first unwillingness. An Order thereupon is made by their
Lordships, on the ^oth. then following, that the Prolocutor should return the
names of all such persons who refused subscription, to the end that such
further course might be taken with them, as to their Lordships should seem most
fit. After which we hear no news of the like complaints and informations; which
makes it probable (if not concluded) that they all subscribed. And being thus
subscribed by all, they were soon after published both in English and Latin,
with this following Title, that is to say, Articles agreed upon by the
Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy, in the
Convocation holden at London in the year 1562. for the avoiding of diversities
of opinions, and establishing consent touching true Religion. But what they
were, and wherein they agreed or differed with or from those established by
King Edward the 6th. shall be referred (for the avoiding of all interruptions
in the course of this History) to a place more proper. Nothing else brought to
a conclusion by them, but the Bill of Subsidy, which having past that House,
was confirmed in Parliament.

Nothing else brought into conclusion, though many things were had in
deliberation. On Friday the 5th. of February, the Bishops of Salisbury, Exon,
St David's and Lichfield, were appointed by the rest of the Prelates, to
examine a Catechism which it seems was presented to them. But being by them
remitted to the consideration of the lower house, they were advertised by Day
and Sampson on the 3d. of March, that the said house unanimously had approved
thereof. And there it rested for that time, and for ever after, nothing being
done in confirmation of it, as a public Doctrine, (by whomsoever it was
written) nor any further speech made of it in the time succeeding. Which
fortune also happened to a Book of Discipline projected amongst some of the
Clergy, and rendered to the Bishops by the Prolocutor, and ten others of that
House, on the 26th. of February. To which some additionals being made by the
first contrivers, it was a second time tendered to them by the Prolocutor, in
the name of the lower House of Convocation, by whom it had been generally and
unanimously recommended to them. But the Bishops let this sleep also as they
did the other. More was it to the profit of the Clergy generally, to make
inquiry into certain Articles, which by the Archbishop, with the consent of all
the rest of the Prelates, were delivered in writing. The Tenor of which
Articles was, 1. Whether if the Writ of Melius inquirendum be sent forth, there
be any likelihood that it will return to the Queens profit? 2. Whether some
Benefices ratably be not less than they be already valued? 3. That they enquire
of the manner of dilapidations, and other spoliations that they can remember to
have passed upon their Livings, and by whom. 4. To signify how they have been
used for the levying of the arrerages of tenths and Subsidies, and for how many
years past. 5. As also how many Benefices they find that are charged with
pensions newly imposed to discharge the pensions of Religious persons. 6. And
lastly, to certify how many Benefices are vacant in every Diocese. But what
return was made upon these enquiries, I find as little in the Acts of this
Convocation, as either in allowance of the Catechism, or the Book of Discipline.

Religion and the State being thus fortified and secured in England, it will
not be amiss to see what they do in Scotland; where the young Queen was
graciously inclined to forget all injuries, and grant more liberty to her
subjects, in the free exercising and enjoying of their own persuasions, than
she could gain unto her self. For in a Parliament held in May, within few
months after the end of that in England, the Act for oblivion, formerly
condescended to in the Treaty at Edenborough, was confirmed and ratified; but
without reference to that Treaty, the results whereof, the Queen by no means
would acknowledge to be good and valid. And thereupon it was advised that the
Lords should supplicate on their knees in the House of Parliament for the
passing of it, which was accordingly performed by them, and vouchsafed by her.
There also past some other Acts of great advantage to the Church, as affairs
then stood; that is to say, one Act for the repairing and upholding of Parish
Churches, and the Churchyards of the same, for burial of the dead. Another
against letting Parsonages, Glebes, or Houses, into long Leases or Fee. But
this came somewhat of the latest, a great part of the Tithes, Houses, and
possessions which belonged to the Church, having been formerly aliened or
demised for a very long term by the Popish Clergy, when they perceived they
were not likely to enjoy them longer for themselves. But on the other side, no
safety or protection could be found for her own Religion; no, not so much as in
the Chapel-Royal, or the Regal City. In contempt whereof, a force was violently
committed in the month of August, in the Chapel of the Palace of Holy Rood
House, (the Whitehall of Edenborough) where certain of the Queens servants were
assembled for their own devotions, the doors broke open, some of the company
haled to the next prison, and the rest dispersed, the Priest escaping with much
difficulty by a private passage. An. Reg. Eliz. 5. 1563.
The Queen was then absent in the North, but questioned Knox at her return, as
the cause of the uproar. By which expostulation she got nothing from that fiery
spirit, but neglect and scorn.

Return we back again to France, where we find some alternations of affairs
between the French King and the Reingrave on the one side, the English and
confederate Princes on the other, but so, that fortune seemed most favorable
to the English party. The Church of Hattivil (a neighboring Village to
Newhaven) taken and garrisoned by the Reingrave, but presently abandoned and
repossessed by the English. The Castle of Tankervile cunningly taken by the
English, and soon after regained by the Reingrave. The City and Castle of Cane
held with a strong Garrison by the Marquess d' Elbeuffe, and besi^ ged by the
confederate forces, both French and English, and finally, surrendered to the
Admiral Chastilion to the use of the Princes, March the 2d. After which
followed the surrendry of Bayeulx, Faleise, St. Lods, and diverse other Towns
and Castles. The Town of Hareflew on the Seine gallantly taken by the help of
the English of Newhaven, on the 10th. and garrisoned by such soldiers and
inhabitants as was sent from thence. Which fortunate successes so amazed the
heads of the Guisian faction, that they agreed unto an Edict of pacification,
by which the French Princes were restored to the Kings favor, the Hugonots to
the free exercise of their own Religion, and all things settled for the present
to their full contentment. But they must buy this happiness by betraying the
English whom they had brought into the Country, and join their forces with the
rest, to drive them out of Newhaven, if they would not yield it on demand. Of
this the Queen had secret notice, and offers by Throgmorton, to deliver up
Newhaven in exchange for Callis. The French resolve to hold the one, and
recover the other; so that new forces are sent over to make good the Town. The
French draw toward it in great numbers, under the conduct of the Marshals of
Brissack and Mont Morency; followed not long after by the Constable himself,
with many other French Lords of the highest quality. The siege grows close,
and the service very hot on both sides; but the English had a fiercer enemy
within the Town, than any whom they found without. The pes^ilence had got in
amongst them, and raged so terribly for the time, that the living were scarce
able to bury the dead. And to complete the miseries of the besieged, the Prince
of Conde, and the Duke of Montpensier, showed themselves openly amongst the
rest in the Camp of the enemies, that the last act of the Tragedy might be
played in their presence. All things conspiring thus against them, the English
are necessitated to a capitulation, by which they left the Town behind them on
the 29th. of July, but carried the plague with them into England. Which might
by some be looked on as an argument of Gods displeasure on this Nation, for
giving aid unto the Rebels of a Christian Prince, though masked with the vizard
of Religion.

Pass we on further toward Trent, where we find the Fathers in high
displeasure against Queen Elizabeth, exasperated by her aiding the French
Hugonots against their King. But more for passing the Statute above mentioned,
for punishing all those which countenanced and maintained the Popes authority
within her dominions. The Pope hereby so much incensed, that he dispatched a
Commission to the Fathers of Trent, to proceed to an excommunication of the
Queen of England. The Emperor had his aims upon her, being at that time
solicitous for effecting a marriage betwixt her and Charles of Inspruch, his
second son; of which his Ministers entertained him with no doubtful hopes. In
contemplation of which marriage, on the first notice which was given him of this
secret purpose, he writ Letters both to the Pope and to the Legates, in which
he signified unto them, that if the Council would not yield that fruit which
was desired, that they might see an union of all Catholics to reform the
Church; at least they should not give occasion to the Heretics to unite
themselves more, which certainly they would do, in case they proceeded so
against the Queen of England; by means whereof they would undoubtedly make a
league against the Catholics, which must needs bring forth many great
inconveniences. Nor did this Admonition coming from a person of so great
authority, and built on such prudential reasons, want its good effect: Insomuch
that both the Pope desisted at Rome, and revoked the Commission sent before to
the Legates in Trent.

But the Ministers of the King of Spain would not so give over, the Archbishop
of Otranto in the Realm of Naples, keeping the game on foot when the rest had
left it. And because he thought the proposition would not take, if it were made
only in relation to the Queen of England, he proposed a general ana^he^atizing
of the Heretics, as well dead as living, Luther and Zuinglius, and the rest;
which he affirmed to be the practice of all Councils, in the Primitive times,
and that otherwise it might be said that the Council had labored all this
while in vain. To which it was replied by one of the Legates, that dive^s times
required different Counsels; that the differences about religion in those elder
times, were between the Bishops and the Priests; that the people were but as an
accessory; that the Grandees either did not meddle, or if they did adhere to
any Heresy, they did not make themselves Heads and Leaders. But now all was
quite contrary, for now the Heretics Ministers and Preachers could not be said
to be heads of the Sects, but the Princes rather, to whose interess their
Ministers and Preachers did accommodate themselves; that he that would name the
true Heads of Heretics, must name the Queens of England and Navarr, the Prince
of Conde, the Elector Palatine of the Reine, the Elector of Saxony, and many
other Dukes and Princes of Germany; that this would make them unite, and show
they were sensible of it; and that the condemnation of Luther and Zuinglius
only, would so provoke them, that some great confusion would certainly arise;
and therefore they must not do what they would, but what they could, seeing
that the more moderate resolution was the better. After which grave and prudent
Answer, it was not long before the conclusion of the Council (which ended on
the 3d. of December) had put an end to all those practices or designs, which
otherwise might have much distracted the peace of Christendom, and more
particularly the tranquillity of the Realm of England. And so I take my leave
of the Council of Trent, without making any other character or censure of it,
than that which is given by the Historian, that is to say, That being desired
and procured by godly men to reunite the Church which then began to be divided,
it so established the schism, and made the party so obstinate, that the
discords are become irreconcilable; that being managed by Princes for the
Reformation of Ecclesiastical Discipline, it caused the greatest deformation
that ever was since Christianity began; that being hoped for by the Bishops to
regain the Episcopal authority, usurped for the most part by the Pope, it made
them lose it altogether, and brought them into a greater servitude; and on the
contrary, that being feared and avoided by the Sea of Rome, as a ^otent means
to moderate the exorbitant power of the Pope, mounted from small beginnings, by
diverse degrees unto an unlimited excess, it has so established and confirmed
the same over that part which remains subject to it, that it never was so
great, nor so soundly rooted.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 6. A. D. 1563, 1564.
HAving dispatched our business in France and Trent, we shall confine our
selves for so much of our Story as is to come to the Isles of Brit^ain. In the
fouth part thereof, the plague brought out of France by the Garrison soldiers
of Newhaven, had so dispersed it self, and made such desolation in many parts
of the Realm, that it swept away above 20000 in the City of London. Which
though it seemed less than some great plagues which have happened since, yet was
it the greatest at that time, An. Reg. Eliz. 6. 1563.
which any man living could remember. In which regard as Michaelmas Term was
not kept at all, so Can^lemas Term then following was kept at Hartford, the
houses in London being not well cleansed, nor the air sufficiently corrected
for so great a concourse. Under pretense whereof, the Council of the King of
Spain residing in Brussels, commanded Proclamation to be made in Antwerp and
other places, that no English ship with cloths, should come into any parts of
the Low Countries. Besides which, they alleged some other causes, as namely,
the raising of Impost upon goods, as well inwards as outward, as well upon
English men as upon strangers, etc. But the true reason of it was, because a
Statute had been passed in the first year of the Queen, by which diverse Wares
and Commodities were forbidden to be brought into this Realm out of Flanders,
and other places, (being the Manufactures of those Countries) to the end that
our own people might be set on work; as also that no English or stranger might
ship out any white cloths undrest, being of price above 4 l. without special
license. But at the earnest suit of the Merchant Adventurers, the Queen
prohibited the transporting of Wool unwrought, and the Cloth-Fleet was sent to
Embden, the principal City in East Fruzland, about Easter following, where it
was joyfully received, and where the English kept their Factory for some years
after. And though the Hanse Towns made such friends in the Court of the
Emperor, that the English trade was interdicted under the pretense of being a
Monopoly, yet by the constancy of the Queen, the courage of the Merchants, and
the dexterity of their Agents, they prevailed at last, and carried on the trade
themselves, without any Competitours.

The apprehension of this dealing from the Council of Spain, induced the Queen
to hearken the more willingly to a peace with France. Which she concluded upon
terms of as good advantage as the times would bear, the demand for Calais being
waved till the eight years end, at which it was to be restored unto her by the
Treaty of Cambray. Which peace was first Proclaimed before her Majesty in the
Castle of Windsor, the French Ambassador being present; and afterward at
London on the 13th. of April. And for creating the greater confidence and amity
between both Princes, it was not long before she sent the Lord Henry Huns^on,
accompanied with the Lord Strange, and diverse Knights and Gentlemen, to the
Court of France, to present that King with the Collar and Habit of the Garter,
into which Noble Order he had been elected at a General Chapter. Garter the
King at Arms was also sent along with them to invest him in it, with all the
Ceremonies and Solemnities thereunto belonging, to make it the more acceptable
in the sight of that people. But notwithstanding these courses on the one side,
and the indignities put upon her by the Hugonot Princes on the other, Reason of
State prevailed with her not to lay aside the care of their safety and affairs.
For well she knew, that if the Hugonots were not encouraged under hand, and the
Guisian faction kept in breath by their frequent stirrings, they would be
either hammering some design against her in her own Dominions, or animate the
Queen of Scots to stand to her Title and pretensions for the Crown of England.
Upon which general ground of self-preservation, as she first aided those of
Scotland for the expelling of the French, and the French Protestants from being
ruined and oppressed by the House of Guise, so on the same, she afterward
undertook the Patronage of the Belgic Neatherlands, against the tyranny and
ambition of the Duke of Alva, who otherwise might have brought the war to her
own doors, and hazarded the peace and safety of her whole Estate.

Having secured her self by this peace with France, and being at no open enmity
with the King of Spain, she resolves to give her self some pleasure, and
thereupon prepares for her Summers progress. In the course whereof she
bestowed a visit upon Cambridge on the 5th. of August, where she was honorably
received by Mr. Secretary Cecil, being then Chancellor of that University;
together with all the Heads of Houses, and other Students attired in their
Academical Habits, An. Reg. Eliz. 6. 1564.
according to their several and distinct degrees. Her lodging was provided in
Kings College, the days of her abode there, spent in Scholastical exercises of
Philosophy, Physic, and Divinity; the nights in Comedies and Tragedies, and
other pleasing entertainments. On Wednesday the 7th. of the same month, she
rode through the Town, and took a view of all the Colleges and Halls; the
goodly Monuments of the piety of her predecessors, and of so many men and women
famous in their generations. Which done, she took her leave of Cambridge in a
Latin Oration, in which she gave them great encouragement to pursue their
studies, not without giving them somes hopes, that if God spared her life and
opportunity, she would erect some Monument amongst them of her love to
Learning, which should not be inferior unto any of her Royal Ancestors. In
which diversion she received such high contentment, that nothing could have
seemed to be equal to it but the like at Oxon, where she was entertained about
two years after for seven days together, with the same variety of Speeches,
Ente^ludes, Disputations, and other Academical expressions of a public joy. In
one point, that of Oxford seemed to have the pre-eminence, all things being
there both given and taken with so even an hand, that there could be no ground
for any emulation, strife, or discord to ensue upon it. But in the midst of
those contentments which she had at Cambridge, were sown the seeds of those
divisions and combustions, with which the Church has been continually
distracted to this very day: For so it happened, that Mr. Thomas Preston of Kings
College, and Mr. Thomas Cartwright of Trinity College, were appointed for two
of the Opponents in a Disputation; In which the first, by reason of his comely
gesture, pleasing pronunciation, and graceful personage, was both liked and
rewarded by her, the other receiving neither reward or commendation; Which so
incensed the proud man, too much opinionated of himself and his own abilities,
that he retired unto Geneva, where having thoroughly informed himself in all
particulars, both of Doctrine and Discipline, wherein the Churches of that
platform differed from the Church of England, he returned home with an intent
to repair his credit, or rather to get himself a name, (as did Erastrotus in
the burning of Diana's Temple) by raising such a fire, such combustions in her,
as never were to be extinguished (like the fire of Taberah) but by the
immediate hand of Heaven.

The Genevians had already began to blow the coals, and brought fuel to them,
but it was only for the burning of Caps and Rochets. The Common Prayer book
was so fortified by Act of Parliament, that there was no assaulting of it
without greater danger than they durst draw upon themselves. And as for the
Episcopal Government, it was so interwoven and incorporated with the Laws of
the land, so twisted in with the Pre^ogative of the Crown and the Regal
Interess, that they must first be in a capacity of trampling on the Laws and
the Crown together, before they could attempt the destruction of it. But Caps
and Typpets, Rochets and Lawn sleeves, and Canonical Coats, seemed to be built
upon no better foundation than superstitious custom, some old Popish Canon, or
at the best some temporary Injunction of the Queens devising, which could not
have the power and effect of Law. This Game they had in chase in King Edward's
time, which now they are resolved to follow both with horn and hound, and hunt
it to the very last: But as good Huntsmen as they were, they came off with
loss, they that sped best in it, being torn by the briers and bushes, through
which the fury of their passion carried them in pursuit of the sport: Amongst
which, none sped worse than Sampson, because none had so much to lose in the
prosecution; for resting obstinate in refusing to wear that habit which of
right belonged unto his place, he was deprived of that place by the High
Commissioners, to which the habit did belong. So eminent a Preferment as the
Deanery of Christ-church deserved a man of a better temper, and of a more
exemplary conformity to the rules of the Church; Both which were found in Dr.
Thomas Godwin, Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen, advanced unto this Deanery
first, and after to the Bishopric of Bath and Wells; more fortunate in being
father to Dr. Francis Godwin a late Bishop of Hereford, never to be forgotten
for his Commentaries of the English Bishops, digested with such infinite pains,
and no less ingenuity.

The obstinacy of these men in matter of Ceremony, prompted the Bishops to make
trial of their Orthodoxie in points of Doctrine. The Articles of Religion
lately agreed upon in Convocation, had been subscribed by all the Clergy, who
had voted to them, subscribed not only for themselves, but in the name of all
those in the several Diocesses and Cathedral Churches, whom they represented.
But the Bishops not thinking that sufficient to secure the Church, required
subscription of the rest in their several places, threatening no less than
deprivation to such as wilfully refused, and obstinately persisted in that
refusal. Many there were who^ bogled at it, as they all did, but did it not so
perversely, nor in such great numbers as when their faction was grown strong
and improved to multitudes. Some stumbled at it in regard of the first clause
added to the 20th Article, about the Authority of the Church, others in
reference to the 36th. touching the Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops;
some thought they attributed more authority to the Supreme Magistrate, over all
persons and causes both Ecclesiastical and Civil, than could consist with that
Autocratie and Independency which Calvin arrogated unto his Presbyteries and
other Churches of that platform: And others looked upon the Homil es as
beggarly rudiments, scarce milk for Babes, but by no means to be served in for
a stronger stomach. In general, thought by the Genevians and Zuinglian
Gospellers to have too much in them of the Pope, or too little of Calvin, and
therefore not to be subscribed by any who desired the reputation of keeping a
good conscience with faith unfeigned. Of which number none so much remarkable
as father John Fox the Mar^yrologist, who had before appeared in the Schism at
Franckfort, and left that Church (when Cox had got the better in it) to retire
to Geneva; being now called on to subscribe, that the opinion which was had of
his parts and piety might advance the service, he is said to have appeared
before the Bishop (but whether before the Archbishop or his own Diocesan is not
much material) with the New Testament in Greek, To this (said he) I will
subscribe, and it this will not serve, take my Prebend of Salisbury, the only
preferment which I hold in the Church of England, and much good may it do you.

This refractory answer (for it was no better) might well have moved the Bishop
to proceed against him, as he did against some others who had stood on the same
refusal; but kissing goes by kindness, as the saying is, and so much kindness
was showed to him, that he both kept his resolution and his place together;
which whether it might not do more hurt to the Church, than that preferment in
the Church did advantage him, I think no wise man will make a question; for
commonly the exemption or indemnity of some few particulars, confirms the
obstinacy of the rest, in hope of being privileged with the like indemnity. And
therefore it was well observed by Bishop Bancroft, when King James proposed the
writing of a Letter to the Bishop of Chester, for respiting some Ministers of
his Diocese from a present conformity, That if this purpose should proceed, the
copy of those Letters would fly over the Kingdom, and then others would make
the same request for some friends of theirs, and so no fruit would follow of
the present Conference, but that all things would be worse than before they
were. But Queen Elizabeth was not drawn so easily to the like indulgencies, for
which she received her own just praises from the Pen of an Adversary, Harding
by name, in his Epistle Dedicatory prefixed before his Answer to the Bishops
Apology, commends her earnest zeal and travail, in bringing those disordered
Ministers into some order of decent apparel, which yet some of them wanted
reason to apply themselves to. And Sanders (who seldom speaks well of her)
first informs his Reader, What bickerings there were in England about the
Rochet, and other Vestments of the Clergy; that many of the opposite party
regarded not the Queens judgment in it, but sent for counsel and advice to
Germany, France, Savoy, and Switzerland, but specially to Theodore Beza and
Peter Martyr; but finally that notwithstanding the advice of the one, and the
addresses of the other, the Queen proceeded vigorously to the deprivation of
all such persons as wilfully opposed her order made in that behalf.

It seems by this that our Genevians, for the greater countenancing of their
inconformity, had stirred up the most eminent Divines of the Gallick and
Helvetian Churches to declare in favor of their doings; And it appears also,
by remembrances in some Authors, that Calvin apprehending some neglect from Mr.
Secretary Cecil, in making either no return, or a return which signified
nothing, to his first addresses, had laid aside his care of the Church of
England, for which he could expect no thanks from the Bishops, or had received
so little from the great men of the Court. But Peter Martyr while he lived,
conceived himself to have some interess in this Church, in which he had enjoyed
such a good preferment, but more in some particular persons and members of it,
who seemed to depend upon his judgment, and to ask counsel of him as their
surest Oracle: In which, how much he countenanced that faction in King Edward's
time, both by his practice and his pen, and what encouragement he gave them in
this present Reign, has been shown before; how much out-gone by Theodore Beza,
who next usurped a super-intendency over all the Churches of this Island, may
be seen hereafter: All that shall now be said of either of them, or of all
together, shall be briefly this, that this poor Church might better have
counted their best helps in points of Doctrine, than have been troubled with
their intermedlings in matter of Discipline. More modestly then so dealt
Bullinger and Gualter, two Divines of Suitzerland, as eminent in all points of
learning as the best amongst them; who being solicited by some some zealous
brethren to signify their judgment in the present controversy, about the
Aparel of the Clergy, return an approbation of it, but send the same enclosed
in several Letters to Sandys, Horn, and Gryndal, that they might see that
neither of them would engage in the affairs of this Church, without the privity
of the Governors and Rulers of it.

To bring this quarrel to an end, or otherwise to render all opponents the more
inexcusable, the Queen thought fit to make a further signification of her
Royal pleasure, not grounded only on the Sovereign Power and Prerogative
Royal, by which she published her Injunctions in the first year of her Reign,
but legally declared by her Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical, according
to the Acts and Statutes made in that behalf; for then it was to be presumed,
that such as had denied obedience to her sole commands, would at least give it
to the Laws. The Archbishop is thereupon required to consult together with such
Bishops and Commissioners as were next at hand, upon the making of such Rules
and Orders as they thought necessary for the peace of the Church, with
reference to the present condition and estate thereof: Which being accordingly
performed, presented to the Queen, and by her approved, the said Rules and
Orders were set forth and published in a certain book, entitled,
Advertisements, partly for due order in the public Administration of the
Common Prayers, and using the holy Sacraments; and partly for the Apparel of
all persons Ecclesiastical, by virtue of the Queens Majesty's Letters
commanding the same, the 15th. day of January, etc. And that they might be
known to have the stamp of Royal Authority, a Preface was prefixed before them,
in which it was expressed, That the Queen had called to her remembrance how
necessary it was for the advancement of God's glory, etc. for all her loving
subjects of the state Ecclesiastical, not only to be knit together in the
bonds of Uniformity touching the ministration of Gods Word and Sacraments, but
also to be of one decent behavior of outward aparel, that by their distinct
habits they might be known to be of that holy vocation, whereby the greater
reverence might be^ given unto them in their several Offices, that thereupon
she had required the Metropolitan, by her special Letters, that upon conference
had with such other Bishops as were authorized by her Commission for causes
Ecclesiastical, some order might be took, whereby all diversities and varieties
in the premises might be taken away; And finally, that in obedience unto her
commands, the said Metropolitan and the rest there named had agreed upon the
Rules and Orders ensuing, which were by her thought meet to be used and
followed.

Now in these Articles or Advertisements, it was particularly enjoined amongst
other things, That all Archbishops and Bishops should continue their accustomed
Aparel; that all Deans of Cathedral Churches, Masters of Colleges, all
Archdeacons, and other dignitaries in Cathedral Churches, Doctors, Batchelors
of Divinity, and Law, having any Ecclesiastical Living, should wear in their
common apparel abroad a side Gown with sleeves straight at the hand, without
any cuts in the same, and that also without any falling cape, and to wear
tippets of ^arsnet, as was lawful for them by Act of Parliament, 24 Hen. 8.
That all Doctors of Physic or any other faculty, having any Living
Ecclesiastical, or any other that may dispend by the Church 100 Marks, he to be
esteemed by the fruits or tenths of their Promotions; or all Prebendaries,
whose promotions are vallued at 20 l. and upward, to wear the like habit; that
they, or all Ecclesiastical persons, or other having any Ecclesiastical Living,
do wear the cap appointed by the Injunctions, and no hats, but in their
journeyings; that they in their journeys do wear the cloaks with sleeves put
on, and like in fashion to their Gowns, without gards, welts, or cuts; that in
their private houses or studies they use their own liberty of comely apparel;
that all inferior Ecclesiastical persons shall wear long gowns of the fashion
aforesaid, and caps as before is described; that all poor Parsons, Vicars, and
Cura^s, do endeavor themselves to conform their aparel in like sort, so soon
and as conveniently as their abilities will serve for the same; provided, that
their ability be judged by the Bishop of the Diocese; and if their ability will
not suffer them to buy them long gowns, of the form aforesaid prescribed, that
then they shall wear their short gowns, as before expressed; that all such
pe^^ons as have been, or be Ecclesiastical, and serve not the Ministry, or have
not accepted, or shall refuse to accept, the Oath of obedience to the Queens
Majesty, do from henceforth wear none of the said aparel, but to go as mere
laymen, till they be reconciled to obedience; and who shall obstinately refuse
to do the same, be presented by the Ordinary to the Commissioners for causes
Ecclesiastical, and by them to be reformed accordingly. But this belongs more
properly to the year next following.

To return therefore where we left, the next considerable action which followed
on the Queens reception at Cambridge, but more considerable in the consequents
than in the act it self, was the preferring of Sir Robert Dudley, the second
son then living to the Duke of Northumberland, to the Titles of Lord Denbigh
and Earl of Leicester, which honor she conferred on him on Michaelmas day,
with all the Pomps and ceremonies thereunto accustomed; She had before elected
him into the Order of the Garter, made him the Master of her Horse, and
Chancellor of the University of Oxon, suffered him to carry a great sway in all
affairs both of Court and Council, and given unto him the fair Manor of
Denbigh, being conceived to be one of the goodliest Territories in England, as
having more Gentlemen of quality which owes sure and service thereunto, than
any other whatsoever in the hands of a subject: And now she adds unto these
honors the goodly Castle and Manor of Kenelworth, part of the patrimony and
possession of the Duchy of Lancaster. Advanced unto which height, he
engrossed unto himself the disposings of all Offices in Court and State, and of
all preferments in the Church, proving in fine so unappeasable in his malice,
and unsatiable in his lusts, so sacrilegious in his rapines, so false in
promises, and treche^ous in point of trust, and finally so destructive of the
rights and properties of particular persons, that his little finger lay far
heavier on the English subjects, than the loins of all the Favorites of the two
last Kings. And that his monstrous vices (most insupportable in any other than
himself) might either be connived at, or not complained of, he cloaks them with
a seeming zeal to the true Religion, and made himself the head of the P^ritan
faction, who spared no pains in setting forth his praises upon all occasions,
making themselves the Tromparts to this Bragadocio; Nor was he wanting to
caresse them after such a manner, as he found most agreeable to those holy
hypocrites, using no other language in his speech and letters than
pure-scripture phrase, in which he was become as dextrous, as if he had
received the same inspirations with the sacred Penmen. Of whom I had not spoke
so much, but that he seemed to have been born for the destruction of the Church
of England, as may appear further in the prosecution of the Presbyterian or
Puritan History, whenever any able Pen shall be exercised in it.

But leaving this Court-Meteor to be gazed on by unknowing men, let us a^tend
the Obsequies of the Emperor Ferdinand, who died on the (...) of (...) in the
year now being, leaving the Empire and the rest of his Dominions to M^x^milian
his eldest son, whom he had before made King of the R^mans. A Prince he was who
had deserved exceeding well of the Queen of England, and she resolved not to be
wanting to the due acknowledgment of so great a merit; the afternoon of the
second day of October, and the fore-noon of the third, are set apart by her
command, for this great solemnity, for which there was erected in the upper
part of the Quire of the said Church a goodly He^se, richly garnished and set
forth, all the Quire being hanged with black cloth, adorned with rich
Scutcheons of his Arms of sundry sorts: At the solemnization of which Funeral
there were twelve Mourners, and one that presented the Queens person, which was
the Marquis of Winchester Lord Treasurer of England, the other twelve being two
Earls, six Lords, and four Knights; the sacred part thereof performed by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, assisted by the Bishops of London and Rochester, the
funeral Sermon being p^eached by the Bishop of London, which tended much unto
the praise and commendation of that famous Emperor. By which solemnity, as she
did no small honor to the dead, so she gave great contentment to the living
also, the people being generally much delighted with such glorious pomps, and
the Church of England thereby held in estimation with all foreign Princes.

Nothing else memorable in this year but the coming out of certain books, and
the death of Ca^vin. Dorman, an English fugitive, first publishes a book for
proof of certain of the Articles denied in Bishop Jewel's challenge; encountered
first by Alexander Nowel Dean of the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, who first
appeared in print against those of Lovain, and is replied upon by Dorman, in a
book, entitled, A Discovery of Mr. Nowel's untruths, not published till the
year next following. But of more consequence to this Church was the death of
Calvin, by whose authority so much disorder and confusion was to be brought
upon it in the times succeeding; a name much reverenced, not only by those of
his own party and persuasions, but by many grave and moderate men, who did not
look at first into the dangers which ensued upon it. His platform at Geneva
made the only pattern, by which all reformed Churches were to frame their
Government; his Writings made the only rule, by which all Students in Divinity
were to square their Judgments. What Peter Lombart was esteemed to be in the
Schools of Rome, the same was Calvin reckoned in all those Churches, which were
reformed according to the Zuinglian doctrine in the point of the Sacrament.
But, Hic Magister non tenetur, as the saying was, he was not so esteemed in
England, nor was there any reason why it should be so; for though some zealous
brethren of the Presbyteterian or Puritan faction appeared exceeding ambitious
to wear his Livery, and thought no name so honorable as that of Calvinist, yet
the sounder members of the Church, An. Reg. Eliz. 7. 1564.
the Royal and Prelatical Divines, as the others called them, conceived
otherwise of him: And the right learned Adrian Sararia, though by birth a
Dutchman, yet being once preferred in the Church of England, he stomached
nothing more than to be called Calvinian.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 7. A. D. 1564, 1565.
WE shall begin this year with the concernments of the Kirk of Scotland, where
Queen E^izabeth kept a Stock still going, the Returns whereof redounded more to
her own security, than to the profit and advantage of the Church of England.
The Queen of Scots was young, poffessed of that Kingdom, and next Heir to this;
first married to the Daulphin of France, and sued to after his decease in
behalf of Charles, the younger son of the Emperor Maximilian, as also of the
Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Bavaria; But Queen Elizabeth had found so much
trouble and danger from her first alliance with the French, that she was
against all Marriages which might breed the like, or any way advance the power
of that Competitor: But on the contrary, she commended to her the Earl of
Leicester, whom she pretended to have raised to those eminent honors, to make
him in some fort capable of a Queens affection. Which proposition proved
agreeable to neither party, the Queen of Scots disdaining that unequal offer,
and Leicester dealing underhand with Randolph the English Resident, to keep her
still in that averseness. He had foolishly given himself some hopes of marrying
with Elizabeth his own dread Mistress, interpreting all her favors to him to
proceed from affection, and was not willing that any Proposition for that
purpose with the Queen of Scots should be entertained. During these various
thoughts on both sides, the English began to be divided in opinion concerning
the next heir to the Crown Imperial of this Realm; One Hales had writ a
discourse in favor of the House of Suffolk, but more particularly in defense
of the late marriage between the Earl of Hertford and the Lady Katherine, for
which he was apprehended and committed prisoner. The Romish party were at the
same time sub-divided, some standing for the Queen of Scots as the next heir
apparent, though an alien born; others for Henry Lord Darnlie, eldest son to
the Earl of Lenox, born in the Realm, and lineally descended from the eldest
daughter of King Henry the 7th. from whom the Queen of Scots also did derive
her claim.

The Queen of Scots also at the same time, grown jealous of the practices of
the Lord James her bastard-brother, whom she had not long before made Earl of
Murrey; and being overpowered by those of the Congregation, was at some loss
within her self for finding a fit person, upon whose integrity she might depend
in point of counsel, and on whose power she might rely in point of safety:
After a long deliberation, nothing seemed more conducible to her ends and
purposes than the recalling of Matthew Earl of Lenox to his native Country,
from whence he had been forced by the Hamiltonians in the time of King Henry.
Being of great power in the West of Scotland, from the Kings whereof he was
extracted, Henry conceived that some good use might be made of him for
advancing the so much desired marriage between his only son Prince Edward and
the Infant-Queen: The more to gain him to his side, he bestows upon him in
marriage the Lady Margaret Douglas, daughter of Queen Margaret his eldest
sister, by Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus her second husband; of which
marriage were born Henry Lord Darnly (of whom more anon) and Charles the second
son (whom King James created Earl of Lenox) father of Arabella, before
remembered. And that they might support themselves in the nobler equipage, he
bestows upon him also the Manor of Setrington, with other good Lands
adjoining, in the County of Yo^k, passing since by the name of Lenox his Lands
in the style of the people. In England he remained above twenty years, but
kept^ himself constant in all changes to the Church of Rome, which made him the
more estimable both with his own Queen, and the English Papists. Being returned
into his Country, he found that Queen so gracious to him, and such a handsome
correspondence with the chief Nobility, that he sends for his two sons to come
thither to him, but leaves his wife behind in the Court of England, lest
otherwise Queen Elizabeth might take some umbrage or displeasure at it, if they
should all remove at once.

It was about the middle of February that the Lord Darnly came to the Court of
Scotland. 1564/5;.
Who being not full twenty years old, of lovely person, sweet behavior, and a
most ingenuous disposition, exceedingly prevailed in short time on the Queens
affection. She had now met with such a man as might please her fancy, and more
secure her title to the Crown of England, than any of the great Kings in
Europe. What then should hinder her from making up a marriage so agreeable to
her, so acceptable to the Catholic party in both Kingdoms; and which she
thought withal of so safe a condition, as could create no new jealousies in
the breast of Elizabeth? But those of the Leicestrian faction conceived
otherwise of it, and had drawn most of the Court and Council to conceive so to.
For what could more secure the interess of the Queen of Scots, than to
corroborate her own Title with that of Darnly? from which two, what children
soever should proceed, they would draw to them many hearts in the Realm of
England, who now stood fair and faithful to their natural Queen. In this great
fear (but made much greater of set purpose to create some trouble) it was
advised that the Queen should earnestly be entreated to think of marriage, to
the end, that the succession might be settled in her own posterity; that all
Popish Justices (whereof there were many at that time) might be put out of
Commission, and none admitted to that office, but such as were sincerely
affected to the Reformed Religion; that the old deprived Bishops, which for the
most part lived at liberty, might be brought to a more close restraint, for
fear of hardening some in their errors, and corrupting others with whom they
had the freedom of conversation; that a greater power might be conferred upon
the English Bishops, in the free exercise of their jurisdiction, for
suppressing all such Popish Books as were sent into England, depriving the
English Fugitives of all those Benefices in this Kingdom, which hitherto they
had retained; and all this to be done without incurring the danger of a
Praemunire, with which they were so often threatened by the common Lawyers. It
was advised also, that for a counterpoise unto the Title of the Queen of Scots,
some countenance should be given to the House of Suffolk, by showing favor to
the Earl of Hartford and the Lady Katherine; and that to keep the balance even
with the Romish Catholics, some moderation should be used to such Protestant
Ministers, (you may be sure the Earl of Leicester had a hand in this) as
hitherto had been opposi^e in external matters, to the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, here by Law established.

Nor was this marriage very pleasing to the Scots themselves; the chief Lords of
the Romish party, who faithfully had adhered to their natural Queen in all her
former troubles, conceived that some of them might be as capable of the Queens
affections, as a young Gentleman born in England, and one that never had done
any service which might enoble and prefer him before all the rest. The
Ministers exclaimed against it in their common preachings, as if it were
designed of purpose to destroy Religion, and bring them under their old
vassalage to the Church of Rome. The Noble men and others of the Congregation,
who had sold themselves to Queen Elizabeth, were governed wholly by her
Counsels, and put themselves into a posture of Arms to disturb the Ma^ch, the
Edenburgers do the like, but are quickly scattered, and forced to submit
themselves to their Queens good pleasure, who was so bent upon her marriage with
this young Nobleman, that neither threatenings nor persuasions could divert her
from it. And tha^ he might appear in some capacity fit for the marriage of a
Queen, An. Reg. Eliz. 7. 1565.
she first confers upon him the Order of Knighthood, and afterward creats him
Baron of Ardamanack, Earl of Rosse, and Duke of Rothsay, which are the ordinary
Titles of the eldest and second sons of Scotland. In May she had convented the
Estates of Scotland, to whom she communicated her intention, with the reasons
of it. Which by the greatest part of the Assembly seemed to be allowed of, none
but the Lord Ochiltrie opposing what the rest approved. About the middle of
July, the marriage Rites were celebrated in the Royal Chapel by the Dean of
Restairig, and the next day the new Duke was proclaimed King by sound of
Trumpet, and declared to be associated with the Queen in the public
government. The news whereof being brought unto Queen Elizabeth, she seemed
more offended than indeed she was. For well she knew, that both the new King,
and the Earl his Father, were men of plain and open natures, not apt to
entertain any dangerous counsels to the disturbance of her quiet; that as long
as she retained the Countess with her (who was the Mother of the one, and the
Wife of the other) they seemed to stand bound to their good behavior, and
durst act nothing to the prejudice of so dear a pledge; but by the
precipitation of this marriage, the Queen of Scots had neither fortified her
self in the love of her people, nor in alliances abroad; and that it could not
otherwise be, but some new troubles must break out in Scotland upon this
occasion, by which it would be made uncomfortable and inglorious to her. And so
it proved in the event, for never was marriage more calamitous to the parties
themselves, or more dishonorable to that Nation, or finally more scandalous to
both Religions; in nothing fortunate but in the birth of James the 6th. born in
the Palace of Edenborough on the 19th. of July, Anno 1566. solemnly Crowned
King of the Scots on the same day of the Month, Anno 1567. and joyfully
received to the Crown of England, on the 14th. of March, Anno 1602.

In greater glory and felicity reigned the Queen of England. Whose praise
resounding in all Kingdoms of the North and West, invited Caecille, sister to
the King of Sweden, and wife of Christopher, Marquisse of Baden, to undertake a
tedious journey both by land and sea, from the furthest places of the North, to
see the splendour of her Court, and observe the prudence of her Government.
Landing at Dover in the beginning of September, they were there received by the
Lord Cobham, with a goodly train of Knights and Gentlemen; at Canterbury by the
Lady Cobham, with the like honorable train of Ladies and Gentlewomen; at
Gravesend by the Lord Hunsdon, with the band of Pensioners; at London on the
11th. of September by the Earl of Sussex and his Countess, who waited on them
to the Lodging appointed for them. Sca^^e had she rested there four days, when
she fell into a new travel, of which she was happily delivered by the birth of
a son; whom the Queen Christened in her own person, by the name of Edwardus
Fortunatus, the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Duke of Norfolk being Sureties
with her at the Font. She called him Edward, with relation to the King her
brother, whose memory she dearly loved; and Fortunatus in regard that he came
so luckily into the world, when his Mother after a most painful pilgrimage, was
safely come to pay her Devotions at that Shrine which she so much honored.
Having remained here till the April following, they were dismissed with many rich
Presents, and an annual pension from the Queen; conducted honorably by the
Lord Aburgavenny to the Port of Dover, and there shipped for Calais; filling
all places in the way betwixt that and Baden, with the report of the
magnificence of their entertainment in the Court of England. And that the
Glories of their entertainment might appear the greater, it happened that
Rambouillet a French Ambassador came hither at that time upon two solemnities;
that is to say, to be installed Knight of the Garter in the place and person of
that King, and to present the Order of St Michael, (the principal Order of that
Kingdom) to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Leicester. The one
performed with the accustomed Pomps and Ceremonies in the Chapel of St George
at Windsor, the other with like State and splendor, in the Royal Chapel at
Whitehall. Such a well tempered piety did at that time appear in the Devotions
of the Church of England, that generally the English Papists, and the
Ambassadors of foreign Princes still resorted to them.

But true it is, that at that time some zealots of the Church of Rome had begun
to slacken their attendance, not out of any new dislike which they took at the
service, but in regard of a Decree set forth in the Council of ^rent,
prohibiting all resort to the Churches of Heretics. Which notwithstanding the
far greater part continued in their first obedience, till the coming over of
that Roaring Bull from Pope Pius the 5th. by which the Queen was
excommunicated, the subjects discharged from their obedience to the Laws, and
the going or not going to the Church, made a sign distinctive to difference a
Roman Catholic from an English Protestant. And it is possible enough that they
might have stood much longer to their first conformity, if the discords brought
into the Church by the Zuinglian faction, together with their many innovations
both in Doctrine and Discipline, had not afforded them some further ground for
the desertion. For in this year it was that the Zuinglian or Calvinian faction
began to be first known by the name of Puritans, if Genebrard, Gualier, and
Spondanus (being all of them right good Chronologers) be not mistaken in the
time. Which name has ever since been appropriate to them, because of their
pretending to a greater Purity in the service of God, than was held forth unto
them (as they gave it out) in the Common Prayer Book; and to a greater
opposition to the Rites and Usages of the Church of Rome, than was agreeable to
the constitution of the Church of England. But this Purity was accompanied with
such irreverence, this opposition drew along with it so much licenciousnesse,
as gave great scandal and offense to all sober men; so that it was high time
for those which had the care of the Church, to look narrowly unto them, to give
a check to those disorders and confusions, which by their practices and their
preachings they had brought into it, and thereby laid the ground of that woeful
schism which soon after followed. And for a check to those disorders, they
published the Advertisement before remembered, subscribed by the Archbishop of
Can^erbury, the Bishops of London, Winchester, Ely, Lincoln, Rochester, and
other of her Majesty's Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical, according to
the Statute made in that behalf.

This was the only present remedy which could then be thought of. And to
prevent the like confusions for the time to come, a Protestation was devised to
be taken by all Parsons, Vicars and Curates in their several stations, by which
they were required to declare and promise, That they would not preach, not
publicly interpret, but only read that which is appointed by public
authority, without special License of the Bishop under his Seal; that they
would read the Service plainly, distinctly, and audibly, that all the people
might hear and understand; that they would keep the Register book according to
the Queens Majesty's Injunctions; that they would use sobriety in apparel, and
especially in the Church at Common Prayers, according to Order appointed; that
they would move the Parishioners to quiet and concord, and not give them cause
of offense, and help to reconcile them that be at variance, to their utmost
power; that they would read daily at the least one Chapter of the Old
Testament, and another of the New, with good advisement, to the increase of
their knowledge; that they would in their own persons, use and exercise their
Office and Place, to the honor of God, and the quiet of the Queens subjects
within their charge, in truth, concord and unity; as also observe, keep and
maintain such Order and Uniformity in all external Policy, Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church, as by the Laws, good usages and Orders, are already well
provided and established; and finally, that they would not openly meddle with
any Artificers occupations, as covetously to seek a gain thereby, having in
Ecclesiastical Livings, twenty Nobles or above by the year. An. Reg. Eliz. 8.
1565/6.
Which protestation, if it either had been generally pressed upon all the
Clergy (as perhaps it was not) or better kept by them that took it, the Church
might questionless have been saved from those distractions, which by the
Puritan Innovators were occasioned in it.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 8. A. D. 1565, 1566.
THus have we seen the public Liturgy confirmed in Parliament, with diverse
penalties on all those who either did reproach it, or neglect to use it, or
wilfully withdrew their attendance from it; the Doctrine of the Church declared
in the Book of Articles, agreed upon in Convocation* and ratified, in due form
of Law, by the Queens authority; external matters in officiating Gods public
service, and the apparel of the Clergy, regulated and reduced to their first
condition, by the Books of Orders and Advertisements. Nothing remains, but
that we settle the Episcopal Government, and then it will be time to conclude
this History. And for the settling of this Government by as good authority as
could be given unto it by the Laws of the Land, we a^e beholden to the
obstinacy of Dr Edmond Bonner, the late great slaughter-man of London. By a
Statute made in the last Parliament, for keeping her Majesty's Subjects in
their due obedience, a power was given unto the Bishops to tender and receive
the oath of Supremacy, of all manner of persons, dwelling and residing in their
several Diocesses. Bonner* was then prisoner in the Clink or Marshalsea, which
being in the Borough of Southwark, brought him within the Jurisdiction of Horn
Bishop of Winchester, by whose Chancellor the Oath was tendered to him. On the
refusal of which Oath, he is endicted at the Kings Bench upon the Statute, to
which he appeared in some Term of the year foregoing, and desires that counsel
be assigned to plead his cause, according to the course of the Court. The Court
assigns him no worse men than Christopher W^ay, afterward chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, that famous Lawyer Edmond Ploydon, whose learned Commentaries do
sufficiently set forth his great abilities in that Profession; and one Mr.
Lovelace, of whom we find nothing but the name.

By them and their Advice, the whole pleading chiefly is reduced to these two
heads, (to omit the nicities and punctilioes of lesser moment) the first
whereof was this, That Bonner was not at all named in the indictment, by the
style and title of Bishop of London, but only by the name Dr. Edmond Bonner,
Clerk, Dr. of the Laws, whereas at that time he was legally and actually
Bishop of London, and therefore the Writ to be abated, (as our Lawyers phrase
it) and the cause to be dismissed our of the Court. But Ploydon found here that
the Case was altered, and that this Plea could neither be allowed by Catiline,
who was then Chief Justice, nor by any other of the Bench, and therefore it is
noted by Chief Justice Dyer who reports the Case, with a Non allocatur. The
second principle Plea was this, That Horn at the time when the Oath was
tendered, was not Bishop of Winchester, and therefore not empowered by the said
Statute, to make tender of it by himself or his Chancellor. And for the proof
of this, that he was no Bishop, it was alleged that the form of Consecration of
Archbishops and Bishops, which had been ratified by Parliament in the time of
King Edward, had been repealed in the first year of Queen Mary, and so remained
at Horn's pretended consecration. The Cause being put off from Term to Term,
comes at the last to be debated amongst the Judges at Sergeants Inn. By whom
the cause was finally put upon the issue, and the trial of that issue Ordered
to be committed to a Jury of the County of Surry. But then withal it was
advised, that the decision of the Point should rather be referred to the
following Parliament, for fear that such a weighty matter might miscarry by a
contrary Jury, of whose either partiality, insufficiency, there had been some
proof made before, An. Reg. Eliz. 8. 1566.
touching the grants made by King Edward's Bishops; of which a great many were
made under this pretense, that the Granters were not actually Bishops, nor
legally possessed of their several Sees.

According to this sound advice, the business comes under consideration in the
following Parliament, which began on the 30th. of September, where all
particulars being fully and considerately discoursed upon, it was first
declared, That their not restoring of that Book to the former power in terms
significant and express, was but Casus omissus; and Secondly, That by the
Statute 5th. and 6th. Edw. 6th. it had been added to the Book of Common Prayer
and administration of the Sacraments, as a member of it, or at least an
appendant to it; and therefore by 1. Eliz. was restored again, together with
the said Book of Common Prayer, intentionally at the least, if not in terminis.
But being the words in the said Statute were not clear enough to remove all
doubts, they did therefore revive it now; and did accordingly Enact, that all
persons that had been, or should be made, Ordered, or Consecrate Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, Ministers of Gods Holy Word and Sacraments, or Deacons after
the form and order prescribed in the said Book, be in very deed, and also by
authority hereof, declared and enacted to be, and shall be, Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, Ministers and Deacons, rightly made, Consecrate, and Ordered,
Any Statute, Law, Canon, or any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. Nothing
else done in this Parliament which concerned the Church, not any thing at all
in the Convocation, by which it was of course accompanied, more than the
granting of a Subsidy of six shillings in the pound out of all their Benefices
and promotions. And as for Bonner, who was the other party to the cause in
question, it was determined, that neither he, nor any other person or persons,
should be impeached or molested in regard of any refusal of the said Oath
heretofore made, and hereafter to be made before the end of that Parliament.
Which favor was indulged unto them of the Laity, in hope of gaining them by
fair means to a sense of their duty; to Bonner and the rest of the Bishops, as
men that had sufficiently suffered upon that account, by the loss of their
Bishoprics.

By this last Act the Church is strongly settled on her natural pillars of
Doctrine, Government and Worship, not otherwise to have been shaken, than by
the blind zeal of all such furio^s Sampsons as were resolved to pull it on
their own heads, rather than suffer it to stand in so much glory. And here it
will be time to conclude this History, having taken a brief view of the State
of the Church, with all the abberrations from its first constitution as it
stood at this time, when the Puritan faction had began to disturb her Order,
and that it may be done with a greater certainty, I shall speak it in the words
of one, who lived, and writ his knowledge of it at this time, I mean John
Rastel, in his answer to the Bishops challenge. Who though he were a Papist,
and a fugitive Priest, yet I conceive that he has faithfully delivered to many
sad truths in these particulars. Three books he writ within the compass of
three years now last past against Bishop Jewel, in one of which he makes this
address unto him, viz. And though you Mr. Jewel (as I have heard say) do take
the bread into your hands when you celebrate solemnly, yet thousands there are
of your inferior Ministers, whose death it is to be bound to any such external
fashion, and your Order of celebrating the Communion is so unadvisedly
conceived, that every man is left unto his private Rule or Canon, whether he
will take the bread into his hands, or let it stand at the end of the table,
the Bread and Wine being laid upon the table, where it pleases the Sexton or
Parish-Clerk to set them. p. 28.

In the Primitive Church Altars were allowed amongst Christians, upon which
they offered the unbloody sacrifice of Christ's body; yet your company, to
declare what followers they are of antiquity, do account it, even among one of
the kinds of Idola^ry, if one keep an Altar standing. And indeed you follow a
certain Antiquity, not of the Catholics, but of desperate Heretics. Optatus
writing of the Donatists, that they did break, raze, and remove the Altars of
God upon which they offered. p. 34. and 165.

Where singing is used, what shall we say to the case of the people, that kneel
in the body of the Church? yea, let them hearken at the Chancel door it self,
they shall not be much wiser. Besides, how will you provide for great Parishes
where a thousand people are, etc? p. 50.

Then to come to the Apostles, where did you ever read that in their external
behavior, they did wear Frocks or Gowns, or four-cornered Caps? or that a
company of Lay-men-servants did follow them all in one Livery? or that at their
Prayers they sa^e in sides, or lay on the ground, or fell prostrate, or sung Te
Deum, or looked toward the South? or did wear Copes of Tiss^e or Velvet? with a
thousand more such questions. p. 446.

Whereas the Church of God so well ordered with excellent men of learning and
godliness, is constrained to suffer Cobblers, Weavers, Tinkers, Tanners,
Cardmakers, ^apsters, Fiddlers, Gaolers, and other of like profession, not only
to enter into disputing with her, but also to climb up into Pulpits, and to
keep the place of Priests and Ministers, etc. p. 2. Or that any Bagpipers,
Horse coursers, Jaylers, or Ale basters, were admitted then into the Clergy,
without good and long trial of their conversation? p. 162.

Or that any Bishop then did swear by his honor, when in his visitation abroad
in the Country, he would warrant his promise to some poor prisoner Priest under
him; or not satisfied with the prisoning of his adversary, did cry out, and
call upon the Prince, not disposed that way, to put them to most cruel deaths;
or refused to wear a white Rochet, or to be distinguished from the Laity by
some honest Priests apparel, p. 162. or gathered a Benevolence of his Clergy to
set him up in his household? p. 163.

Or that the Communion Table (if any then were) was removable up and down,
hither and thither, and brought at any time to the lower parts of the Church,
there to execute the Lords Supper -- or that any Communion was said on Good
Friday, or that the Sacrament was ministered then, sometimes in loaf Bread,
sometimes in Wafers, and those rather without the name of Jesus or the sign of
the Cross, than with it; or that at the Communion time the Minister should
wear a Cope, and at all other Service a Surplice only; or as at some places it
is used, nothing at all besides his common apparel, or that they used a common
and profane cup at the Communion, and not a consecrated and hallowed vessel?
p. 162, 163.

Or that a solemn curse should be used on A^h Wednesday; or that a Procession
about the fields was used in the Rogation week, rather thereby to know the
bounds and borders of every Parish, than to move God to mercy, and show men's
hearts to devotion; or that the man should put the Wedding ring upon the fourth
finger of the left hand of the Women, and not on the right, as has been many
hundred years continued? p. 163.

Or that the resi^ue of the Sacrament unreceived, was taken of the Priest, or
of the Parish Clerk, to spread their young childrens butter thereupon, or to
serve their own tooth with it at their homely table; or that it was lawful then
to have but one Communion in one Church in one day, p. 164. or that the Lent or
Friday was to be fasted for civil policy, not for any devotion, p. 165. or that
the Lay people communicating, did take the cup at one another hands, and not at
the Priests? p. 166.

Or that any Bishop then, threw down the Images of Christ and his Saints, and
set up their own, their wives, and their childrens pictures in their Chambers
and Parlours, p. 164. or that being a virgin at the taking of his Office, did
afterward, yet commendably, take a wife unto him, p. 165. or that was married
on Ash Wednesday; or that preached it to be all one to pray on a dunghill and in
a Church; or that any Friar of 60 years, obteining afterward the room of a
Bishop, married a young woman of nineteen years, etc? p. 166.

Thus have we seen the Church established on a sure foundation the Doctrine
built upon the Prophers and Apostles, according to the explication of the
ancient Fathers; the Government truly Apostolical, and (in all essential parts
thereof) of Divine institution; the Liturgy an extract of the Primitive forms;
the Ceremonies few, but necessary, and such as tended only to the preservation
of decency, and increase of piety. And we have seen the first Essays of the
Puritan faction, beginning low at Caps and Surplices, and Episcopal habits; but
aiming at the highest points; the alteration of the Government both in Church
and State, the adulterating of the Doctrine, and the subversion of the Liturgy
and form of worship here by Law established. But the discovery of those
dangerous Doctrines, and those secret Plots, and open practices, by which they
did not only break down the roof and walls of this goodly building, but
dug up the foundation of it, will better fall within the compass of a
Presbyterian, or Acrian History, for carring on of whose designs since the
days of Calvin, they have most miserably imbroyled all the Estates and
Kingdoms of these parts of Christendom; the Realms and Churches of Great
Britain more than all the rest. Let it suffice me for the present if I have
set the Church on its proper bottom, and showed her to the world in her
Primative luster, that we may see how strangely she has been unsettled, how
monstruously disfigured by unquiet men, whose interess is as incompatible with
the rights of Monarchy, as with distinction of apparel, the Government of
Bishops, all set forms of Prayer, and whatsoever also they contend against.
And therefore hear I will conclude my History of the Reformation, as not being
willing to look further into those disturbances, the lamentable effects whereof
we feel to this very day.

AN APPENDIX To the former BOOK:
CONTAINING, 1. The Articles of Religion agreed upon in Convocation Anno 1562.
compared with those which had been made and published in the Reign of King
Edward the 6 th Anno 1552. 2. Notes on the former Articles, concerning the
Particulars in which they differed, and the reasons of it.


A PREFACE to the following ARTICLES.
THe Lutherans having published that famous Confession of their faith, which
takes name from Ausb^rge, at which City it was tendered to the consideration of
Charles the 5th. and the Estates of the Empire there assembled, Anno 1530. In
tract of time, all other Protestant and Reformed Churches followed that
example; And this they did, partly to have a constant Rule a among themselves,
by which all private persons were to frame their judgments, and p^rtly to
declare that consent and harmony which was betwixt them and the rest of those
National Churches, which had made an open separation from the Popes of Rome.
Upon which grounds, the Prelates of the Church of England having concurred with
the godly desires of King Edward the sixth, for framing one uniform Order to be
used in God's public Worship; and publish ing certain pious and profitable
Sermons in the English Tongue for the instruction of the people, found a
necessity of holding forth some public Rule, to testify as well their
Orthodoxie in some points of Doctrine, as their abhorrency from the corruptions
of the Church of Rome, and the extravagancies of the Anabaptists and other
Sectaries. This gave the first occasion to the Articles of Religion published
in the Reign of King Edward the sixth, Anno 1552. as also of the Review thereof
by the Bishops and Clergy assembled in their Convocation under Queen Elizabeth,
Anno 1562. which being compared with one another will appear most plainly,
neither to be altogether the same, nor yet much different, the later being
rather an explication of the former, where the former seemed to be obscure, or
not expressed in such full and significant terms as they after were, than
differing from them in such points, wherein they dissented from the Romanists
and some modern Heretics: But what these differences were, both for weight and
number, the Reader may observe by seeing the Articles laid before him in their
several Columns (as hereafter follows) wherein the variations are presented
in a different character, or otherwise marked out by their several figures in
the line and margin: Which was first done with reference to some Annotations
intended once upon the same, for showing the reason of those Additions,
Substractions, and other alterations which were thought necessary to be made
to, and in, King Edward's Book, by the Bishops and Clergy in their Convocation,
Anno 1562. But that design being laid aside, as not so compatible with the
nature of our present History, the Articles shall be laid down plainly as they
are in themselves, leaving the further consideration of the differences which
occur between them to the Reader's care.

Articles agreed upon by the Bishops and other learned men (1) in the
Convocation held at London, in the year 1552. for the avoiding of Diversitities
of Opinions, and stablishing consent touching true Religion:

Published by the Kings Authority.

Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the
whole Clergy, in the Convocation holden at London, in the year 1562. for the
avoiding of Diversities of Opinions, and stablishing consent tonching true
Religion:

Published by the Queens Authority.

I. Of Faith in the holy Trinity.
THere is but one living and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or
passions; of infinite power, wisdom and goodness; the Maker and Preserver of
all things both visible and invisible. And in Unity of this Godhead there are
three Persons, one Substance, Power, and Eternity, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost.

I. Of Faith in the holy Trinity.
THere is but one living and true God, Everlasting, without body, parts, or
passions; of infinite power, wisdom, and goodness* the Maker and Preserver of
all things both visible and invisible. And in Unity of this Godhead there be
three Persons, of one Substance, Power, and Eternity, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost.

II. The Word of God made very Man.
The Son, which is the Word of the Father, took man's nature in the womb of the
blessed Virgin, of her substance: So that two whole and perfect Natures, that
is to say, the (2) Godhead and Manhood, were joined together in one Person,
never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God and very Man, who truly
suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and
to be a sacrifice not only for original guilt, but also for actual sins of men.

II. Of the Word or Son of God which was made very Man.
The Son, which is the Word of the Father, begotten from everlasting of the
Father, the very and eternal God, of one Substance with the Father: (2) took
Man's nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin, etc.

III. Of the going down of Christ into Hell.
As Christ dyed for us, and was buried, so also is it to be believed that he
went down into Hell: (3) For his Body lay in the Grave till his Resurrection,
but his Soul being separate from his Body, remained with the Spirits which were
detained in prison, that is to say, in Hell, and there preached unto them, as
witnesses that place of Peter.

III. Of the going down of Christ into Hell.
As Christ dyed for us, and was buried, so also it is to be believed that he
went down into Hell.

IV. The Resurrection of Christ.
Christ did truly rise again from death, and took again his Body, with flesh,
bones, and all things appertaining to the perfection of man's nature, wherewith
he ascended into heaven, and there fitte^h till he return to judge all men at
the last day.

IV. Of the Resurrection of Christ.
Christ did truly rise again from death, and took again his Body, with flesh,
bones, etc.

(5)

V. Of the holy Ghost.
The holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son, is of one Substance,
Majesty and Glory with the Father and the Son, very and eternal God.

V. The Doctrine of the holy Scripture is sufficient to salvation.
Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation, so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, although sometimes
it may be admitted (6) by Gods faithful people as pious, and conducing unto
order and decency, yet is not to be required of any man that it should be (7)
believed as an Article of the faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to
salvation.

VI. Of the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures for salvation.
Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to salvation, so that
whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man that it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or
be thought necessary or requisite to salvation.

In the name of the holy Scripture (7) we do understand those Canonical Books
of the Old and New Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the
Church; that is to say, Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Joshua
Judges Ruth 1st. of Samuel 2d. of Samuel etc.
And the other Books (as Hierom says) the Church does read for example of
life, and instruction of manners, but yet does it not apply them to establish
any Doctrine; such are these following, The 3d. of Esdras The 4th. of Esdras
The Book of Tobias The Book of Judeth The rest of the Book of Hester The Book
of Wisdom, etc.


All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do
receive and account them Canonical.

VI. The Old Testament is not to be rejected.
The Old Testament is not to be rejected, as if it were contrary to the New,
but to be retained. Forasmuch as in the Old Testament as in the New,
everlasting life is offered to Mankind by Christ, who is the only Mediatior
betwixt God and Man, being both God and Man. Wherefore they are not to be
heard, who feign, that the old Fathers did look only ^or transitory Promises.

VII. Of the Old Testament.
The Old Testament is not contra^y to the New, for both in the O^d and the New
Testament Everlasting life is offered Mankind by Christ, etc.



VII. The three Creeds.
The three Creeds, Nice Creed, A han^^^sius Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received; for they may be
proved by most certain warrants of the holy Scripture.

VIII. Of the three Creeds.
The three Creeds, N^ce Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that which is commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be ^eceived and bel^^v^d for
they may be proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture.

VIII. Original Sin.
Original sin stands not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelag^^an^ do
vainly talk, and at this day is assi^^med by the Anabaptists) (9) but it is the
Adam, whereby Man is very far from God, from Original Righteousness, and is of
his own nature inclined to evil, so that the flesh luste^h always contrary to
the spirit, and therefore in every person born into this wo^ld it deserves
Gods wrath and damnation. And this infection of nature does remain, yea in them
that are regenerated, whereby the lust of the flesh, called in Greek (...),
which some do expound the wisdom, some sensuality, some the affection, some the
desire of the flesh, is not subject to the Law of God. And although there is no
condemnation for them that believe and are baptized, yet the Apostle does
confess, that con^^piscence and lust has of it self the nature of sin.

IX. Of Original or Birth sin.
Original sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly
talk) but is the fault and the corruption of the nature of every man, etc.

IX. Of Free Will.
We have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the
grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will and working
with us, when we have that good will.

X. Of Free Will.
The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, (10) that he cannot turn
and prepare himself, by his own natural strength and good works, to faith and
calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
acceptable unto God, etc.

X. Of Grace.
The Grace of Christ, or the holy

(...)

IX.
Justification by faith only in Jesus Christ, in that sense wherein it is set
forth in the Homily of Justification, is the most certain and most wholesome
doctrine for a Christian man.

XI. Of the Justification of Man.
We are accounted Righteous before God only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works or deservings.
Wherefore that we are justified by faith is a most wholesome Doctrine, and very
full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of Justification.

(...)

XII. Of good Works.
Albeit the good works which are the (13) and follow after Justification,
cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods judgment, yet are
they pleasing and acceptable unto God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily
of a true and lively faith, insomuch that by them a lively faith may be as
evidently known, as a tree discerned by the fruit.

XII. Works before Justification.
Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ;
neither do they make men meet to receive Grace, or (as the School-Authors say)
deserve Grace of Congruity; yea rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the nature of
sin.

XIII. Of Works before Justification.
Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are
not pleasant to God, etc.

XIII. Works of Supererogation.
Voluntary works besides, over and above Gods Commandments, which they call
works of Supererogation, cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety; for by
them men do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as they are
bound to do, but that they do more for his sake, than of bounden duty is
required; Whereas Christ says plainly, When you have done all that are
commanded to you, say, We are unprofitable servants.

XIV. Of Works of Supererogation.
Voluntary works besides, over and above Gods commandments, which they call
works of Supererogation, etc.

XIV. None but Christ without sin.
Christ in the truth of our nature, was made like unto us in all things (sin
only except) from which he was clearly void both in his flesh and in his
spirit: He came to be a Lamb without spot, who by sacrifice of himself once
made, should take away the sins of the world; and sin (as St. John says) was
not in him: But all we the rest (although baptized and born in Christ) yet
offend iu many things, and if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us.

XV. Of Christ alone without sin.
Christ in the truth of our nature, was made like unto us in all things, (sin
only except) etc.

XV. Of the sin against the holy Ghost.
Not every deadly sin, willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against the
holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore the grant of Repentance is not to be
denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism. After we have received the holy
Ghost, we may depart from Grace given, and fall into sin, and by the Grace of
God (we may) arise again and amend our lives. And therefore they are to be
condemned which say, They can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny
the place of Penance (14) to such as truly repent.

XVI. Of sin after Baptism.
Not every deadly sin, willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against the
holy Ghost, and unpardonable, etc.

And therefore they are to be condemned which say, They can no more sin as long
as they live here, or deny the place of Forgiveness to such as truly repent.

XVI. The Blasphemy against the holy Ghost.
The blasphemy against the holy Ghost (15) when any man, out of malice and
hardness of heart, does wilfully reproach, and persecute in an hostile manner,
the truth of Gods Word, manifestly made known unto him. Which sort of men,
being made obnoxious to the curse, subject themselves to the most grievous of
all wickednesses; from whence this kind of sin is called unpardonable, and so
affirmed to be by our Lord and Savior.

(...)

XVII. Of Predestination and Election.
Predestination unto life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before
the foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly decreed by his
counsel, secret unto us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has
chosen out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as
vessels made to honor. Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a
benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose, by his Spirit working in
due season; they through grace obey the calling, they be justified freely, they
are made sons by Adoption, they are made like the image of the only begotten
Jesus Christ, they walk religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy
they attain to everlasting felicity.

As the godly consideration of Predestination and Election in Christ, is full
of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as feel
in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of the
flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their mind to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
faith of eternal salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God: So for curious and carnal persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into wretchlesness of most
unclean living^, no less perilous than desperation.

Furthermore, though the Decrees of (17) yet must we receive Gods promises in
such wise as they be generally set forth to us in holy Scripture; and in our
doings that will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly declared unto
us in the Word of God.

XVII. Of Predestination and Election.
Predestination unto life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before
the foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly decreed by his
counsel, secret unto us, to deliver from curse and damnation those has chosen
in Christ, (16) out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting
salvation.

-- they are made the sons of God by Adoption, they be made like the Image of
His only begotten Son Jesus Christ, etc.

Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be generally
set forth to us, etc.

XVIII. Everlasting Salvation to be obtained only in the Name of Christ.
They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, That every man shall be
saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his life according to that Law, and the light of Nature: For holy Scripture
does set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved.

XVIII. Of obtaining Eternal Salvation by the Name of Christ.
They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, That every man shall be
saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, etc.

XIX. All men are bound to keep the Precepts
Although the Law given from God by Moses as touching Ceremonies and Rites, do
not bind Christian men, nor the Civil Precepts thereof ought of necessity to be
received in any Commonwealth; yet notwithstanding no Christian man whatsoever
is free from the obedience of the Commandments which are called Moral.
Wherefore they are not Weak, and brag continually of the Spirit, by which they
do pretend, that all whatsoever they preach is suggested to them, though
manifestly contrary to the holy Scripture.

(...)

XX. Of the Church.
The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in which the
pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according
to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things, that of necessity are requisite to
the same.

As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred, so also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their Livings, and manner of
Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith.

XIX. Of the Church.
The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in which the
pure Word of God is preached, etc.

XXI. Of the Authority of the Church.
It is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods
Word written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be
repugnant to another; Where^ore although the Church be a witness and keeper of
holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so besides
the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed, for necessity of
Salvation.

XX. Of the Authority of the Church.
The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in (20) It
is not lawful for the Church, etc.

XXII. Of the Authority of General Councils.
General Councils may not be gathered together without the commandment and will
of Princes. And when they be gathered together, (forasmuch as they be an
Assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and word of God)
they may err, and sometimes have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless it may be declared, that they be taken out of
holy Scripture.

XXI. Of the Authority of General Councils.
General Councils may not be gathered together without the commandment and will
of Princes, etc.

XXIII. Of Purgatory.
The Doctrine of the Schoolmen concerning Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping, and
Ado^ation, as well of Images as of Relicts, and also invocation of Saints, is a
fond thing vainly invented, and grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but
rather perniciously repugnant to the Word of God.

XXII. Of Purgatory.
The Doctrine of the Schoolmen concerning Purgatory, etc.

XXIV. No man to minister in the Church except he be called.
It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public
Preaching, or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully called and sent to execute the same. And those we ought to judge
lawfully called and sent, which be ^hosen and called to this work by men, who
have publi^k Authority, given unto them in the Cong^egation, to call and send
Ministers into the Lords Vineyard.

XXIII. Of ministering in the Congregation.
It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public Preaching,
etc.

XXV. All things to be done in the Congregation in such a Tongue as is
understood by the People.
It is most fit, and most agreeable to (21) that nothing be read or rehearsed
in the Congregation, in a Tongue not known unto the People; which Paul has
forbidden to be done, unless some be present to interpret.

XXIV. Of speaking in the Congregation in such a Tongue, as the people
understands.
It is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of God, and the custom of the
primitive Church, to have public prayer in the Church or to minister the
Sacraments in a Tongue not understanded by the people.

XXVI. Of the Sacraments.
Our Lord Jesus Christ gathered his (22) by Sacraments very few in number, most
easy to be kept, and of most excellent signification, that is to say, Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord.

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed upon or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And in such only as worthily receive
the same they have a wholesome effect or operation, not as some say, Ex opere
operato.

The Sacraments ordained by the Word of God, be not only badges or tokens of
Christian men's profession; but rather they be certain sure witnesses, effectual
signs of grace, and Gods Good will toward us, by the which he does work
invisibly in us, and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm
our faith in him.

XXV. Of the Sacraments.
Sacraments ordained of Christ (23) be not only badges and tokens of Christian
men's profession, but rather they be certain sure witnesses, and effectual
signs of Grace, and Gods good will toward us, by the which he does work
invisibly in us, and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm
our faith in him.

There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lo^d in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism and the ^upper of the Lord.

Those five commonly called Sacraments

The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ to be gazed on or to be carried
about, but that we should duly use them. And in such only as worthily receive
the same, they have a wholesome effect or operation; But they that receive them
unworthily purchase to themselves Damnation, as St. Paul says.

XXVII. The wickedness of the Ministers takes not away the Efficacy of Divine
Institutions.
Although in the visible Church, the Evil be ever mingled with the Good, and
sometimes the Evil have chief Authority in the Ministration of the Word and
Sacraments; yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name, but in
Christ's, and do minister by his Commission and Authority, we may use their
Ministry both in hearing the Word of God, and in receiving of the Sacraments;
Neither is the effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their wickedness, nor
the Grace of Gods of Gifts diminished from such as by faith and rightly do
receive the Sacraments, ministered unto them which be effectual, because of
Christ's Institution and promise, although they be ministered by evil men.

Nevertheless it appertains to the Discipline of the Church, that inquiry be
made after them, and that they be accused by those, that have knowledge of
their offenses; and finally being found guilty by just judgment be deposed.

XXVI. Of the unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the Effect of the
Sacraments.
Although in the visible Church, the Evil be ever mingled, etc.

-- that inquiry be made after evil Ministers, etc.

XXVIII. Of Baptism.
Baptism is not only a sign of Profession, and mark of Difference, whereby
Christian men are discerned from others, that be not Christened; but it is also
a sign of Regeneration, or new birth, whereby, as by an Instrument, they that
receive Baptism Rightly, are grafted into the Church; the promises of
forgivness of sin, and of our Adoption to be the sons of God, by the holy
Ghost are visibly signed and sealed; Faith is confirmed, and Grace increased by
virtue of Prayer unto God. The custom of the

XXVII. Of Baptism.
Baptism is not only a sign of Profession, and mark of Difference, etc.

-- The Baptism of young children is in any wise to be retained in the Church,
as most agreeable to the Institution (27)

XXIX. Of the Lords Supper.
The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the Love that Christians ought
to have amongst themselves, one to another; but rather it is a Sacrament of our
Redemption by Christ's death. Insomuch, that to such as Rightly, Worthily, and
with Faith receive the same, the Bread which we break is a partaking of the
Body of Christ, and likewise the Cup of Blessing is a partaking of the Blood of
Christ.

Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of Bread and Wine) in the
Supper of the Lord cannot be proved by Holy Writ; but it is repugnant to the
plain words of Scripture, and has given occasion to many Superstitions.

Since the very being of human (29) that the body of one and the same man
cannot be at one and the same time in many places, but of necessity must be in
some certain and determinate place; therefore the Body of Christ cannot be
present in many different places at the same time. And since, as the holy
Scriptures testify, Christ has been taken up into Heaven, and there is to
abide till the end of the world; it becomes not any of the faithful to
believe or profess, that there is a Real or Corporal presence (as they phrase
it) of the Body and Blood of Christ in the holy Eucharist.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, was not by Christ's Ordinance, reserved,
carried about, lifted up, or worshipped.

XXVIII. Of the Lords Supper.
The Supper of the Lord is not only a sign of the Love, etc.

-- but is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthrows the (28),
and has given occasion to many Superstitions.

The Body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after an

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christ's Ordinance, etc.

(...)

XXIX. Of the Wicked which eat not the Body of Christ in the Lord's
The wicked and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do carnally
and visibly press with their teeth (as St. Augustine says) the Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ; yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ, but
rather to their condemnation, do eat and drink the Sign or Sacrament of so
great a thing.

XXX.
The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay People; For both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be
ministered to all Christian People alike.

(...)

XXX. Of the one Oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
The Offering of Christ once made, is the perfect Redemption, Propitiation, and
Satisfaction for all the sins of the whole World, both Original and Actual, and
there is none other Satisfaction for sin but that alone; Wherefore the
Sacrifices of Masses, in which it was commonly said, that the Priests did offer
Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, were
fables and dangerous deceits.

XXXI. Of the one Oblation of Christ finished upon the Cross.
The offering of Christ once made is the perfect Redemption, etc.

blasphemous fables and (33) dangerous deceits.

XXXI. A single Life is imposed on none by the Word of God.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are not commanded by God's Law, either to vow
the estate of a single life, or to abstain from Marriage.

XXXII. Of the Marriage of Priests.
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons are not commanded by Gods Law, etc.

Therefore it is lawful also for them, (34) as for all other Christian men, to
marry at their own discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to
godliness.

XXXII. Excommunicated Persons are to be avoided.
That person which by open Denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from
the unity of the Church, and Excommunicated, ought to be taken of the whole
multitude of the faithful as an Heathen, and Publican, until he be openly
reconciled by Penance, and received into the Church by a Judge which has
authority thereunto.

XXXIII. Of Excommunicated Persons, how they are to be avoided.
That person which by open Denunciation of the Church, etc.

XXXIII. Of the Traditions of the Church.
It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, and
utterly like; for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversities of Countries, Times, and men's Manners, so that
nothing be ordained against Gods Word. Whosoever through his private judgment
willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the
Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be ordained and approved
by common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly, (that others may fear to do
the like) as he that offends against the common Order of the Church, and
hurts the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the Consciences of the
weak Brethren.

XXXIV. Of the Traditions of the Church.
It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies, etc.

Every particular or National Church (35) has Authority to ordain, change or
abo^ish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by Man's Authority,
so that all things be done to edifying.

XXXIV. Of the Homilies.
The Homilies lately delivered (36) England by the Kings Injunction^, do
contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and fit to be embraced by all men; and
for that cause they are diligently, plainly, and distinctly to be read to the
People.

XXXV. Of Homilies.
The second Book of Homilies, the several Titles whereof we have joined under
this Article, does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for the
times; as does the former Book of Homilies, which were set forth in the time of
Edward the sixth: and therefore we judge them to be read in Churches, by the
Ministers diligently and distinctly, that they may be understood of the People.
The names of the Homilies. Of the Right use of the Church. Of Repairing
Churches. Against the Peril of Idolatry. Of Good Works, etc.


XXXV. Of the Book of Common Prayer, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England.
The Book lately delivered to the Church of England, by the Authority (37),
containing the manner and form of public Prayer, and the ministration of the
Sacraments, in the said Church of England; as also the Book published by the
same Authority for Ordering Ministers in the Church, are both of them very
pious, as to ^uth of Doctrine, in nothing contrary, but agreeable to the
wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel, which they do very much promote and
illustrate. And for that cause they are by all faithful Members of the Church
of England, but chiefly of the Ministers of the Word, with all thankfulness and
readiness of mind, to be received, approved, and commended to the People of God.

XXXVI. Of Consecration of Bishops and Ministers.
The Book of Consecration of Edward the sixth, and confirmed at the same time
by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary to such
Consecration and Ordering. Neither has it any thing that of it self is
superstitious and ungodly; And therefore whosoever are Consecrated or ordered
according to the Rites of that Book, since the second year of the aforementioned
King Edward, unto this time, or hereafter shall be Consecrated or ordered,
according to the same Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and
lawfully Consecrated and Ordered.

XXXVI. Of the Civil Magistrates.
The King of England is after Christ England and Ireland.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Civil Magistrate is ordained and approved by God, and therefore are to be
obeyed, not only for fear of wrath, but for conscience sake.

C^vil or temporal Laws may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and
grievous offenses.

It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
Weapons, and serve in the Wars.

XXXVII. Of the Civil Magistrates.
The Queens Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England, and other
her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all cases does appertain, and is
not, nor ought to be subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty (40), by which Titles we understand
the minds of some slanderous folks to be offended: We give not to our Princess
the Ministry, either of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments, the which thing the
Injunctions lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen, do most plainly testify:
but that only Prerogative, which we see to have been given always to all godly
Princes, in holy Scriptutes by God himself, that is, that they should rule all
Estates committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil doers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of this Realm may punish Christian men with death, etc.

XXXVII. The goods of Christians are not common.
The Riches and Goods of Christians are not common, as touching the right title
and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely boast.
Notwithstanding every man ought, of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give alms to the poor, according to his ability.

XXXVIII. Of Christian men's Goods which are not common.
The Riches and Goods of Christian men are not common, etc.

XXXVIII. It is lawful for a Christian to take an Oath.
As we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men, by our
Lord Jesus Christ, and James his Apostle; so we judge that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requires, in a
cause of Faith and Charity, so it be done according to the Prophets teaching,
in Justice, Judgment, and Truth.

XXXIX. Of a Christian man's Oath.
As we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men, etc.

XXXIX.
The Resurrection of the dead is not past already, as if it belonged only to
the Soul, which by the grace of Christ is raised from the death of sin, but is
to be expected by all men in the last Day: for at that time, as the Scripture
does most apparently testify, the dead shall be restored to their own bodies,
flesh and bones, to the end that the wicked man, according as either
righteously or wickedly he has passed this life, may, according to his works,
receive rewards or punishments.

XL.
They who maintain, that the Souls of men deceased do either sleep without any
manner* of sense to the day of Judgment; or affirm that they dye together with
the Body, and shall be raised therewith at the last Day, do wholly differ from
the Right* Faith and Orthodox Belief, which is delivered to us in the Holy
Scriptures.

XLI.
They who endeavor to revive the Fable of the Millenarians, are therein
contrary to the holy Scriptures, and cast themselves down headlong into Jewish
Dotages.

XLII.
They also deserve to be condemned, who endeavor to restore that pernicious
Opinion, that all men, though never so ungodly, shall at last be saved; when
for a certain time, appointed by the Divine Justice, they have endured
punishment for their sins committed.

FINIS.

