A New Creature: Or, A Short DISCOURSE, OPENING The Nature, Properties, and
Necessity of the Great Work of the New Creation upon the Souls of Men.

BEING Some Plain DISCOURSES on Galatians vi. 15.

By O. H. an Unworthy Minister of the Gospel.

Rev. xxi. 5. Behold, I make all Things new. Aug. de civit. Dei, lib. 11. cap.
21. Nec Author est excellentior Deo, nec Ars efficacior Dei verbo, nec causa
melior, quam ut bonum creetur a bono Deo. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at
the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower end of Cheapside, 1695.

AN EPISTLE TO My Dear Friends and Beloved Hearers at N. in Yorkshire.
My dearly Beloved;
TWO Sorts of Doctrine I have always judged necessary, and very seasonable; 1.
What concerns the Person, Natures, Offices, and Undertakings of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in all his mediatory Latitude: 2. That which relates to a saving
Internal Work of Grace upon the hearts of Men, which is the Spring of all
External Motions: These are as standing Dishes requisite in every Feast, and to
the pursuit whereof, my Heart has been much inclined: the former I have
largely treated upon, from 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy
of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save Sinners, of
whom I am chief. Which contains the Sum and Substance of our Christian Faith,
the Marrow of the Gospel, the Quintescence of our Happiness: nor does any
Minister need to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the Power of God
to Salvation, (...) every one that believes, Romans 1.16. And though this may
seem to be out of fashion amongst some that would be esteemed rational
Preachers, and think treating of Christ, as but a conceited Canting, (though
the great Apostle of the Gentiles mentions the Name of Christ nine several
times in his Ten first Verses of 1 Cor. 1. and in his Epistles some hundreds of
times; yea, and glories in it, and professes, 1 Cor. 2 2. I determined not to
know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.) But I wave
this Subject for the present. 2. That which has respect to the inner Man,
especially the New Man, a saving Work in the Soul, is the Subject before us;
which my Heart has been much set upon; and after my Pilgrimage and Travels
amongst you above Forty Four Years, in many Difficulties, not without some
success of my poor Labors, knowing that shortly I must put off this my
Tabernacle 2 Pet. 1.14. I was willing to leave one Legacy more behind me, as a
standing Testimony to surviving Posterity, of my ancient endeared Love to your
precious Souls, and a mean of your spiritual good, when my Mouth is stopped with
Dust: And having lately treated on this Subject, some of you desired me to
Print it, which I was the more willing to do, upon these Motives; 1. Because I
am sure the Subject is of daily, important, and universal use: 2. I have not
seen any full Treatise upon this Subject: 3. Most need it: 4. Some were greatly
alarmed in hearing it; and who knows what good the presenting it to the Eye, as
well as to the Ear may do? It Is true, it is simply and plainly dressed, not with
Ornaments of Art or Rhetorical Flourishes to set it off to the Learned, being
calculated in intelligible Language to vulgar Capacities, and possibly it may
prove more profitable to Country Hearers: nor ought it to offend any, that much
of this Treatise is in Scripture dialect in words, The Holy Ghost teaches, 1
Cor. 2.13. which the Spiritual Man cannot but approve, and Love.

And now, my dear Neighbors and Friends, God knows, and you know, From the
first day that I came to you, after what manner I have been with you at all
Seasons, Acts 20.18. My Tears, Temptations, Banishment, Imprisonment,
Confiscations, Night Travels, and Preachings, Fastings, Watchings,
Encouragements, Discouragements: and I may truly appeal to the Searcher of
Hearts, wha the same Apostle said of his Galatians, My little Children, of whom
I travail in Birth again, until Christ be formed in you, Gal. 4.19. Alas, what
are you better for having Christ revealed to you, unless he be revealed in you,
Gal. 1.16. Oh! woe will be to you, if you prove Christless, after your hearing
so much of Christ. Words signify little without a Work: every work will not
serve turn, but what is genuine, and accompany Salvation. I will say to you, as
Dr. Harris to his Children in his last Will and Testament; Think how you and I
shall endure the Sight, the Thought one of another at the Last Day, if you
appear in the Old Adam; much less shall you stand before Christ, unless you
show the Image of Christ in you; and therefore never cease till you be made New
Creatures, and study well what that is. Thus he.

Alas! Sirs, you may make a shift to pass through this world unsuspected; many
Moralists, yea, Christians, may subscribe their Names to your Testimonial, and
give you the Right Hand of fellowship in this world, when you must be set at
the Left in the next: Things will not then be carried as they are now. Deal
faithfully with God and your own Souls; see you have the Root of the Matter,
the Life of Grace: you may herd amongst the Sheep now, and be found amongst
Goats at last. A King will give his Subjects liberty to travel into another
King's Dominions, reserving their Loyalty to their own King: Papists in Queen
Elizabeth's days, being commanded to go to Church, or be punished, sent to the
Pope for a Resolution of this Case of Conscience: His Answer was, They might
comply; but Fili, da mihi cor, My Son, give me thy Heart: Thus the Devil will
give you leave to read, pray, hear, receive, attend on Ordinances; but as long
as he has you fast by the Heart Strings, you are still his Slaves, none of
God's Servants: for the Soul is the Man: As a man thinks in his Heart, so is
he, Prove. 23.7. As a man's Principles are stated, so he receives his
denomination, a good or a bad, a Jew, or an Heathen; a Saint or a Bruit. If you
have a Beast's Heart in the shape of a Man, God will esteem you no better than
a Beast. And it is an usual Saying, It is better be a Beast, than be like a
Beast. It is the Saying of a Learned Man. Some make the Image of the Living God
hewn out of the Stock of a dead Tree: But the New Creature is not such a
lifeless thing as many imagine: It is the Spirit of power, of love, and of a
sound mind, Baxter's Life of Faith, page 122.
2 Timothy 17. This Text, (says a good Divine) does express the three parts of
God's Image in the New Creature, (...), certainly this vital Principle has
strong and vigorous motions God-wards, and against Sin; Its an holy Spark,
working upwards to God, and forwards straight for Heaven: Most Professors are
mistaken in this great Work; though Ministers are often calling on you Sinners to
look about you, we tell you, there is a Cheat in the case, Satan is busy to lay
his Brats in God's Bed. Counterfeit Coin is common; our Warnings now will be
thought of, these frequent Summons will ring in your Ears, our Sermons will
have a Repetition in this, or in another world: Conscience will gall you, and
you cannot plead Ignorance, or say, [non putaram] I thought not of such a day.
How often do we tell you of the danger of dying in your old state, and of that
Sulphurous Lake, that thousands are scolded in that once lived as securely as
you now do, and they are in an hopeless, helpless Eternity; and how can you
tell but this may be the last day? the last warning or overture of Grace, the
last knock at your Door? God may say, Away, be gone out of my sight, take him,
Devil, I will no more be troubled with such a Miscreant. But if after all this,
you be senceless, and lie still while you are nailed in your Coffin, you are
dead, twice dead; and this Security is a confutation of that Principle, that
Adam and his Posterity by the Fall, is not dead, but sleeps, or only in a
swound and languor, but life is in him: No, no, this sad Stupor or Spiritual
Lethargy, shows it is not an excitation of a principle, but an infusion of new
Life: all our shouting, and rubbing, and pricking, will not recover Sinners; we
must leave them to a creating Power, and to him that can raise the Dead.

But let me rather persuade you to look after this New-Creation-Work, from the
Advantage it will be to all sorts of Persons, of every Age and Relation.

Oh! you Old Persons, that are going off the Stage of the World, dropping into
the Grave and Eternity, that have been long, and not yet lived, begin at last
to turn over a new leaf, seek a New Life, that you may have Comfort, and not
terror in your expiring Pangs: yet there is hope, God still waits to be
gracious, and stands knocking at your Door; rise out of your Bed of sloth, put
back the Bar, admit him with all his Graces; make out for this Change, against
your last Change.

You Young People, that have lately stepped into the World, and slipped thus far
before you know where you are, it may be, young in Years, old in Sin, you are
entering into a wicked world, with wicked hearts, Oh! look after this blessed
Antidote, that may prevent Infection; be sure of a Pilot that may row you
through this boisterous Sea safe to the Haven: without new hearts you will make
this bad World worse, and be worse by it; rather seek to amend it.

You that are entering into Callings, or for changing Conditions, you will be
fit for nothing without this; you will bring a Curse into every Relation, and
Vocation without this: but this will make you fit for any thing, and you will
be attended with God's Blessing, in all you set about.

You Married Persons, I recommend this New Creature to you, that you be sure to
marry in the Lord, then you will be Heirs together of the Grace of Life: and
pray, praise God together, have this sweet Relation perfumed, and meet in Glory.

You Rich Persons are Beggars without this; this will make you rich and
honorable, the excellent in the Earth, God's Jewels, Favorites of Heaven. And
you poor, that cannot get daily Bread, this will make you rich in Faith, Heirs
of a Kingdom: Oh what a Treasure is this fear of the Lord!

You poor Athenians, that are always inquiring after News, new Opinions, new
Inventions, new Fashions, here is a brave and blessed piece of Novelty for you;
this New Creature will stand you in stead, not so much to please your itching
Ears, as to profit your Languishing Souls.

Well, I have done my poor Endeavor, to effect this work upon your Hearts.
When we have said and done all we can, we have done nothing at all, except the
Eternal Jehovah strike with the great Hammer: O thou infinite Almighty God,
that have made the Earth by thy Power, have established the World by thy
Wisdom, and stretched out the Heavens by thy discretion, Jer. 10.12. Look into
the Hearts of Sinners, see what a Chaos of Confusion is by Sin, brought upon
the noble Soul; go over thy Work again, mend what Sin has marred, put Light in
the Understanding, Power into the Will, Rectitude into the Affections, make
Conscience do its office. O that Corruption may be mortified, Satan cast out, a
sound Principle introduced, the Soul redintegrated, and everlastingly saved.

I commend these my poor Labors into the Hands of God, to use them as he sees
good; and to you that heard these Sermons, and to others that shall take the
pains to read them, having delivered my Conscience, in some measure of
Uprightness, whether the Effect answer my Pains and Aims, or no: And in this
labor of Love, I am willing to take my Leave of the World, as to troubling it
any further in this kind, and commend you, my Brethren, to God, and to the Word
of his Grace, which is able to [renew your hearts, and] build you up, and to
give you an Inheritance among all them which are sanctified; Acts 20.32. which
is the daily Prayer of

A Poor Watchman for Your Souls, O. H.
May, 3. 95.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. THe Text opened, a Doctrine raised and handled, Page 1 Chap. II. What
is meant by a New Creature; Doctrine raised Page 13 Chap. III. Why this is
called a New Creature? A Parallel betwixt the Old Creation and this New
Creation Page 30 Chap. IV. Wherein the New Creature is available to Souls Page
43 Chap. V. Some Inferences by way of Question and Answer from the Premises
Page 56 Chap. VI. An Use of Reproof and Conviction of sundry sorts Page 69
Chap. VII. An Use of Correction for Reforming Sinners Mistakes Page 94 Chap.
VIII. Some Objections of Sinners answered, against their Endeavors to be New
Creatures Page 110 Chap. IX. Instructions for the Trial of our Spirits, whether
we be indeed New Creatures Page 124 Chap. X. A further Trial of the New
Creature, as to the Will and Affections; the Subjects of it; and its Properties
Page 138 Chap. XI. A Trial of the New Creature, by its Effects, Consequences
and Proper Operations Page 152 Chap. XII. Directions what Means may be used for
the obtaining this New Creature Page 164 Chap. XIII. Instructions, how those
must behave themselves that are indeed New Creatures Page 177 Chap. XIV. An
Answer to some Cases of Conscience Page 189
Galatians vi. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision, but a New Creature.


CHAP. I. The Text opened, a Doctrine raised, and handled.
SOme Interpreters think that this Text comes not in, so much as a proof of the
Assertion immediately preceding of the Apostle's glorying in Christ's Cross,
and his being crucified to the world, ver. 14. As it is a conclusion of the
main Doctrine delivered in this Epistle, viz. That a Sinner is not justified by
the Law, but by Faith in Jesus Christ, q. d. [hoc est quod dico et repeto, et
extremis verbis contendo] I urge this first and last with the greatest ardour
and importunity, let Jews and Judaizing Christians say what they will or can,
this I resolutely affirm, that now in the Gospel-state, as settled by Christ,
it is of no great moment, whether a Man be a Jew or a Gentile: It Is true,
under, the Law there was something of privilege in Circumcision, as it was a
badge of God's Covenant with Abraham's Seed, and the Uncircumcised were
Strangers to the Covenants of Promise, and had no right to Church Membership,
but now in the Gospel, God is the God of the believing Gentiles, as well as of
the Jews; for there is not one God in the Old Testament, and another in the
New, as the Manichees dreamed, but it is one God, that shall justify the
Circumcision by Faith, and Uncircumcision through Faith, Romans 3.29, 30. i. e.
both one way, so they be sincere Saints, for God regards not any for being
Circumcised, nor rejects any for the want of it, but looks at real
Sanctification of Heart and Life.

This is a sound and apposite dependence of the words; but Calvin adjoyns them
to the foregoing Verse. The Reason why the blessed Apostle is crucified to the
World, and the World to him, is because in Christ (in whom he is planted) the
chief thing available, is a New Creature; other things are insignificant: the
truth of this the Apostle had before demonstrated [quia Scilicet, veritas
Evangelij omnes legis figuras absorbeat, and exinaniat] because the
Gospel Truth makes void legal Figures: so both Interpretations come to one.

It Is observable that this Phrase is three times used, with different
Conclusions, 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is
nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God. Again, Gal. 5.6. For in
Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but
Faith which works by Love. And in this Text, But a New Creature: They all
conspire in this one Sense, That in this New Testament-Dispensation by Christ,
no Privileges are efficacious to the Salvation of a Soul, without a working
Faith accompanied with a Principle of Grace in the Heart, and an Holy Life,
agreeable to the Rule of God's holy Word: thus there is a due consistency in
these necessary Qualifications: for in Spiritual Means, Marks, Methods of
Salvation, there is a blessed Combination, Confederacy and Concatenation: not a
Link of this Golden Chain can be wanting: the true Religion is of one piece,
there is no loose Joint, but all the parts make up one entire Body and complete
System of Christianity.

But to come to the Words, in which we have the negative and positive parts of
our Religion: wherein it does not consist, and wherein it does: Suppose Men had
excellent Privileges, and choice Advantages, these would not of themselves
attain the Ends, viz. God's glory and Man's happiness.

By this Word, [in Christ Jesus] some understand in the Christian Religion,
others in the Church or Kingdom of Christ, others in the Gospel Dispensation,
[in negotio salutis obtinendae per Christum] in the business of obtaining
Salvation by the Lord Jesus Christ: The Doctrine of the Gospel is called the
Faith of Jesus Christ, Romans 3.22. wherein, and whereby the Glorious design of
saving Sinners by Jesus Christ, does eminently and evidently appear, called the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
4.6. And he has brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel; or
through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10.

Circumcision was to the Jews a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11.
a Badge and Cognizance, whereby an Israelite was distinguished from other
People, to be God's peculiar Heritage: it both engaged to Duty, and entailed
many Privileges: see Romans 9.4.

By its not availing any thing, is signified its ineffectualness to attain
these two great Ends: 1. The justifying of a Sinner before God: 2. The
Salvation of a Soul with God: not that I think the New Creature justifies, as I
shall show hereafter, but it is in a justified Person, and these external
Privileges avail not to our Justification, and the want of them hinders not;
but in this case, there is neither Greek, nor Jew, Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free, but Christ is all, and in
all, Col. 3.11. Hence observe.

Doctrine 1. That the richest Privileges and most glorious Professions, avail
no Man without a New Creature.

The Jews boasted of their Privileges, and by consequence Gospel-Professours,
are apt to bear themselves big with what they think to be of great worth, but
they all signify nothing in the sight of God, if they be not New Creatures:
Men may please themselves with external Shows, Professions, Privileges, as to
be born of Godly Parents, to be baptized, living under pure and powerful
Ordinances, associating with the best Saints in the purest Churches, sitting
down at the Lord's Supper, making credible Profession, performing Religious
Duties; yea, suffering much for the Religion of God; all these together will
not avail a Soul, in order to his Eternal Happiness, without being a New
Creature: mistake me not, I do not say, but these are good in their places, and
great Mercies and Duties.

Observe 1. Things that hinder or oppose the New Creature, are hurtful in their
own Nature, and to be laid aside, as Sin and the Old Man, Ephesians. 4.22.

2. Things that further not this New Creature in our Hearts, are comparatively
useless, though lawful, as the Profits, Pleasures, Honors of this world.

3. Things that do further the Work of the New Creature by God's appointment,
are not of themselves sufficient to attain their End, without the concurrence
of divine Grace; as Preaching, Prayer, Seals, they are but means.

4. Things good in themselves may, by man's abuse, prove rather Snares and
Hindrances, then Helps and Furtherances in Heaven's Road; Circumcision was once
good and God's Ordinance, but when some Judaizers affirmed, that except
Christians were Circumcised after the manner of Moses, they could not be saved,
Acts 15.1, 9, 10. The Apostles determine the point, saying, that God put no
difference between Jews and Gentiles; and this was a Yoke that neither they nor
their Fathers were able to bear: and so it was not only laid aside as other
legal Ceremonies, which became not only [ mortuae, but mortiferae] dead, but
deadly; so the Apostle affirms, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing, Gal. 5.2. Nay, the best Duties, Ordinances, Privileges, rested in
short of Christ, will rather ruin, then raise us; undo us, than endow us with
Grace here, or glory hereafter: see Romans 9.31, 32.10.3.

But this is a great Truth, that all the Privileges in the world without this
New Creature, can never of themselves render a Soul acceptable to God, or bring
it to eternal happiness in the Enjoyment of God.

1. Because such a Person may be, and is in the Old Adam, and is yet under the
Old Covenant, which brings a Curse, and being out of Christ, (the Second Adam)
Gal. 3.10-13. All that he has, does, enjoys, is accursed to him; for every
man must either keep the Law, and satisfy for the breach of it in his own
Person; or another, that is able, must do it for him, and that is none but
Christ our Surety; and Chrst does it not for any but such as by Faith have
interest in him; now he that is not a New Creature, has no interest in Christ,
for if any man be in Christ, (i. e. related to Christ, entitled to him) he is a
New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. And he that is not graffed in this true Vine, and
does not partake of the root and fatness of this Olive Tree, can bear no Fruit,
John 15.1, 5. Romans 11.17. Do nothing to any purpose, nor improve any Privilege
to his Spiritual profit, for he is a dead Branch cast forth and withered, and
cast into the Fire, John 15.6. Though he was in Christ by Profession, yet
because he was not planted in Christ, by possession of him, he is a woeful
castaway: he is graffed in a wrong Stock, to be fruitful here, or to shoot up
as high as Heaven at last: now we cannot be accepted but in the beloved, Ephesians.
1.6. And without Faith in Christ it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. for
the first man Adam was made a living Soul, [and by his Fall, himself and his
Posterity are become dead, condemned Sinners] but the last Adam is made a
quickening Spirit. [i. e. Christ becomes a Principle of Life to all his
Spiritual Offspring] and he will own none but such: see 1 Cor. 15.45, 49.

2. Because such Souls want the sanctifying operations of the Holy Ghost: and
we find that the offering up of the Gentiles, is only acceptable, by being
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.16. God will own nothing from Men, but
what has the Breathings of the Spirit in it: For God knows the Mind of the
Spirit, Romans 8.26, 27. The least interpellations thereof in his Children,
though but a groaning that cannot be uttered, is accepted by God; but the most
eloquent Rhapsodies, and loudest Vociferations of graceless Souls, are rejected
by the Lord; For if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his,
Romans 8.9, 11, 14. Here we read of the Spirit of God dwelling in Believers: and
As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they (and indeed none else) are the
Sons of God. God will own none for his, but them that have this stamp, this
seal upon them; so 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has also sealed us, and given the earnest
of the Spirit in our Hearts: and this is the Earnest of our Inheritance, Ephesians.
1.13, 14. Now all external Ordinances, Privileges and Performances, amount not
to this: and the Scripture tells us, that He is not a Jew (i. e. a sincere
Christian; for its an Old Testament Title, given to a New Testament Saint) that
is one outwardly; neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh,
but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart,
in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God,
Romans 2.28, 29. There lies the Life and Vitals of our Religion; the Tree must
first be good, or it can never bring forth good Fruit: [Operari sequitur Esse];
working attends the being of a thing. If men be not good, they can never do
good: now it is not any thing External, that can make Persons good, it must be
the hidden man of the Heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. that constitutes a Person good. So
Reason makes a Man, not Jewels, or outward Ornaments; thus Grace constitutes a
Christian, not outward Privileges. As nothing that is without a man, can defile
a man, Mark 15. So nothing without can cleanse him.

I shall briefly apply this point, and so pass to the next

Is this so, That the Richest Privileges, and most Glorious Professions, avail
not any Man, except he be a New Creature? Then,

It follows, that Religion consists not in Negatives, but Positives: Its false
arguing to say, I am not a Jew, not a Turk, no Heathen, and therefore a good
Christian; nay, its not enough to say I am no Swearer, Drunkard, Whoremogner,
therefore a Saint good enough; this was the Fallacy of the Pharisees, Luke
18.11. God I thank thee, that I am not as other men, Extortioners, Unjust,
Adulterers, or even as this Publican. Alas this would not do; God disowned him:
Christianity consists in something positive, Little Children, says the
Apostle, let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness is righteous, even
as he is righteous, 1 John 3.7. Christ became the Author of Eternal Salvation
unto all them (and only them) that obey him, Heb 5.9. Alas! Persons may gull
and beguil themselves with airy Notions and Speculations of free Grace,
Christ's merits, and trusting God, and so build Castles in the Air, which will
drop with them into Hell; for without practical Godliness, they will be
deceived, and die with a Lie in their Right Hand. Mistake not, I say not that
free Grace, or Christ's Blood, is but a fancy, or that a Soul can be saved
without them, or that he that believes (with a Gospel sincere Faith) shall
miss of Heaven, but many snatch at these, and espouse a mere Chimaera, a Fancy
or Notion of these, while they have not a Principle in their Hearts, or the
Power of Godliness in their Lives. I may say with the Apostle, Can Faith save
thee? No, no, such a Faith without Works is dead, James 2.4, 20. And being
lifeless, it is lost, thou must have something that has existence.

2. That Christianity does not lie in mere Externals: If men have no more
Religion then is visible to others, they have not that which will serve their
turn: true Godliness is a hidden mystical thing, Our Life is hid with Christ in
God, Col. 3.3. Its a Pearl in the Shell, its an hidden Spring that moves the
visible Hand: God's Children are hidden Ones, Psalm. 83. King's in a disguise,
It appears not yet what they shall be, 1 John 3.2. The best and worst of a real
Saint is not obvious to men's view: The King's Daughter is all glorious within,
Psalm. 45.13. If Privileges and Profession did denominate a Saint, we might
infallibly tell who should be saved; but a Child of God has two sides, one
God-wards, another Men-wards. A Merchant's Wares are in back Shops: the best
Goods are often under Deck. In the hidden parts, says David, thou shall make
me to know Wisdom, Psalm 51.6. Hypocrites are painted Sepulchers, that
outwardly appear beautiful, but within are full of dead men's Bones, and of all
uncleanness, Mat. 23.27. You must look at Internal Principles, not at external
Professions or Privileges.

3. There is such a thing as Nominal, without Real Christianity: some have a
Name to live, but are dead, Rev. 3.1. Have high Titles, but bad Hearts, vicious
Lives; profess they know God, but in Works they deny him, Tit. 1.16. That have
Heaven in their Mouths, and Hell in their Minds; that soar high, but design
low: there may be a real Heathen under a Christian Name: [Ad Ecclesiam non
pertinent omnes qui sunt intus:] All Church Members, are not Members of Christ;
they are not all Israel that are of Israel, Romans 9.6. A fine Title may be on
some Boxes, that have nothing within to Answer it: Judah that was uncircumcised
in heart, may be ranked with Egypt, Edom, Moab, Ammon; some may cry out, The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 9.26. The Church, the Church,
they are right Church Members, that yet do wickedly, and think their Privileges
will excuse them, as though thereby they were delivered to do all manner of
abominations, Jer. 7.4.16. They shall know one day, that an empty Name without
the Thing, is but a great crime, that it will rather aggravate their
Condemnation, then tend to their Salvation. Alas! how many are providential,
not principled Christians, that have nothing more to plead for their
Christianity then that they were born in a Christian Country, and in their
Infancy were baptized, and since do as other Folks do, go to Church, and carry
civilly, and pass amongst men for downright honest men: But God judges not as
man judges; when Persons stand before the awful Tribunal of the righteous
Judge, Names, and Titles, and Privileges, will signify nothing; such Varnish
will melt off before the Fire of God's wrath; nothing then will signify, but
the inner Garment of Sanctification, and the upper Garment of Christ's
Righteousness for our Justification, to cover all defects of the former: this
is fine Linen, clean and white, Rev. 19.8. This is the Righteousness of Saints.

4. Yet Privileges are not to be slighted, nor Ordinances to be despised: As
you are not to rest in Circumcision or Baptism, as though this were enough, so
you are not to cast off God's Institutions, as if they were of no worth,
there is a medium betwixt an abuse, and total neglect: Men may abuse Meat and
Drink, yet must not lay them aside: Ordinances can do us no good without the
concurrence of Divine Grace; man lives not by Bread only, but by God's blessing
therewith, Deuteronomy. 8.3. Must Bread be cast out upon this Pretense? Surely no, it
becomes us to obey God in Hearing, Praying, Reading, Meditating and Attending
on God in his own ways; the Seals of the Covenant are not insignificant
Ceremonies: Ordinances are [ canales gratiae] Channels and Conduit-Pipes,
through which God conveys his Grace to Souls: These are Golden Pipes through
which the Olive Branches empty the golden Oil out of themselves, Zech. 4.13.
Souls, shall the Bucket be thrown away because it has not Water in it self,
without letting it down into the Well, by the Chain of Faith? Shall the Bridge
or Boat be slighted, because of it self it cannot carry us over the River? Nay,
rather let us get upon it and walk, get into it and Row, and wait for the Gale
of the Spirit to waft us over: Privileges are good, the Fruits of Christ's
purchase, the Pledges of God's Love, they must be made use of, though not trusted
to or boasted of: you must be very thankful for, fruitful under pure and
powerful Ordinances; let God have the glory, look you after the advantage of
Privileges; set them in their places, not in God's room; let none say, the
Table of the Lord is contemptible, Mal. 1.7. Nor on the other hand, let not
presuming Souls say, Let us fetch the Ark of the Covenant, that it may save us,
1 Samuel 4.3. Alas, what can the Ark of God avail us, if the God of the Ark leave
us? Let our dependence be on God in the way of his appointments: Affect not to
be above, but go beyond all Ordinances, God is present in all, that we may
despise none; he withdraws in some, (sometimes in all) that we may idolize
none: when you enter upon a Duty, look up to the blessed Jesus, make Conscience
of, yea, make it your business to get communion with God therein: If you miss
of God in Ordinances, you lose your end; yea, you lose your Souls: If you find
God, glory in the Lord boast not of the Duty or Ordinances; sit not down in the
Porch, but make forward to the Holy of Holies; press to the City of Refuge, lay
your Sacrifices at the Door of the Tabernacle, put your Offering into the
High-Priest's hand; thank God for inlargements, but depend not on them; If you
make your Services your Saviors, you will perish with them; when you have done
all, say, I am still an unprofitable Servant, Luke 17.10. I have but done my
Duty; nay, I have not done my Duty, my best Righteousnesses are not only too
scant a Covering, but also filthy Rags, Isa. 64.6. My very Duties as well as
Sins may undo me: yea, I find Hell-Torment the upshot of Privileges; and
further Advancement by Privileges, through a non-improvement of them sinks
deeper in Hell, as Corazin, Capernaum, Mat. 11.21, 24 For Privileges to
graceless Souls, do take away the Cloak that might cover the foulness of Sin;
and so do rather aggravate than extenuate it, John 15.22, 24. I must therefore
look for something else than Privileges, that is, a New Creature.

Chap. II. What is meant by a New Creature; Doctrine raised.
THe main Point in the Text, and which I principally designed, is concerning
the New Creature, (...), New Creation [ locutio est Christiana] its a Speech
peculiar and proper to the New Testament dispensation: 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man
be in Christ, he is a new creature: i. e. If a man be a true Christian, formed
to the Gospel Pattern, and Rule, and Ends, he is, and must be, and cannot but
be of a new Frame and Stamp: So it was prophesyed of Old concerning Gospel
Times and Dispensations; Behold the former things are come to pass, and new
things do I declare, Isa. 42.9. chapter 65.17. Behold, I create new heavens, and
new earth; yea, all things new: So here he frames a Work of Saving Grace in the
Hearts of all his Saints: It signifies a new, noble, heavenly Disposition,
opposed to the antiquated corrupt state of Nature, derived from the first Adam,
called the Old Man.

Que. Why is this called a Creature?

Ans. 1. Because it is produced only by the Almighty Power of God, whose
peculiar prerogative it is to Create.

2. Because as a Creature, it has a real Existence as this visible frame of
the Universe has: If there be a Heaven and Earth, there is a new Creation in
the Soul of Man; its no Fiction, Chimaera, or Imagination of man's brain.

3. Creation makes a mighty change so does this Work of Conversion, [
vehementem mutationem significat] as Creation changes a thing from a
nonexistence to a real Being; so by this Work of Grace, Old things are past
away, and all things become new: But of this more hereafter.

Qu. 2. What Is meant by New?

Ans. 1. New, in Scripture Language, signifies 1. Another, distinct and
different from what was before: So Exodus 1.8. There arose a new King over
Egypt: i. e. another: Thus this New Creature is distinct from the former, as
Caleb is said to have another Spirit, Numb. 14.24 (i.e) different and of
another Nature, than the rest of the Spies; yea, what he himself formerly had:
Thus it is with the Convert.

2. New signifies Strange, not heard of before, Numb. 16.30. If the Lord make a
new thing, if the Earth open her Mouth: an unheard of Wonder, a Prodigy never
known before: So say they, What new Doctrine is this? thou bring strange
things to our Ears, Acts 17.19, 20. Thus the Work of Regeneration was strange,
even to a great Doctor among the Jews, Job. 3.34.

3. New signifies something secret, hidden, not easily discerned, or not
manifest to all, Isa. 48.6. I have showed thee new things, from this time, even
hidden things: And this work of the New Creature, is much hid from the Eyes of
others, and sometimes kept secret from a man's own observation, Job 11.6. That
he would show thee, the secrets of Wisdom: And David says, In the hidden part
thou shall make me to know Wisdom, Psalm. 51.6.

4. New, imports something excellent, transcendent, admirable, Psalm. 33.3. Sing
unto him a new Song. Psalm. 42.10. Sing unto the Lord a new Song: i. e. an
excellent Song, of the very best you can attain to: Even so this is the chief
of God's Works in the world, and renders the Righteous more excellent then his
Neighbor: and a man of understanding is of an excellent Spirit, Prove. 12.26.
chapter 17.27.

The Text being thus opened, I shall deduce an Observation relating to the
preceding Words of the Text; Circumcision avails nothing, nor Uncircumcision,
in this New Testament-Dispensation by Christ. What is it it then that avails?
The Answer is, The New Creature; this indeed is available: So this is set in
contradistinction to the forementioned Privileges comprehended under this word
Circumcision.

Doctrine 2. That a New Creature is only and every way available to the Souls
of Men.

Nothing else can avail any thing to men's Eternal Salvation, but a New
Creature; and this is very available.

Understand this of things of this kind or nature: for a New Creature must not
be set in competition with the Eternal Love of God, or Blood of Christ, or
sanctifying Operations of the Holy Spirit, for application of Christ's
purchaces to us. A New Creature is but a Creature, and cannot do the Work of
the Infinite God, who has appropriated Salvation-Work to himself; There is no
Savior besides me, where is any other that may save them? Hos. 13.4.10. It is
not any thing done by Man, nor wrought in man, that can save him from divine
Wrath, or advance him to Heaven; No, the Lord justifies, sanctifies, glorifies
by Christ: All the Causes of man's Salvation, are without him, Ephesians. 1.4, 9.
1st. There Is the Efficient Cause, God's choosing us. 2dly. The Material Cause,
Christ's redeeming us. 3dly. The Formal, the good pleasure of his Will. 4thly.
The Final, the praise of God's glorious Grace. So then we do not put this New
Creature in God's room, as any cause at all of our Happiness, but a necessary.
Qualification, Disposition, to which Salvation is annexed, or as the Apostle
phraseth it, that which accompanies Salvation: Heb. 6.9. Things that accompany
Salvation [(...)] that have Salvation: i. e. commprehend it, are contiguous to
it, touch it, have Happiness annexed to it by the indispensible connection of
Grace and Glory by Covenant-Promise.

But more of this hereafter.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall speak to these 4 Things in the
Doctrinal part of it: Viz. 1. Show what this New Creature is. 2. Why it is so
called. 3. Wherein it is available. 4. Answer some Queries about it, and so
apply it.


1. What is this New Creature?

Answer; In opening this, I shall explain These 2 things 1. The Names given to
it. 2. The Nature of it.


1. For the Names or Titles given to this New Creature, which are synonymous
Expressions, holding forth the same thing for Substance, are such as these:

1st. Its called the forming of Christ in the womb of a Man's Heart; Gal. 4.9.
My little Children of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be formed in
you. Full glad would I be to see this blessed Embryo teamed in your Hearts.

2dly. Its called quickening, Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened, who were
dead-in trespasses and sins. Alas! what dull Stocks and Lumps of Sin are we,
till animated with the spirit of Grace, and quickened by a vital principle? And
this is done with Christ, verse. 5. by his Resurrection.

3dly. Its called Parturition, or bringing forth by spiritual pangs of
Soul-travail, New Birth; John 3.3. Verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man
be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Convicting Grace brings a
lively and lovely Offspring into the World, better than the product of Nature.

4thly. Such Converts are compared to little Children, Mal. 18.3. Verily I say
unto you, except you be converted, and become as little Children, you shall not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: i. e. You must needs have the Qualities and
Dispositions both of Infants and bigger Children.

5thly. This work of God on the Soul, is called a dying with Christ, and a
rising again with him; Romans 5.5. For if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his Death, we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection,
Col. 3.1. All real Christians are risen with Christ, hence it is called the
first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6. As if they were newly brought out of their
Graves, that had been long dead, and useless.

6thly, Its called the Image of God on Souls, Col. 3.10. And have put on the
New Man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created
him, Ephesians. 4.24. The new man, which after God is created in Righteousness and
true Holiness. This new Creature is a blessed Resemblance of the Trinity of
Persons, in the renewing of the Mind, Will and Affections, conform to God.

7thly. It is called the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious Promises, that by these you might be partakers of
the Divine Nature: i.e. Of those Divine Qualities, whereby the Soul resembles
God, not only as a Picture does a Man in outward Lineaments, but as a Child
does his Father, both in countenance and condition: As the noble Qualities of
an Immortal Soul show there is a God; so the renewed Faculties show what that
one God is: But more of this hereafter.

Thus for the Names of this New Creature, most of which are figurative
Expressions, denoting this same thing we are now treating of.

2. For the Nature of this New Creature, take this Description of it.

The New Creature is a supernaturl Work of Gospel Grace wrought in the Soul of
a Sinner, by the Word and Spirit of God, changing the whole Man from an old
state and course into a new, thereby transforming it into the Divine Likeness,
and turning the Heart and Life to the rule of the Word, in order to the glory
of God, and the Souls present and everlasting communion with him: This is the
New Creature.

I confess this Description is long, but I cannot leave out any of the parts
thereof.

I shall very briefly open the Branches of this description.

1. For the general Nature of it, I call it a Supernatural Work, for it is
above the power of nature to produce it, it comes from above; so he that is born
again, John 3.3. Is [(...)] from above: This perfect Gift comes down from the
Father of Lights, James 1.17. That Jerusalem that is above, is the Mother of us
all, Gal. 4.26. This New Creature is no Herb that grows in Nature's Garden; its
a Plant of Paradise: Flesh and Blood cannot so much as reveal this to the sons
of men, Matthew. 16.17. Therefore its no wonder if learned Doctors (such as
Nicodemus) laugh at such Doctrine, as Fantastical Fancies, and say, How can
these things be? John 3.4. Or like Ezekiel's hearers, who says, Ah Lord God,
they say of me, Does he not speak Parables? Ezekiel. 20.49. For such wisdom is too
high for a Fool. Psalm. 56.9. In God's light only must we see light. Experience
is the best Mistress in these Cases. We speak wisdom, says the Apostle, among
them that are perfect: But the natural man receives not the things of the
spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2 6, 14. This New Crerture is of a Celestial Original,
and must have an heavenly Interpreter.

2. In this Description, we have the particular Nature of this New Creature; I
call it a Gospel Grace: it is no branch or fruit of the Old Covenant of Works,
for the Law makes nothing perfect: There was no Law which could give Life,
Gal. 3.2, 21, 28. But the New Testament Dispensation, called the Promise; this
only produces the New Creation.

Objection. You Will say, Had not Old Testament Saints this New Creature? Does not
David say, Create in me a clean heart? Psalm. 51.10.

I Answer; Old-Testament-Saints had a New-Testament-Spirit; for they without us
could not be made perfect, Heb. 11.40. The same Gospel belonged to them and us,
and was preached to both, Heb. 4.2. Abraham saw Christ's Day, they all partaked
of Gospel Grace, John 8.56. both in Justification and Sanctification; they were
but different Editions of the same Gospel Covenant: they were as Children in
Minority under Tutors and Governors, Gal. 4.1, 2, 25. Gospel-Saints as
Children at Age; their state was under the Bond woman, in Mount Sinai; Ours is
of Jerusalem, which is free. However, that Gospel-Promise, made known in the
Old Testament, belongs both to them and us; Ezekiel. 36.26. A new Heart also will
I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you: This is the proper
Gospel-Work in both Dispensations: and sincere Believers of Old had experience
of it, though the Veil was upon the Face of Moses, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15. and the
Hearts of Carnal Jews, as it is on all Unbelievers to this day: but
Gospel Grace renews Souls.

3. Here Is the subject, in which this New Creature is, and that is in the Soul
or Heart of a sinner: There Is the Seat and Center of this New Creation; its not
merely external in the Eye, or Foot, or Hand, or Tongue; but its an internal
work in the Soul, the Christian is renewed in the Spirit of his Mind, Ephesians.
4.23. Behold, says David, thou desire Truth in the inward parts; in the
hidden part thou shall make me to know Wisdom, Psalm. 51.6. Its called the
hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. Not but that it breaks out in Lip and
Life: but the Root and Spring lies under Ground, out of the view of the world,
as the best Treasures are locked up, the best Goods are under Deck, or as
Merchants Wares lie in a back Shop, not exposed to the open view of the World:
A Christians Life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3. Hence they are called
God's hidden Ones, Psalm. 83.3. And the King's Daughter is all glorious within,
Psalm. 45.13. These gracious Souls are like Kings in disguise; and it does not
yet appear what they shall be, 1 John 3.2. But when the Shell is broken, the
Pearl will appear: all external Changes in men are but the change of the
Clothes; this the change of the Man and his Manners: For he is not a Jew that
is one outwardly, but inwardly: Right Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the
Spirit, not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, Romans 2.20,
30. It is wrought by God, and known to God, who alone searches and sees the
Heart.

4. The Instrumental, or Organical Cause of this New Man, which is the Word of
God Romans 1.16. This is the power of God to Salvation, James 1.18. Of his own
Will begat he us by the Word of Truth, 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives for
ever. The Word is the Seed, which being ingrafted in the Heart, springs up in
obedience, which is the Flower and visible product of the New Creature; yea,
it is properly the Gospel-Word: Moses or the Law may bring us to the Borders,
but Joshua leads us into Canaan; the terrors of the Law prepare the way, as
John Baptist, but the Word of the Gospel is the door of Faith, that takes Souls
by the hand, and leads them into the Chamber of Presence: this is God's method,
to work this New Man by a powerful Gospel-Sermon; so says blessed Paul, 1 Cor.
4.15. I have begotten you in Jesus Christ through the gospel; there is the
Instrument, Paul, I have begotten you; the means, by the gospel; the author, in
Jesus Christ; faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.14. Prove. 8.34. Therefore let all
lie at the Gates of Wisdom: Expect not this New Creation, if you turn your
backs on God's Institutions.

5. The Efficient Cause is the Holy Ghost, The love of God is shed abroad in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us, Romans 5.5. Oh what a
gracious Tincture does the Spirit leave upon Hearts! what a sweet Breath does
it breath into them, which breaths out Love to God and Men! How is this New
Creature diffused into all the Faculties of the Soul by the Spirit! This is
both a Seal and an Earnest, who has also sealed us, Ephesians. 6.13, 14. and given
us the earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. All good is conveyed
to us by the Holy Spirit from the Father and the Son, especially this Saving
Good of Conversion; we are born again of Water and of the Spirit, John 3.3, 8.
and sanctified by the Spirit, born of the Spirit, and are Temples of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.11, 19. Nothing can search or reach the Heart but the Holy
Ghost: The Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God, 1 Cor.
2.10. and deep things of Men. An Angel is too short-sighted to see into Man's
Heart, too short-handed to reach the Conscience, or make a New Creation: God
alone turns Stones into Flesh; God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in
the Tents of Shem, Genesis 9.27. It is an Act of Power to make a People willing,
Psalm. 110.3. or Volunteers: No man can come to Christ, except the Father which
sent him, draw him, Job 6.44. And God reaches forth the Hand of the Spirit to
attract Hearts to himself.

6. The proper immediate Effect of this Work, that is, a change into a new
Frame or Course, by which the Sinner becomes new, or another than what he was
before; this is the [ formalis Ratio] genuine necessary Attendant; yea,
intrinsic nature of this which we call the New Creature: 2 Cor. 5.17.
Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things are past
away, behold all things are become new. The Faculties are the same, but new
Qualities are put in; as in a Lute, the Strings are the same, but it is set to a
new Tune. In a River, the Water is the same, but it is put into a new Channel,
the Bowl has got a new Bias: So the Convert said to the tempting Harlot [ Ego
non sum Ego] I am not I; or as Paul said of himself, who was before a
Blasphemer, a Persecutor: but I obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1.13. i. e. converting
Grace has changed me. Thus the same Apostle says of the Corinthians, Such
were some of you, but ye^ are washed, but ye are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.11. Oh
what a mighty change does Grace make! from Lying to Fearing an Oath; from vain
speaking, to Holy Discourse; from carelessness, to the greatest concernedness
about Soul affairs; yea, from Darkness to Light, Ephesians. 5.8. From Death to Life;
from Satan to God, Acts 26.18. The Man is now got into a new World, as one
observes from Ezekiel. 11.19. I will give them one Heart; which that I may do, I
will cast it a new, in order to this, I will melt and soften it, as one that
has many pieces of old Silver by them, casts them into the Fire, melts them,
and molds them into one Bowl: Thus does God with the divided Heart in renewing
it, and framing it for his use.

7. Here Is yet further the compleatness of this Change; its not some external
Acts, Motions, Conversation, nor only Internal Cogitations, Affections,
Workings of the Will and Conscience; but the description goes further, even to
the State, Constitution, Relation of the Man; and therefore I add, [changing
the whole man from an old state to a new] for every Man and Woman has a state
before God; therefore Paul sends Timothy, to know the state of the Philippians,
Phil. 2.19. This imports not a transient Act, but a settled abiding Frame,
continued Relation: Sinners are by Nature Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Limbs of
Satan, Heirs of Hell; this new Mold makes them Children of God, Members of
Christ, Heirs of Heaven; yea, it puts them into an habitual tendency toward
Heaven, and heavenly things, which is a kind of a second Nature in them; this
moves the holy Soul (acting like it self) as naturally upwards, as a Stone
moves downward, therefore its called a Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 14. the acting
follows the being of a thing: Make the Tree good, and the Fruit will be good,
Mat. 12.33. If a Watch be not well made, it will never go well: They say of the
Peacock, roast him as much as you will, yet when cold, his Flesh will be raw
again. So force a Carnal Heart to the highest strain of seeming Piety, yet it
will come to its old Complexion, because there is not a new Nature: fill a Pond
full of Water, it will abate if there be not a Spring to supply it: The New
Creature is united to Christ, and receives grace for grace, John 1.61.

8. Here Is the Pattern, Copy, Example, according to which this New Creature is
molded, [it is the Soul's being transformed into the divine likeness] this
Image of God consists in Knowledge in the Intellectual Faculties, Righteousness
in the Will, Holiness in the Affections: Col. 3.10. And have put on the new
man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created him,
Ephesians. 4.24. That you put on the new man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness; or holiness of truth. As the Work of Grace in
the Heart is a true Copy or Transcript of the Divine Image, they agree as the
Face in the Glass does, with the Face of the Man that looks in it, or as the
Image in the Wax with the Sculpture in the Seal, from which it is derived:
Godliness is Godlikeness [ Summa Religionis est imitari quem Colis] The Sum
and Substance of our Religion is to imitate whom we worship: not that its
possible to be like God with a perfection of degree, but Sincerity; Be ye
perfect, as your Father in Heaven is perfect, Mat. 5.48. A Child has the parts
of a Man, though not the bulk; for the New Creature is in a daily increase, and
tends to perfection, as a small Seed has vertually the bigness of a grown
Tree, though little in its self: But the Christian is like God; man only can
beget a man like himself: So the Spirit only does beget the Christian like God.
Now Divines, Journal Christian, Bemon, part 2. page 173.
take notice of a double Likeness, a bare Similitude; Snow and Milk are both
white alike, yet are not the Image one of another, 2. Derivation, deduced from
another, and so the Picture which is drawn every Line by the Face of a Man,
this is properly the Image of a man, after whose Likeness it is made: Thus by
Holiness, the Christian becomes the Image of Christ; Romans 8.29. Whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son.

9. There Is the Rule of this New Creature, which is expressed, by [turning the
Heart and Life to the Rule of the Word]; this either refers to the manner of
framing the New Creature, or the Rule by which the New Creature acts and moves,
being once formed: As to the former, the New Creature receives the Stamp,
Signature, and Impression of the Word: Romans 6.17. But God be thanked, that ye
were the servants of sin: But ye have obeyed from the heart that form of
doctrine which was delivered unto you: Or as it is more properly in the Greek
[(...)] into which you were delivered; i. e. the Soul is the Metal, the Word is
the Mould, into which the Sinner is cast, and thereby receives a new Stamp,
formed into a new Shape, which naturally issues it self into a new course of
Life, according to Scripture-Rule: This immediately after my Text, ver. 16. is
called the Canon, or Rule of the New Creature; for it is added, As many as walk
according to this Rule, or Canon [(...)] Peace be on them: This is that
Cynosura or Square that Architects have in their Building, to level the Stones
and Timber suitably [ ut singulae parts just a Symmetria cohaereant. Calvin]
that all the parts of the Edifice may agree by a just proportion; thus must,
thus will the Christian do, his desire and design is to lie Square to the Word
of God, to have respect to all God's Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. To walk in all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6.

Every Child of God is taught by God to walk by Rule: All Callings have their
proper Rule; the Physician studies Galen; the Lawyer his Littleton; the
Philosopher his Aristotle, Plato: yet in all Professions men may vary in their
Methods, in the same Calling, because no Rule is so perfect, but another may
add to it: But the standing Rule of God's Word, is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. able to
make the man of God perfect, 2 Timothy 3.17. Nothing must be added to it, or taken
from it. The Christian is both drawn and determined by its authority more then
by a whole team of humane Arguments.

10. Lastly, here is the End of this New Creature, which is twofold, [1. the
Glory of God: 2. the Sonl's present and everlasting Communion with him:] Both
these are wrapped up together, and are very consistent; yea, cannot be
separated. Now God's Glory is promoted by the New Creature; 1. In this World;
2. In the other.

1. In this World the New Creature is only capable of glorifying God; such a
Soul is planted in Christ the true Vine, and glorifies God by bringing forth
much Fruit, John 15.8. Being filled with the Fruits of Righteousness, which are
by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God, Phil 1.11. The chief design
of the true Christian and new Creature, is to promote the glory of God,
actively and passively; this is the first Petition in the Lord's Prayer; and
the first right Step the converted Soul takes Heavenward; and he is content to
be vilified, so God may be glorified; and if God be glorified by others, what
ever become of him, he rejoices, as Paul, in preaching Christ by others, to
preach down his credit, Phil. 1.18.

2. And in the next World, this New Creature will raise a glorious Monument, to
the glory of Jehovah, When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and
admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1.10. The New Glory of this Creation
will reflect more glory to the Author, than that of the old one: Oh what a
glorious Sight will it be to see so many glorious Stars in the Firmament of
Glory, borrowing their Light from and reflecting Light to the Sun of
Righteousness.

2. The New Creature is the only Person on Earth that is qualified for Communion
with God; he only can say, Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3. It Is this New Creation that raises this clod
of Clay above the Earth, and ingageth the Heart to approach to God, while
others worship afar off, Jer. 30.21. Exodus 24. These Holy Souls are they that
worship in the Temple of God, and the Altar, Rev. 11.1. Psalm. 148.14. God
admits them into his Presence, as a People near unto him: this is the Person
that only sanctifies God's Name in his Worship, and is satisfied with the
fatness of God's House: here is the blessed Merchant that trades in rich Pearls,
that goes from Port to Port, from Ordinance to Ordinance; not to see Places,
but to take in his Lading of Communications from God, of Graces, Privileges,
Assurance and Comforts.

Thus I have briefly opened the nature of this blessed Work of the New Creature.

Chap. III. Why this is called a New Creature? A Parallel betwixt the Old
Creation and this New Creation.
2. THe Second general Head in the Doctrinal Part, is briefly to give the
Reasons why the Holy Ghost gives this Saving Conversion the Title of a New
Creature, or (as the Word is) of this New Creation. Now the Answer is, Because
in many things it bears some proportion and resemblance with the first spacious
Universe of Heaven and Earth, this magnificent Structure. I shall run the
Parallel betwixt them in these 12 Particulars, for the Information of our
Judgments.

1. God is the first and only Cause of the Creation of the World, not Angels or
created Intelligences, who though they be mighty, yet are not Almighty; its the
peculiar prerogative of Elohim, the infinite God, to create: God orders the
Jews in Babylon to repeat that famous Sentence in the Chaldee Language, to
confute their Idolatry, in Jer. 10.11. Thus shall ye say unto them, the Gods
that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish from the
Earth, and from under these Heavens. The Reason is given in the Hebrew
Language, Ver. 12. He has made the Earth by his Power; he has established the
World by his Wisdom, and has stretched out the Heavens by his discretion.
VidWeem 's Image of God in Man, p.3.
In the business of Creation, Divines say, [ Deus est causa Simpliciter in
Creatione, at Essendi hoc in aliis] God is the only Simple Cause in Creation,
but in his other Works, he is only the Cause of being this or that: So none can
create this New Man, it may be said, Have we not all one Father? has not one
great God created us? We are God's workmanship, its the same mighty power that
raised Christ from the Dead that gives Faith to the Souls of Men, and quickens
the Dead, Mal. 2.10. Ephesians. 2.10. Ephesians. 1.20. Romans 4.17.

2. God made all things of Nothing, i.e. of things that had no Existence before
he made them; He calls those things which be not, as though they were, Romans
4.17. Indeed they tell us that [Nothing] is taken in a threefold Sense; 1st.
Its taken privatively, so an Idol is nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4. Isa. 40.17. i.e. it
has no Divinity in it; 2dly. Comparatively, so all the World is nothing before
God; 3dly. Nothing Negatively or Simply; so there was no Fruit upon the
Fig Tree, Mark 11.13. In this Sense God made the World of Nothing; there was no
Praeexistent Matter for God to work upon: Just thus in the New Creation, when
God comes to work upon a Sinner, he finds no Principle of Grace, or inclination
to good in him: I know, says blessed Paul, that in me, that is in my Flesh,
dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18. Nay, there is much Evil in us, yea, yet
worse, there is antipathy to what is good, within our naughty Hearts: Thus as in
the First Creation, God produces an habit from the negation: he works a
Principle of Grace where there was no such thing.

3. God made all things by Christ, his infinite and coeternal Son: All things
were made by him, (i. e. by this Essential Word) and without him was not any
thing made that was made, John 1.3. By him were all things created, visible and
invisible. By this Heir of all things he made the Worlds, both according to the
Matter and Form thereof, Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2. And thus it is in the New
Creation, for we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works,
Ephesians. 2.10. As Christ is the Firstborn of the Creatures, after whom the New
Creature is formed; for God in his naked Majesty is invisible, not obvious
clearly either to corporal Eyes or humane Minds, but Christ is the express
Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3. and manifests the glorious Perfections of the
infinite God: That as we have born the Image of the earthly Adam, we should
bear the Image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.45, 49. That is Christ; thus in the
Incarnation, God was Man; in Regeneration, Man becomes like God.

4. God created all things with a Word: So says the Apostle, Through Faith we
understand, that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God, Heb. 11.3. God's [
Fiat or] Let it be, produced the whole Fabric of Heaven and Earth: By the Word
of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them, by the Breath of
his Mouth, Psalm. 33.6. Art needs many Helps; Nature needs few; God needs
none; nor does use any Instrument in the Creation, for nothing can intervene
betwixt the First Cause and the First Effect; it is an immediate Product of his
arbitrary Will and Pleasure. So it is in this New Creation, James 1.18. Of his
own Will begat he us with the Word of Truth. God speaks the Word, and the
Sinner is converted. If it be said, That Ministers are Instruments in
Conversion. I Answer, But still they are nothing, neither is he that planteth
any thing, 1 Cor. 3.7. They need God; God needs not them, he can do his Work
without them; yea, in the first Infusion of a Principle of Saving Grace,
there is nothing of Instrumentality; its done Immediately.

5. God made all things good and perfect at first, 1 Timothy 4.4. Genesis 1.31. Every
Creature of God is good: And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold
it was very good, quia nec temere nec frustra factum] nothing was made either
unadvisedly or to no purpose. A thing may be said to be good, as it is
correspondent to the Idea of the Divine Wisdom, or as it is fit for that use to
which it is designed, and for which it serves: It needs not be enquired,
whether God could not have made the World, or its parts, better or more
perfect; for if we consider the World in respect of the whole; so it is perfect
both as to its degrees and parts: But as to its parts severally, God could have
made them better; as in a Camp, there are Captains, Soldiers, and a General;
in some respect if a Soldier were a Captain, he were better, but in respect of
the whole Camp, (which consists of Superiors and Inferiors) he is better as a
Soldier. So in this New Creature, it is perfect in its kind, in subserviency
to God's great Ends, though defective in point of degree in this World: hence
God's Children are said to be not perfect, as having not attained, Phil. 3.12.
Yet they are perfect, Ver. 15. To be sure this New Creation is good, as will
appear anon.

7. Though God from Eternity purposed to create the World, yet the World was
created but in Time, not from Eternity, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created
the Heaven and the Earth. God works all things according to the Counsel of
his own Will, Ephesians. 1.11. Its true, all things had a kind of Being in God, as in
the Cause, whence all things flow, in the Eternal Mind, or Idea, according to
which all things were framed; but they had not their real or actual Existence,
till God in his Wisdom thought good to produce them: In thy Book, says David,
Psalm. 116.16. were all my Members written. Thus it is in this New Creation: God
has a Book of Life, and such as are in the Book of Life, shall in time be
savingly Converted, Called, Sanctified, Justified, Glorified. Thus runs the
Golden Chain, Romans 8.29.30. As many as were ordained to Eternal Life, shall
believe: All such as the Father gives to Christ, shall come to him, John 6.37.
He has chosen us in Christ before the Foundation of the World, that we should
be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. So then this New Creation in time, is the result and effect
of God's determination before all Time: see 2 These. 2.13.

7. The Creation of the World was gradual, both as to Time, and as to Manner:
In point of Time, God made the World in Six Days, Genesis 1. Not but that God
could have dispatched all in a Moment, but for sundry weighty Reasons he took
every day a moment to do the work of that day in: Thus God is perfecting this
New Creation all the time of a Christian's Life: and for his manner or method
of working, God proceeded from imperfect to perfect; first God made a confused
Chaos, then he made the Elements, then [ orta ex Elementis] what arises from
them: First he made things without Life, then things having Life: Man, that was
the Masterpiece of the whole Creation, he made the last. Even thus does Grace
proceed in the New Creation; he first forms a Chaos, some confusion of Spirit,
by a legal Work, first comes a Spirit of Bondage, to fear, then a Spirit of
Adoption, Romans 8.15. First some glimmering Light in the Mind, then the Day Star
arises in the Soul, 2 Pet. 1. And the Sun of Righteousness comes with healing
under his Wings, Mal. 4.2. And the Grace of God grows, till the Christian comes
unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ,
Ephesians. 4.13.

8. The first thing that God created, was Light, Genesis 13.4. God said, Let there
be Light, and there was Light: In this he proceeds from total Privation to
Habit: it is hard to describe this Light, possibly it was a bright lucid Body,
like the Fiery Cloud in the Wilderness, giving imperfect Light, successively
moving over the several parts of the Earth, and afterward condensed,
increased, perfected, and gathered together in the Sun; the Apostle applies
this to the workings of God's Spirit in converting a Sinner, 2 Cor. 4.6. For
God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the Face of
Jesus Christ. The first thing a Limner draws in a Picture, is the Eye: the
first Lineament of this gracious new Man, is Saving Knowledge: God will not
dwell in a dark House, and therefore first he beats out Windows, in his
Habitation, without knowledge the heart is not good, Prove. 19.2. The Devil's
Kingdom is a Kingdom of Darkness; Christ's of Light: Converting Grace delivers
us from the power of darkness, and translates us into the Kingdom of his dear
Son, Col. 1.13. which is a State of marvelous Light, 1 Pet. 2.9.

9. God created some things Actually, other things Potentially, or Vertually,
Genesis 1.11, 12. And God said, Let the Earth bring forth Grass, the Herb yielding
Seed, the Tree yielding Fruit. Some things were made in their first Principles,
Production of Fruits in their proper kind, as from Bees, Honey; from Vine,
Grapes, and thence Wine; Oil from the Olive, etc. Thus it is in the New
Creation, God plants a Seed, an Habit of Spritual Life, which of its own Nature
inclines the Christian to Acts of Holiness: In every Habit there is a
propensity to act; so Faith works by Love, Gal. 5.6. Repentance brings forth
Fruits meet for such a Principle, Matthew. 3.18. Heavenly Acts are the genuine
Fruits of a Saving Grace, yea, inseparable Companions.

10. The same Hand that created, does uphold the Creature: also, it would
crumble into its primitive nothing: So God upholds all things by the Word of
his Power, Heb. 13. He does not as an Artificer, who makes a Clock, a Watch, a
Ship, or other Machin, and leaves it to others to wind it up, or maintain it;
but a divine Maintenancy is vouchsafed to every Creature, which God has made;
Creatures are but Shadows to the Body; or as the Reflection of the Glass which
vanishes, when the Face is turned away: Psalm. 104.29. Thou hidest thy Face,
they are troubled; thou take away thy Breath, they die, and return to the
Dust. In the Chain of Second Causes, God stands at the upper end, and actuates
every thing thereof by his Influency: H^s. 2.21, 22. I will hear the Heavens,
and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear the Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, and they shall hear Jezreel: Thus it is with the New Creature,
Assisting-Grace supplies and actuates Received-Grace in every Duty and
Exercise, without Christ we can do nothing, John 15.5. We must lean upon our
Beloved every step of the way, or we fall, Cant. 8.5. Nothing will go forward
without a daily Supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Philippians 1.19.

11. God had Glorious Ends in the Work of Creation: The Lord made all things
for himself, Prove. 16.4. For his Service and Glory: Thus the four and twenty
Elders acknowledge, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and
power: for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were
created, Rev. 4.10, 11. All Creatures have a tendency toward their Original,
and thereby declare that God is their Supreme Cause and ultimate End; as all
Rivers come from the Sea, and run back into it, Eccels. 1.5, 6, 7. Every
Creature leads Man to God; for, Romans 11.36. of him, [as the Efficient Cause]
through him, [as the Conserving Cause] and to him [as the Final Cause] are all
things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen: Yea, further, The Heavens declare the
Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his Handiwork, Psalm. 19.1. Every
Creature has a legible Character of God's Power, Wisdom, Goodness engraven
upon it; and has a Mouth to preach something of the Magnificence of its
Creator; yea, the visible Creature leads man to its visible maker; nay further,
by that supply that the Ceature affords to Man, it gives him abundant Cause of
glorifying God; hence says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat
or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Much more does the New
Creature work directly to the attaining of God's high and glorious Ends, as
might be demonstrated; 1. By its accomplishing God's pleasure, Holiness is
according to his Will; 1 These. 13.2. By working the Soul Godwards, it sets the
Affections on things above, Col. 3.1, 2.3. As it evidently demonstrates all
God's glorious Attributes, as being the lively Picture of the Deity engraven on
the Soul; 4. And does contribute much to the Soul's advancing the glory of God;
as we showed before.

12. The whole Creation shall be burnt, 2 Pet. 3.10, 12. The heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth
also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Not that this glorious
Structure shall be annihilated, or turned into its first nothing, I cannot
think so; but it shall be purified, clarified, and defecated from the filthy
Dregs that Sin has stained it with: So I find Amesius say, De mundi Elementis
hoc unum dicam, absumptum iri tantum, ut novam qualitatem induant, manente
Substantia, Calvin, 2. Pet. 3.
[ Elementa ^on erunt sublata, sed mutata et ^urgata] the Elements shall ^ot be
quite taken away, but ^hanged, and purged: the Substance shall remain, only ^he
corrupt qualities introduced by Sin, shall be burged away: For,

1. In Peter it is said, The Heavens and the Earth are kept in store, reserved
unto Fire against the Day of Judgment. Now, Fire turns combustible Matter into
its own Nature, but does not quite consume its matter it feeds on, but purifies
things: all melting of Metals, is not annihilating of them.

2. Scripture rather asserts a mutation or changing of these material Heavens
and Earth, then total abolition: Psalm. 102.25, 26. Yea, all of them shall wax
old like a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed. The 70 render it [(...)] Thou shall fold them: and thus the Apostle
translates this Text, Heb. 1.12. As a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they
shall he changed: Alluding to a Garment, or a Book, or Scrowl of Parchment,
when its folded up, there is no Letters or Words visible; thus it passes away
by a notable change.

3. The whole Creation lies under the Curse and sad Effects of Sin, which by a
kind of natural Instinct, it longs to be delivered from: See Romans 8.20, 23 The
whole creation groaneth and travelleth in pain together until now, etc. [
Calvin says, hunc locum accipio, nullum esse Elementum, nullamve mundi partem,
quae non veluti praesentis miseriae agnitione tacta, in spem Resurrectionis
intenta sit] there is no Element, or part of the World, but is touched with the
sense of the Creature's misery, and longs for the hoped for Resurrection: and
surely God will not frustrate its expectation.

4. There is something in those Texts that look this way, Psalm. 93.1. The world
also is stablished that it cannot be moved. Eccles. 1.4. The earth abides for
ever, Eccles. 3.14. Whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever: Psalm. 119.90.
Thou have est ablished the earth, and it abides. All these speak the World's
continuance.

Obj. Job 14.12. So Man lies down, and rises not, till the Heavens be no more.

Answ. i.e. Not for the uses they are now for, the Heavenly Luminaries are but
for the Terrestrial Bodies, Genesis 1.15, 16. But in that other State, there is no
need of Sun, or Stars, as now, Rev. 21.23.

Qu. What Use will Heavens and Earth be then of?

Answ. As an Everlasting Monument of God's Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, and
possibly righteous Men shall dwell in this New Heaven and Earth, and
contemplate God in his glorious Works: 2 Pet. 3.13. so Righteous is taken for
Persons, Isa. 1.21. That New World shall be possessed only by Saints; no
Sinners with them.

Now if we apply all this to this New Creation whereof we are treating, it will
exactly square thereto: Grace shall continue, He that does the will of God,
shall abide for ever, ^ John 2.17. This Principle is an immortal Seed; and
shall be cleansed from all Dregs of Sin, and the Fruits thereof: and the
Spirits of Just Men shall be made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Yea, their Bodies shall
be made like unto the glorious Body of our Lord Jesus, Phil. 3.21. And though
they may pass through the Fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. (not of Popish Purgatory) of
affliction, or of the Spirit's refining, yet they shall lose nothing but Dross,
and shall come forth as Gold.

Thus I have run a Parallel betwixt the Old Creation and the New.

But this New Creation is; 1. Better; 2. More difficult then the Old.

1. Its better, though the first was perfect in its kind, yet this is a more
excellent Workmanship, being of a more pure, refined, spiritual Nature, and
repairs what was decayed in the Old, and brought about with more transcendent
Love and Good will, and has a tendency to an Everlasting Concernment of
precious Souls in the other world: But of this more anon.

2. This is a Creation in some respects more difficult then the former was.
This may seem a Paradox, that the framing of this new Creation in the Heart of
a Sinner, is a greater work, and of more difficulty, then that of making this
great Universe, Heaven and Earth: mistake not this difficulty is not [ respectu
Dei, fed rei] not in respect of God's Omnipotency, to whom all thing are
possible and easy: but with respect to the thing it self, and our
consideration of it, the appears to our apprehension in these four Respects.

1. When God made the World, he met with no opposition; he Spoke the Word, and
no^ said no to it, by contradiction: But in this Ne^ Creation, the World, the
Devil, and Corruption within opposes this work, sometimes custer in Sin;
however the Carnal mind is enmity it s^ against God, and fights against him,
Romans 8.7.

2. When God make the World, it cost hi^ but the speaking of a Word, as was
said; b^ in order to this New Creation, it cost him dear, even the giving of
his own Son to become Man, to live a Life of Sorrow, to endure the painful,
shameful, cursed Death of the Cross, that Sinners might be reconciled to God,
and become like God.

3. When God made the world, he needed, no, nor used any Instruments, in order
to the effecting that Work. But in this of the New Creation, he sends Ministers
laboring, traveling, and long waiting on Sinners, to work on men's Hearts; he
chose Men like themselves, endue; them with Gifts, gives them Compassionate
Hearts, weeping, beseeching with earnest Entreaties to come in; yet that will
not do, except the Spirit strive and prevail.

4. When God made the World, all was finished in Six Days: Heaven and Earth
were finished, Genesis 2.1. And all the Host of them, needed not a second hand to
complete them: But he is carrying on this work of the New Creation many Years,
the whole Life of the Christian, if he live a hundred Years, it will be still
defective in point of degree, and never complete, till the Soul be landed in
Heaven.

Chap. IV. Wherein the New Creature is available to Souls.
THe third main Head in the Doctrinal part, is to demonstrate, wherein this New
Creature is only and every way available to the Souls of men.

And here, lest I be mistaken, I must premise two Caveats by way of exception;
the first refers to the Kind; the second, to the End of this availableness.

1. For the Kind, we must beware how we put the New Creature in the room of
Christ: it is not so available as our blessed Lord Jesus is, who is the only
Foundation, on which the Church is built, 1 Cor. 3.10. And able to save to the
uttermost, Heb. 7.25. No Creature must be set up in competition with him, for
there is no Salvation in any other, Acts 4.12. And herein I am afraid the
Quakers are guilty of a gross Heresy, who call us from a Christ without us, to
a Christ within us: yea, it has been a dispute in the Plantation, called
Pensilvania, whether we must believe only in a Christ within us, or a Christ
both within and without us, and it was carried mostly in the former Sense: But
let no man be drawn from placing his entire confidence in Christ the Son of
God, both God and Man in one Person, who suffered Death on the Cross, to make
atonement for Sinners, and now sits on the right hand of God to make
intercession for us. 2. If by a Christ within, they mean that called Light
within, either Free will or Natural Conscience, or a power to help our selves
without special Grace, its an exploded Error, and it is to be feared, the
Jesuits deliver their Popish stuff out of these men's Mouths with refined
Language. 3. If by Christ within, be meant Christ's Person in the Believer,
that he is Christed or Goded, it is blasphemy. 4. If by this expression, Christ
within us, the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. or Christ dwelling in our hearts by
faith, Ephesians. 3.17. It is as the Sun is in the House, when the Beams or Rays
thereof shine into it: So Christ dwells in Souls by his Spirit, Romans 8.9. and
its Graces; and this is that which is called the New Creature, and this is but
a Creature, and a weak one, full of imperfections; its a Vein of Gold embased
with Earth and dross, not to be trusted to: The Bride may highly prize her
Husband's Picture, if like him, and drawn by his Hand; but it is ridiculous to
dote on that, and slight her Husband; and when she wants Money or Clothes, to
go not to her Husband for them, but to his Picture: Surely, our Lord will not
take it well, if men honor his Image, to the dishonor of his Person: the
Original is one thing, the Copy is another: Christ the object of our Faith and
Grace, and the Fruit of his Spirit are different: Grace in the Heart is not so
available as Christ in Heaven. Let every thing have its due place.

2. That which refers to the End, is this Negative, that the New Creature is
not ordained to have a direct tendency to the justification of a Sinner; God
did not appoint it for that End: That is Faith in Christ, Romans 3.20, 21, 22. in
his Blood, Merits and Satisfaction to Divine Justice, apprehended by Faith
alone: And this excludes not only Man's merits, but any gracious Habits wrought
in man, or good Works done by man; nay, it also excludes Faith it self as the
work of man, any otherwise then as laying hold on Christ's Righteousness. But
this I affirm that this New Creature, or the best Inherent Righteousness cannot
justify a Sinner before God's Tribunal: For a Man is not justified by the
works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, Gal. 2.16. And lest any
should say, it was by the Works only of the Ceremonial Law, its apparent the
Apostle includes the Moral Law, that observance thereof cannot justify; for
the Gentiles were never bound to the Ceremonial Law, yet he proves both Jews
and Gentiles to be both under sin, Romans 3.9.-2.28, 30. and both alike justified
by Christ in the way of believing: But where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, Romans 4.15. Besides, that Law that shows Sin, is the moral Law;
For by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. And it is that Law that
drives us out of Self to Christ, and therefore it can never justify us: God
has nailed up that Door, that none since the Fall, can enter into Happiness by
Law-Righteousness; This way to Heaven, is like the Northern Passage to the
Indies, whoever attempts it, is sure to be frozen up before he gets half way
thither.

Obj. But if a legal Righteousness by our own strength will not justify a
Sinner, yet this New Creature, or the habit or exercise of Evangelical
Righteousness will surely justify?

The Apostle himself Answers, No; and he instanceth in two famous Saints in the
Old Testament, the one is Abraham, the other David, Romans 4.1, 6 Faithful, Holy
Abraham, though no Idolater, but circumcised, offering his Son, must not glory
in any Habit or Acts of Grace. And David, though a Man after God's own Heart,
yet says, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified, Psalm. 143.2. If the Lord mark iniquity, who can stand?
Psalm. 130.3. Holy Paul dare not stand in his own Righteousness at God's Bar,
but in the Righteousness, which is of God by Faith, Phil. 3.7.8, 9. Indeed this
imparted or inherent Holiness, was infused into the Soul for other Ends than to
justify a Sinner before God from the guilt of any one Sin: and yet this New
Creature is very available to the Souls of men in these 12 cases.

1. This New Creature rectifies the Soul's Faculties, that were marred by
Adam's Fall: The former Structure, though once a famous Edifice; by the Fall
was not only tottering, but a ruinous House, and lies in Rubbish; this New
Creation re-edifies it in a more stately sumptuous manner: yea, it is richly
adorned thereby, Prove. 1.9. They shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy Head,
and Chains about thy Neck, Prove. 12.26. chapter 17.27. Thereby the Christian is
more excellent then his Neighbor, and of an excellent Spirit, more excellent
then himself was; he is by this become like the Angels, yea, like God himself:
and though he be short of Adam in the degree of Grace; yet upon better terms,
in point of duration: and now great Grace is upon all true Believers, Acts
4.33. Man by his Fall became like the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.12. But this
New Creature makes him better then other men. All men are level as to God, till
this New Creation sets a divine Stamp on some: The tongue of the Just is as
choice Silver, but the heart of the wicked is little worth, Prove. 10.20. God
only has Sovereignty and Authority, to rate his Creatures: this is the
Estimate he sets on his.

2. This New Creature is the fruit and Evidence of Electing-Love; this is the
legible print of God's Heart from Eternity: He has chosen us, Ephesians. 1.4. that
we should be holy: This is the proper product of free undeserved Grace, Gal.
1.15. God calls by his Grace; This is the glorious display of his Banner of
Love over Souls. In the Old Creation there was the strength of God's Arm; in
this there is the working of God's Bowels: God found all mankind alike involved
in Sin and Misery, but Grace makes some to differ from others, 1 Cor. 46.7. As
a curious workman seeing a Forest overgrowing his Ground, marks some Trees,
designing to make of them some rare pieces of workmanship; thus God carves his
own Image on a common Log, and sets it apart for himself; this is an act of
discriminating Love, and when the Sinner sees it, he must cry out, Who am I, O
Lord God, that thou have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7.18. By the Grace of God
I am what I am, 1 Cor. 5.10. This, this is a shedding abroad his love in my
Heart, Romans 5.5. I read Love in every Line and Letter of this new Impression:
and does not this avail a Soul much?

3. This New Creation consecrates the Soul to be a receptacle for God, and
renders the Person acceptable to him: God dwells in the humble and holy Heart,
Isa. 57.15. There only he takes up his lodging, when he has perfumed the Heart
with Mirrh and Frankincense, Cant. 3.6. He lays himself in that sweet Bed:
Having builded this Mansion House, it becomes an habitation of God through the
Spirit: a Temple of the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 2.22.1 Cor. 6.17, 19. God has two
Thrones in Heaven, and in an Holy Heart: The Soul and Body is a Sacrifice holy
and acceptable to God, Romans 12.1. Happy Soul, that is thus owned by the Great
God: no matter if men reject you, if God accept you: if men desert you, yet if
God possess you, you are are happy: when God casts out the Devil's baggage, and
says, This is my Rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it,
Psalm. 132.14, 15. No bad House will be kept there where God dwells, for he
makes all welcome; this is available.

4. The first instant of this New Creation, commenceth a Communion with God;
this is a consequence of the former, and the peculiar privilege of a Saint,
Truly, our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son, 1 John 1.3. This
communion with God, is a mystery to most men. Every one that hangs about the
Court, does not speak with the King: many meddle with Duties, but meet not with
God: It is good for me to draw night to God, Psalm. 73.28. How often does the
Christian cry out, Oh when shall I come and appear before God? Psalm. 63.2. This
New Creature puts a Biass in the Soul God-wards, it naturally mounts the Soul
upwards, to engage his heart in approaching to God, Jer. 30.21. And the Lord
meets him that rejoices and works Righteousness, Isa. 64. Birds cannot
converse with Men, there is not a suitableness of Nature; an Hypocrite cannot,
dare not come before God, Job 13.16. But a Saint dare draw near with boldness
through Christ; for he is like God, and [ communio fundatur in Similitudine]
Communion is founded in Similitude.

5. This New Creature evidenceth a Soul's interest in Christ, and his union to
him; yea, puts the poor Believer in a capacity of sucking Influence from him,
as the Child in the Womb draws nourishment from the Mother's Navel; this
Churches Navel never wants Liquor, Cant. 7.2. It is this New Creature that
evidenceth our interest in Christ: If any man be in Christ, he is a New
Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. This was one End of our Lord's giving himself for us, to
purchase to himself a peculiar People, Tit. 2.14. Christ's Cross was both an
Altar and a Laver, to expiate, and to purge, to sanctify and justify: you
shall find continual supplies of Grace from Christ, and of his fullness receive
grace for grace, John 1.16. The New Creature has a constant Spring to feed it,
to recruit it in its decays, God still says, My Grace shall be sufficient for
thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. So he becomes indefectible, the New Creature needs not to
fear famishing, having these Breasts of Consolation to suck, Isa. 66.11. and as
a Storehouse to go to; so says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all Grace,
who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have
suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you: Surely
then this New Creature avails much.

6. The New Creature is the inlet to true Joy, Peace, Satisfaction; though in
its first Infancy, there be a casting down, yet it is in order to a lifting up:
Light is sown for the Righteous, Psalm. 97.11. It may for a season lie in the
Furrows of Gospel-sorrow: They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm.
126.5, 6. Just like the Pangs of a Childbearing Woman, that end in comfort,
John 16.21. The Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy
ghost: Romans 14.17. all Joy comes in at this Door: that is but a Bastard, yea,
diabolical Peace, that is not a Companion of the New Creature; when a strong
man armed keeps the Palace, his goods are in peace, Luke 11.21, 22. The
Palace is the Heart, the Goods are the Soul's faculties; the Strong Man is the
Devil: the Soul has never quiet day in God's way, till Satan be dispossessed,
and a rightful Lord introduced, that is, our Lord Jesus. Its true, there are
often Furrows in the Face of the new Creature, but they are for Sin, and for want
of the Sense of its inbeing; but in God's time, he will rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Yea, sorrowful Sufferings will at
last yield the peaceable fruits of Righteousness, Heb. 12.11. And is this worth
nothing?

7. This New Creature has all things profitable entailed upon it: Godliness is
profitable to all things: yea, Godliness with contentment, is great gain, 1.
Tim. 4.8-6.6. All the good things of Heaven and Earth, are made sure by
Covenanttitle to this New Creature: All things are yours, says God, 1 Cor.
3.21. Every thing turns to advantage: the Christian is the true Chemist, to
extract Gold out of every thing: All things work together for good to him, Romans
8.28. though not singly, yet jointly, in composition with other Ingredients; he
gains to this New Man by outward Losses: Every Mercy, Ordinance, Providence,
Affliction, is a Talent by which he is a gainer, Mat. 25.27. If he fight with
Satan, he gets Ground at last. In petty Skirmishes the Carthaginians got some
small Victories, but the Romans came off Conquerors at last. So the Godly Soul
may receive some Foils, but at last he shall be more than a Conqueror, yea, a
triumpher through the Captain of his Salvation, Romans 3.37.

8. The New Creature renders the Person that has it, safe, in a safe
condition. He that dwells in the secret place of the Most High, shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. The Holy Angels are a royal Guard
to these Newborn Babes of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. Many are the dangers the New
Creature is exposed to, but one Angel is as a whole Camp, to incompass and
deliver God-fearing Souls, Psalm. 34.7-6.18. But the God of Angels is nigh to
them, and saves them: in Spirituals God will secure them from Seduction, and
the evil of Temptation. It is not possible that the Elect shall be finally and
damnably seduced, Mat. 24.24. for Grace establishes the Heart; and they that
are of us, shall no doubt continue with us, Heb. 13.9. They shall be kept by
his mighty power, through Faith to Salvation, 1 John 2.19. 1 Pet. 1.5. And we
know that these Souls that are born of God, are so kept, that the wicked One
touches them not, 1 John 5.18. God will keep them, that they shall not be
tempted above what they are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. God will furnish his Child with
Armor of proof against Satan's assaults; this Breast Plate may be shot at, but
never shot through; the Christians Bow abides in strength, and he stands as a
Rock in the midst of Waves, Rev. 3.8, 9, 10. He can neither be stormed nor
undermined, if the Saints have but a little strength, yet it shall be lasting,
yea, everlasting.

9. The New Creature makes Christians that possess it, useful and profitable to
all about them: It is natural for this New Creature to propagate its kind; as
Sin, so Grace is assimilating: how sollicitous was the Church for her little
Sister that had no Breasts, when she should be spoken for, Cant. 8.8. How did
the blessed Apostle Paul pant after the Conversion of his Countrymen the Jews,
Romans 9.1.-10.1. The Godly Soul labors to do good to all about him, both good
and bad: He would fain pluck Sinners out of the Fire of Hell, Jude 22. and
engage them for Heaven: and he spurs on his Brethren in Heaven's-Road, by
Counsels, Admonitions, Prayers, Example, and all holy Exercises in Christian
Communion: yea, this New Creature where ever it is, makes such the Pillars of
the Place and Nation, where they live: Ten Righteous Persons might have saved
Sodom, Genesis 18.19, 22. And Lot's presence there, bound the Angels Hands till he
was gone: the Godly Soul shall never know while he lives, what use he was of in
the world: Every Godly Soul is a fruitful Tree, that brings forth Fruit in due
season, yea, in old age, Psalm. 1.3.-92.14.

10. This New Creature fits Souls for Gospel-Privileges; it is only the New
Creature that is a Vessel qualified to receive the new Wine of the Gospel, Mat.
9.16, 17. In the Gospel all things are new, Rev. 21.5. There Is a New Name, Rev.
3.12. New Church, Jerusalem, Rev. 21.1. New Way, Heb. 10.19. New Covenant, Heb.
8.10. A New Commandment, John 13.32. New Sacraments, Matthew. 26.26-28.19. New
Relation, 1 Pet. 2.9. A New Condition, 2 Pet. 3.13. And a New Song, Rev. 14.3.
Yea, New Heavens, and a New Earth. And surely it is very fit that Christians
should have New Hearts, which God promises in the New Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.26. A
new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you. New
Qualifications fit Persons for new Dispensations; therefore God joins the new
Heavens, and new Earth with the new Seed, Isa. 66.22. else there would be a
great Inconsistency: New Palates will find sweetness in this new Meat and new
Wine, else it will be lost upon them.

11. The New Creature fits Persons for Death and Heaven: To these to live is
Christ, and to dye gain, Phil. 1.21. Living and Dying, these are the Lord's,
Romans 14. Its this that renders Persons meet for that heavenly Inheritance, Col.
1.12. No Eyes can see God, but of those that are pure in Heart, Mat. 5.8.
These, and only these, are wrought for this self-same thing, 2 Cor. 5.5. Heaven
is not like Noah's Ark, that had clean and unclean Creatures brought into it:
Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Frogs came into
Pharoah's Court; but no unclean thing can enter Heaven, Rev. 21.9. A sensual
Palate cannot taste the sweetness of that Wine in our Father's Kingdom, Matthew.
26.29. For its New Wine, and renewed Souls are capable of taking pleasure in
it: O happy Soul, that has got Christ in the Arms of his Faith, and in his
Heart by this New Nature, he may lift up his Head, and say with Simeon, Now,
Lord, let thou thy servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word, for mine
Eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2.29, 30. And is not this available to Souls?

12. Yea this New Creature is Heaven begun: it is a considerable part of
Heaven; Holiness is a considerable Happiness; its the Seed and Embryo of that
heavenly state: Grace and Glory as they are joined in a blessed connection,
Psalm. 84.10. So they differ but in degree, not in Specie; Grace is Glory begun,
Glory is Grace consummated; Grace is the Bud, Glory is the Flower: this New
Creature is the Key of Paradise, the inlet into Glory: yea, it is Salvation
already, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us and called us. This blessed work of the
New Creature is a quickening together with Christ, and raises us up together,
and makes us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: And thus we are
saved in our Representative, Ephesians. 2.5, 6, 7. yea, this Divine Principle is an
Heaven begun, not only as a Pledge, but part of it. The Scripture often tells
us, that God's Children have Eternal Life, John 17.3. And this is, 1. [ in
precio] in price, for it is a purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1.14.2. [ in promisso]
in promise, for God has promised Eternal Life to all that obey him, Heb.
5.9.3. [ in semine] in Seed, this Water within the Believer, is a Well
springing up to Eternal Life, John 4.14.4. [ in pignore] in pledge and pawn,
this is called sometimes the Seal of the holy spirit, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Sometimes
the Earnest, which is part of the thing to be enjoyed. Sometimes the Witness of
the Spirit, which never bears its testimony to a Lie, 1 John 5.10. He that
believes in the Son of God, has the witness in himself; for the holy spirit
bears witness with our Spirits, Rom^ 8.16. And in these respects the New
Creature is available in such a manner, as no externa^ Gospel-privileges, or
worldly enjoyments are to the Children of men. Thus much for the third Head.

Chap. V. Some Inferences by way of Question a^ Answer from the Premises.
FOr the Practical Improvement of this gre^ Truth, I shall keep close to the
Meth^ which the Holy Ghost prescribes in all Truth^ 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture
is given by Inspirat^ of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Repro^ for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousne^ These are the Uses I shall make of
this point.

1. Doctrine, or Information of the Judgme^ that our Minds may be informed in
points fit (...) be known.

Now there may be inquiry into Seven Poin^ about this Doctrine of the New
Creature, whi^ I shall reduce to Question and Answer.

1. Quest. Whether is the framing of this N^ ^reature in the Soul miraculous?
The Reason of this Question, is because we have compared it to, yea, ^ewed a
precedence above the first Creation, which was a Miracle, therefore it should
seem that this also must be so.

Answ. 1. Some things are Miracles, yet not (...) Creation; as Stephen seeing
Jesus at God's Right hand, Acts 7. Or barren Sarah's concei^ing, Genesis 2 1. or
the Sun's going back, or standing still, Isa. 38. For then Nature is only
ex^ended. 2. Some things both a Miracle and a Creation, as the Virgin Mary's
conceiving, and ^earing a Son, yet remaining a Virgin, Luke 1.^5. Manna was
both a Miracle and a Creation, Exodus 16.22.3. Some things seem a Miracle, as an
Eclipse of the Sun, seems a Mi^acle to ignorant People, but Mathematicians now
the Cause. 4. Some things are a Creation, yet not a Miracle, as the Conversion
of a ^oul, the subject is a rational Soul, and so ca^ble of a Principle of
Grace, and had once ^od's Image; but its lost, and is recovered by (...)
Spiritual Creation, of that which Man had ^st by his fall and folly; and so
it is called.

2. Quest. Whether is there any Inclination in ^an toward this New Creation?
Or whether there (...) any Spark of Good left in man upon his fall, that ^ing
improved by his Natural Faculties, and dili^nce may grow up to a New Creature?
For it may ^m there is in man a Natural Conscience, prompting ^n to good,
excusing him in doing it, drawing him ^m Evil, and accusing him upon the
committing it; (...) Romans 2.14, 15.

Answ. 1. Those [(...) or (...) as Grecians call them] common notices, or An^
ticipations of Good, are not in the Will, but (...) the Mind; not in the
Affections, but Conscience, [ nec vero cordis nomen pro sede affectuum, se^
tantum pro intellectu capitur, Calv. in loc.] It was not engraven in their Will
to choose it, but the power of some Truths flashed in their Eyes, tha^ they
could not but know them, and have so^ general liking of them: so they could not
b^ know that Adultery and Stealing are naught^ the contrary, good. 2. But
whether these we^ left in man's Heart after the Fall, as Relics (...) God's
Image, or introduced by God's Providence afterward for the good of mankind, a^
to maintain Peace and Intercourse in Societi^ is much disputed: Mr. Capel of
Tempt. thin^ the latter. However, 3. All our Protest^ Writers affirm, with the
Scriptures, that Man Nature is universally depraved, against (...) Socinians,
that hold the Nature of Man is (...) corrupted, but say, whatsoever Spot or
Vic^ in Man, proceeds from frequent Acts of S^ and Custom in Sinning, without
the inter^ corruption of his Nature. But the Script^ tell us of Man's total
degeneracy: In me, sa^ Paul, i. e. in my Flesh dwells no good thing, Ro^ 7.18.
Our mind and conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.^ There is none righteous, no not
one, of all the race Mankind, Romans 3.9, 10. And therefore ne^ a Sanctification
throughout, in Soul, Spirit, and B^ 1 These 5.23. Yea, 4. There Is an utter im^
tency in Man to renew himself, Romans 5.6. (...) we are all without strength,
cannot think a g^ thought, 1 Cor. 3.4. Yea, dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians.
2.1. And are mere Passives in the first Infusion of Spiritual Life: [ Subjectum
dei actionem suscipens] a Subject capable of divine operations; but in the
power of Darkness, lead captive by Satan at his pleasure, Col. 1.13. Yea, The
Carnal Mind is enmity to God, 1 Timothy 2.26. God works both to will, and to do,
of his good pleasure, Romans 8.7. [ut velimus, in nobis sine nobis operatur, Aug.]

3. Quest. Why then does God and Man call upon us to turn our selves, yea, to
make us a new heart and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 18.31. if this be not in our power?
Does he not mock us, when he calls us to do that which he knows it is
impossible for us to do?

Answ. No; for, 1st. It was once in our power to do good by his Donation, and
if we have lost it by our own Folly, and cannot do what he requires, we must
hereby know that God has not lost his Authority to command, because we have
lost our Ability to obey: He will let us know his Sovereignty. But, 2dly. God
knows Man is a proud Creature, and thinks he can do what he cannot: And now God
commands to convince him of his insufficiency, that he may look uy to God for
help. Yet, 3dly. Though Man has lost the Rectitude of his Faculties, he has
not lost his Faculties: he has a Rational Soul, if he have not Spiritual
Grace. Though carnal Persons be morally dead, yet they are naturally alive: Men
have a self-reflecting Conscience, which they may, and must use, It is the
Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the Belly, Prove. 20.27.
4thly. It was the saying of Augustine, Twelve Hundred Year^ ago, He that made
thee without thee, will not save thee without thee. If thou be not an Efficient
in thy own Conversion, thou may and must be an Instrument in thy Salvation:
thou art bound to work out thy own Salvation, Phil. 2.12.

4. Quest. What is a Man better for his endeavors unless God give him the
Grace of this New Creature? All that he can do, will be to no purpose, nothing
can be pleasing to God, or available to himself in his natural state; For
without Faith it is impossible to please God? Heb. 11.6.

Answ. 1. Though carnal men cannot do what God requires in a due manner, yet
God has some respect to such as for the matter do something of their Duty; God
took notice of Ahab's humiliation, and promises not to bring the Evil in his
days, 1 King. 21.27, 29. Jehoahax^ wa^ none of the best Kings, Yet when he
besought the Lord, he hearkened to him, 2 King. 13.4. And upon Rehoboam's
humiliation, the Lord considerably remitted of his punishment, 2 Chronicles. 12.6,
7. And is not a relaxation or removal of outward punishment of some worth with
you? Yea, though the young Gentleman's obedience was but poor stuff, and he in
his natural state, yet Jesus beholding him, loved him; see Mark 10.20, 21. Is
this nothing?

2. However, such as frame not their Hearts and Doings to turn to God, and
through sloth or wilfulness, neglect God's appointed Means of becoming New
Creatures; do, First, evidently declare themselves to be causes of their own
damnation; Secondly, render themselves daily worse and worse, and grow more
unable to repent, 2 Timothy 3.13. Thirdly, provoke God to give them up to their
own Hearts Lusts, Psalm. 8.10, 11. Fourthly, make themselves manifold more the
Children of Wrath, Matthew. 25.15. Are more inexcusable, and sink themselves
deeper in Hell: And is this any way desirable?

3. But though such poor Souls cannot with all their endeavors, make
themselves New Creatures; yet we may say of such, as our Lord said of the
Scribe, Mark 12.33, 34. When he saw that he answered discreetly, Thou art not
far from the Kingdom of God. You are in an hopeful way to Heaven, while you are
endeavoring in the use of God's appointed means.

4. And who can tell what these Labors will produce? Its true, thou can not
deserve Grace [ ex congruo] to challenge it of Debt for the work done; nor can
I say that Grace is due to thee by any Promise; for all the Promises of God are
made in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. But I have something yet to say for thy
Encouragement: For, 1st. thou have to deal with a God of infinite Goodness,
that has Sworn he delights not in the death of a Sinner, Exodus 34.7. Ezekiel.
33.11. And who knows what he may do for thee? 2dly. God has yet spared thy
Life, and is sending terms of Reconciliation to thee a vile Sinner, 2 Cor.
5.20. and stands knocking at thy Door, while thou knockest at his. A general
Pardon is proclaimed, Mark 16.15. thou have no cause to despair. 3dly. Did
thou ever meet with any that came sad, and disappointed from his Door? Did he
ever say to any, Seek ye me^ in vain, Isa. 1. Nay, does he not say, Those that
come unto me, I will in no wife cast off; John 6.37? 4thly. And does he not
say, Those that seek me early, shall find me, Prove. 8? Does not the Gospel
promise what the Law commands? God does graciously undertake to do what he
requires us to do; he bids you make you a new Heart; and the same God says, I
will put a new Spirit within them, Ezekiel. 11.19. O put him to it, and try him
what he will do: the Means I shall suggest hereafter: This only in Answer to
this Question.

5. Quest. Is not the New Creature begot in the Ordinance of Baptism, which is
called the washing (or Laver) of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. then we need no more?

Answ. 1. Baptism (as Circumcision of Old) is a Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, Romans 4.11. And supports Faith either in the Parent, or in the Child, or
Party baptized, for the Promise is to you and to your Children, Acts 2.38. The
Apostles baptized Believers: Now the Effect is not before the Cause: If they
were Regenerated before, Baptism could not be the Cause of Regeneration. 2. Yet
some have been baptized upon the Profession of their Faith, that never were
regenerated, as Simon Magus, who was still in the gall of bitterness, Acts
8.13, 23. So it was but a Sign, no proper Cause, which would have had its
certain Effect. 3. If Baptism were the Cause of Regeneration, then no
unbaptized Children were regenerate, and so could not be saved, if dying in
Innocence; but David believed his Child's Salvation, 2 Samuel 12.23. though not
Circumcised, by virtue of the Covenant. 4. It is a groundless Popish Doctrine,
to think that Sacraments confer Grace, [ ex opere operato] merely because used,
that they stamp an indelible Character on the Party baptized, its but an
External Act, and cannot reach the Heart or Conscience, no more then Old
Testament Rites could do, Heb. 10.1, 3. Nor is it in the power of the holiest
Minister on Earth, or Angel in Heaven; its God's prerogative, and he is a free
Agent, 1 Pet. 1.21. to work or suspend his Grace.

Object. But does not Baptism now save?

Answ. But it is when there is the Answer of a good Conscience, and it is by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, Romans 1.16.-10.14. The Gospel-preaching is the
Power of God to Salvation; yet all are not saved by it: Faith comes by hearing,
Jam. 5.3. Yet all that hear, do not believe; For who has believed our Report?
Ordinances are but Channels, not Springs of Grace; the Blessing upon them
depends only on Sovereign Grace: how many Thousands have gone to Hell with
Baptismal Water on their Face! Ishmael, Esau, and all the House of Israel that
were uncircumcised in Heart, Jer. 9.26. Rest not satisfied with this, but see
you be baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, Matthew. 3.11.

6. Quest. Wherein does this New Creature excel shining morality, or the
splendid common Graces of the Hypocrites?

Answ. 1. In the Root or Principle, begot by a Saving change from Nature to
Grace; carnal men, though they have never so fair a Flower, yet want the Root
of the matter, John 19.27. This unsoundness of Heart is the Hair in the
Moralists Pen that blurs all his fair Writing; as he said of a Person of such
and such Virtues [ tamen est Romanus] yet he is a Leper, as was said of Naaman
the Syrian; still graceless, unprincipled. 2. In the Universality, Zechariah
and Elizabeth walked in all the Commandments of the Lord; Luke 1.6. But of the
Moralist and Hypocrite it may be said, the Legs of the Lame are not equal: they
are addicted to halting and halving: they are always partial, seem excellent in
one Grace, but defective in another; yea, totally want what is essentially
necessary to constitute a Saint: The Moralist is defective in compliance with
the first Table of the Law, the Hypocrite with the Second: but the New Creature
lies square to all Commands and Duties at all times, Psalm. 106.3. The New
Creature acts for a right End, God's glory and communion with him, but the
Moralist and Hypocrite always, and in every action has a squint Eye at
himself, profit, pleasure, honor, as Jehu and the Pharisees. 4. The New
Creature always improves Jesus Christ, both for assistance and acceptance, the
Moralist and Hypocrite stand upon their own Legs, and think their Penny current
Money with God; but the gracious Soul denis himself in all; his Works are
wrought in God, John 3.21. He is accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. In the Lord
shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory, Isa. 45.25.

7. Qu. Wherein lies the difference betwixt this New Creature, which consists
in Sanctification, and the state of Justification? The Reason of this Query, is
because Papists and some others confound them.

Answ. 1. The New Creature in Sanctification, is an Inherent Work done within
us; A New Spirit will I put within you, Ezekiel. 36.26. And the Kingdom of God is
within you, Luke 17.21. And though at first it be immediately infused by the
Spirit, yet the Christian is an Agent in promoting his Sanctification, 2 Cor.
7.1.1 John 3.3. they may and must cleanse themselves. But now Justification is
a Work done without us by the Lord Christ, with his Father, by his Satisfaction
of Divine Justice on the Cross, and by his Intercession at God's Right Hand, we
have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of Sins, Ephesians. 1.7. The Red
Lines of Christ's Blood, blot out the Black Lines of our Sins out of God's
Debt-book; he washes us from our Sins in his own Blood, 1 John 1.7. Rev. 1.5.
He was delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our Justification, Romans
4.25. No other Person or Thing is interposed, no Faith it self, as a Work, has
not any causality in this Work, its only God's free Work of Grace for Christ's
sake to forgive Sins.

2. The New Creature in Sanctification, is not wrought in the same measure or
degree in all the Saints of God, some that are sincere, come far short of
others; there are some Babes, others strong men, Heb. 5.13, 14. It Is said of
some Kings of Israel, there was none like them, Neh. 7.2. Hananiah feared God
above many: There was none like Job in the Earth, Job 1.8. So there was
different products of the Seed, yet all in good Ground, Matthew. 13.23. Some
Christians abound in Faith, Love, Humility, Patience, Knowledge, Mortification,
others are defective. But Justification is alike to all, and upon all that
believe, for there is no difference, Romans 3.22. The meanest weakest Believer
has as large a Store as the strongest: I write unto you little Children,
because your Sins are forgiven you for his Name's sake, 1 John 2.12. They are
as much justified as Fathers and Young Men: Mary Magdalen, the Penitent Thief,
are as much justified as Peter: the reason is, because they are all partakers
of like precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. The least measure whereof attains its End
of receiving Christ, as the greater; for it is Christ received by Faith that
justifies: a weak Hand may receive a Gift as well as the stronger, though not
so steaddily; but its the Gift that inricheth, not the strength of the Hand.

3. The New Creature comes on by degrees, its not complete, as it shall be, at
the first instant; it is first an Embryo, Christ formed in the Heart, and then
increases with the increase of God, till it come to a perfect man, Col. 2.19.
to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. The Apostle
thanks God for the Thessalomans, that their Faith did grow exceedingly, 2 These.
1.3. and Charity: Its like the Sun that shines more and more to the perfect
day, Prove. 4.18. A good Man grows stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. But now
Justification is complete at first, every whit as much at first ingrafting into
Christ, as afterward: All that believe, are justified from all things, Acts
13.39. No Condemnation can be laid in against them, Romans 8.1. He forgiveth all
trespasses, blotting out the handwriting, Col. 2.13, 14. God thoroughly washes
away his Childrens blood, Ezekiel. 16.9. There Is not a Spot to be seen on them, no
Charge can be drawn up against them, Romans 8.33.

Quest. Why then are Christ's Disciples bound to pray daily for Pardon? Matthew.
6.12.

Answ. 1. Because we are daily committing new Sins, in many things we offend
all, James 3.2. We miss it in every thing: Oh, how many are our secret Faults,
Psalm. 19.12.2. God would have us daily lie under the sense of our former guilt,
the desert of Sin, and the worth of pardoning Grace; David was assured of
Pardon by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13. yet afterward prays for it, Psalm. 51.2. The
prodigal Son confesses his fault, after his Father had fallen on his Neck,
Luke 15.20, 21.3. Pardoning Grace may be clouded in the sense and assurance of
it, and in this respect the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith, Romans 1.17. From a less to a stronger Faith. Besides, 4. We may
distinguish betwixt a justified State, and applications of Pardon to Souls,
there is forgiveness with God, which must be daily sued out by Faith and
Prayer, Psalm. 130.4.

4. Another difference betwixt this New Creature and Justification, is, that
the Grace of the New Creature is never perfect in this Life; the holiest Saints
have some Spots, and defects, who can say, I have made my Heart clean, Prove.
20.9. I am pure from my Sin? Eccle. 7.20. There Is not a just man on Earth, that
does good, and sins not, Mat. 3.14. John Baptist needs a New Baptism; all
the Disciples need their first washing, John 13. A Paul complains of a Body of
Death, Romans 7.14. Its in Heaven only that the Spirits of just men are made
perfect, Heb. 12.23. Bat Justification is perfect; there is no Spot in the
justified Cant. 4.7. Fair as the Moon, Cant. 6.10. [as to Sanctification] clear
as the Sun [in respect of Justification] Psalm. 51.7. white as Snow, Isa. 38.17.
God deals with them, as if they had never offended, casting their Sins behind
his Back, into the depth of the Sea, Mich. 7.18. Remembers them no more, Jer.
31.34.

Object. But does not God punish his for Sin?

Answ. Those are not properly Acts of Vindictive Justice, but Fatherly
Chastisements, coming from God, not as a Judge upon a Malefactor, but as an
indulgent Father to his wandering and way-ward Child. Its true, Afflictions are
materially the Curse, but formally a Blessing, being like a Water running
through the blessed Mineral of Covenant-Love. With reference to this Pardoning
Grace, Dr. Ames Medul. p. 139.
its worth noting what D. Ames observes, that there is fourfold Pardon; 1st. In
God's decree and purpose, foreseeing it, Gal. 3.8. 2dly. In Christ's
undertakings, our Sins laid on him, Isa. 53.6. 3dly. Virtually upon the
Christians first Relation to God, Romans 8.1. 4thly. Expressly applied upon the
Believers Repentance, acting of Faith, and sense of pardon, Romans 5.1. And I may
add, there is a Day of public proclaiming this Pardon before the whole World,
Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

Chap. VI. An Use of Reproof and Conviction of sundry sorts.
A Second Use of this point, is Reproof. If a New Creature be available to
Souls, yea, of such absolute necessity, then what shall we say?

1. Of non-pretenders to it. 2. Of mere Pretenders to it.
1. There are some in the World, that plainly say in Words or Deeds, that they
are as they have been, and so will continue; they trouble not themselves about
these new things; but say, I am [ Semper idem] still the same. I thank God, I
am no Turn-coat, nor will I meddle with them that are given to change, I love
the old way.

To this Answer, Take that Text with you, Jeremiah 6.16. Stand ye in the ways,
and see, and ask for the Old Paths, where is the good old way, and walk
therein. Mark it, not simply the Old Way, except it be good; for there are many
old ways that are not good: Cain's way is old enough, so was Balaam's and
Core's, yet there is a Woe unto them that walk in those ways, Jude 11. The Woman
of Samaria boasted of the Antiquity, that their Father Jacob gave them that
Well, that her Ancestors did worship in that Mountain, John 4.12.-20.24. But
our Lord teaches her other Doctrines; yea, it was no good Plea of the Jews,
that they did as their Fathers, in burning Incense to the Queen of Heaven,
though they pleaded great Success; then, say they, We bad plenty of Victuals,
and saw no Evil, Jer. 44.17, 18. God answers them to the purpose, Ver. 21.22.
But let me say to you,

1. That this Plea is a multiplication of the Fault; if it be not a good way,
every Step you take in it, is a new Error, and brings new guilt, [ vetustas
Erroris seductio Errantis] The way of the Wicked seduceth him. Have you
examined, whether this be God's way or no? If you be wrong, the further you go,
the further you are from God.

2. This continuing in old Customs without inquiry will harden your Hearts, and
make you more incapable, yea, more unwilling to return. Can the Ethiopian
change his Skin, and the Leopard his Spots, then may ye also learn to do good,
that are accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13.23. Custom in Sin takes away Conscience
of Sin: the more men travel, the more brawny are their Feet.

3. But what think you, Adam went wrong, and do you delight to follow him? or
rather should not the Old Man be crucified, Romans 6.6. You have no reason to
bear big or brag of the Old Man, which is corrupt according to deceitful Lusts,
but rather put on this new man, which after God is created in Righteousness,
and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 24. See a Parallel betwixt the first Adam and
Second, 1 Cor. 15.45, 49. And then make your choice.

4. You Will never walk in Heaven's Road, without a change: Deceive not your
selves, you must be turned from your vain Conversation, received by Tradition
from your Fathers, 1 Pet. ^.18. You will never walk in this New and Living Way,
without a New Heart: You cannot serve God, but it must be in the Newness of
Spirit, not in the Oldness of the Letter, Romans 7.6. You are undone, if you dye
as you are born; you need not change your Religion, for you profess the true
Religion, only you must see you be true to that Religion by a change of Heart
and Life: Except you be born again, you cannot see the Kingdom of God, John
3.3. Better never have been born, then not be new born: But more of this anon:
Tremble to think of appearing before God naked, or in your old rotten Rags: the
Gibeonites might cheat Israel with their old Bottles, Clouts, Shoes, Josh. 9.4.
but you cannot cosen God so: An old frame is not fit for a new state: old
Hearts for new Heavens: If you live after the Flesh, you shall dye, (i. e. be
damned) Rom 8.13: but if you through the Spirit, mortify the deeds of the
Body, you shall live, i. e. be saved.

There are many more that are far from being New Creatures, that have a black
Brand of Reprobation printed on their Foreheads, and disclaim any pretenses to
this New Creation-Work; as,

1st. Such as have imbibed Atheistical Principles, and say with their Tongues
or in their Hearts, there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. at least Deists, that deny
God's Providence, and Divine Revelations.

2dly. Profane Scoffers at true Christian Piety and the Power of Godliness, 2
Pet. 3. under the Name of Puritans, loading Strictness in Religion, with Names
of Obloquy, Scorn, and Derision.

3dly. Profoundly ignorant of Gospel-Mysteries, 1 Cor. 13.34. and the
Essentials of Religion, the knowledge whereof is of the highest importance and
necessity, and yet do scorn to learn.

4thly. Voluptuous Epicures, Drunkards, Adulterers, and that wallow in all
Sensuality and Immorality, without control or remorse, and glory in their
shame, Phil. 3.19.

5thly. Proud contentious, revengeful, hateful hating all about them, Tit. 3.3.
That evidently manifest the Fruits, or Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20. in
bitter Revilings, Suits at Law, Variance about Trifles.

6thly. Covetous, griping Muck-worms, that make Gain their Godliness, Gold
their God, Col. 3.5. These are Idolaters, that are hard-hearted to the poor,
but please themselves with worldly Enjoyments, Luke 12.20.

7thly. Swearers, profane Takers of the Name of God in vain, foolish Talkers,
Jesters Liars, Ephesians. 5.4, 5. think their Tongues a^ their own, and they may say
what they list.

8thly. Neglecters of God's worship, public private, secret, never call on God
except by horrid Imprecations, yea, that think it is in vain to serve God, Mal.
3.14. and hate such as do.

Such flagitious Offenders there are in the World, yea in England, that make a
Scoff at the Name of the Spirit and Grace of Christ, and will own no
Regeneration, but what they imagine they received in Baptism, which yet they
grossly contradict, as if they would scorn, and run counter to the
Bible-Religion and Morality it self; these profligate Wretches I remit to the
righteous Judgment of the Great God, because I have little hopes they will read
such plain Treatises, or hear any powerful Preachers; and so are out of the
Road of ordinary means of Grace, or hopes of Good.

2. But those I have at present to deal with, are Pretenders, and but mere
Pretenders to this New Creation, that have something like it, but it will not
prove the New Creature, but a dead Carcass, a lifeless Image of it: Many of our
constant, diligent Attenders on all Ordinances, are apt to say, I thank God, I
hope I am a New Creature. To which I Answer, It Is well if it prove so; but the
Apostle says, Not he that commends himself, is approved, but whom the Lord
commends, 2 Cor. 10.18. And Solomon says, There is a way which seems right
unto a man, but the End thereof are the ways of Death; Prove. 14.12. But Persons
had need to beware taking Counters for Gold, Pebbles for Pearls; there is much
counterfeit Ware passes for current Coin now adays. May not an Angel be hanged
for a Sign, when the Devil is within? Are not many Professors like the
Pharisees, painted Sepulchers, that appear Fair, but within are full of
Rottenness, and dead men's Bones, Matthew. 23.27, 28. Like a Golden Saddle stuffed
with Straw; or Apothecaries Boxes, with specious Titles, but empty of useful
Drugs: So it is said [ Aliud in titulo, aliud in pyxide] a specious Title, but
nothing within of what is promised. Alas, how many Professors have we known
histrionically acting the part of Kings on the Stage, that were Beggars, in
Rags, when divested of their gilded Robes of a glorious Profession: How many
have the Complexion, but not the Constitution of Saints: one calls them deaf
Nuts; another, Apples of Sodom; a third, Cockles and Darnel, that make a fairer
show then good Wheat, but must be cast out. There were some of Old, that
desired to make a fair show in the Flesh, Gal. 6.12. but are like vapouring
Tradesmen, that bear big to gain Credit, but if searched into, possibly not
worth a Groat, when their Debts are paid: Such there always have been, and its
well if the World be mended.

I shall briefly propound and Answer the Pleas, that may make for their
pretense.

1st. Plea. I have heard that the New Creature consists in Knowledge, and I
thank God that has given me a large share of that.

Answ. We know that we all have knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.1. Tit. 1.16. What kind of
knowledge is yours? Devils have more knowledge then you, yet are not, nor ever
can be New Creatures: a Toad has a Pearl in its Head, Poison in it is Body;
thousands go knowingly to Hell, and the more knowledge without Grace, the more
torment, Luke 12.47.

2d. Plea. But I believe the Revelations of God, give credit to the Gospel, I
can say the Creed, am Orthodox, no Heretic.

Answ. That Is well so far; but read Romans 2.17 -- to ver. 25. What can thou
say of thy self more then this professing Jew, that rested in the Law, made his
boast of God, approved of things more excellent; who yet was condemned as a
perfidious, self-contradicting, God-dishonouring wretch: but thou believe, so
does the Devil believe and tremble, James 2.19. Thou may have an Orthodox
Head, and Heterodox Feet.

3d. Plea. I am come of Religious Parents, that improved, pleaded the Covenant
for me, trained me up in the Fear of God.

Answ. John Baptist anticipates this Plea, Mat. 3.9. Think not to say in your
Hearts, We have Abraham to our Father, Matthew. 8.12. The Children of the Kingdom
may be cast into utter Darkness. Alas Parental Privileges without Parents
Principles, signify nothing: Let our Lord Christ, who will be Judge, answer
this vain Plea, John 8.33-44. This may aggravate your Sin, never save your
Souls, without Personal Piety.

4th. Plea. I have made a credible Profession of my Faith, am Baptized, am
admitted to the Lord's Supper, join with God's People.

Answ. So did Simon Magus believe, professed his Faith, was Baptized, Acts
8.13.20-23. deceived the purest Church on Earth, for he proved a rotten
Hypocrite; so did Judas, so did he that wanted the Wedding Garment, Matthew.
22.12. And how easy it is to cast a Mist before the Eyes of fallible men,
daily experience testifies: See an Instance of some that partake of
extraordinary Privileges, Ordinances, yet rejected, 1 Cor. 10.5.

5th Plea. Yea, but I am not only admitted, but continue long with them, hold
up Society with them in public, private Exercises.

Answ. So did the Foolish Virgins accompany the Wise, till the last Hour, with
shining Lamps, and when the Bridegroom came, they all trimed their Lamps, but
at last it was found, they had no Oil in their Vessels, and so were shut out;
see Matthew. 25.1-12. And do you not read of some that pertinaciously maintain
their Plea to the very last, when the Door is shut, and still begin to say, We
have eat and drunk in thy presence, -- Luke 13.25, 26, 27.

6th. Plea But I have had great Convictions of Conscience for the evil of Sin,
Justice of God; these sure were pangs of the New Birth.

Answ. Cain had these legal terrors, yet was naught; so had Saul, so Judas;
yea, Felix trembled upon Paul's preaching, Acts 24.25. And all these were but
as [ praejudicium judicij] foretastes of that horrible Vengeance in the other
World. Some Sinners have a fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation, Heb. 10.27. Oh look to your coming out of your Horrors of
Conscience; see you close with Christ.

7th. Plea. Yes, I have had strong persuasions in my Breast to close with
Christ, and do take him by Faith to be my Savior.

Answ. An almost Persuasion is one thing, and a thorough Resolution is another,
Acts 26.27, 28. Some barter, but buy not this Pearl of Pirce, some are content
with a Christ to pardon and save them, but like him not as a King to rule them,
and mortify their Lusts: look to it, there is more sorts of Faith then saving:
the Apostle supposes a man to have all Faith, 1 Cor. 13.2. Yet not that which
works by Love, 1 Timothy 1.5. Feigned Faith is one thing, Unfeigned is another.

8th. Plea. But I confess all my Sins, from the bottom of my Heart, repent of
them, and am heartily sorry I have done amiss.

Answ. So have many Hypocrites, Reprobates; so did Pharaoh, Exodus 9.27. I have
sinned this time, the Lord is righteous, and I and my People are wicked, 1 Samuel
24.16, 17-26.21. Twice did Saul confess his Folly; yea, lift up his Voice, and
wept, and ingenuoussy said, I have sinned. So did Ahab humble himself, King.
21.27. And you find Judas repenting himself; yea, restoring, and saying, I have
sinned in betraying Innocent Blood, Matthew. 27 34. Oh see yours be not a worldly
Sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10.

9th. Plea. But I take up strong Resolutions of better and new Obedience, and
do actually reform; is not this the New Creature?

Answ. No, the New Creature always produces Reformation, but Reformation may
be without the New Creature; Herod feared John Baptist, and when he heard him,
he did many things, and heard him gladly, Mark 6.20. Partial Reformation is no
sound Evidence of Regeneration: the unclean Spirit of scandalous sinning may go
out of the Devil's Slave for a Season, Matthew. 12.43-45. Men may escape gross
Pollutions, yet be entangled in the Devil's Fetters, 2 Pet. 20.23.

10th. Plea. I do not only Reform, but also Conform to the Will of God, in
keeping all his Commands; this surely shows Grace.

Answ. Yes, if done from a right Principle, according to rule, for a right end,
with Faith in Jesus Christ: but deceive not your selves, outward Compliance
does not always testify a New Creature, the Young Gentleman in Matthew. 19.20.
said concerning the Commandments, All these things have I kept from my Youth
up, what lack I yet? Alas poor man, he lacked the main: Paul, before
Conversion, says of himself, touching the Righteousness of the law, blameless,
Phil. 3.6.

11th. Plea. But I do not only Reform, Conform; but I Perform many good Duties;
I Read, Pray, Fast, am serious in God's Worship.

Answ. It Is well so far; all do not so: but remember those Hypocrites in Isa.
58.2. That sought God daily, delighted to know his ways -- yea, the Pharisees
made long Prayers, Matthew. 23.14. Yea, they fasted, and that twice a Week, Luke
18.11,12. They were famous for Religious Exercises, yet gross Hypocrites.

12th. Plea. Those were only for Externals in Religion, but I am for Internals
also, that God may have my Heart.

Answ. Very well; but it is one thing to be sound in the Doctrinals, another to
be sincere in Practicals, Experimentals; it is one thing to say it, another
thing to feel it, and do it: The Scribe in Mark 12.32, 33. subscribed to the
Truth of this great Doctrine of Loving the Lord with all the Heart,
Understanding, Soul, and Strength, and repeats it, yet was not of, but only,
not far from the Kingdom of God, verse. 34. Yea, you may take delight in
approaching to God, yet be bad, Esaias, 38.2.

13th. Plea. But I am upright in what I do: I know nothing to my self but
Integrity; Conscience does not accuse me to be an Hypocrite.

Answ. It may be so, because Conscience may be asleep, and says nothing, or
nothing to the purpose, being blinded with Ignorance, or besotted with
self-conceit, and want of self-searching. But know, there may be a moral
Integrity in particular Acts, when there is not a Gospel-integrity in point of
State, as in Heathen Abimelech: see God's attestation to it, Genesis 20.5, 6.

14th. Plea. I have a Love to God, Jesus Christ, and follow him out of my dear
and tender respects to him.

Answ. It Is well if so, but is it not self-love that engages you to follow
him? as those, John 6.26. Ye seek me, not because ye saw the Miracles, but
because ye did eat of the Loaves, and were filled. Aug. complained 1200 Years
ago [ vix diligitur Jesus propter Jesum] Jesus is scarcely loved for Jesus
sake: he pays well for his Entertainment in the World's Coin: Let Christ and
Carnal Interest part, and then you will see what is the Master you will follow; then
a discovery will be made.

15th Plea. Well, but I have suffered much for Christ, his Cause, and a Good
Conscience, a trial has been made of my Integrity.

Answ. You have not yet resisted unto Blood, striving against Sin, Heb. 12.4.
Yea, the Apostle seems to suppose a Man may give his Body to be burnt; and yet
not have Charity, 1 Cor. 13.3. And it may be as possible, some may suffer in an
humor for a good Cause, as others pertinaciously in a bad; the Thorny Ground
Hearers past the brunt of Persecution, Matthew. 13.20, 22. falling on the Stony
Ground, but were naught. And the Apostle Paul supposes the Galatians to have
suffered many things in vain, Gal. 3.4. Many things make up a Christian
sufferer. Men may bear the Cross, and not follow Christ.

16th. Plea. But I give liberally to the Poor of my Substance, am much in the
exercise of Charity to persons in necessity.

Answ. The Apostle supposes still, that a Man may bestow all his Goods to feed
the Poor, yet not have Charity, 1 Cor. 13.3. You Will say this is a strange
Paradox; what is Charity, but a free distribution? But the Apostle
distinguishes, betwixt an Hand-Charity and a Heart-Charity; the poor Widow
with half a Farthing, and a free Heart gave more then all the other rich men's
large distributions, Matthew. 6.1, 2. Mark 12.41, 44. Some give for Ostentation,
others of Necessity; yea, out of Covetousness; you give nothing, unless you
give your selves first to God, 2 Cor. 9.5, 7.2 Cor. 8.5.

17th. Plea. I am forward for Reformation in my place, appear against
Profaneness, Sabbath-breaking, and am of a public Spirit.

Answ. It Is well done, but see you mistake not; how often did the Jews find fault
with our Lord for healing on the Sabbath day, and his Disciciples for plucking
Ears of Corn. Mark 12.1, 2. Take heed blind Zeal transport you not: but suppose
it be against Sin, see whether Self bear not sway, as it did Jehu, who was
partial in his Reformation, 2 King. 10.28, 29. At least temporary as Joash, who
was very zealous for Reforming, whilst his good Uncle Jehoida lived, 2 Chronicles.
24.2-18.

18th. Plea. I thank God, I have good Gifts in Discourse, in Prayer, and can
edify others, that are apt to admire me.

Answ. Gifts are one thing, Grace another; all gifted men are not gracious men:
who more eminent than Judas the traitor, yet an Apostle; and some will say in
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesyed in thy Name? Mat. 7.22, 23. To
whom he will say, I never knew you, depart from me. The Devil has finer Gifts
then any of you all: yet he is a damned Fiend in Hell: Gifts come upon another
Errand than Grace, 1 Cor. 12.7. Gifts are given to profit others, Grace for a
man's own Soul.

19th. Plea. I am verily persuaded I am sound at Heart, my Conscience flies not
in my Face, yea, I have great Peace, Joy and Comfort within.

Answ. God knows whether your Peace be of the right Stamp or no: I have told
you, there is a Peace of the Devil's speaking, and that may arise from
Conscience's Sleep, Security. I now tell you of a Joy rising from the common
workings of the Spirit, the stony Ground hearers anon with Joy received the
Word, Mat. 13.20. but had no Root? Luke 8.13. It Is not to tell what Joy and
Triumph some may conceive upon a Mistake. Some taste of the good Word, yea, of
the heavenly Gift, Gal. 6.3. James 1.22. Yet fall away totally and finally,
Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Look to your selves, thousands deceive themselves in this
weighty Affair.

20th. Plea. You are seeking to drive us to despair, but that I will never do,
I will hope well still, say what you will.

Answ. There Is a double despair, 1st. Good, and Necessary, a despair of ever
being saved in the state of Nature, wherein we are born, and this God brings
the Sinner to, in order to planting sound Hope, and sincere Faith in the Soul;
2dly. There Is an Evil, sinful despair of obtaining Mercy at God's hands through
Christ: God forbid we should drive Sinners to this despair: no, no, its the
former we aim at. Such as Paul felt, Rom: 7.9. I was alive without the Law
once, but when the Commandment came, sin revived and I dyed; ie. I saw my self
in a damnable state, no hopes of Salvation, while I continued in the state of
Nature: we are sure till Souls see themselves condemned, they will never look
after a Pardon; it is this we drive men to: Therefore, 2dly. there is a twofold
Hope, 1. A bad, a false, rotten Hope, that is built upon men's Fancy and
Imagination, Job 8.14. -- 11.20. This will be swept away like a Spiders-Web,
give up the Ghost; what has the Hypocrite gained by his hope, when God takes
away his Soul, chapter 27.8. It Is the best Office we can do the Sinner, to break
the Heart of this groundless Hope; that we might bring in a better Hope: Hence,
2. There Is a good Hope through Grace, an Hope that will not make ashamed, 2
These. 2.17. Romans 5.5. An Hope that rests upon the Promises of Grace in the
Gospel, its this that will do Men good at the last: but men must be sure to
observe and comply with the terms of the Promise, else it is groundless
presumption: A Prince has as much reason to be offended with him that keeps
not close to his Commission, as with another that acts without a Commission:
The Israelites of Old, says one, durst make God and his Promise a
Leaning-stock for their foul Elbows to rest on, Isa. 48.2. They call themselves
the holy City, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel: See also Micah 3.11.
Nothing more common, yet nothing more dangerous, for such are more bold then
welcome: for though a Prince may be so condescending as to let a poor Sick or
Wounded Man, especially in his Service, fainting and unable to go alone, upon
his humble request, make use of his Arm, rather then perish in the Street, yet
would reject a reeling Drunkard, if he desired to lean on him: thus a poor
bleeding, humble Penitent is entertained, when a presumptuous Rebel is kicked
off with infinite abhorrency; we must encourage the former, and convince the
latter, that their Hope may be dashed, and another Hope, ( begot again a lively
hope, 1 Pet. 1.3.1 John 3.3. that teaches Persons to cleanse themselves) be
planted in the Soul: For the wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but the
righteous has hope in his Death, Prove-14 32.

Chap. VII. An Use of Correction for Reforming Sinners Mistakes.
MY third Use is [(...)] for Correction, or Castigation of what is amiss, in
order to a Restitution of the Souls of Sinners to their pristin rectitude, for
that is the notion of this Word: for it signifies not only Correction of
Manners, but rectifying of inward Faculties, as Critics observe. I must
confess, the Work is arduous, and indeed it is impossible for a finite Creature
to work this New Creature: the best Ministers are but Instruments; and what can
the Ax do without the Hand to move it, or the Sword without the Hand to wield
it? Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believed? 1
Cor. 3.5. I am (said worthy Mr. Baxter) but a Pe^ for God to write with. Well
then, shall we do nothing, because we cannot do all? He tha^ set us a work, is
able to second our Work with his Benediction: the World has been form'^ new by
this blessed Word of Truth.

I shall therefore make one Experiment more to see what the great God will do
for a New Creation upon the Souls of Men; humbly imploring the Blessing of
Heaven upon my poor Endeavors: In prosecuting this Point, I shall use some
persuasive Arguments to prevail with poo^ Sinners, to look after it in due time.

2. Answer what Objections Sinners can make against it, and so make way for the
next Use of Instruction.

7. For Motives, Arguments, I shall not repeat any thing drawn [ ab utili] the
advantages thereof used in the Doctrinal part, as 1. Rectifying the Souls
Faculties: 2. Evidencing Electing Love: 3. Consecrating the Soul for God: 4.
Fitting it for Communion with God: 5. Entituling to Christ: 6. Producing true
Joy: 7. Intailing all things profitable: 8. Putting the Soul into a safe State:
9. As rendering them useful: 10. Fitting them for Gospel-Privileges: 11.
Preparing them for Death and Heaven: 12. Yea, is an Heaven begun. All these
might be improved as strong Arguments to persuade Sinners to press after it.

But I shall further draw some Arguments [a periculo] from the danger Sinners
are in, till they become New Creatures.

1. If you are not New Creatures, you are not true Christians: For if any man
be in Christ, he is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. i.e. Whoever is worthy the
Name of Christian, fit for so high a Character, he must necessarily be a New
Creature, or else he arrogates to himself an high Title, not belonging to him:
And alas, what will a bare Name signify? [ nomen inane, crimen immane]
arrogating such an high Title, is a piece of high Presumption; nay, its no less
then Blasphemy, when men call themselves Jews ( or Chri^tians) and are not,
Rev. 2.9. Even as it is Treason against the rightful Sovereign, for any Subject
to entitle himself King: what horrid Presumption are graceless Sinners guilty
of? for whatever you may account your selves, God accounts you no better then
Heathens: uncircumcised Judah is ranked with Egypt, Edom, Ammon, Moab, in
Scripture, Jer. 9.26. Are ye not as children of Aethiopians to me, O children
of Israel, says the Lord, Amos 9.7. Profane Saul is called a Cushite, Psalm.
7, 54, and 59., And graceless Jews, though of the true Religion, are accounted
as Strangers; and God esteems wicked Princes, rulers of Sodom, and People of
Gomorrah, Isa. 1.10. though his People by Profession: And what if God account
you (that brag of the Christian Name) no better then Jews, Mahometans,
Heathens? You are like to fare no better than they.

2. You will fare worse then they: God will judge you according to the Helps
and Advantages you have had: it will be worse with you than Sodom and Gomorrah,
Tire and Sidon, Matthew 11.20-24. Yea, the Men of Nineveh, and Queen of the
South, shall rise up in Judgment against Graceless Professors of the true
Religion, Matthew. 12.41, 42. Oh, how dreadful a Rebuke will this be? They may
say, If we had heard so much of Christ, and Gospel Grace, we would have framed
more to compliance therewith, we knew not what estate we were in, or what would
be the astonishing Consequence thereof, as you heard from day to day: we never
pretended such high Principles, nor were engaged by Baptism to be God's
Servants, Subjects, Soldiers, as you were. Now we know that the Soldier that
has taken Press-Money, and is false, or fights none, or is a Renegado, has
the heaviest doom, Mat. 24.51. The Hypocrites are free Denizons of Hell, its
their proper place: You had better been born in India, then in England, in
Turkey, then within the Pale of the Church, and not be New Creatures; yea,
better have been no Creatures, or vilest Creatures, than not be New Creature,
as our Lord said of Judas, It had been better if he had never been born, John
1. So say I. and not new born: If you lived and dyed as Beasts, there is an End
of you, you would feel neither Weal nor Woe; but it will be otherwise with you:
Woe, woe, to you that ever you were born: Lord have mercy on you.

3. If you be not New Creatures, you are Slaves to, and bear the Image of the
Devil: you are lead captive by him at his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. Yea, you are
his willing Slaves: its converting Grace only that brings out of the power of
Satan, Acts 26.18. But they are invisible Fetters; for he holds his black Hand
over the Sinners Eye, and works effectually in his heart, 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians.
2.2. that the poor Slave will not believe his Slavery, but thinks he is a
Freeman, though he be holden with the cords of his sins, Prove. 5.22. and dragged
apace Hell-wards: O worse then Egyptian Bondage, or Turkish Slavery! who would
abide it? Yea, without this New Creation, you have the Devil's Image upon you,
you are the very Picture of that infernal Fiend; so that if it be asked, whose
Image and Superscription is this? It must be answered, Satan's. Our Lord tells
the Jews, You are of your Father the Devil, John 8.44. Your Envy is the Devil's
Eye, your Hypocrisy the Devil's cloven Foot, your Lying the Devil's Tongue;
your carnal Policy the Devil's Head; your Pride and Self-conceit the Devil's
lofty Countenance, and all these will end in the Devil's despair. Oh tremble,
to carry such a resemblance to God's enemy: It Is storyed, that when they brough
Tamerlane a Pot of Gold, he asked what Stam^ was upon it; when he understood it
had the Roman Stamp, he utterly refused it: Even (...) will God reject you, if
the Devil's stamp be o^ you, you will be no current Money with God, the you have
golden Gifts.

4. If you be not New Creatures, God an^ you are fallen out, there is an enmity
and anti^ pathy betwixt the holy God and your carn^ Hearts: and this is the
height of a Creatures S^ and misery. It is very observable that in the middle
of that black Bed-roll of Heathens Sins Romans 1.29, 30, 31. that cursed Root and
Sprin^ [ haters of God] being in the midst, it diffuset its malignant Influence
backward and forwards to actuate all those Sins: Not that the Creatur^ can
directly intend to be an Enemy to God, b^ that a graceless Person is
interpretatively, an^ consequentially an enemy to God, the chief good: as he
is an enemy to Holiness, Justic^ Truth, which are divine Perfections, so God at
counts them that are Enemies to his Soveraig^ ry, Luke 19.27. yea, the carnal
mind is enm^ it self against God, Romans 8.7. And S^ turns God to be an Enemy,
Zech. 11.8. Isa. 6.10. And there is no Person that God hates an^ despises so
much, as this hypocritical Pretend Psalm. 73.20. O Lord, when thou awakest, the
shall despise their Image; Either it is spoken wicked men's Prosperity, which
God slights, (...) but an imaginary thing, or else the Image of temporary
Profession, with their fantastical Faith, Piety, Devotion, which now the
rotten-hearted hypocrite danceth about in, in his pleased thoughts, as a man in
a Dream, conceits himself a great Prince; but a Day is coming, that this great
Idol shall be broken, and the Worshippers of it hissed down to Hell with
greatest Shame and Disdain: for it is said of the Ape, because he has the Face,
but not the Soul of a Man, he is the most ridiculous and odious of all
Creatures: Thus an hypocritical Judas is more abhorred of the Lord, then a
bloody Pilate, for it is an high Crime for an ignoble Person to counterfeit
himself to be a King's Son, and a false Friend is more detested than an open
Enemy: Such are those that pretend friendship to God, and are his real Enemies.

5. If you be not New Creatures, you are not capable of getting good by any
Ordinances and Providence: nothing will do you good, for you want a Principle
and Capacity to improve any thing: you are spiritually dead, dead in trespasses
and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. It is this New Creation alone that puts Life into you;
Preaching to you, is but [ surdo canere] as singing to a deaf man, speaking to
a Stone: that which is nourishing Food to a living man, corrupts, and turns to
putrefaction in a dead Man's Mouth: though the Sinner breaths, yet he lives
not: naturally alive, spiritually dead; this is the worst kind of Death, for he
is alienated from the Life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. Heb. 9.14. As his Works are but
dead works, so his Soul is but a dead rotten Carcass: Its true, a poor carnal
dead Sinner, that is naturally alive, may hear a sound in the Ministry of the
Word, but receives not the Sense, conceives not aright of the Significancy of
what he hears. Its worth your observing that its said of Readiness Companions,
Acts 7.9. They heard a Voice: yet its said, Acts 22.9. They heard not the voice
of him that spoke to me. Are not these inconsistent? No, they heard indeed a
Sound, but nothing distinctly, or they might hear a Voice, but not Christ's, as
Saul did; even so in an Ordinance, men may hear distinctly the Voice of a Man,
but not the Voice of God, so as to fall down and confess, that God is there of
a truth, 1 Cor. 14.25. This is that which makes such a difference of Hearers in
the same Auditory; Some hear what the Spirit says, Rev. 2. Others profit not
from Day to Day, because the Word is not mixed with Faith, Heb. 4.2. The
Chemist can do nothing without Fire: the Sinner will neither do, nor receive
Good by any thing without the Spirit, and this blessed New Creation.

6. Without the New Creature, you will not be secured from the worst of Sins:
for as you want a Principle of Obedience; so you have no reason to expect
assistance from Heaven: its only God's fear in your hearts, that keeps you from
departing from him, Jer. 32.40. Indeed the Text says, 1 John. 3.9. Whosoever
is born of God, does not commit sin, for his Seed remains in him. But alas,
you want this Seed; there is in you the Fomes, Spawn, Spring, Root of all
Abominations, there want nothing but a Tap to give it vent: Satan will be ready
enough to fill your hearts to lie to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.3. To betray Jesus,
to run into all Excess of Riot, if Satan find his House empty [of Saving Grace]
though it be swept, Matthew. 12.43, 44, 45. [from some gross Sins by Morality]
garnished [with Gifts and common Graces] he will take to himself seven other
Spirits more wicked, and take faster possession; as those that escaped some
gross Pollutions, yet are again entangled, their latter end is worse then their
beginning, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. These may, and likely will wallow in worse mire
then ever before: Besides, God may in Justice, give you up to your own hearts
Lusts, Psalm. 81. or to strong delusions, to believe a Lie, 2 These 2.10, 11. If
God leave you, who knows whither you may be hurried? you will fall downwards
into Sin, and grow worse and worse, till you be diabolized; as demure as you
seem to be, you may commence Persecutors, and Blasphemers, Atheists, and to
that height of Impiety, that now you shrug and tremble at; yea, you may commit
that unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost: You say now, God forbid, is thy
Servant a Dog? so said Hazael: but how can thou be secured? thou have no hold
of God by Faith, and God has no hold of thee in a Covenant Relation, for thou
want the Graces of the Covenant: look to they self, for God will not look to
thee, till thou be his: and thou can not look so to thy self, but thou may
prove a profane Esau, a scoffing Ishmael, a betraying Judas: who knows where
thou will stop, whither thou will run?

7. If you be not New Creatures, you will meet with a woeful disappointment: Oh,
remember the case of the Foolish Virgins, that too late found they had no Oil
in their Lamps, or Grace in their Hearts, when the Door was shut, and they shut
out, and cried Lord open to us, Mat. 25.8-12. Oh what an astonishing Word was
that, I know you not. It will not be loud Cries, or Heart-renting Lamentations
that will pierce the Ears of a Righteous God: Oh think how dreadful it will be
to go off the Stage with a lie in your right hand, Isa. 44.20.-50.11. To walk
all your days by Sparks of your own kindling, and lie down in Sorrow. It would
vex any Man to be cheated with Pebbles for Pearls, Flint for Diamond. Men say,
when they are cheated, they would rather have given three times as much, then
to be thus abused: but thus it is with you, the Devil imposes on you, and lest
you should see your Mistake, the Devil holds his black hand before your Eyes,
the God of this World blinds you, and carries you to Hell in a Golden Dream,
in a Fools Paradise. Its a dreadful case, if your Eyes be never opened till the
Flames of Hell flash in your scorched Faces: If there be no discovery till
there be no remedy; as some Diseases are past Cure when they are known: A
graceless Life brings despair of Death. O consider, poor Sinner, what Relief
will thou have in thy dying-groans? When this King of Terrors, Job 18.14. this
grim Sergeant lays his cold Hand of Arrest upon thee: Oh what horror will seize
upon thee? when thy fine spun Hope must be as the Spiders Web, Job 8.14-11.20.
swept away with God's Besom. or give up the Ghost, when thou breathest thy
last, what a dreadful case will thy Soul be in? Alas! what have thou gained
(though thou should gain the World) when God takes away thy Soul? Mat.
16.26. John 27.8, 9. Thou had better dye a Dog, a Toad, a Serpent, or vilest
Creature, than a Man, if thou be not a New Creature: for the upshot of their
Misery is but an inlet to thine: its a sad case for a poor Sinner to leave the
World, and knows not whither he is going: he must not stay, and he dares not
dye: if his Eyes be opened, and he sees Hell flames flashing in his Eyes, oh!
with what a shriek must his poor confounded Soul descend into that Infernal
Lake of Fire and Brimstone; this will be a Day of desperate Sorrow, Isa. 8.22.
When Men shall look to the earth, and behold trouble and darkness, dimness of
anguish: and they shall be driven to darkness: Who can conceive duly of the
astonishing Horrors of a desparing Soul!

8. Who can tell how quickly this Anguish may seize upon you: You now live at
ease, and fear not, because you feel no danger, like Laish of Old, and Rome at
this day: but when you say Peace and Safety, then sudden destruction comes
upon you, as travail upon a woman with-child, and you shall not escape. Its a
dreadful Evil to be surprised, 1 These. 5.3. The poor graceless Sinner is not
sure to be another Night out of Hell: such a Voice may come to thee, as to that
senseless secure Wretch, that reckoned upon Years, This night shall thy Soul be
required of thee, Luke 12 19, 20. Poor Sinner, thou art in continual danger,
God is angry with thee every day, Psalm. 7.11, 12. and stands with his Sword
whet, and Bow bent, and his Arrows stringed, and directed to thy Heart; yea, it
will come as a Shower, suddenly, violently, inevitably; upon the wicked He
shall rain Fire and Brimstone, yea, Snares, and an horrible Tempest, Psalm.
11.6. God, thine Enemy, stands over thee as an Enemy with a Sword of Vengeance
in his Hand, ready to cut thee in pieces: and though thou sleep, yet thy
judgment of a long time sleeps not, nor thy damnation slumber, 2 Pet. 2.3. Oh,
who would continue one Hour in such a case, when thy Life hangs in doubt, nay,
thy immortal Soul is hanging over Hell by the small twittered Thread of thy
natural Life: Surely if thou were condemned and to be executed to morrow, thou
would be much concerned to prevent or prepare for Death: Oh Sinner, bethink
thy self, the J^dge stands before the Door, James 5.9. Heaven or Hell may
attend the next Step thou take, the next Breath thou breathest: for any thing
thou know, the Word of Coumission may be gone out, Cut it down, why
cumbereth it the Ground, Luke 13.7, 9. At least, it may be the last Year, Week,
Day or Hour of Indulgence, mad Man that thou art, to stand in the place where
all God's Arrows fly; thou art the Center where all the ^urses of Law and
Gospel meet. The Roman Emperor wondered that Knight slept so securely, that was
in abundance of Debt, and sent for his Pillow: Surely thy Pillow is very soft,
or thy Heart very hard, that can sleep in such Debts to Justice, and not fear
an Arrest, to carry thee to the Prison of Hell: the Plague is running on thee,
and a Lord have mercy on thee, is upon thy Door, and will not this alarm thee,
to look about thee?

9. The possibility of obtaining this New Creature, will aggravate thy Misery:
had thou been in Turkey or India, and never heard of the first Creation, or
the Fall, or means of recovery, or a possibility of being made New by the
Second Adam, thy case had been excusable, at least more tolerable: so says our
Savior, If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin, but now
they have no cloak for their Sin, John 15.22. The old Sinner must go into Old
Tophet, Isa. 30.33. And the damned Caitiff will have nothing to ease his
Torments, not a drop of Honey in his bitter Gall: there was to be no Oil nor
Frankincense in the Offering of Jealousy, Numb. 5.15. Why so? because it was a
Memorial bringing Iniquity to remembrance: Just so this dreadful Memorial in
Hell, will bring the Sinners slighting of Grace, hardening his Heart against
the Reproofs of the Word, Motions of the Spirit, Checks of Conscience, Counsels
of Ministers, and all these will be as Scorpions to sting thee, as Oil to the
Flame, to burn hotter. Oh woe is me, Ministers warned me, told me of my danger,
I heeded them not, I did not believe that things would ever come to this pass:
Oh that I had regarded the things that belong to my Peace, but now its too
late, my Day is over, my Sun is set; the Door is shut, the Gulf is fixed, and
my Soul shut up in everlasting Darkness: these will be your despairing Groans
another Day: Oh take warning while it is called to day; for there will be
nothing to mitigate, but much to aggravate your Miseries, and thus those two
Scriptures are reconciled, Rev. 14.10. The same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup of his
Indignation: i. e. without the least Ingredient of Comfort, no Sugar in that
bitter Cup of Wormwood: but Psalm. 75.8. In the Hand of the Lord there is a Cup,
and the Wine is red, it is full of mixture: i. e. of dreadful Ingredients, to
aggravate the Sorrows of damned Miscreants; yea, these wicked Souls shall drink
the Dregs thereof, and wring them out, i.e. their Hearts shall meditate Terror,
and their Consciences shall squeeze out the astonishing Circumstances of their
bypast Lives, and that Worm shall never dye, but be gnawing at their
Heart Strings for evermore.

10. Lastly: You must undoubtedly be shut out of Heaven, if you live and dye
without this New Creature: I told you, that this New Creature fits for Heaven
in the Reasons of the Point, I will now tell you some Reasons, why its
impossible any Soul that wants it, should go to Heaven; nay, its as possible
for a Devil to be saved as a poor unregenerate Sinner: For,

1. A Soul without this New Creature, has no Interest in Christ; For if any
man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. This is clear, and it is as
clear that there is no Salvation in any other then in Christ, Acts 4.12. You
must mount to Heaven alone, if you think to ascend any other way then upon the
Ladder of Jacob, as Constantin told Acesius long ago: its a vain attempt, and
its a mere Frenzy to divide assunder, what God has joined so inviolably
together; Holiness and Happiness, a new Nature and a new State; if you rend
them, God will rend you.

2. Its impossible you should walk in the way to Heaven, without being New
Creatures, for the End can never be attained without the Use of the means.
Reason tells us, that he that would arrive at London, must go by Land or Water,
in Ships, or on Horseback, Coach, or on Foot, or by some means or other; or he
can never come thither. So it is here, God has prescribed Means and Methods
for attaining Eternal Happiness, and bids us enter in at the strait gate,
Matthew. 7.13, 14. Yea, strive to enter in at the strait Gate; And adds, That
many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Luke 13.24. How shall they
then enter, that neither strive, nor seek nor make any Essay to enter! And how
can they seek or strive, that have to strength; nay, that have no life, as a
graceless Soul is? who is is dead in Trespasses and Sins: and till the Grace of
God infuse new Life into him, with this New Creature, he can neither stir Hand
nor Foot in a Spiritual Sense, Heavenward, and is not likely to come thither.

3. Nay, he that wants the New Creature, has no Heart, Mind, or Will to be
saved: and God saves no Man against his Will, but his Grace makes them truly
willing; and this change of the Will is a considerable part of the New
Creature, and it is a Sovereign Act of free Grace, thy people shall be willing
in the day of thy Power, Psalm 110.3. None follow the Captain of our Salvation
to Heaven, but Volunteers, and there is great need of a vigorous Will, for
Heaven must be taken by Storm, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force, Matthew. 11.12. No man will be obedient, except he
be willing: there must be the Imprimis of a willing Mind, before there be an
active Hand, 2 Cor. 8.12. a worshipping Knee, or a walking Foot: they whose
Spirits do not make them willing, will not remove from Sin, or move one step
Heaven-wards, and hence it is that our blessed Savior charge men's disowning
him upon their Wills, You will not come to me that you may have life, John
5.40. And why will ye dye, O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 18.3. This is the true
reason of Sinners undoing, they will not choose Salvation, and so
consequentially and interpretatively they damn and destroy themselves, Ho^ 13 9
If a man will not eat, he will not live; if a man drink Po^son, he will dye:
and he that will not use means of Salvation, cannot be saved: how shall we
escape, if we neglect (much more wilfully reject) so great Salvation, Heb 2.3.
And how should it be otherwise, if Men be not converted, and become New
Creatures?

4. What should the old Creature do in Heaven? Heaven would be no Heaven to
him: the Heavenly Jerusalem is another kind of thing then most take it to be.
What wild, bald Conceptions have sensual Sots of Heaven? as though it were
Mahomet's Paradise, or Heathens Elysian Fields, wherein Men may only gratify
their Senses, or wallow in Pleasures: Alas, a Man may say to these ignorant
Souls, as our Lord to Zebedee's Children, You know not what you ask. You would
go to Heaven, yes, fain you would be saved, but do you know what Heaven is? I
will tell you briefly, Heaven consists in a freedom from all Sin, a perfection
of Grace, enjoyment of God, employment in divine Praises, love, delight in God,
meditation on God, Ecstacies and Ravishment of all the Soul's Faculties in
immediate communion with him: And what aukard Conceptions has a carnal Heart
of these blessed Privileges? They would be no advantage to him at all, but a
torment, to him that hates God, runs from him, cannot abide to come near him in
any Duty, likes not the Society of God's Saints, delights in sinful Practices,
dallies with Satan's Temptations: Can men imagine they shall take Cards and
Dice, Cups and Queans with them to Heaven? Nay, can Men take fair Houses, full
Bags, or worldly Business into another world? Can men make great Purchases,
gather great Rents, or break Jests with their Companions in a future state?
Alas, a poor carnal heart is weary of Duties, much more will he be in Heaven;
Sermon is too long, Prayer is tedious, when will the Sabbath be gone? Can these
be fit to enjoy God in an eternal Sabbath of rest? nay, the poor guilty Sinner
cares not for coming near to God, the Sight of God is terrible to him, as it
was to fallen Adam: indeed without converting Grace, introducing this New
Creature and Divine Nature, the Soul would be altogether strange to God, and
any converse with an holy, glorious God; yea, even the sanctified themselves,
by reason of the Remainders of Corruption in them, have much ado to bring their
Hearts to converse with God, especially when they lie under the sense of Guilt,
even a Godly Peter then cries out, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O
Lord, Luke 5.8. Much more will a graceless Soul not dare to come near to God;
an Hypocrite shall not come before him Job 13.16. He will not, and God will not
suffer him: but a gracious Heart can truly say, It is good for me to draw nigh
to God, Psalm. 73.28. Communion with God is his Heaven upon Earth: Therefore
this God will be his Salvation, himself is his best Heaven: but a carnal Heart
knows not what this means, and is therefore incapable of Heaven.

Chap. VIII. Some Objections of Sinners answered, against their Endeavors to
be New Creatures.
IT IS much if a Carnal Heart, and a Witty Head, with the Devil's help, have not
something to say against the thing it self, or their Attempts after it, to
excuse themselves.

1. Object. Who can in this World be so qualified for Heaven, the best come
infinitely short. I have beard it said, that as the Soul passes out of the
Body, it is then perfected and qualified for its enjoyment of God; no man can
expect it before; and though I cannot so delight in God, and his Service now,
yet I hope God will perfect my Soul in the instant of its separation from the
Body.

I Answer; 1. There is an habitual and an actual disposedness for Heaven, (as I
have at large explained in a Treatise, on Col. 1.12. called, Meetness for
Heaven) and every Child of God, after the first Infusion of Grace into him, and
change of his State and Relation Godwards, is put into a capacity for communion
with God, in this and in the other World, but increase in Grace, and exercise
of Grace does daily capacitate him for further communion with God: no man can
expect he shall be a perfect man, till he be a man; perfection of degrees
follows that of parts: you must first be in Christ, or else you will not arrive to
the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12, 13.

2. That Man feeds himself with a vain groundless hope of being saved, and
completed at Death, that is careless and graceless in Life, for he has no
promise to nourish such a Persuasion; did God ever say, Live as thou listest,
and at the Instant of Death I will infuse Spiritual Life into thy Soul, trust
me for that at thy expiring Breath, I will give thee that then, which will
qualify thee for Heaven, and make thee then in love with me, though thou never
caredst for me all thy Life long. Where do you find such a Promise? and who but
a mad man, will put all to a desperate adventure at the last gasp? You have
more reason to fear he will not, then to hope he will give you Grace; nay, you
have a dreadful threatening, that because he called, and you refused; you shall
call and cry, and he will not answer, Prove. 1.24-28. And you have a terrible
Instance of the fruitless Cries of the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25.10. And who
are you that the Great God should be at your beck? He can and will hear the
least whimper of a Child, but regards not the howling of a Dog: he may and will
say, Go to the Gods, the Lusts you have served, I know you not, I own you not
for mine: This is not a time for getting, but using Grace; yea, Death is a time
for perfecting the Work of Grace: Woe be to that wretched Caitiff that hangs
his Eternal state on the uncertain working of the Principle of Life in the
moment of Death

2d. Object. But if I have not yet the New Creature, I may have; there is time
enough before me, I am young, and yet in my full strength, of an healthful
Constitution, and may live long: Let old Persons that are going off the Stage,
look after this New Creature, I have other things to mind.

Answ. 1. Alas, Man, art thou certain thou shall live till the next Year, the
next Month, Week, Day, or Hour? Have not many as young as thou art, gone to the
Grave before thee, and what Assurance have thou of thy Life another Moment? For
what is our Life but a vanishing Vapor, James 4.14. Its a Bubble, a Blast, a
Shadow, a Dream, Smoke, Job 7.7. Yea every Man in best estate is altogether
Vanity, Psalm. 39.5. and 90 56. As flourishing Grass in the Morning, cut down
before Evening: If you fall not by some force of outward Casualty, you carry
your Bane lurking in your Bosoms: Have you a Lease of your Lives, as Hezekiah
had? You have little reason to boast your selves of to Morrow, for you little
know what a big-bellied Day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. It may Land thy Soul
in Eternity? Therefore dispatch this main Work at present.

2. The longer thou deferrest, the more difficult will thou find it thy Heart
will be daily more hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin, Heb. 3.13. Jer.
13.23. Custom in Sin will make Conscience more brawny: A Sickness may easily be
cured at first, but when it gets into the Nerves, Bones, or strikes to the
Heart, it becomes incurable, impregnable: So it is with Soul-maladies. Oh, what
mischief may a Thief do, if suffered to lodge one Night in your Houses!
Besides, the Life or Death of the Soul may hang upon this nick of Time; he often
limits it to a Day, Now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation, Heb.
4.7.2 Cor. 6.2. Who can tell but God may say after this day, My Spirit shall
strive no more with them, Genesis 6.3. You may provoke God to withdraw: Oh, how
many Instances have we of thousands that have lost their Day, and have been
undone forever.

3d. Object. If I become a New Creature, there will be so much strictness and
severity in Praying, Reading, Watching, Holy Walking, that it will never be
abiden, it will make me Melancholy, and rob me of the Joy and Comfort of my
Life.

Answ. 1. Though the possessor of the New Creature lose sensual delights, which
are Madness, rather then true joy, Eccles. 2.2. Yet he may retain the lawful
Comforts of his Life: Its true, that he must lay aside lascivious Jests, wanton
Songs, unlawful Gaming, excessive Drinking, blasphemous Stage Plays,
Filthiness: But there is no real Content in these, to a generous Spirit, that
bring Guilt and Wrath: but the gracious Soul may take as much, or more real
Pleasure in Relations and Worldly Enjoyments (keeping the due Circumstances of
Time, End, Measure, and Freedom from Scandal) as another Man; nay, now he
tastes the Blessing of God in his Enjoyments, as he has a right to them in
Christ, as they are cleansed from the Curse, sugared with God's Love, helping
him in God's Service, toward Heaven; and the New Creature puts Wisdom into the
Christian, to set every thing in its Place and Order, so that the Godly Man
enjoys himself with more sweetness in a mean condition, then many wicked men in
their Abundance.

2. A Man has never true solid Joy and Peace till he be a New Creature; this,
and this only lays the Foundation of strong Consolation. Serious Godliness is
no such melancholy Life, as the Carnal World do imagine: Suppose the Christian
do labor, toil, and take pains in God's Service, Love oils the Wheels of his
Soul, and he takes as much pleasure therein, as Jacob for Rachel. God spices
every step of his way, Wisdom's ways are pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. The severest
Commands of God are not grievous, 1 John. 5.3. but delightful, the Spirit helps
his Infirmities, Romans 8.26. Inlargeth his Heart, he mounts up with Wings as
Eagles: he is sure his Gains will answer his Pains: He that digs in a Golden
Mine, is paid for every stroke he strikes; nay, there is a [ praemium ante
praemium] a Reward at present, In keeping thy Commandments, there i^ great
Reward, Psalm. 19 11. You hear of the Saints sorrow for Sin, grief for God's
withdrawing, vexing with Satan's assaults, but you see not their Joy, a
stranger intermeddles not with his Joy, Prove. 14.10. He has Comforts that none
know of, or can deprive him of; yea, he has more Comfort in his Tears for Sin,
than a wicked man has in gratifying his Senses, in committing Sin; in the
midst of the carnal man's Joy his Heart is sad; in the midst of the Christians
sorrow for Sin, his Heart is full of Joy: do but try a Godly Course, and you
would not exchange it for the Wicked's Rant.

4th. Object. But if I leave my old Companions, they will laugh me to scorn, I
shall be accounted a Fool, a Dotard, a Schismatic, a Fanatic, all that is
naught; and this I cannot brook, and indeed I know not how to discard and
disoblige my old intimate Comrades.

Answ. 1. If owning God and saving your precious Souls be a disobliging of
them, they are better lost then found: Carnal Friends are dear, but God dearer:
Religion binds you to forsake your own People, and your Father's House, Psalm.
45.10. To hate Father and Mother, in comparison of, or standing in competition
with Christ, Matthew. 10.37. And its the best Match you can make: You Will not
repent it to foregoe those Siren Songs of bewitching Companions, that lead you
down to Hell, for the Society of Saints; to forsake such incarnate Devils, for
the ministry of blessed Angels; yea, to renounce the Devil for communion with
an holy God, you have little reason to be afraid or ashamed of such an exchange.

2. As for their hatred, scorn, or reproach, read Isa. 51.78. Fear ye not the
reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their Revilings -- The Tongue of such
wicked Villains are no Slanders: better be reviled then praised by some: Our
Lord, says, Woe be to you, when all men speak well of you: When the Papists
called Luther an Apostate, he accounted himself a blessed Apostate, from the
Synagogue of Satan, to the Church of God: And what if an Ishmael mock Isaac, or
a Shimei rail at David, are they worse for lying Tongues bespattering them:
Glorious Stars may be called by ugly Names, as Bear, Dragon, but are glorious
still: so may you be: An Heathen Seneca could say, and glory in it [ mala de me
loquuntur, sed mali] They speak evil of me, but they are evil men. And is it
not better to be reproached by bad men, for being good, then to be damned by
God for being bad? Does not Christ bid you rejoice, and be exceeding glad?
Matthew. 5.10. Surely you may wear these as Trophies and Badges of Honor: So did
Paul glory in Christ's Cross, as an old Soldier, Gal. 6.17. in his Scars
received in the Wars for his Prince: The Christians of Old rejoiced, that they
were counted worthy to suffer shame for the Name of Christ, Acts 5.41. They
looked on that Reproach as their greatest Honor and Ornament: You deserve not
the Name of Christian, if you will not bear a foul Word from the foul Mouths of
men, for him, that despised the Shame for your sakes, Heb. 12.2. If me^ clip
your Credit, to make it good weight with God, and rub your Crown with Dirt, to
make it brighter, you will be no losers: if you be reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are you, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you, 1
Pe^ 4.14.

5th. Object. I see no such Beauty or Excellency in these Puritans and
Precisians, that pretend to be New Creatures; they are no better than their
Neighbors; all are Sinners, and so are they; nay, I have seen them slip into
Scandalous Sins, they are Proud, and Envious, and Covetous; they are but a pack
of Hypocrites.

Answ. 1. Take heed of speaking Evil of the Persons and Things that you know
not; Carnal Persons are not competent Judges of God's Children, Psalm. 83.5.
These are hidden Ones, Kings in disguise, It does not yet appear, what they are
or shall be, 1 John 3.2. The King's Daughter is all glorious within, Psalm.
43.13. The Life of Saints is hid with Christ in God, Acts 3.3. You know not
what they do in Corners, much less do you know their Consciences: take heed of
rash judgment: you know neither their best nor their worst, there is a Vail upon
the face of their Souls: there is an hidden man of the heart, which is
invisible to the Eyes of Spectators; and if these gracious Souls should open
their Experiences to you, you would judge them Paradoxes, Riddles, or mere
Enthusiasms. Wisdom is too high for a Fool: learned Nicodemus has odd and
aukard Conceptions of the New Birth, John 3.4. The natural man knows not the
things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. If you had new Eyes, you would be fitter to
judge of things that differ: Suspend your Censures, call not them Hypocrites,
whom God will own for Children: a blind man is not fit to judge of distinct
Colors.

2. Its true, all are Sinners, yet there is a vast difference of Sinners: 1 John
3 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin [(...)] does not work sin,
he makes not sinning his trade: his business is to walk in the Ways of God, and
if he be overtaken with a fault, Gal. 6.1. he discovers it, mourns for it,
rises out of his Falls by Repentance, he hates Sin more, becomes more watchful
and jealous of himself, prays, desires strength from Christ, to crucify the
Flesh, and Sin has not dominion over him, Gal. 5.24. Romans 6.14. but he makes
progress in Mortification: and ordinarily this Child of God does not fall into
any gross and scandalous Sin, or if at any time God does suffer him to fall
foully in Judgment to a wicked World, yet it costs him dear, it may be broken
Bones, as it did David, and God can heal his Backslidings, and make him more
humble after: however there is a vast difference betwixt a Sheep stepping into
the Mire, and a Swine wallowing in the Mire: Some are, and some are not the
Spots of God's Children, Deuteronomy. 32.6. You have more need to judge your selves,
then censure others to be Hypocrites: Hear what Reverend Mr. Hildersham says
in this case; What some say of Professors, these Gadders after Sermons, Hild.
on Psalm. 51. page 642,
these holy Brethren, that stand so much upon Sincerity, can abide nothing that
savours of Popery; these precise Fools must be Singular, forsooth, dare not
Swear -- they are no better than Hypocrites. He Answers, though these things be
found in some Hypocrites, yet they are no Signs to know an Hypocrite by, nor
are they Hypocrites that do thus; thou that scornest a Man for this, bewrayest
the Profaneness of thy own Heart, and openest thy Mouth against Heaven, Psalm.
73.9.

6th. Obj. You told us this Work is Creation-Work; Can a Man create himself?
Sure its not in the power of a dead man to make himself alive? So you said
Sinners are dead, this is the Work of Omnipotency, God must do all: Alas, what
can Man do of himself?

Answ. 1. You are not naturally dead, though spiritually dead, yet you are alive,
God has given you rational Souls, Faculties capable of knowing, loving, and
enjoying God: you are not senseless Stocks or Stones, nor mere Brutes; there is
in you a remote aptitude, if not a present promptness to receive Grace: you
have the noble Faculty of a self-reflecting Conscience, that is the Candle of
the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the Belly, Prove. 20.27. It can
discover moral Good and Evil, yea, it can excuse or accuse in what you do, good
or amiss, Romans 2.14, 15. You might be much better if you minded this Light
within you, the Light of Natural Conscience: How can you expect more, till you
improve what you have: Nature can do little toward Grace, yet Moral Principles
cherished and improved, may be some Fence against vicious Inclinations, and
prevent a Custom in sinful Practices; however, its dangerous to imprison the
common Notices of a Deity, Romans 1.18. or Moral Duty; this is the Road to
obliterate them, this shuts the Door against Grace, and opens the Sluice of
Vice: nourish what is good in thee; who can tell what it may come to at last?

2. God commands the use of Means; and though he has not bound himself, yet he
has bound every man to his utmost power to be tending toward God. Divines
say, That though no Exercise of Common Grace can merit Special Grace, yet God is
not wanting in his further Grace, to those that have made a due improvement of
Common Grace, and done what in them lay toward their own Salvation: Your
business is to work out your own Salvation, Phil. 2.12. For it is God that
works in you the will and the deed.

It is an Old Saying of St. Augustine, He that made thee without thee, will not
save thee without thee. God loves to second man's endeavors; he is never
wanting to the diligent: [ lex jubet, gratia juvat] the Precept commands the
Gospel-Promise will assist: God has not lost his right to command, though we
have no Might to obey; his Authority must sway with us, though we have not
ability to do his requirement: [ praecipit Deus quod ipse praestat] he bids us
up and be doing, and he will take us by the Hand and help us: Try, Man, in so
necessary a Work as thy Soul's eternal Happiness; thou have lost much labor in
other cases, thou may not lose it in this: there is a May-be in it, and that is
warrant enough for such a Venture. Be laborious, and thou may be gracious.

7th. Obj. But I may as well sit still, as rise up to fall; I shall never hold
out, I see so many Temptations of a cunning Devil, oppositions of a furious
World, and strong Corruptions of a treacherous Heart, that I do foresee I shall
not be able to stand; I had better not begin at all, then begin in the Spirit,
and end in the Flesh, and so sink my apostate Soul deeper.

Answ. 1. Art thou in good earnest, that make this Objection? or do thou
Complement with God, and make it an Excuse and Evasion? If the latter, and this
be but to save thee a labor of being serious in Religion; thy case is
lamentable, thou have yet but slight thoughts of God, thy Soul, or of Heaven,
that make such frivolous Excuses, to incur a certain Damnation. But if thou
be in good earnest, it will put thee upon the search of thy Heart, whether thou
be sincere that thou may persevere, that thou may not build upon a Sandy
Foundation; and if indeed thou art jealous of thy self, and afraid of Apostasy,
this very Fear is the best Fence against falling away: I will, says God, put
my fear in their hearts, Jer. 32.40. and they shall not depart from me: Blessed
is he that fears always, Prove. 28.14. This Godly Fear will make you avoid
Sin, and all its occasions, improve Talents, time and means of Grace, put you
upon all methods to grow in Grace, and gain Assurance: A caution is necessary
to the best; see Heb. 3.12, 13-4.1. But be sure yours be a Godly Jealousy,
arising from a Sense of the Evil of Sin, and your own weakness, and not a mere
Consciousness of your Hypocrital Hearts.

2. If once this New Creature be truly framed in thy Heart, it will be
permanent and abiding; not but that it is a Creature and so loseable of it
self, but by virtue of God's Covenant and Promise, so it is an incorruptible
seed, a well of living waters, springing up to everlasting life, 1 Pet. 1.23.
John 4.14. If once this Work be savingly wrought, though it be but a Spark, an
Infant, an Embryo of Grace, the God of Heaven is concerned to look to his own
Creature, you shall be kept by the power of God through Faith to Salvation, 1
Pet. 1.5. None shall pluck you out of the Father's Hands, John 10.28. Nothing
can separate: The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against you, Mat. 16.6. Romans
8.37. Fear not, you have the Father's Care, the Son's Prayer, the Holy Ghost's
abiding in you for ever, Phil. 1.6. John 1.7.1 John 2.27. Hypocrites will be
Apostates: a rotten Core will spread to the Skin: its very rare to see an
Hypocrite undiscovered till Death; though the Foolish Virgins held out long,
yet it appeared at last they had no Oil in their Vessels: They went out from
us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt
have continued with us, 1 John 2.19. Take thou care of thy Sincerity, and God
will take care of thy Perseverance: God will not renounce his own Image: Christ
will not forsake his own Members. If thy state and standing were in thine own
Hands, thou would as surely lose thy Integrity, as Adam his Innocence; but we
are kept by the power of God through Faith to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

There Is one thing I fear more than all the rest, and that is a lazy,
sloathful, luskish Spirit, that will not take any Pains in God's Work, nor in
the concerns of the Soul, but think Grace must drop into their gaping Mouths;
this Sloth has killed thousands of Sinners: Oh, it will cost him trouble,
care, pains, and this he cannot brook. And do Men think to grow Rich without
laboring, careful Endeavors, and traveling to Markets? And can they think to
go to Heaven, or get Grace without taking Pains? Its true, its not merely Pains
that will do it, but Sloth will lose it; and without Pains-taking, nothing
that is excellent will be obtained; for [ Difficilia quae pulchra] The more
choice things are, the hardlier are they come by. I am sure Christians of Old
labored hard, that they might be accepted of God, 2 Cor. 5.9. And the Apostle
tells the Hebrews, that God does not forget their work and labor of Love: and
urges them to show the same diligence, and not be sloathful, but followers of
them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises, Heb. 6.10, 11, 12.

Let the slothful Person ask himself these Questions; 1. Whether the Pains of
Hell be not more intolerable than the Pains God calls for from him to escape
it? Or, 2. Whether Heaven will not requite all his Pains to obtain it? Or, 3.
Whether he take not more pains to scrape together a little Dirt of Wealth, or a
necessary supply of Wants? Or, 4. Whether thousands take not more pains to get
to Hell, then God requires of him to travel to Heaven? And let the wretched
Sluggard know, that by that time he has been an Hour in those intolerable.
Torments, he would be glad to be turned into the World again, though upon the
hardest terms of Obedience, Mortification, and acting all things within the
verge of an humane Capacity; would he not gladly accept the Conditions, in
order to Eternal Life? But alas, Men are made up so much of Sense, and
understand so little of Invisible Realities, that they choose rather to be
damned Eternally, than to endeavor to live Holily: therefore men's destruction
is of themselves, Hos. 13.9. They will not come to Christ, that they may have
life, John 5.40. That Is a true Maxim [ nemo nolens bonus aut beatus est] It is
God's Ordination, that men's own estimation, choice, and endeavors shall be
the necessary preparative to their Fruition: and hence, it is that the slothful
Servant was a wicked Servant, and fared and sped according to his Sloth, Matthew.
25.26.

Chap. IX. Instructions for the Trial of our Spirits, whether we be indeed New
Creatures.
THe Fourth and Last use of this point, is, that which the Apostle calls
[(...)] i. e. Instruction in Righteousness: and this I shall rank under these
Fou^ Heads.

First; Give a particular account of the Nature, Parts, and Properties of the
two Creatures, for helping our Spirits in the trial of our States.

Secondly; Give Some directions what those must do to obtain it, that feel or
fear they yet have it not.

Thirdly; How such must act, live, or behave themselves, as do find upon
Scripture-grounds, and good experience, that this is savingly wrought within
them.

Fourthly; I shall Answer some Queries or Cases of Conscience for satisfaction
of such Souls as are doubtful of their Sincerity, or would be further informed
in some Points about this New Creature. All these I must briefly dispatch.

1. It is of very great Concernment for every Rational Soul to know, and be at
some certainty whether he be a New Creature.

I might here refer the Reader to the Description of it in the beginning. 1. I
called it a Supernatural Grace, as to the general Nature of it. 2. For its
particular Property, or Nature, I called it a Gospel Grace, in its specifial
quality. 3. As to its subject, it is in the Soul of a Sinner. 4. The
Instrumental Cause of it, is the Word of God. 5. The Efficient Cause, is the
Holy Ghost. 6. The proper immediate Effect, is a great change. 7. The
Compleatness of this change, in point of state, Constitution, Relation. 8. The
Pattern is the divine Image or Likeness. 9. The Rule of it, which is the Word
of God. 10. The End, it is the Glory of God, and the Soul's Happinness in its
communion with God.

You see then this New Creature is a very extensive and comprehensive thing, it
contains the whole Encuclopaedia, (as I may say) or compass of Experimental and
Practical Religion.

It is a Relation, not one quality, nor yet one single habit, neither one Star,
nor yet a Constellation of Graces, but a Relation or Rectitude, and orderly
Correspondence of the Faculties straining forth from the infusion of all those
Habits and Qualities into Man, Dr. Arrows Tract Sacr. page 138.
as a Learned Man observes; wherein the Appetite is subject to the Will, the
Will to Reason, the rectifyed Reason to God, and the Conversation corresponding
to this inward Principle, not completely or perfectly in point of degree, as it
was in Adam's Soul, in the state of Innocence, but by Integrity of the parts,
so far as the Soul is sanctified in this Life, and completed to a perfect Man
in Heaven: It is (say Divines) [(...)] a Spiritual Chain, wherein all Virtues
and Graces are linked, concreated with Adam, infused into the Christian in this
New Creation, whereby he has a power to act as a Christian, in this lower
World, in all Christian Exercises, that God in his Word calls him to.

Four Heads I shall reduce these Trials of the New Creature to.

Viz. 1. The Preparatives to it. 2. The Parts of it. 3. The Properties thereof.
4. The Effects and Fruits of it.


Had I time, and room, these might be largely insisted upon.

A Touch of each.

1. For the Preparatives or Antecedents that lead to the New Creature; not that
the Creature can prepare himself for it, but the same God that makes it, does
something on the Soul to usher it in, as the Chaos and Darkness was before the
beautiful Fabric of the World: so God works.

1. Sense of Sin, Wrath, and the undone estate the Soul is in, this is a New
York; for formerly the Sinner neither felt nor feared Evil, but thought his
State as good as any Bodies; doubted not his own Salvation; now a Spirit of
bondage to fear, Romans 8.5. has seized on him; He is shut up as a Sheep for the
Slaughter, Gal. 3.22, 23, 24. The Law is a severe Schoolmaster, and works
Wrath, Romans 8.15. Now the Sinner cries, Woe is me, I am undone, I never thought I
had been in this miserable state: I see I am a condemned Malefactor at the
dreadful Bar of a Sin-revenging Judge: my Mouth is stopped, I have not a Word to
say for my self, why Sentence should not be executed upon me: Woe is me, I am
likely to perish for ever.

2. A discovery of his helpless state, he himself cannot help or deliver
himself, the whole World cannot; its not within the power of Men or Angels to
bring any Relief to his forlorn, perishing Soul; I am, says the poor Sinner,
helpless, fatherless, Hos. 14.13. Succourless; I am without strength, in me
dwells no good thing, Romans 5.6, 7, 18. I could provoke God, but I cannot please
him; Heaven is shut against me, and I have no Key to open it: Hell gapes for
me, and I know not how to escape it: I hang over Flames, I lie in Chains, and
all the World cannot break them, Silver and Gold will not redeem me, 1 Pet.
1.18. Great men are vanity, good men have no Oil to spare, Matthew. 25.9. It I
sat upon a Prince's Throne, I could not purchase or command a Pardon, The
redemption of the Soul is precious, it cease for ever, Psalm. 49.7. My case
grows worse and worse.

3. A serious Enquiry after a Remedy, when the poor Sinner is thus puzzled and
non-plust, and knows not which way to turn himself, then he begins to ask new
Questions, not as he was wont, Who will show me any good, Psalm. 4.6. of worldly
advantage; no, but his Tune is turned, now he cries, Men and Brethren, what
shall I do? Acts 23.16, 30. Oh Sirs, What shall I do to be saved? Oh, you
Ministers, Christian Friends, did you ever know any case like mine? Is it
possible that ever I should find Mercy? Is not the Day of Grace past? I fear I
have committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost: Woe is me, what Course shall I
take? I see nothing but bare Walls at home; Is there Relief to be found for a
poor pining Soul? Tell me, O tell me, what Door I must knock at, and how I must
knock, that I may speed.

4. Sad thoughts of heart upon discovery of the Remedy: Oh, says the poor
Sinner, you tell me God is a merciful God, forgiving iniquity, transgression
and sin, Exodus 34.6, 7. But I spy one Red Letter in his Name [ that will by no
means clear the Guilty]. Now I am guilty, and I have read that the Arms of
Justice and Mercy are of equal length, both infinite; how must Justice be
satisfied? I am sure not by me, in my own Person. Well, the Gospel tells the
Sinner, that the Wards of the Lock are changed; this Chancery will relieve the
condemned Sinner; Christ in our room has suffered and satisfied Justice for
us, Isa. 54.5.1 Pet. 2.24. Yea, faith the Soul, but how shall I have Interest
therein? Its answered, By Faith. Alas, says the Sinner, I am but where I was,
I can no more believe, then I can keep the whole Law: Oh this unbelieving Heart
kills me, binds me over to Wrath: still I would believe, but I cannot, my Faith
is but Unbelief, Mark 9.24. I thought believing was the easiest thing in the
World, now the Spirit has convinced me, I neither do, nor can believe without
an Almighty Power, John 16.8. Ephesians. 1.19. I would give all the World, that I
could believe.

5. Obstructions are at last removed; a stubborn Will by Grace, is made willing
in the Day of God's Power, Psalm. 110.3. Now Prejudices are removed: though a
Nathaniel say, Can there any good come out of Nazareth? John 1.46, 49. Yet if
he come and see, he will believe: This was the Woman of Samaria's case, John
49.19. Alas faith the Soul, I have been foolish, and ready to pick Quarrels at
God's way of justifying and saving poor Sinners, and said of the
Gospel Dispensation, how can these things be? But I am at last satisfied, that
a Revelation from God is not only authentic, but most rational; but yet I have
within me strange Imaginations, and high things that exalt themselves against
the knowledge of God. Well, God comes with his Spiritual Weapons, and pulls
down these strong holds, dismounts the Sinner's carnal Confidence, and levels
these high Mountains of Opposition, leads captivity captive, 2 Cor. 10.45. And
now the Sinner is content, that God should take his own method in justifying
and saving a Sinner by the Merits of Christ, without the least respect to any
worthiness in him: and there is much ado to bring the proud Heart to this, to
forego his own Righteousness.

6. Restlesness of Spirit in its present state, the Sinner is now heavy laden,
Matthew. 11.28. must have rest somewhere, but can enjoy no rest in a sinful
state; There Is no Peace, faith my God, to the Wicked, Isa. 57.21. This is not a
state to be rested in, faith the trembling Soul, I am got off all bottoms, I
see my old unregenerate state hopeless and deplorable, yet I fear I am not
centred and anchored on Christ, the Rock of Ages; Woe is me, I am fluctuating on
the Waves betwixt Hope and Despair, I fear the issue: sometimes I spy the
Daybreak, but Clouds and Darkness overwhelm me again: however, I am not
content with these poor Husks of the World in my Christless state in a far
Country, I will arise and go to my Father, Luke 15.17. In this tumultuous Sea,
I find no bottom for the Sole of my Foot, I must make to Ship or Shore; none
but Christ, none but Christ, let me have him, though with Fightings from
without, and Fears within. I am shifting from Post to Pillar, let me be
dissettled till my Soul fix on Christ, then shall not my Heart be troubled, if
believing in God, I believe also in Christ, John 14.1. Let me never be at rest,
till all ways are blockt up but this: If I sit still, I dye, 2 King. 7.4. If I
go to the World, I pine; I will venture upon God's Promises, Christ's Purchase:
if I must dye, I will dye there; but never did any dye at his Door.

7. At last the troubled Spirit issues out its perplexed Thoughts in Complaints
and Prayers: God faith, I have surely hearth Ephraim bemoaning himself, Jer.
31.18. So methinks I see the disquieted Soul creep into a Corner to ease his
burdened Spirit into God's Bosom in this manner: Lord, here I am, as wicked a
Malefactor as ever stood at thy Bar, and as miserable a Beggar as ever lay at
thy Door; I was condemned as soon as convinced, and have too too woefully
improved the Stock of Original Sin in thousands of actual Rebellions: I am
twice dead, in danger to be plucked up by the Roots, Jude 1. and flung into the
Fire of Hell: many means have thou used, but nothing does me good, yet now thou
have brought me into the Wilderness: Oh, speak to my Heart, Hos. 2.14. Every
Sin deserves damnation; Oh, how many Hells then do I deserve? Thou art
Righteous, if thou damn me; my Mouth is stopped, I am found guilty before God,
Romans 3.19. I am self-condemned, thou shall need no other Witness or Jury to
find me guilty: but Christ suffered and satisfied Justice for some poor
Sinners, and why not for me, the chiefest of Sinners? 1 Timothy 1.15. I find not
one word in Scripture against it, but a Proclamation of a general Pardon to
all: Christ with all his Benefits is offered to me in the Ministry of the Word,
upon the condition of Faith and Repentance: Its true, I can neither repent nor
believe, but they are both included in the absolute Grant of the
Gospel Covenant, which gives what it requires. Lord, give me a
Gospel-Repentance unto Life, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ: I hang on
thee, sweet Jesus, who wast exalted on purpose to give Repentance and
Forgiveness of Sins, Acts 5.31. and the Faith of God's Elect.

Thus much for Preparatives.

2. The Parts of this New Creature lie in the renewing of the several Faculties
of the Soul, which consists; 1st. In the Mind and Understanding; 2dly. In the
Conscience; 3dly. In the Will; 4thly. In the Affections, which are the Motions
of the Will.

1. The New Creature consists much in the Mind, which is called a renewing in
the Spirit of the Mind, Ephesians. 4.23. Interpreters have been much perplexed to
know what is meant by the Spirit of the Mind, Calvin says [ Ego Simpliciter
accipio, Calv. in loc.
acsi dixisset, renovemur non tantum quod ad inferiores Appetitus ant
Concupiscentias quae palam sunt vitiosae, sed etiam quod ad partem illam animae
quae nobilissima and praestantissima habetur] i. e. be renewed not only in the
inferior Appetite and concupiscible Faculties, but in that part of the Soul,
which is esteemed the most noble and excellent. For the Mind is accounted a
Queen, and almost adored by Philosophers. Now the Mind is renewed, when there
is,

1. New Conceptions of things, otherwise than ever before, for a new Light set
up in the Soul, to see things after another manner, the eyes of the
understanding are now enlightened, Ephesians. 1.18. Now he sees more Wickedness in his
bad Heart, then ever he did, which makes him cry out, as Job, Behold I am vile,
Job 40.4. Lord, thou art Heaven, I am Hell, said Mr. Hooper. Now the Soul sees
more Poison and Malignity in Sin, then ever before, he sees it exceeding
sinful, Romans 7.9, 17. As striking at the Majesty, clouding the Glory of the
Holy God, as crucifying Christ, grieving the holy Spirit. The New Creature
begets other Conceptions of Christ, as the Rose of Sharon, Cant 5.9. the chief
of ten thousand. He looks on God's Commands as not at all grievous, 1 John 5.3.
but pleasant, comfortable, and profitable; he looks on the Saints as the most
excellent in the Earth, Psalm. 16.3. Prove. 3.18. He has got Eye Salve to judge
of things as they are: The spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.15.

2. The New Nature brings a New Memory, he forgets Injuries, and remembers
Truths; his Memory is sanctified and fortified, he lays up things in his Heart,
as the Pot of Manna was laid up in the Ark: he can abundantly utter the Memory
of God's great goodness, Psalm. 145.7. The New Creature is as a Phylactery to
prompt and put him in mind of God's Law, Numb. 15.39. If he has not a great
Memory, yet he has a good Memory: God brings Sins to remembrance committed
many Years ago, and the Soul is humbled for them, as if but newly committed:
and though sometimes the best of God's Children are subject to slippery
Memories, and do need Monitors, yet they have Minds clarified, and apt to be
tenacious of the things of God, 2 Pet. 3.1. I stir up your pure minds by way
remembrance. An hint will bring God and good things into their Thoughts again:
but wicked men are described by this Character of forgetting God, Psalm. 50.22.
Do you make it your business to remember God upon your Beds, and in all Places,
Psalm. 63.6.

3. The New Creature has a new Councellor; formerly the Soul consulted with
carnal Interest, and base and by-ends, even in things of Religion, if the
Practice of Religion did cross his low and selfish Designs, he laid it down;
but as soon as this Principle is put within him, he says as Paul, immediately,
I conferred not with Flesh and Blood, Gal. 1.16. God's glory, the good of his
own and others Souls lay uppermost. Now the Christian goes to the Sanctuary in
arduous cases, Psalm. 73.14. and makes the Scriptures (those divine Oracles) the
chief Counselors, Psalm. 119.24 in his Works, Natural, Civil, Spiritual; and
dare venture upon nothing but what he has warrant from God for: not, What
says this Friend, or the other Relation; but what says God in the case,
directly, or by good Consequence? See the difference betwixt good Jehoshaphat
and Ahab, 1 King. 22.5, 6. the former said, Enquire, I pray thee, at the Word
of the Lord to day. The other made nothing of it: they so^n forgot his Works:
they waited not for his Counsel, Psalm. 108.13. And God gives them up to walk in
their own Counsels, Psalm. 81.12.

4. The New Creature has new Admiration; the Carnal Heart wonders at trifling
Novelties; David prays, Open thou mine Eyes, that I may behold wondrous things
out of thy Law, Psalm. 119.18. There indeed he spies wonders of Power, Wisdom,
Holiness, Faithfulness, and a display of all God's Attributes, but especially
of free Grace and Love in the Work of Redemption: he sees no reason to admire
any thing, but things the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. and are in
continual ecstacy in the admiration of: O the Love of God in sending Christ, of
Christ in becoming Man, 1 John 3.1. in taking any of the Sons of Men to be the
Children of God, [(...)] Oh the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, Romans 11.33. There there only is something to be admired: all
the Glories of the World are but mere contemptible Pageantry, he can trample
them under his Feet with a better disdain, then Diogenes trampled on Plato's
bravery, for he is in a sort crucified to the world, Gal. 6.14.2 Cor. 4.18. And
can pass by things, seen with an holy scorn, compared with things unseen, which
are Eternal.

This is the New Creature in the Mind.

2. The New Creature is also manifest in the Conscience, which though it be not
a distinct Faculty, (but a compound of more) yet it is of great use in the Soul
of Man, and its necessary that the Heart be sprinkled from an evil Conscience,
Heb. 10.22. which is done by the Blood of Christ, and that the Conscience be
purged from dead Works to serve the living God; and this is effected by the
Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. Now there are Four Offices of Conscience, which the
New Creature does in good measure rectify.

1. As it is [ Index] a guide, a discoverer of Duty, a bright Star in a dark
Night, an Hand in the Margin, to show us what is worth our observing, a
Schoolmaster to teach us, a Monitor to show our Mistakes; and it must be
regulated by the Word of God; for Conscience is corrupted, and is apt to be
deceived, and deceive us: it is but an under-Officer, and must it self be
subject to God's Law: hence the Christian seeks to regulate its dictates by the
Word of Truth, and Grace brings it to the rule; What says my Supreme Lord and
Master, I must follow thee no further than God's Law allows: now the New
Creature brings the Conscience to the Word, and says, Thus far thou must go,
and no further: the End of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure Heart, and
good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. These are always Companions;
this is a good Conscience.

2. Conscience is [ liber] it is a Book, wherein are noted and writ down all a
man's Actions, Expressions, yea, his Thoughts and Imaginations; so it is a wise
and faithful Register, to produce them, as a faithful Witness for, or against a
man another day, the Books were opened, Rev. 20.12. One of those was the Book
of Conscience; Conscience is as a thousand Witnesses; if good, the Holy Ghost
joins with it, my Conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9.1.
And this is our rejoicing, the testimony of our Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. If the
Person have done any thing amiss, Conscience brings it to the man's
remembrance, as the Sin of Joseph's Brethren made them say, We are verily
guilty, Gen 43.21. Now a faithful Witness will not lie. A rectified Conscience
will give in a true Testimony to promote Repentance, which is therefore called
a bethinking our selves, 1 King. 8.47. or Heb. a bringing back upon our Hearts.
Conscience has a tenacious Memory, and will speak true in its Excusings or
Accusings, Romans 2.14, 15. which is proper to Conscience, as a Conscience, but
Grace regulates it, and adds some force to it.

3. As Conscience is [ judex] a Judge to pass the Sentence upon a man, as the
verdict is brought in: It Is true, it is but a petty Judge under the Supreme
Judge, yet the Great God confirms its judicial Sentence: 1 John 3.20. If our
Hearts (i.e. our Consciences) condemn us, God is greater than our Hearts, and
knows all things. Every man may and must keep a privy Sessions within,
preparatory to the Great Assizes, if he be but passive, and is loath to hearken
to this Sentence, he is self-condemned; and this is but [ praejudicium judicij]
a sad prognostic of his being condemned at God's Tribunal, which he seeks to
escape, as Felix did, but cannot: But if he join issue with this Sentence, and
condemn himself actively and voluntarily, he shall not be judged or condemned,
1 Cor. 11.31. Now Grace in the Heart makes a Man do this. I am the Man, says
Conscience, I confess both the Fact and Fault. A^rtthou so, says Conscience, I
must needs pass the Sentence upon thee according to God's righteous Law. Well,
I yield, says the Soul, I am convicted in this Court, and cannot escape the
Judgment of God: I must fly to the City of Refuge.

4. Conscience is [ vindex] an anvenger, a selftormenter, a guilty Person is
one that torments or afflicts himself; some do this sinfully, by worldly
Sorrow, which causes Death, 2 Cor 7.10. The Christian must do it
penitentially, either for his own Sins, or other men's; so Lot vexed his
righteous Soul with the Sodomites Sins, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. The Word [(...)] he beat
and Bastinado'd his righteous Soul: The Godly Man must take the Whip of
Conscience with the Hand of Grace, and whip himself for his Sins: or God will
take it with his Hand, and scourge him with it, as he did David, whose Heart
smote him for numbering the People, 2 Samuel 24.10. The Worm of Conscience gnawing
at the Heart, is an acute Pain, and will be one of the Torments of the Wicked
in Hell, Mark 9.44. But the Godly Man prevents that by joining issue with
executing God's Sentence by self-excruciating trouble for Sin here: this is a
profitable use of Conscience, by a free and voluntary seconding its severe
Lashes to promote Godly Sorrow.

This for two parts of the New Creature, that concern; first, the Mind;
secondly, The Conscience.

Chap. X. A further trial of the New Creature, as to the Will and Affections,
the subjects of it; and its Properties.
3. ANother Subject, wherein this New Creature resides, is the Will, and this
is [ Cardo animae] the hinge of the Soul, the Master-Wheel, upon which the
whole Soul turns, as an old Bowl receives a new Byas, that turns it quite
another way, then what it had gone: now the change of the Will is the main work
of converting Grace.

There are Four Motions of the Will, wherein the New Creature shows it self,

1. In its Designs, Aims, Intentions: The world and it self, were the main
drift of the Will in a natural state: all seek their own, Phil. 2.21. the
gratifying of the Flesh, sensual Appetite, and carnal Interest: the universal
Inquest is, Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6. Oh for a good Bargain, a
cheap Purchase! Another is for strong Drink, or sweet Meats, Plays or
Pleasures; another for Cap and Knee, and Titles of Honor: But the New Creature
post-pones and scorns all these, and designs the glorifying of God, enjoyment
of him, let Chrst be magnified, and my Soul glorified, Phil. 20. And I can hate
all other things, God has twisted them together, and the Soul cannot part
them: God is the Christians chief supreme End, in his natural, civil, spiritual
acts; the New Man aims at the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Oh that my Soul may
obtain fellowship with God, 1 John 1.3. Psalm. 73.25. I will trample on sinful
worldly self, and spurn away this dirty Dunghill, in comparison of God's Glory
and Salvation of my own Soul; all other things will neither please nor profit
this high-bred Creature infused into the Soul.

2. The Elective Power of the Will, the New Creature chooses the most proper
means to attain these high Ends, as he chooses God for his only End, so in the
first place he chooses Christ as the only Way, Truth and Life, John 14.6.1, 51.
By whom he may ascend to God, as the Ladder of Jacob: for there is no coming to
the Father, but by the Son: The Will therefore consists to have Christ upon his
own terms, and chooses him above the World, John 1.12. May I have Christ, I
will cast all others as Dung at my Heels, Phil. 7.7, 8, 9. Away with them, away
with them, I will refuse Crowns and Scepters in comparison of, or in
competition with Christ, the New Creature comes off freely in his choice of
Christ, is not forced to him as his last shift, to escape damning, but by a
sweet tendency and propensity of the Will touched and attracted with the
Loadstone of divine Grace, To me to live is Christ, Phil. 1.21. as well as he
is good to dye with; yea, the New Creature chooses, the Precepts, the Promises,
the Patterns of the Word, Psalm. 119.30, 111. The way of Faith and Holiness to
walk in, in order to the attaining Happiness; and he never repents this blessed
Choice.

3. There Is a cleaving act of the Will, a peremptory, resolved adhereing to God
and his ways, the Will is fixed, determined for God, whatever shall be said
against; he is not off and on like a double-minded man, unstable in all his
ways, James 1.8. [(...)] hanging in suspense, halting betwixt two Opinions, 1
King. 18.21. but cleaves to the Lord with purpose of Heart, Acts 11.23. as Ruth
was steadfastly minded to go with Naomi, Ruth 1.16, 17, 18. All men on Earth,
and all the Devils in Hell shall not alter this resolution: I will go and
return to my Father, Luke 15.17. I am purposed that my Mouth shall not
transgress, Psalm. 17.3. Let others do as they list, as they dare answer, I and
my House will serve the Lord, John 24.15. I must not be guided by Example or
Carnal Reason, but by the Word of God, and having made my choice by the Grace
of God, I will not be altered as long as I breath, no Sufferings shall daunt
me, no Allurements shall entice me from my God.

4. There Is a resigning act of the Will, by which it gives up it self to the
Will of God: the New Creature melts and molds the Will of man into the Will of
God: as our Lord said, Not my will, but thine be done, Matthew. 26.39. And those
gracious Souls, Acts 21.13. said, The will of the Lord be done. Hence Luther
durst Pray [ fiat volunt as mea] Let my Will be done; but came off thus, Mine,
Lord, because my Will shall be thine. There shall be but one Will betwixt us:
this has been the Language of all the Holy Men in Scripture, Eli, David, Paul:
Let the Lord do as seems good to him, 1 Samuel 8.10.2 Sam. 15.25. This Harmony of
Wills is a glorious Fruit of the New Creation; and sweet and certain Character
of the New Creature: this brings Serenity to the Soul in all states, when Wind
and Tide, go both one way, there is no Storm; so when the Christian acquiesceth
in God's will, there is great Peace in the Soul.

4. The last Subject, wherein the New Creature is formed in the Affections,
these are the Motions of the Will, the Will is the [ primum movens or mobile]
the main Wheel that carries the Affections along with it: the Affections are
either, 1. disliking; or 2. liking: Aversations or Approbations of these
Faculties of the Soul, and both of them are reduced to sweet Order and Harmony,
according to Scripture-Rule.

1. The disliking or disapproving Affections, the Stream is quite turned into
another Channel, the Soul loathes what it before loved, and bears an implacable
hatred, yea, antipathy, not only to Sin, but to all appearances of it, 1 These.
5.22. and Avenues that lead to it, or proceed from it, hating even the Garment
spotted by the Flesh, Jude 23. as one detests a Coat with the Plague in it, as
a man's Stomach rises against some kind of Meats, or a Toad for its poysonful
quality, or a Serpent for its Sting, or rather for its loathsome Nature: David
says, I hate, and abhor Lying, Psalm. 119.163. He cannot use words enough to
express his Antipathy to Hypocrisy. And true hatred is [(...)] against all the
Kinds of what we hate, I hate every false way, ver. 104. says the same Holy
Man. The New Creature makes the Christian not only angry at Sin, as against his
Interest, or as a Man may be with his Wife or Child, in a fit of Passion, and
entertains good Thoughts of them again, when the Passion is over; but there is
an implacable Enmity commenced in the Heart against all Sin, yea, there is an
hatred of wicked men's persons for their Sin's sake, Psalm. 139.21, 22. which
otherwise the Soul loves, as he would not hate the Devil but for Sin: O, how
weary am I of this Body of Death, I know not how to bear it, its like a
stinking dead Carcass, that at once both burdens me with its weight, Romans 7.24.
and poisons me with its stink: It Is this, and this alone that makes me send
forth [ quotidianos mutigus] daily groans, and Mournings. Oh that I could put a
Bill of Divorce into the Hands of my dearest Lust, never to meddle with it
again: I will never be reconciled to Sin more; I will cut off my Right
hand-Sin, and run the Knife of the Law into the very Heart of my dearest Lusts:
I will study their utter extirpation: I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face
to God, Ezra 9.6. because of my Spots of guilt and filth; never did any thing
lie so near my Heart, as my Sin against God, I will declare mine Iniquity, and
be very sorry for my Sin, Psalm. 58.18. For the future, I will stand in awe that
I may not sin, Psalm. 4.4. I will fear Sin more then Hell: I cannot bear them
that are evil, Rev. 2.2. Though I have patience to bear any Affliction: I
behold transgressors, and am grieved, Psalm. 119.58, 136. and shed many Tears
for the dishonor they bring to my God: Oh that Sin were banished out of the
World, or my Soul withdrawn from the wicked world.

2. As for the liking Affections, the renewed Soul can truly say, as David, I
have set my affections to the house of my God, 2 Chronicles. 30.3. As to inferior
Objects, my Soul is as a weaned Child, Psalm. 13 1.12. New light begets new
love, new desires new delights: Truth in the Understanding, darting upon the
Affections, contracted in the Glass of Meditation, inflames the Soul: Did not
our Hearts burn within us, while he opened to us the Scriptures? Luke 24.32.
The Sun in the Firmament sheds his Influence into the Bowels of the Earth, but
Light and Heat come together into Souls; knowledge affects the Heart^ the more
the Christian knows God, the more he loves him: The Soul risen with Christ,
cannot but set his affections on things above, Col. 3.2. For where the treasure
is, there will the heart be also, Matthew. 6.21. Oh says this Christian, how
good is God, I love the Lord from my inmost Bowels. Psal^ 18.1. Mat. 22.37.
With all my heart, soul, mind, and might: with my Soul have I desired thee in
the night, Isa. 26.9. Even as the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks: When
shall I come and appear before God? Psalm. 45.1. God, even God alone is my
exceeding joy, Psalm. 43.4. I will take pleasure in nothing but in God: This,
this is both my Duty and Privilege: I hope I can call the Sabbath a delight,
Isa. 58.13, 14. And he promises I shall delight myself in the Lord: My Comfort
and Content is, in communion with God, and it is an anticipation of Heavenly
Joys: I love the Word of God, his testimonies are the rejoicing of my heart,
and I have rejoiced in the ways thereof, more then in all Riches; and delight
my self in the Lord's Statutes, Psalm. 119.14. Oh how the good Soul is ravished,
and transported in the Galleries of Love! the Pleasures of the Soul are
infinitely beyond the Pleasures of Sense.

Oh then, Christian, feel how the Pulse of thy Soul beats in a constant motion:
is thy Heart working God-wards in Duties of God's Worship, or in daily
Converse: which way tends the bent of thy Soul? Art thou truly troubled, that
thou can not delight thy self in the Lord, Psalm. 37.4. as thou ought?
Would thou give all the World that thou had but an Heart to love God more?
Can thou say as Peter, Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love
thee, Joh 21.15-17. A Flame may be painted, but a painted Flame cannot be felt:
I find the workings of Love kindled in my Bosom, if I know any thing of my
Heart: and I have searched the Characters of true Love in the Scriptures, and I
find my Heart ecchoing thereto, harmonizing therewith, and I am told, that this
Love is the proper Character of this New Creature, connatural with, engraven in
the New Nature, for he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1
John 4.16.

Thus much for the Preparatives to, and parts of this New Creature; I proceed
briefly to the

Third Head, which is the Properties of this New Creature: and they are these
Seven.

1. It is an universal New Creature, it is not in part of the Soul, but runs
through the whole man, soul, body and spirit, 1 These. 5.23 It Is extensive and
comprehensive, takes in all Internal Powers, External Members, all Acts in all
Faculties, at all times, in all employments; as in the Law, the whole Sacrifice
was to be offered to God, Lev. 18.9. So it is not acceptable to God if any part
be withheld from God, Romans 12.1. This New Creature is as Leaven that runs
through the whole lump, Matthew. 13.33. and puts a gracious Tincture into all the
Faculties: This is not a Limb or Member, but a whole New Man; yea, the
Christian is a perfect man, having all the parts of a Saint, though defective
in point of degree: our heavenly Father begets no Blind, Lame, Mad, or Maimed
Children; there is no Idiots in his Family: A Christian indeed has all Graces
radically; but the Hypocrite is mainly defective in something essentially,
requisite to make up a Saint; he is a Cake half baked, Dough on one side, the
Legs of the Lame are not equal.

2. It is a vital, self-moving New Creature, I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me, Gal. 2.20. Its true, it is hid from outward Observation, as the
Spring that moves the visible Hand, for our Life is hid with Christ in God,
Col. 3.3. But a vital Principle it is: this gracious habit is to the Soul as
the Soul is to the Body; it is a spark of divine Life kindled by the holy
Spirit, a Seed of God, 1 John 3.9. quickened within the Womb of the Earth by the
influence of Heaven, putting forth gracious Acts, precious Fruits, by
excitations of assisting Grace, after a nipping winter of Temptations or cold
Autumn of Spiritual Decays: his Spirit makes him willing. Oh, says the
Christian, I am restless, as a Bird out of the Nest, or a Fish out of its
proper Element of Water, unsatisfied till I return to my God. But the Hypocrite
is but like a Pupper dressed like a Saint, moved by Art, or as a Machin by
something outward, which the workman fastens to it, but not informed by a Soul
of its own; so its at last worn or broken, and crumbles to nothing: so does the
Hypocrite; as one says, There is a vast difference betwixt Wool on the Sheep's
back, which clipped, will grow again, and the Wool on the Sheep's Skin on the
Wolf's back, which grows no more The living Saint still works upwards, the
graceless Soul is dead, and puts forth no vital acts.

3. Its a sensible new Greature, its not a dead inanimate Log, but of a tender
quick sensation and can easily discern what Profits or Prejudiceth it, what
helps or hurts it; it groans under what it feels does make against its being or
well-being: nothing does it hurt so much as Sin, or what has a tendency to it:
any act of omission or commission, lies heavy upon it, pricks and wounds it,
and makes it bleed; hence it is called an heart of Flesh, which is a soft and
sensible thing: defects of Grace, inroads of Temptation, intermissions of Duty,
or worldliness, are more laid to heart by the New Creature, then gross
out-breakings of Sin in the Hypocrite: whatsoever it perceives to be anoyance
or disturbance, is a grievous Affliction. Oh, says the Soul, I found at such a
time God's withdrawing the assistance of his Spirit. I puzzled and bungled in a
Duty, and could make nothing of it; Woe is me, what had I done to banish my God?
I find a weight on me, and a Sin that easily besets me, Heb. 12.1. Did I not
quench, grieve, resist the Spirit? was I not sluggish, heartless, formal? Lord,
forgive me that Sin, and quicken me with thy Grace: The Hypocrite has none of
these Experiments, Soul-exercises, Agonies, but runs on (...) heartless
Formality, and customary Performance; but knows nothing of God's access, and
his recess, coming or going.

4. It is a growing New Creature, it never stands at a stay; the Godly Man is
compared to the Sun, that shines still brighter to the perfect day, Prove.
4.18. to Calves of the stall, Mal. 4.2. that are still growing; as new born
babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby, 1 Pet.
2.2, 3. Its the duty of Saints, yea, their property to grow stronger and
stronger, Job 17.9. To perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. For the
New Creature helps, eggs on the Child of God to improve his Talents, to use
God's appointed means for increase, to derive Virtue from Jesus Christ, that he
may increase with the increase of God, Col. 2.19. This New Creature begets a
new Appetite, which in this imperfect state, makes him gape and long after
more; and he never says he has enough in this lower World: Its said of the
Crocodile [ quamdiu vivit, crescit] so the Saint, he grows as long as he lives.
Oh, says the Soul, I am short, still defective; the greatest part of what I
have attained, is the least part of what I want: Oh that I could be more like
God! be changed into his Image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. I can never be
enough like God: this is the clearest evidence of the Truth of Grace: a dead
Picture will not grow as a living Child, a dead Stake grows not as a living
Plant: Lord make me more humble, holy, heavenly, self-denying, watchful,
fruitful.

5. It is a depending New Creature, it makes the Soul sensible of its own
weakness, it feels not its own Feet, it cannot stand alone, therefore leans on
its Beloved, Cant. 8.5. every step through this Wilderness state: Woe be to me,
says the Soul, if I be alone, I have long found it by too dear-bought
Experience: I am like a Staff, and shall stand no longer then I am upheld by an
Almighty Hand; if God bid me come upon the fluid Waves, and reach out his Hand,
I will venture, as Peter, my Feet shall not fail, if Faith fail not: Lord, hold
up my goings in thy path, that my Footsteps slip not, Psalm. 17.5. Alas,
without thee I can do nothing, John 5.5. But by thee I can run through a Troop,
and by my God I can leap over a Wall, Psalm. 18.29. I am able to do all things
through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. I find by experience, that the
least difficulty overmatcheth me without divine assistance, and the greatest
Mountains become a plain before Zerubabel. My Lord of Hosts, who out of
weakness can make strong; if he say, My Grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor.
12.7. I will encounter a Goliath, and in the Name of the Lord do wonders: my
only Strength is in thine allsufficient Grace: by the Grace of God I am what I
am, 1 Cor. 15.10. do what I do.

6. Its a wakeful New Creature; the Soul never sleeps: Grace in the Soul is
still waking, I sleep, but my Heart wakes, Cant. 5.2. The wise Virgins as well
as the foolish may take a Nod, Matthew. 25.6, 7. But they are quickly awaked with
the Bridegroom's coming: Grace may lie in the dull habit, or as a Spark of Fire
in the Ashes, but it will revive: there needs not a new Life to be put in, but
a stirring up that vital Principle: it may seem a Paradox that the Christian is
distinguished from his Heart: a suspension of the Actings of spiritual
Liveliness and Vivacity there may be, whereby the Senses are at present bound
up, by indisposition to Duty, yet a Principle of Grace, inclining to motion
there may be; thus there is two different Natures in the Child of God, like two
distinct Persons; so Paul, Romans 7.20. If I do that I would not, it is no more I
that do it, but sin that dwells in me. So he distinguishes often betwixt I and
I: these different Natures have opposite Actings: in the worst state of a
Christian's spiritual dullness, he is very apprehensive things are not right
with him; there is some Convictions, Challenges, Purposes, Protestations of the
inward Man against this lazy frame, it displeases him, and he has some faint
and languid Struglings to raise himself: The New Creature gives not full
consent, though it can act little vigorously, but there is a lusting against each
other, Gal. 5.17. Peter's Faith did not act, yet not totally fail, when he
denied his Master: For Christ's Prayer was heard for him, Luke 22.32. There is
some tendency in the Heart God-wards in the Saints lowest Ebbs: he is not
satisfied in his Sleepiness.

7. It is an abiding New Creature, it will remain and overcome all Oppositions,
and continue as long as the Soul continues, as was said before, it is an
immortal Seed, the world passes away, and the lust thereof; but he that does
the will of God, abides for ever, 1 John 2.17. This anointing abides in them,
and causes them to abide in him, ver. 27. This Principle will be as a well of
water springing up into everlasting Life, Joh. 4.14. This fear of the Lord
endures for ever, Psalm. 19.9. His Righteousness endures for ever, Psalm.
112.3. Morality withers and Decays, but Sincerity will run parallel with the
Life of God, and Line of Eternity: If thou art an Apostate, thou wast never
such a New Creature, as I have described: If you continue in my Word, then are
you my Disciples indeed, John 8.31. Look you to your Sincerity, and God will
look to your Perseverance; nay, that Principle will be attended with an holy
Jealousy, which is the aw-band of the Soul, and a special Preservation against
Apostasy, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their Hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. This Fear will teach them to incline God-wards, and abhor what
tends to departing from God: Scripture makes this a clear evidence of a state
o^ Grace, Col. 1.21, 23. of interest in Christ Heb. 3.6-14. And the contrary of
a Soul going off, 1 John 2.19. Try your selves by this Character: Do you
persevere?

Objection. How can I evidence my self to be a New Creature, I am not yet at
the End of my Journey, who knows what I may do, or be? I have a backsliding
Heart, I may fall away before I dye.

Answ. Its true, thou can not presage what may come; but thou may guess at
time to come from what thou have met with in times past, thou have had
experience of the operations of Grace, witnessings of God's Spirit, healing of
Backslidings, conquest of some strong Lusts, victory over the World,
vanquishing Satan's assaults, so that thou can set up Samuel's Stone
Ebenezer, Hitherto has the Lord helped, 2 Samuel 7.12. And do thou not find it
on Record, Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has
begun a good Work in you, will perform it till the day of Jesus Christ. Has,
Does, Will, is the Scripture-Logick: its true, you are not absolute Conquerorss
till the last Enemy be destroyed, which is Death; but, Scripture style reckons
sincere Combatants to be Conquerors; Ye are of God, little Children, and have
overcome them, 1 John 4.4-5.4. And this is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our Faith; yea, we are more than conquerors, through him that loved
us, Romans 8.37. And it is often said, To him that overcomes, will I give to eat
of the tree of life, Rev. 2.7. Mark it, its not said, to him that has
overcome, but [(...)] to him that is overcoming: Do thou keep thy ground,
fight still, though sometimes thou art foiled? Yet do thou not gain ground by
thy falls, mourn for Sin, and grow more watchful? As long as thou art in the
Field against Sin, Sin is not on the Throne in thy Heart: And if sin have not
dominion over you, you are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14. This
Victory may be to acceptance with God, though not with satisfaction to thy
self.

Chap. XI. A trial of the New Creature, by its Effects, Consequences, and
proper Operations.
4. THe last way of discovering the truth of the New Creature in the Soul, is
by its proper Fruits and Effects, as the Tree is known by its Fruits, and the
quality of the Spring by its Streams that issue from it: I can but name these.

1. The New Creature produces a New Tongue, New Speech, New Expressions: the
Soul that was wont to speak the Language of Ashdod, now speaks the Language of
Canaan: his Tongue was wont to Swear, Lie, Curse, rail at Religion, or vain
Jangling, idle Tales, impertinent Stories; or at best but of Weather, Trading,
News; now he changes his Note; The mouth of the Righteous speaks Wisdom, and
his tongue talks of Judgment, Psalm: 37.30, 31. Why so? the law of his God is
in his heart: Out of the abundance of the Heart, his Mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34
What say you, Sirs? do you speak as becomes Saints, not Filthiness, foolish
Talking or Jesting, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. Is your Speech always with Grace, seasoned
with Salt: Col. 4.6. Not corrupt Communication, but that which is good to the
use of edifying? Ephesians. 4.29, 31. Do you exhort, and provoke one another to Love
and good Works? Heb. 10.24, 25. Do you speak reverently of God, his Word, and
Works? Do you with one Mind and one Mouth glorify God, Romans 15.6. Edify
Saints, and convince Gainsayers? Ribauldry, Barbarology and Railing, are far
from a Godly man's Mouth: rather giving of Thanks, asking and answering serious
Questions with his Tongue, which is his glory.

2. New Works: Not only New Expressions, but New Actions: The New Creature
ingageth Men to a New Course of Life, to cast off the works of darkness, and to
put on the armor of light, to walk honestly as in the day, Romans 13.12, 13, 14.
What a change does it make in men's Employments, their Backs are now where their
Faces were; and their Faces where their Backs were: This Grace of God teaches
them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously,
godly; yea, to be zealous of good works, Tit. 2.11, 12, 14. They are wont to
work hard for the world; now they work out their Salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12. They used to follow Sports and Stage Plays; now they
find other employments, Reading, Praying, Meditating examining their
Consciences, mortifying Lusts: they find something else to do now, then to
spend their time in Idleness, and inventing Pastimes, to pass away their time:
they have many Graces to exercise, Duties to perform, personal and relative;
they have no time to be Idle, but must fill up their time with profitable
Employment, to God's glory and their own good account: Oh how busy is a Child
of God, striving to enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13.24. taking the kingdom
of heaven by violence, Matthew. 11.12. And giving diligence to make their calling
and election sure, 1 Pet. 1.10. and that their Master may not find them idle,
but that they may be found of him in Peace.

3. A New Rule suitable to the New Creature; alas in time past, the poor Sinner
walked according to the course of this World, Ephesians. 2.2. 1 Pet. 1.18. The old
Traditions and Customs of men were wont to be the carnal man's Canon; he
followed the multitude by conformity to the world: but now the rule of the new
creature is the Star he Stears his Course by, Romans 12.2. Gal. 6.16. Bring me a
warrant from the Word in a plain Text; or a direct unstrained Consequence to
bottom my obedience upon, or you say nothing: God's will is my rule of
obedience, that only binds Conscience: and the New Creature lies square to
every Command: The authority of God sways it, because there is something in the
Soul that suits and lies square to every precept: if he cannot keep any, yet he
has respect to all God's Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. He is as it were
foursquare, lies square to every thing God makes his duty; but an Hypocrite is
like a round Globe, touches in some Corner, omits all but what his Interest or
Fancy calls him to in that juncture: yea, if he should keep all, yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all, James 2.10. A true Christian is of a Catholic
Spirit, an Universalist, like Zechariah and Elizabeth that walked in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6. These were indeed
righteous: if there be Circumcision of Heart, there will be circumspection in
Life: See then you walk circumspectly [(...)] Ephesians. 5.15. according to command,
and to the height of every Command, baulk none, abate nothing of what God makes
Duty.

4. A new End, design; Alas, Self is the End and great Idol of a carnal Heart,
till Grace rectify and regulate it: All seek their own, Phil. 2.21. Matthew.
6.2. self-ease, pleasure, self-profit, self-honour, or applause; the Water will
rise no higher then the Spring: New Grace changes the Biass of the Soul, as a
Ship sailing Westward, there comes a strong Gale of Wind, and carries it
directly into the East: Self-seeking is so natural, that till Grace alter the
constitution of the Soul, the sinner will never be beaten off: self-denial is
the first and last Lesson our Lord teaches his Disciples, Matthew. 16.24. This
is the first Step and highest Round in Jacob's Ladder; has thy soul so far
learned it, as to makes God's glory, communion with him the chief aim of thy
Duties, Studies, Endeavors: can thou, soul, throw thy self in the Dust, that
God may be on the Throne; disappear, that God may only be seen, as John Baptist
said, He must increase, but I must decrease, John 3.30. If any good be done,
its not I, but the grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Let him alone have the
glory: let the Crown be set no where but on Christ's Head, Psalm. 151. Cant.
3.11. It becomes him best: I will cast down my Crown before the Throne, and
say, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, Rev.
4.10, 11. As all the Lines tend to the center, so shall all my Actions tend
only to thy glory: Let God in all things be glorified, though I be vilified, 1
Pet. 4.11. This Rent will I daily pay as a Tribute to the Crown of Heaven: I am
resolved to glorify God in my Body and Soul, which are his, 1 Cor. 6.20 Better
lose my Life, then lose the End of my Life, God's glory.

5. New Worship is always a Companion of the New Creature: Its true, the carnal
man might hear and read the Word, Pray, receive the Sacrament, and perform the
external Acts of Religion before, but formally, heartlesly, hypocritically, God
knows, having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5.
But as soon as the Grace of God has formed the New Creature in the Heart: then
it is said, as of Paul, Behold he prays, Acts 9.11. Why, did not Paul pray
before? Yes doubtless, he was a Pharisee and Pharisees made long Prayers, its
likely had a great Gift of Prayer; ay, but now a Paul had the grace of Prayer,
behold he prays, now he prays with a witness; his Prayer has all the
Requisites essential to Prayer. Oh now, if you could lay your Ear to the Closet
of this new born Saint; what sighs and groans would you hear? Romans 8.26. What
throbs, and tears, what self-loathing Confessions; what heartrending
Complaints; what Heaven-piercing Expostulations would you have? What believing,
pleading of Promises; what improvement of Christ's mediatorship? this is not
formal or heartless Canting: As soon as ever this New Creature was formed, the
Soul was turned from Idols, to serve the living and true God, 1 These. 1.9. i.
e. as such a God in a sincere and lively manner, in Spirit and in Truth, John
4.24. If the Words be the same, the workings of Heart are as different, as a
living man's tone from dead Organ-pipes; the one has Breath, the other not:
The gracious soul engages his Heart to approach unto God, Jer. 30.21. Yea, he
also says, Let us lift up our Hearts with our Hands, Lamen. 3.41. i. e. [
oremus and laboremus] let us pray and use our utmost endeavor to obtain what
we pray for: the Hypocrites Tongue may wag; but the New Creature sets the Heart
a breathing, Hands on working, Feet on walking; Oh how he is concerned in a
Duty!

6. A New War is commenced by the New Creature: as soon as this New Creature
peeps out, Satan musters all the powers of darkness against it: and now begins
this holy War, which never cease while the Soul is in the ^ody: and Oh, how
many a sharp skirmish has the Christian with Satan, and his armed Bands! the
carnal Heart holds correspondence with the Enemy, and the Devil lets him alone,
and all his Goods (or soul's Faculties) are in peace, Luke 11.21. he sleeps
quietly in the Devil's Tents, little dreaming whither he is going: or rather he
is carried in a golden Dream into Satan's Territories: or as Solomo^'s young
Gallant with the Whore, As an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a Fool to the
correction of the Stocks, Prove. 7.22. But the converted soul sees his danger,
and struggles hard to extricate himself, and when he is at liberty, the Devil
pursues him with rage sometimes, otherwhiles with subtilty seeks to undermine
him; he is aware of both, and is not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. One
while he fights with spiritu^^ weapons, and so resists the Devil, and he flees^
another while the soul retires to his strong hold, by Faith and Prayer, and is
secured: Thus the gracious soul is warring a good Warfare, fighting the Fight
of Faith, 1 Timothy 1.18-6.12.2 Tim. 2.4. which is a good Fight, he gets
disintang^ led from the affairs of this life, and lays aside every weight, that
he may militate more strenuously and more successfully: nor does the good soul
so fight, as one that beats the Air, 1 Cor. 9.26. laying about him at
adventures, but he spies his Enemy, has taken a view of them in
Scripture Light, lets fly at the Faces of foreign and intestine Adversaries,
with spiritual, scriptural Weapons, and never sounds a Parley, o^ makes a Truce,
but disputes every Inch of hi^ passage to Heaven: thus this New Creature (...)
the Christian Champion.

7. The New Creature finds out new company; alas his old Companions grow stale
wi^ the Convert, he cannot take delight in his old Comrades, that would jest
and be merry, and seek to drive him out of his melancholy Dump with pleasant
stories, this is but as singing Song to an heavy Heart: The good Heart is now
sick of such vain company, and bids them be gone, they are of no use to him.
It Is very observable, three times, and upon so many occasions, does David
require all wicked men to depart from him, Psalm. 6.8. Depart from me, all ye
workers of Iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, q. d. I
have got better company and comfort then you are, Psalm. 119.115. Depart from
me, ye evildoers, for I will keep the Commandments of my God, q. d. I have
taken up other Resolutions, and must have other Companions then you: the last
is Psalm. 139.19. Surely thou shall slay the wicked, O God; depart therefore
from me ye bloody men, q. d. I am loath to fare as you fare, and will not be
found in your company: this is Christian Policy as well as Piety: it is
impossible the New Creature should take delight in his old Companions: for what
communion has light with darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 17. what concord has
Christ with Belial? There are in the world, persons more suitable to his
temper, even Saints (not in Heaven, but) that are in the Earth, men excellent
in whom is all his delight, Psalm. 16.3. These, these are his Companions, Psalm.
119.63. the delight of his soul, he loves them dearly, because they are so like
his Father in Heaven: these are they he hopes to live with in the other world,
and he must associate with them in this, he loves to discourse with them, join
in Prayer with them, none such content he has on Earth as in the communion of
Saints.

8. The new Creature needs and requires new Cordials, new Food and Physic, the
world and all that it can afford, that are wont to be so pleasant, are all but
dry Meat, have no more savor then the white of an Egg: the Soul has now a
more dainty and delicate Stomach, then to be satisfied with such Husks and
trash: he sues for the tender Mercies of God, Psalm. 119.77. Let thy tender
mercies come unto me, that I may live, q. d. I know not how to live a natural
Life, and I cannot live a spiritual Life without these tender Mercies; the Lord
knows my squeamish and delicate Stomach, and crowns me withloving-kindness
and tender mercies, Psalm. 103.4. Luther called the whole Turkish Empire but a
Crumb cast to Dogs: and often protested to God, that he would not be put off
with these low things, even when he had a Silver Mine offered him: Even an
Heathen Seneca could say, [ major sum and ad majora natus] I am greater, and
born to higher things, then terrene Objects: Will not a Christian much more say
so? The Christian has Meat to eat that Men know not of^ spiritual Manna,
Angels Food, is the Christians Diet, John 4.32. the fatness of God's house;
yea, marrow and fatness, Psalm. 36.9. 63.5. 19.10. God's word is as honey and
honeycomb.; better then necessary food: yea, Jesus Christ himself, the bread of
Life, John 6.55. The New Creature finds full contentment in Christ, through a
promise: Its worth observing, that spiritual delights are suited to all the
spiritual senses [ melos in aure, mel in ore] Music in the Ear, his Mouth is
most sweet: Wine to the taste: yea, his Love is better then Wine, Cant 5.16. as
Ointment poured forth to the Smell, chapter 1.2.3, 12, 13. chapter 2.6, 8, 3. yea, as
Spiknard, Myrrh: his Embraces to the touch and feeling, His left hand is under
my head, and his right hand does embrace me: As for the sight, my beloved is
white and ruddy, Cant. 5.10-16. he is altogether lovely in all his parts, and
comely proportion: You see the New Creature has its Senses as well as the
Body, and spiritual good things gratify them, who by reason of use, have their
Senses exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5.14.

9. The New Creature has a new home, our being upon Earth in these Houses of
Clay, Job 4.19. is our short home: our being under the Earth, is our long home,
Eccle. 12.5, 7. Romans 6.23. In the Grave. Hell is the sinner's last and
everlasting Home: Heaven is the Saints best eternal home, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8.
Knowing that whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord --
but we are willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be present with
the Lord. A poor graceless Wretch is well where he is, like that carnal
Cardinal that would not change his part in Paris for his part in Paradise: Such
as these are men of the world, whose portion is in this life, Psalm 17.14. These
are written in the Earth, possibly as recorded and renowned among the great
Ones of it, Jer. 17.15. But there is a Generation of the Sons of men, that are
not of this world, whose Names are written in Heaven, John 15.9. And are
traveling toward the New Jerusalem, thence they came, and thither they are
bound; Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the Mother of us all, Gal.
4.26. It Is thither the New Creature tends, there it would gladly be: it is
troubled at whatsoever stops it in its motion homewards: Romans 8.23. Not only
they (i.e. the other Creatures) but our selves also, which have the first
fruits of the spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for
the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our Body: Oh blessed Jubilee! when shall
the dawning of that glorious day appear? How long must I dwell in Meshech, or
in the Tents of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5. How long shall I abide on this side Jordan?
Oh that once at last I might inhabit that goodly Mount and Lebanon! Why is his
Chariot so long in coming? why stay the Wheels of his Chariot? Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, break down the walls of this earthly Tabernacle, and
cloth me with that house from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. How long shall ^ be tossed
on this tumultuous Sea? when shall I reach the Haven? I long to be with Christ,
Phil. 1.23. among the Spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23-11.13, 14,
15, 16. Here I am a Stranger and Pilgrim, and am seeking another Country,
thither I am hasting; there I would be, that this disguise may be plucked off,
that when he shall appear, I may be like him, and see him as he is, 1. John
3.1, 2. My best Life is yet hid, but when Christ who is my Life, shall appear,
then shall I also appear with him in glory, Col. 3.3, 4. For this I hope and
wait, and Pray and long.

10. The New Creature begets new Apprehensions of it self in all this, he was
darkness, but now he is light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. The poor old Creature
thinks well of himself, and his doings; he imagines he can Pray, perform Duty,
and when he has by the strength of his Gifts come off finely, then he applauds
himself, as Bernard said of himself [ been fecisti, Bernarde] well done, now
God is beholding to thee, and owes thee a kindness, as the Hypocrital Jews,
Isa. 58.3. And the Pharisees, Luke 18.11. But this New Creature will teach its
possessour another Lesson, when he has done all, alas, he is an unprofitable
Servant, Luke 17.9. My Righteousnesses are but as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. Still
I am an unclean thing: I deserve nothing but wrath, if I justify my self, mine
own Mouth shall condemn me, Job 9.20. My Spiritual Duties need Spiritualizing;
my Repentance needs repenting of, my Exercise of Grace needs a gracious Pardon:
My Lord Jesus must take away the Iniquity of my holy things, perfume my poor
Services, and offer my Prayers with his much Incense, upon the golden Altar,
Exodus 28.58. before the Throne, Rev. 8.3. I dare not stand before God in my
best suit of Inherent Righteousness. If thou Lord should mark Iniquity; Oh
Lord, who can stand? Psalm. 1 30.3. In thy sight, shall no man living be
justified, Psalm. 143.2. If I look at the New Creature, there is many defects
therein: if I reflect on the purest actings of Grace, alas they are imperfect:
I must be found in Christ, or I am lost for ever, Phil. 3.9. Not having mine
own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is by the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. Oh my Lord, when I am
standing before the Angel of the Lord, Satan stands at my right hand, to resist
me, and justly he may, for I am clothed with filthy Garments: Oh speak the
word, that mine Iniquity may pass away from me, and cloth me with change of
Raiment, Zech. 3.1, 4. My change of Principles will not do without an upper
Garment to cover all my Defects and Faults: there I stick, there I must stand
righteous before God at the Great Day: The sum of all this, is contained in
that excellent Text, with which I conclude this Head, Phil. 3.3. For we are the
Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the Flesh.

Chap. XII. Directions, what Means may be used for the obtaining this New
Creature.
I Am sensible I have insisted too long upon the First Head of this last Use of
Instruction, concerning the Evidences of this work in our Souls, from its
Preparatives, Parts, Properties and Effects, I shall be the briefer in the rest.

2. The next is to give some Instructions to those that feel or fear they are
not yet New Creatures, how they are to behave themselves and what course they
are to take, that they may become New Creatures

I am much prevented in this by the worthy labors of those excellent Men, Mr.
Baxter Mr. Jos. Allein, and many others in their Directions about Conversion,
which is co-incident with this: to whom I refer the Reader.

Yet this must not be understood, as though it were in any man's power to
change his own Heart, no more than he can create himself or put life into a
dead Carcass, but it becomes Men, 1. Not to hinder or obstruct the strivings of
the Spirit that may work this Grace; 2. To improve their natural Faculties to
the utmost, in order to the attaining of this End: I shall but briefly lay
before you what a natural man can do, by the help of common Providence, and
what he must do, as he will answer the contrary another day, to that God that
has given him a Command, and rational Faculties capable of compliance.

1. Own and improve natural Principles, such there are, that are [(...)] innate
notions, common to man, as man, endowed with Reason, as, That there is a God,
that this God must needs be an excellent Being, the ultimate End of all things,
the chiefest Good, that all things depend upon him, and must be reduced to him;
that this God must be worshipped, that his Will is the Rule of man's Obedience;
that there is moral good and evil, that there will be a retribution in this or
in another world. Natural Conscience even of Heathens, discovers something of
these grand Principles; for so says the blessed Apostle, Romans 2.14, 15. That
though the Gentiles have not the written Law before their Eyes, yet they have a
transcript thereof in their Hearts, which declares to them some Good and Evil,
and Conscience accordingly excuses them if they do well, and accuses them if
they do evil, Romans 1.18, 24. The imprisoning of these Truths in
Unrighteousness, produced a judicial hardening, and giving them up to
Uncleanness; and rendered them to be without excuse: and can we think that Men
now disclaiming and obliterating these notices of Religion will fare better?
Surely no: So on the contrary, the way to obtain more, is to improve what we
have: I say, not that God is bound to give special Grace to such as improve
common, but an instance can hardly be produced to the contrary: and this is
God's method in vouchsafing his Grace, to engage Souls to cherish and excite
moral Principles by diligent endeavors, which God usually seconds with his
blessing; yea, this course does naturally tend to weaken vicious Inclinations:
Set your selves about this work, and you little know what it may come to at the
last. Oh that unconverted Sinners had but the Integrity of King Abimelech, to
act according to that Light they have, Genesis 20.6. and restraining Grace God
affords them, which the Lord ca^ Integrity, which yet is but moral, yet is
good, so far as it goes, and a mean of more.

2. Be jealous, lest you be mistaken in this point, lest you mistake the Nature
of this New Creature, or lest your own Hearts deceive you, for they are
deceitful and desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9. And Satan will be in danger to
cast in a Brat of his own in the room of this New Creature: Counterfeit Grace
may look like Saving Grace: Reformation looks like Regeneration how often is a
Bristol Stone taken for a Pearl^ painted Grapes once cheated living Birds: yo^
must first get a Scriptural definition of thi^ New Creature: To the Law and to
the Testimony^ Isa. 8.20. Judge your selves by that word tha^ must judge you at
the last Day, Romans 2.16. Be afraid of Self-deceit, Blessed is he that fears
always: you live in the midst of Cheats, a deceitful Heart, deceivable Lusts, a
deceitful World, and a cunning Devil, all set against you, and we are apt to
believe that to be true, we would have to be so: but put the case to thy self,
What if I be mistaken? I read of some that think themselves something, when
they are nothing, Gal. 6.3. Others put a false Syllogism upon themselves,
deceiving their own selves, James 1.22. What if this be my case? What if I be
in a golden Dream, imagining I am bound for Heaven, when I am descending into
the Pit? what if I be found without the Oil of Grace in the Vessel of my Heart;
a foolish Virgin amongst the wise, Mat. 25.1, 10. What if I prove the only
Guest at the Gospel-feast, without a VVedding-Garment, Matthew. 22.12, 13. and be
struck speechless? Oh what an astonishing disappointment will it be? has none
proved such? why may not I? Some have gone off the Stage with a Lie in their
Right hand, Isa. 44.20-50.11. and have lain down in Sorrow, notwithstanding the
Sparks of their own kindling: O what need have I to fear, lest a promise being
left of entering into Rest, I should really come short of it, Heb. 4.1.

3. Deal faithfully with your own Souls, in self-examination: Flatter not your
selves, but examine not only your Actions, but the Internals of your Souls, how
your Principles are stated: you may do it, for God has given you a
Self-reflecting Faculty, The Spirit of a man is the Candle of the Lord, Prove.
20.27. that searches the inward parts of the Belly: You must do it, you are
commanded to commune with your own heart, to examine your selves, Psalm. 4.4.2
Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.4. Psalm. 77.6. prove your work, God's Servants have made
diligent search: and will you continue Strangers to your own Hearts? will you
be so unkind Neighbors, as never to ask your Hearts how they do? or will you
be put off with afrivolous or delatory Answer? Oh Sirs, come to a point, drive
your selves to this Dilemma, I am either a New Creature or not, a Child of God
or of the Devil; I am bound either for Heaven or Hell: I had not need to hang
in suspense about this weighty case: I will now put this doubt out of doubt. I
cannot rest satisfied with uncertainties in so weighty a concern: God forbid I
should weigh it light, or be mistaken: I must not take Preparatives for parts
of the New Creature; the Porch for the House. I will try and try again, and
prove my marks by Scripture-rule, and appeal to God for the Sincerity of my
Heart: Examine me, O Lord, and prove me, and try my Reins and my Heart, Psalm.
26 2. I must be a new Man, or no man in Christ; I will not be put off with
morality, or uncertainty; irresolvedness breeds disquietness. I am determined
to make something of it.

4. Attend diligently on the most powerful Ministry, not such a dull, formal,
heartless Preaching, as will rock you asleep in Security, or sow Pillows to
your Arm-holes, Ezekiel. 13.17 -- 22. Preaching placentia, promising Life in a
sinful State, crying, peace, peace, when God proclaims war against you:
thousands are undone by Flatteries. Oh wait on a rouzing, convincing Ministry,
which is the power of God to Salvation, Romans 1.16. The Seed, the proper method
of working divine Grace, Gal. 4.19. where Christ is formed in Sinners Souls,
the Glass in which you may behold the Face of your Hearts, James 1.25. By which
you may be changed into his Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. Beholding the glory of the Lord
therein. I have begotten you (says Paul) through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. This
is God's workhouse, where he shapes and forms this New Creature: of how many
an Ordinance may it be said this and that man was born there, Psalm. 87.5. Oh
therefore be constantly waiting at the Posts of Wisdom, hear the most warm
lively Preachers prepare for hearing, set your selves as in the presence of
God. Say thus with thy self, I am going to hear the Word of the Living God,
which is the ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. apt and able to give life
to dead Souls, 1 These. 2.15. It is not so much the word of Men, but of God. Oh
that it may work effectually in my Soul: It is not Man, but God, that is now
treating with me, God himself is now beseeching me, the Minister praying me in
Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. I perceive it sticks at
me, God has declared he is Friends with me, if my naughty Heart were at last
prevailed with to be reconciled to him. O that this may be the Day, this the
Sermon, wherein and whereby thou will mould and melt my Soul for thy self: now
Lord, let thy words be as Spirit and Life to my Soul; Oh, for renewing Grace.

5. Own Convictions by the Word: strike while the Iron is hot: let not
Impressions dye or wear off: this lost both Felix and Agrippa their Souls, Acts
24.25, 26, 27. stifled Convictions leave the Heart harder: heated water, cooled
again, is sooner frozen: who knows how long the Spirit may strive? when God is
working, work then: put not off warnings, when God convinces thee of the evil
of a Sin, presently discard it, when of a Duty, fall close to the practice of
it: when a wound is made, take heed left the Wind get in and it begin to
fester, and at last grow incurable: Our Lord is standing at thy Door, and
knocking, Rev. 3.20. He will not always wait thy leisure: the Spirit will not
always strive with thee, Genesis 6.3. You must sail when the VVind blows. There
are [ candida tempora] proper Seasons for every thing: Its a dangerous thing
for a Man not to know his time, Eccles. 9.12. If you miss the nick of
opportunity, it may never return: the Market lasts not all the Year: If the
Tide have brought you thus far, go with it, it may never return to fetch you
off: Now is the accepted Time, now is the Day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. Not to
morrow: O quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19 that would set you on a Fire for
God: Think you thus, I have sitten out many a day of Grace, lost many a golden
Season, it is infinite mercy God is still calling: if I lose this, I may never
have more; yea, I may be in Hell before another Sermon; yea, before Morning: O
that I could know the Day of my Visitation, Luke 19.4. O that now at last, my
Soul were effectually changed!

6. Get thy Heart affected with thy Sin and Misery, by nature and practice:
look on thy self as dead in Trespasses and Sins, and so incapable of quickening
thy self. Alas, my Praying, Reading, hearing, Reforming, will never do the cure
or effect the End: I am sunk far below the possibility of humane or angelical
help; Means must be used, but Means must not be rested in, they cannot effect
the End: nay, alas, I am without strength, Romans 5.6. and can do nothing, In me,
that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing, Romans 7.18. I am a miserable Leper,
full of wounds, bruises, putrified sores, Isa. 1.5. Woe is me, I am defiled in
Adam, and actually polluted; I am a Sink, a Sty, a Dunghill of Sin, a lump of
Sin, averse to all good, propense to all Evil: I am in the gall of bitterness,
and bonds of Iniquity, Act. 8.23. Satan is leading me Hellwards I must be
changed or damned: for ought I know I stand tottering over the brink of Eternal
Misery; I hang by the small Thread of my natural Life over everlasting
Burnings: my case is worse then the Beasts, that are not capable of moral Evil,
or pain; Acts 3.18. I am already condemned, and waiting for the execution of
the righteous Sentence: in a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery
Indignation, Heb. 10.27. Another Step may set me past hope for any thing that I
know. This night, Luke 12.20. may Devils require my Soul, and hurry it into the
Infernal Lake. O what will become of me! whither am I going: Lord awake my
sleepy Conscience, to see my danger, that I may haste out of the Sodom of Fire
and Brimstone to the Mountain: God forbid I should stay another day in my
unregenerate State.

7. Learn to know and improve Jesus Christ, The Life of Holiness as well as
Righteousness is in him: I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. There Is no Spiritual Life, but what
is derived from Christ, who says, Because I live, you shall live also, John
14.19. Sinners are dead: the nearer they come to Christ, the more hope of Life:
as the nearer to the Sun, the more light: we only come to have the Light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. Nothing
does so transform a Sinner, as looking on God through Christ: the Woman had
virtue from him, that did but touch the Hem of Christ's Garment: none are
Branches of this Vine, but they have Life and Fruitfulness, John 5.5. All that
are grafted in this Olive, partake of the root and fatness of that Olive Tree,
Romans 11.17. Labor after Faith and Love; Faith unites the Soul to Christ, for
he dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. Love does assimilate the Soul to
God: and the more we are like to God, the more of his Image we have. Faith is
the radical ligament of a Soul to Christ: Love is a voluntary mover of the Soul
to Christ: Faith is the receiver, Love the worker: Faith works by love, Gal.
5.6. and both are absolutely necessary to the New Creature: Christ is the Image
of God, and the New Creature is the Image of Christ; and so of God: Love sees
all good in God-enjoyment as its End, and in conformity to him as its means to
attain that End. Faith unites the Soul to God mystically, Love morally: there
can be no New Creature without both these; therefore to believe in God, and to
love God, are both the only means to be like God, and therein consists the New
Creature: ^erefore study these, or you will never be New Creatures.

8. Get divorced from Sin and Sinners: you may and must amend your ways, Jer.
1.3. if you cannot mend your Hearts: Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isal.
1.16. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
return to the Lord, Isal. 55.7. Be no more slaves to your Lusts, which are as
Cords to hold you in the Devil's Service, and drag you down H^llwards, Prove.
5.22. This day give an everlasting Farewell to Sin: Say to every Idol, Get thee
hence; what have I any more to do with ^ols, Isa. 30.22. Hos. 14.8. If you
cannot st^ up Sin by the Roots, yet be sure to cut off its I^ches; its true,
this is not enough, but this is so^ething, and who knows what it may tend to,
and end in? Departing from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.^^. is one part of the New
Creature: however, you cannot find Mercy, except you forsake as well as confess
Sin, Prove. 28.13. Spare but one Sin, and God will not spare thee: turn from all
Sins, and you shall live, Ezekiel. 18.21. If you fall out with Sin, there is some
hopes; and then away with Sinners, forsake the foolish and live, Prove. 9.6. But
a Companion of Fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.20. There Is no hopes of that
Man that delights in vain Company: how many have been jear'd or alur'd from
hopeful beginnings by loose Companions if ever God begin this New Work upon
you, this will be the first Evidence of it; yea, and this is a singular help to
it, changing your Companions, running from the Tents of the Wicked into the
Society of the Godly: I recommend this in a special manner to all Persons,
young and old, and desire you to read and study Prove. 1.10, to 18. 2.12.20.
4.14.18. 2 Cor. 6.17. Be sure you join with Christian Society, open your Cases
to them; beg their Counsel and Prayers: Company is assimilating, Sin is
infectious, Holiness imitable: Let Communion of Saints be in your Practice as
well as in your Creed: New Society is a Sign and Means of new Hearts: I despair
of your being New Creatures in Old Company.

9. Enter into a Solemn Covenant with the Lord, by taking God as your chiefest
Good and utmost End, and by making a Deed of Gift of your selves entirely to
the Lord. I shall not much need to enlarge upon this, having treated on it
fully elsewhere, only as its subservient to this design: Enter into an Oath,
and swear the Lord lives, Jer. 4.2. Deuteronomy. 26. and avouch him to be yours. Do
this understandingly, solemnly, resolutely, deliberately: Set some time apart,
set God before thine Eyes, make him witness of the singleness of thy Heart,
that thou take God the Father, to love him, trust in him, depend on him,
resign up all to him: God the Son, as Prophet, Priest, King, to be led by him,
justified, and ruled by his Laws: God the Holy Ghost to be enlightened, to be
fanctified, comforted by him: and when thou have thus taken God for thy God,
and devoted thy self to him, Soul and Body, thou may expect and hope that the
Lord will dwell in thee, as in his Temple, his House; cleanse thee from
Filthiness, adorn thee with Graces, enable thee for his Service, that all the
Persons of the Sacred Trinity will take up their lodging and residence in thy
Soul, that you may henceforth be an Habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians.
2.20, 21, 22. This imports the New Creature we are speaking of, and this is the
way to obtain it, To give up your selves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. To be ordered
according to his pleasure, for his glory, that he may be glorified both in Soul
and Body, which are his, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. If thou voluntarily subscribe to the
Equity of his Articles, taking him with all the Sufferings attending the ways
of Religion, and yieldest up thy whole Interest to his dispose, hating the Sins
that he forbids, practicing the Duties that God commands, walking in all the
Ways of his appointment, in his Worship and Ordinances: this, this is a coming
up to the terms of the Covenant of Grace, and then thou shall have the Graces
and Privileges of that Covenant, which comprehends this New Creation.

10. Down on thy Knees, and beg this New Creature at the Hands of God: say as
David, Create in me a clean Heart, Oh God, and renew a right Spirit within me,
Psalm. 51.10. Say, Lord I am quite marred in the Old Adam, and I cannot help my
self, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one: but thou have
promised in the Gospel, to make all things new, and in the New Covenant thou
promisest a new heart, Ezekiel. 36.6. This is the great Mercy, O Lord, I want, and
wait for, and I ask thee nothing but what I have under thine own Hand in the
Promise: Oh that I were partaker of it! yea, thou have promised to give thy
holy spirit to them that ask it, Luke 11.13. Now thy Spirit can sanctify
Hearts, as Lightning cleanses the Air, as Fire refines Metals: Lord, seal up
my Soul with the Holy Spirit of Promise; set on me thine own Stamp, as the Seal
leaves its impress on the Wax: Lord, I shall never be acceptable to thee,
profitable to Men, or comfortable to my self, except I be renewed and become a
New Creature, I cannot without this, live to any purpose, and I cannot dye with
any comfort.

Objection. But God hears not Sinners, their Prayers are abomination.

Answ. If you be resolved to go on in a course of Sinning, or pray to gratify
a Lust, as a Thief for a Prize, you and your Prayers are abominable: but if you
be repenting: returning Sinners, and pray for Grace, Pardon, God will pity you,
and who knows but he may meet you in Mercy, as he did the returning Prodigal,
Luke 15.20. Repent then, and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy Heart may
be forgiven thee, Acts 8.22. Thou art undone, if thou give over Praying: many
have sped well at his Door, and so may thou; still ask, seek and knock!

Chap. XIII. Instructions, how those must behave themselves that are indeed New
Creatures.
A Third Head to be insisted upon in this Use of Instruction, is to direct
sincere Christians that do find by good proof, that this New Creature is
wrought in them, how they should live, walk, and behave themselves in the
World, both toward God and Man.

1. Use God's appointed means for clearing up the reality of this New Creature:
it is one thing to be, another thing to know that we are New Creatures: Alas,
some sincere Souls walk at Uncertainties. A Letter may be written, says one,
though it be not sealed: So Grace may be writ in the Soul, though the Spirit
has not set to its Seal: partly to keep the Soul humble, partly to punish some
Sin: But I must not handle the common place of Assurance, the possibility, the
hindrances, helps, advantages, nature or kinds of Assurance; but give an hint.
Are the Figures of Grace engraven upon the Dial of your Hearts, pray and wait
for the Sun of Righteousness shining on it, that you may better see what time
of day it is in your Hearts: yet if you grope in the dark, you may feel some
Characters engraven: however, give diligence to make first your Calling, then
your Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Your happiness consists in being, and your
comfort in knowing you are New Creatures. Heb. 6.10. And we desire that every
one of you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope to the
end. Another Text calls for a full assurance of Faith in drawing nigh to God,
Heb. 10.22. Another speaks of Assurance of understanding; yea, full Assurance,
yea, Riches of full assurance, Col. 2.2. Then indeed thy Heart will be
comforted to the purpose: O labor after much Grace, much Comfort, or the joy
of the Lord is your strength, Neh. 8.10. and will cheer up your Hearts in every
condition and affliction. O Brethren, content not your selves to live at
Uncertainties, or under Doubts, but use all means to attain to the highest
pitch of Assurance that is attainable in this world.

2. Thank God for this rich mercy of the New Creation in your Souls: will you
bless God for the good Creatures that nourish your Bodies, and will you not
adore him for this new, and more excellent Creature in your inward man? Say as
the blessed Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again to a
lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead. Next to
Christ's blessed Undertakings for you, this is the greatest mercy God
vouchsafed to you, to form Christ in your Souls: Alas, what were you better
then the rest of the corrupt Mass of Mankind, that lay in the Ordure of Sin?
What desert was there in you, that you should be raised up to sit with Princes,
even with the Princes of his People, to be made like Angels: Surely you that
are such Patterns of Mercy, must be Trumpets of God's Praise, you that were
stinking Carcases, incarnate Devils, to be made by this New Creation a chosen
Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People; what is this
for, but that you should show forth the Praises of him who has called you out
of Darkness into his marvelous Light, 1 Pet. 2.9. O admire free Grace, and say
with David, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my House that thou have brought
me hitherto, 2 Samuel 7.18. How many Millions of pretending Christians know
nothing of this great Work, experimentally: this is as Life from the Dead,
infinitely better then natural Life, and all the comforts there of.

3. Take heed of declining or Apostasy; The New Creature is but a Creature, it
may fail, yea, it will fail, if not supported by an Almighty Hand, and if God
be provoked, he may justly withdraw, and leave us to our selves: then we fall,
as a Staff supported by an Hand: its true, the Covenant secures real Saints
from falling finally, but imperfect Grace exposes them to falling foully, as
David, Peter: Be jealous of thy self, Blessed is he that fears always, Prove.
28.14. Be not secure, that exposes to Satan's Temptations: Sleep levels all,
the Wise Man is no wiser then a Fool to project his own safety; or the Strong
Man better than the Weak to defend himself: the best of Saints in Spiritual
Slumber, becomes as Sampson, but like another man: watch, that you enter not
into Temptation, Matthew. 26.41. It Is worth watching to keep the House from
Robbing: Sleeping one Night, may keep thee waking many Nights in Sorrow, as it
did David: The sleepy Christian often loses God's Presence, as Christ withdrew
from the sleepy Spouse, Cant. 5.2, 4. A sleepy Soul is not capable of improving
Christ or Grace: put the sweetest Wine in a sleepy Man's Hand, it will be
spilt: And if at any time you take a Nap, rouse up your selves, gird on your
Armor, rally your routed Forces: Remember whence you are fallen, repent, do
your first Works, Rev. 2.5. Awake out of your Lethargy, lest it end in
Apostasy: when thou have fallen, show this New Creature is in thee by a rebound
upwards, in renewed Purposes against Sin, recover thy Spiritual strength,
activity and familiarity with God; be restless till Matters be set right again,
like a Bird from its Nest, a Stone from its Center, or as undigested Meat on a
sick Stomach, that has no ease till Sin be picked up by a Vomit of Repentance;
and renewed Acts of Faith: Look to your selves, that we lose not those things
which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward, 2 John 8.

4. Get this New Creature increased: be not content with the habit: if you say
you have enough, you have no Grace: your business is to perfect Holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. To grow in Grace, that you may be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, 2 Pet. 3.18. 2 Timothy 2.1. Dead things grow not:
Children grow, and are fed by that by which they were bred, as new born Babes,
desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. Be
often sucking the Breasts, and you will grow up to further maturity. There is,
says one, much Scurf on the Face of this new born Babe of Grace, which by
degrees will wear off as it grows up, and so be more discernable: growth helps
to see its truth: blow up this Spark into a Flame, and it will be visible: An
Hypocrite grows not, no more than the Hands, Arms, Legs of a pictured Child on
the Wall, let it be there never so long. Oh, strive to grow every day better,
to grow from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7. reaching after Perfection in
Grace; to run the Race set before you: to get daily more power against
Corruption: He is a careful and skilful Physician that evacuates the Disease,
and corroborates or strengthens the Body: you must do both: the Old Man and New
Creature, are like Weights in Balances, as the one ascends, the other
descends: as the Earth and Sea, where the one loses, the other gains: Oh, be
still on the gaining Hand, improve all Mercies, Afflictions, Ordinances,
Providence, for nourishing this New Creature in your Souls: when you are grown
most, you will still be defective, something will still be lacking in your
Faith, Love, Humility, 1 These. 3.10. You know but in part, and are not yet ripe.

5. Live up to this New Creature, live at the rate of Persons so principled,
walk worthy of God, who has called you into his Kingdom and glory, worthy of
the vocation wherewith you are called, 1 These 2.12. Let your Conversation be as
becomes the Gospel, Ephesians. 4.1. Phil. 1.27. There Is an Only upon this, as a most
comprehensive Word: you must act above the rate of carnal men, Soberly,
Righteously, Godly, Tit. 2.12. If you be singled out to be New Creatures, what
singular thing do you? Matthew. 5.47. What do you more then others? Remember,
Sirs, you are New Creatures; an old Heart would have served well enough to have
done the Devil's drudgery withal: you are new born to higher Employment, now
you must serve not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the
Spirit, Romans 7.6. When the Temple was built with such curious Care, and costly
Materials, surely it was for Holy Use? Sincere Christians are God's workmanship
created in Christ Jesus to good works, Ephesians. 2.10. Now it becomes you to act as
you are: it would accent your Sin with a greater Circumflex, if you sin, that
have such a curious Work of the Spirit in your Hearts, as none in the
World-have besides you: you are consecrated Persons, and by your Sin you
profane God's Temple; other's Sins are Theft, yours Sacrilege, because you
rob God of what was devoted to him: when God breathed such a noble Soul into
Man's Body, he designed him for higher Acts then merely Sense, as Beasts, or to
converse with Beasts, 1 Cor. 3.3. So Christian, thou art of an higher
extraction, then to walk as Men, as carnal Men; no, Friend, as thou have
received Christ, so thou must walk in him, Col. 2.6. O take heed of Sin, it is
contrary to the Divine Nature God has planted in thee; now we know the more
unnatural any Act is, the more horrid: as for a Woman to kill her own Child, or
a Man to be cruel to his own Flesh: Oh take heed of Killing the Babe of Grace
in thy Soul, by Sin; but live up to the Principles and Privileges.

6. Attend upon God in all his Institutions, and in all put forward for closer
communion with him in all Duties and Ordinances, as in hearing the Word,
Prayer, Seals of the Covenant, Christian Conference, Communion of Saints: these
are the Air that the Christian breathes in; the most wholesome for this New
Creature, Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy House, and the place where
thine Honor dwells, Psalm. 26.8. And he often cries out for the Living God; Oh
when, says he, shall I come and appear before God? Nothing lies nearer David's
holy Heart then God's presence in his Ordinances, Psalm. 42.1.63, 1, 2.84.1, 2.
It is or should be so with the New Creature: but oh wait for the Spirit's
wafting over thy Soul to Jesus: rest not in Ordinances, they are but the Boat
or Bridge to carry thy Soul over to God: the Ordinance is lost, and thy labor
is in vain if thou do not enjoy God in Ordinances. O labor to see Christ
walking in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, Rev. 2.1 Be sure you hold
Christ in the Galleries, Cant. 7.5. Ordinances are the golden Pipes that empty
the golden Oil out of themselves, Zech. 4. Be sure that of his fullness you
receive, and Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16. The Holy Ghost sits in Ordinances as a
Minister of State in his Office, ready to distribute to every ones case as
there is need: thou art at the right Door, wait his leisure, and it shall not
be in vain.

7. Endeavor to propagate Religion, do what thou can to make others new
Creatures, thy Relations, Neighbors, and all thou art acquainted with: this is
the Duty, yea, the Property of the new Creature by Prayer, Advice, Example,
procuring the help of Ministers, Christian Friends: it is true, no man can
propagate Grace to another, it is not in our own power to effect it, but we must
endeavor it: Oh how Paul was concerned for his Countrymen the wilful
unbelieving Jews, Romans 9.10. His Prayers, Tears, Wishes, speak him their
cordial Friend, who were his bitter Enemies. God commanded Abraham that all his
House should be circumcised, to have him go as far as he could to draw them
into affinity with God: true Grace makes men love Relations better than ever,
and causes natural Affection to run in a spiritual Channel, which vents it
self for the good of their Souls: Be concerned to make a Jointure of the
Promises, to thy Wife, an entail of the Covenant to thy Children: this is a
thousand times better then leaving them thousands a Year: Should not you desire
that one Heaven may hold those hereafter, that one House hold now? Oh tremble
to think when your House breaks up, of one going to Heaven, another to Hell:
and let your Charity extend it self to all you are acquainted with, and let
your Practices be convincing and winning to all about you: Alas, what
multitudes are there that are unexperienced in this mighty work, yet must feel
it, or never be happy: do what thou can to call in all to this blessed Feast,
yet there is room, Luke 14.22. Have thou none thou love so well as to wish
them thy happiness? There Is no Envy in Spiritual things, the more and merrier,
and no less cheer: it will add some Pearls to thy Crown to win Souls: If a
Neighbor locked himself in a Room on design to murder himself, would thou
not break open the Door and rescue him? Oh happy Souls that are employed and
successful in this Soul-Charity!

I have long ago, seen a Book writ by Mr. Reiner of Lincoln, called, The Rule
of the New Creature, to which I refer the Reader that can procure it; at
present I shall sum up my thoughts in these Twenty brief Rules of Direction.

1. Reason right, and Reckon straight: let your Reason be regulated by the Word
of God, Luke 5.21.1 Pet. 3.15. It must follow Faith, not give Law and measure
to it: be sure your Accounts be squared by the Golden Rule of Scripture, 1 Cor.
4.3. Set all straight against the Reckoning Day, Romans 14.12.

2. Baulk no Sufferings for Christ, to avoid sin against Christ: Be content to
fill up Christ's Sufferings, Col. 1.24. Nay, be glad to suffer, Matthew. 5.11.
But tremble to sin: Sinless sufferings are sweet, Heb. 11.26. But sweet sins
will be Bitterness in the end, Rev. 2.2. Bear any thing but Sin.

3. Profess what you are, and be what you profess, Romans 10.10. Matthew. 10.32,
33. Think not to dissemble with Men, for worldly Ends: but upon a just Cause
and Call, own Godliness: be indeed Nathaniels, John 1.47. Pretend not more then
truth: God knows the Heart, Heb. 4.13.

4. Serve God for Service, not for Wages: or rather, let his Service be your
Wages, Psalm. 19.11. or reward, so it is, God himself is the Saints reward, Genesis
17.1. Hypocrites make Religion a Mount to ascend to some other End: let God be
thy all, Matthew. 6.3. Psalm. 73.25.

5. Be most for God, when God seems most against thee: its pure Faith and Love
to hang closest to an angry God, Job 13.15. Hos. 6.3. To conceive most hopes
through Christ, when Sense and Reason make against you, this is a Faith to be
admired, Matthew. 15.28.

6. Join pure Precepts to precious Promises: look on Precepts as pure,
therefore lovely, Psalm. 119.140. Dare not to divorce them, though for your
Spiritual Interest: Heb. 8.10. Romans 7.12, 14, 22. See to the Law within you,
and before you, as well as plead the Promises of the Gospel for you.

7. Be best when least in Men's sight: God and Souls give each other their
Loves, when alone, Cant. 7.12. Psalm. 17.25. Matthew. 6.6. Make God your Witness;
not Men only: Friends are most familiar when they are withdrawn from all other
Company.

8. Sail low, but aim high; conclude you have not attained to Perfection, Phil.
3.13, 15. Romans 12. but still be designing it, be not high-minded, yet mind
highest things; aspire to be better then others, yet esteem others better than
you, Phil. 2.3, 4.

9. Do all you must, not all you may, Ephesians. 5.15.1 Cor. 10.23. walk to the
height of a Command, not to the utmost of lawful liberty; go not near the Pit's
brink, stand fast in your Christian liberty, Gal. 5.1, 13. but do not always
use it.

10. Be best when others are worst: be as Noah in the Old World, Genesis 6.9, 19.
Lot in Sodom, Timothy in Ephesus, Joshua among the Israelites: be hottest in
coldest Weather, brightest in the darkest Night, Savor of Heaven in Hell, Neh.
5.20-5.15. Phil. 2.15.

11. Be Rational, when most Spiritual: do nothing at hap-hazard, or with a
blind Zeal, let all Services be reasonable, Romans 12.1. Ezekiel. 18. God's Will is
our Rule, and his ways are equal, the highest Reason in Man, is to comply with
God's pleasure.

12. Naturalize Religion, and Spiritualize the World: let Godliness be as
second nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Phil. 2.20. Let common Objects, Occurrences be well
improved to good Ends and Purposes: Mercies, Afflictions, Spiritual Chemists
turn all to Gold, Romans 8.28.

13. Be dead living, and lively in thoughts of Death, Col. 3.3. Gal. 6.14. A
Child of God is a Paradox, dead to the World, crucified, yet the most active
and vigorous Person in the World: you must have the best Death and best Life,
then fear not Death.

14. Suit Grace to every case; in confessing Sin, mourn, in begging Mercy,
working Desires, in Thanksgiving, Joyfulness, yet rejoice with trembling, 1
Cor. 15.30, 55. Heb. 2.14. Psalm. 38.18. Matthew. 5.4. Psalm. 2.11. Phil. 1.2.
Psalm. 26.12. in Prosperity, have Humility, in Adversity, Contentment, your Foot
must still stand in an even place.

15. Let your life be a Comment on your Faith: let your believing and living be
harmonious: let Doctrine of Faith, Grace of Faith, Life of Faith, sweetly
correspond, Doctrine according to Godliness, Godliness according to Truth,
James 2.18. 1 Timothy 1.5. Tit. 1.1. Romans 2.18, 23, 24. Jer. 32.19. Let not Head
and Hands be contradictory.

16. Eye God that eyes you in all you do: think the King of Heaven sees thee,
the Omnipresent God is in the room with thee, the Omniscient God knows thy
Heart, approve thy Heart to God, let thine Eyes be ever on him, toward him,
Psalm 35.15.26, 3.

17. Echo to divine Calls, when God has a Mouth to speak, have an Ear,
Tongue, say, Here I am. Word or Rod, a call to Duty, from Sin; what is the
meaning of this? Oh that I could attain God's end, and not resist or quench the
holy Spirit, 1 Samuel 3. Psalm. 27.8. Mich. 6.9. 1 These. 5.19.

18. Observe and make up daily decays, keep up your Watch that you sin not,
Matthew. 26.41.1 John 2.2. But if you sin, lie not in it, but rise, mourn, act
Faith on Christ, your great Advocate, let not an ill matter go on quickly,
recover your first Love, Rev. 2.4, 5.

19. Give no Offense carelessly, and take no Offense causlesly: let there be no
occasion of stumbling in you, 1 John 2.10. Matthew. 7.1. Judge not uncharitably,
take all that is said and done by the right handle: make no sinister
Constructions, 1 Cor. 10.32.

20. When you have done all, Luke 17.10. Phil. 3.7, 8. Say, all this is as
nothing at all, to appease God's Wrath, or satisfy Justice, in an absolute
Sense, and to do what is required in a comparative sense, without Christ I can
do nothing, John 15.5.

Thus I have briefly touched the Rules of this New Creature, which I leave to
the Reader's further Consideration and Practice.

Chap. XIV. An ANSWER to some Cases of Conscience.
4. THe last Head which I propounded in this Use of Instruction, is Answering
some Cases of Conscience that Godly Souls are apt to make in this case, wherein
I must be very brief.

1st. Case. Whether is it possible that a Man can be a New Creature, and not
know it, since it is so remarkable a change.

Answ. I have hinted at this before, but observe it, you must distinguish
betwixt a reflexive sense of a change in Heart and Life, and a due apprehension
of this change morally considered as Saving; many a Soul can truly say,
something has been done, but I know not whether the thing which may be
entitled A New Creature; I am much in the dark about it: I cannot but say I
have had Convictions, and something like Conversion, though not Consolation: I
am kept still in innitency upon a Promise, though I cannot say I have assurance
of my Interest in the Covenant. Precious Mr. Paul Bains could say, Sustentation
I have, but Suavities Spiritual I do not experience. So you may have the Root,
though not the Flower; Water of Sanctification, though not the Oil of
Gladness: wait on God, and in due time you may have this cleared up to you: If
you follow on to know the Lord, his going forth is prepared as the Morning,
Hos. 6.3. Grace and Peace shall not be long parted: Light is sown for the
Righteous, and Joy for the upright in Heart, Psalm. 97.11. It Is not lost, but
laid up and hid in the Furrows of the Believer's Bosom.

2d. Case. Whether is it possible that he that is a New Creature, should have a
self-accusing, self-condemning Conscience?

Answ. You must distinguish of Consciences condemning a man's self; 1.
Passively, when our Hearts censure us, and we stifle them, such a one indeed is
self-condemned: 2. If we be Active in condemning our selves; it is a good Sign,
and a great Duty; as we showed before: but the meaning of this Query, refers to
the State of the Man, whether the Conscience of a New Creature may censure the
real Christian, and tell him he is an Hypocrite. To which I Answer, If
Conscience act according to the Rule of the Word, it must be regarded as God's
Officer, speaking by his authority; but if it speak not in God's Name, and by
his order, we may appeal to the Higher Court of the Holy Scriptures, and it is
certain that Conscience may be corrupted, and it is often used by Satan, to
deceive good Men as well as bad: and they shall at last have their action
against Satan for false Imprisonment, and disturbing their Peace: Your best
course therefore is to have recourse to the Word, for Conscience is but an
under Officer, and must be accountable for its Verdict. Remember, it is one
thing to have Hypocrisy in thy Heart, another thing to be an Hypocrite: the
best will find much Guilt within them, which Conscience rebukes them for, and
they bewail it; but they are not therefore Hypocrites.

3d. Case. Whether may God carry it strangely, as if he were an Enemy to a New
Creature, that should seem to be his darling?

Answ. Thou art a Stranger to Scripture, and the Experiences of all God's
Children, if thou think God must always be dandling this New Creature on his
Knee, or giving it the Kisses of his Mouth; no, no, he has reserved these
Sweat-meats for the upper Table in Heaven: there is great reason thou should
have his Frowns, as well as Smiles, to humble thy Heart, exercise thy Graces,
discover the necessity of Christ, the desireableness of Heaven: God can and
may, without any impediment to his Love, hide it for a season from his own
dearest Child: David indeed called in question God's Love and Faithfulness,
when he hid his Face; but at last, he found that it was his Infirmity, and
doubtless, lamented it as his Sin: God has given abundant Security in his
Promises of his Love without present sense: you must not think much at him, if
he do not come to visit you, and take you up in his Arms as often as you would
have him: Thou needst some purging Physic as well as Cordials: a Son may need
a Frown, as well as a Smile from his Father: God is a free Agent, his Kisses
are his own: but its well thou art so sensible of his Access and Recess, his
Smiles and Frowns: it is a sign of some Spiritual Life in thy Soul.

4th Case. But you said the New Creature grows; I find it otherwise, I cannot
see that I grow in Grace, nay, I decline and go backwards, what think you of
that?

I Answer, As the Christian grows in Grace, so he grows in Light to discover
his state, and sees more vileness in himself, and is still more sensible of
decays in Grace, which keeps him humble, self-denying and vile in his own Eyes,
that is growth too, bless God for it: but observe it, grains of allowance must
be given to Old Age, when natural parts decay, and Persons may not be so quick
and lively as formerly, yet may be more solid and increasing in Experiences.
Mr. Greenham said, It Is an hard and rare thing to keep up young Zeal with old
Discetion. Do thou not keep up a more constant course of Duty, settled
Resolutions for God? Is not thy Heart more deaded to the world, taken up with
things unseen? Art thou not more composed under Afflictions? do thou not more
discover and bewail Spiritual Sins? Do thou not long more after the good of
Relations, take more delight in God's Word, breathe after more of God's
Presence in Ordinances? Speak out, Man, deal faithfully, bear not false witness
against thy self: yet it is true, the growing Tree meets with a fall of the
Leaf, a sharp Winter; yet does a Spring come, it grows in the Summer: Peter's
Fall was recruited to geater boldness for God: but I hope thou art not a
backslider in Heart, Prove. 14.14. To dislike the ways of God: Thou art but
overtaken with a Sin, against thy strong Purposes, Gal. 6.1. When thou
sleep, does not thy Heart wake? Cant. 5.2. Thou art not pleased with this
declining state: Thy Spirit is willing, but thy Flesh is weak, Matthew. 26.41.

5th. Case. But alas, I have such strong, impetuous, yea, imperious workings of
Corruption in my Heart, as never any had that has a principle of Grace: None
like me: Is it possible I should be a New Creature?

I Answer, The Heart knows its own bitterness, and wickedness, Prove. 14.10.
Every gracious Soul thinks his own Heart worst, because he knows it best: But
who told thee that thy Heart was so bad? Was it always thus with thee? Was
there not a time that thou thoughtest thy Heart was as good as any Bodies? Is
it not Spiritual Light that makes these strange Discoveries? Whatsoever does
make manifest, is Light, Ephesians. 5.13. Did not Sin revive upon the coming of the
Commandment? Romans 7.9. But Friend, let me ask thee: Do thou think that upon
the planting of this New Creature in thy Soul, Sin should be utterly
extirpated, that thou should hear no more of it? Do thou not find even
blessed Paul, groaning still under a Body of Death? Romans 7.24. Will not the
Flesh still lust against the Spirit? Gal. 5.17. Surely thou know little of a
Christian state, if thou imaginest a total Immunity from the Body, and
Indwelling of Sin in this world: Its well if Sin be not upon the Throne, though
thou have it in the Field to fight with: the Gospel-privilege is, Sin shall not
have dominion over thee, because thou art under Grace, Romans 6.14.

6th. Case. But what will you say by a Man that cannot give a precise account
of the Time and Manner of the forming of this New Creature in his Heart, that
never had such terrors as some have?

I Answer, Will any say the River Nilus is no River, because men never found
out the Head of it? God is a free Agent, and has different Seasons and Manners
of working: Some were wrought upon in their younger days, and were religiously
educated, and never stepped aside into gross Sins, and God steals in gently upon
them, and opens their Hearts as he did Lydia's Acts 16.14. and gently attracts
them to himself, picking the Lock (as it were) without much noise; whenas he
breaks the Wards in others, with astonishing Convictions, as he dealt with
Paul, and Luther, and famous Mr. Bolton: Some are of mild and gentle Natures,
and God sees they cannot bear hard blows, which some others need, of sturdy and
stubborn Spirits: Do not murmur, but thank God that he has come so sweetly
into thy Soul: he knows thy frame and constitution: See the Work be there, and
a Scriptural work, and leave God to his liberty: But this thou can say
through Grace, it is not with thee now as it has been, as the blind man said,
I may be ignorant of some Circumstances, But one the I know, that whereas I was
blind, now I see, John 9.25. Things are otherwise represented to me, and my
Spirit working otherwise within then formerly: So that I may say as Rebekah
with her Twins in her Womb, If it be so, or not so, why am I thus?

7th. Case. But alas, no Body knows what a frame of Spirit I have in my
Prayers, such Distractions and Diversions I have from God, as cannot be
consistent with the New Creature in any; what think you?

Answer, I say, it is sad, that such Vermin should crawl in God's Sanctuary,
especially when thou art in God's immediate worship: but do thou approve of
them, and make them welcome? Are they not troublesome Guests? Do they not
forcibly assault thee, as so many unmannerly Guests? Suppose in your Family as
you are kneeling in Prayer, a company of Roysters stand under your VVindow,
roaring and hollowing, though it disturb you, would you thence question your
Sincerity in the Duty? And it is all one, whether the disturbance be in the Room
or in the Bosom, since both are disliked as a burden to thee: Mr. Tho. Shepard
Treat. of Distract.
I often reflect on a passage I read many Years ago, The good Lord keep the
Hearts of his People under a due sense of their Distractions, for they are
never like to be rid of them while they live. Thou do reckon thy self to be
as in the Belly of Hell with Jonah, while thou art yoked with such thoughts and
sendest many a deep groan to Heaven against them, and at sometimes, do obtain
some help against them, and gettest near thy God in duty.

But I shall add no more of these Cases, but only add two Words as a Close of
this Discourse, That if poor doubting Souls would, instead of their
Complainings and Objections, but do these two things, it would tend more to
their Satisfaction, and the Glory of God.

1. That they would spend that time in examining their own Consciences, which
they take up in fruitless Complaints: Alas, many Professors have got an Art of
whining and complaining to Ministers and Christian Friends, and think to be
better thought of for such complaints; but this is a sad Judgment of God, for
Persons to pine away in their Iniquity, and yet mourn one toward another,
Ezekiel. 24.23. If poor Souls would spend that time in searching their own
Consciences and Conversations, it would tend more to the clearing up the
Sincerity of their Hearts, and Saving Work of Grace: Fall to this, Sirs, enter
into your Closets, commune with your own Hearts, deal faithfully and
effectually; put not off your selves with unproved Conceits and groundless
Imaginations, but go through-stitch with the Work; ransak your Hearts, they are
your own; be not put off with such mannerly Excuses as Rachel's: Take such an
Account as you must give to God: let no lust escape your view, or the least
Grace be belyed or denied with any scorn or disregard: When David thought of
God, he was troubled, and expresses many discontented Murmurings; but when he
communed with his own Heart, Psalm. 77.36, 40. he clears God, and condemns his
Unbelief; indites the Thief, and clears his Conscience of that troublesome
Jonah in his Bosom: Thus plaindealing evidenceth a Christian's State sooner
then wrangling: and yet still thou art at a loss: Appeal to God, and say as
Job, Thou know that I am not wicked, Job 10.7. Or as Peter, Thou know
that I love thee, John 21.15. Or as David, Do not I hate them that hate thee?
Search me, O God, and know my Heart, Psalm. 139.21, 23. As wise Physicians,
trust not their own Judgment about their own Health; so the Saint knows God's
Line reaches lower then his own, and to his Judgment he will stand.

2. Instead of complaining, fall vigorously upon the work of Sanctification, to
mortify beloved Lusts, to cut off a right Hand, and pluck out a right Eye,
Matthew. 5.29. When you have searched out the Leaven, purge it out, 1 Cor. 5.7.
Lay aside every Weight, and the Sin which does most easily beset you, Heb.
12.1. Run the Sword of the Spirit to the Heart of every Lust: Lay the Ax to the
root of the Tree, stub up Sin by the Roots: if a vain Thought, a proud,
lustful, worldly, passionate Thought arise in your Hearts, suppress it,
militate against it, crucify the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts, Gal.
5.24. So will you evidence your selves to be Christ's, 2 Cor. 7.1. be daily
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. Observe wherein you missed it in such a
Duty, and be still mending it, as Apelles, when he had drawn a Picture, was
ever and anon spying Defects, and then mended it with his Pencil: so do you.
Observe what Conscience said, Oh my Soul, in such a Duty thou wast cold,
distracted, unbelieving, hard, vainglorious, in such an Affliction thou wast
froward, peevish, discontented, in such a company thou spakest idly, or wast
guilty of sinful silence: In the enjoyment of such a Mercy, or in thy posperous
state, how proud, secure, self-conceited, slighting others, wast thou? Oh mourn
for this Fault, watch against it for the future: walk more closely with God,
maintain daily Intercourse with God and thine own Conscience: thereby you will
be better acquainted with God and your own Souls, and discern better how your
Principles are stated; For if you walk according to this Rule, Peace shall be
upon you, Gal. 6.16. Hence the blessed Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing
is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly
Sincerity, not in fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our
Conversation in the World. Dying Hezekiah could plead this with God in his
Appeal, Isa. 38.1.

Oh Sirs, learn to e^ercise every Grace to every Duty; the Exercise of Grace is
the clearest Evidence of Grace, both to our selves and others; as he confuted
his Antagonist, that disputed against Motion, by starting up and walking: So do
you walk with God, hereby do we know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments, 1 John 2.3, 6. If you walk as he walked, you evidence that you
abide in him: as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. If you expect that God's Spirit will witness with
your Spirits, and so subscribe your Certificate for Heaven; you must be
uniform, and universal in your course of Godliness, both in your Worship and
Walking, walking before God, and with God, Genesis 5.24-17.1. Then indeed will you
be found upright or perfect: But if thou have any close Box in the Cabinet of
thy Heart, wherein thou layest up and hidest any beloved Lust; or if thou
roylest these Waters by any uneven walking, or stoppest thy Travels in Heaven's
Road, by idleness, sleeping, or stepping back, and losing thy first Love, then
no wonder if thou can not discern this Stamp of God's Image upon thy Soul,
but call thy very state into question.

Yet above all, I advise thee to stop the Mouth of Conscience, with that only
that satisfied the Justice of God: Nothing can reconcile a Man to himself, but
that which reconciled God and Man.

It was Dr. Sibs Advice, When the Water of Sanctification runs muddy, betake
your selves to the Blood of Justification: There, there must lie your Comfort,
and Confidence, by this only must you answer all the Objections raised by Satan
and Conscience, from Justice, Law, or whatsoever opposes your Peace, rising
from the Defects and Imperfections of Grace, or this New Creature within you:
And indeed, the best of us must anchor and center here, as to out
Justification, Acceptance with God, or composedness of Conscience.

Come then, let us go (in this Gospel-way) to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling, that speaks better things then that
of Abel, Heb. 12.24. (...); So be it.

FINIS.

