A NARRATIVE OF THE Holy Life, and Happy Death OF That Reverend, Faithful and
Zealous man of God, and Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Mr. JOHN
ANGIER, Many years Pastor of the Church of Christ at Denton, near Manchester in
Lancashire.

Wherein are related many Passages that concern his Birth, Education, his
entrance into the Ministry, discharge of his Truth therein, and his Death.

Phil. 3.17. Brethren, be followers together of me and mark them which walk so,
as ye have me for an e^ample. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible
and Three Crowns, at the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 168

The PREFACE.
GOdly Ministers are styled the Chariots and horsemen of Israel; these are the
watchmen of the city, that give warning of danger, intercede with the Lord; and
doubtless the Church of God must needs receive great detriment by the removal
of such worthies. It is a saying of the Jewish Rabbis, Quando luminaria
patiuntur Eclipsin, malum est signum mundo, when the heavenly luminaries are
eclipsed, it is a dreadful presage of approaching evil to this lower world. The
Church in these parts has been successively blessed with famous Ministers, and
gracious Christians, whose praise is in the Churches of Christ; many whereof
now sleep in the Lord; yet through Gods wise care of the Churches succession,
not a few are yet left, as hopeful slips spring up in their room; on whom and
the people surviving, I would here take occasion to drop a word of counsel.

1. You that are like to succeed this old stock of Preachers, worn or wearing
out, look to your planting into Christ; let your own Souls be duly built upon
the right foundation; presume not to be Ministers before you be Christians; get
experience of Divine Truths in your own Souls, and transcribe them in your
daily practice: Believe, repent, obey, your selves, or you will teach these
things sorrily and unconcernedly; whatever your gifts be, see you have sincere
grace, and dedicate your all to God; you serve an holy God, Christ, you preach
an holy Gospel, you have before you holy examples, be you also holy in every
change, in all conditions. Aarons ornaments signified nothing, if Holiness to
the Lord was not writ upon his forehead in a plate of Gold: if you had profound
Wit and Learning, tenacious Memories, brave Elocution, that you could speak
with tongues of Men and Angels, all is of no worth without Grace within, and
universal sanctity; one allowed sin will worm-eat the goodliest trees, and
blast the pleasantest fruits; some Ministers are eminent for one rare gift,
others for other accomplishments; all have some, few have all; some modest
young men look upon themselves as much behind others, are apt to be
discouraged; my advice to such is, to make up that defect in diligence,
holiness and in faithfulness; what Nature or Art denies, get a supply by Grace;
Grace within, vigorously exercised, the assisting grace of God setched in by
faith and prayer; Be faithful to what you have, if you cannot attain to much:
that is a brave saying of Luthers, and shall be my Motto, I desire to be found a
faithful Minister of Christ and his church, if I cannot be prudent or skilful:
Let not weakness of parts discourage you; some ordinary men of low gifts, may
honor God more than some famous learned Doctors: Be industrious in your
Studies: daily improve your talents; you have more helps than your
predecessors; give not occasion of the complaint of that Hebrew Rabbi, that the
Father had Plowed, Sown, Reaped, Fanned the Wheat, set Bread on the Table, but
the children have not a mouth to eat it; the greatest Parts may rust away by
idleness; but meanest grow bright and useful by diligent improvement; the
diligent hand with Gods blessing makes rich; but be sure you keep humble:
despise not, but reverence your forefathers; if you exceed them in advancement
of Learning in some points, its well if you fall not below the min real worth,
as to the power of Godliness: read their lives in Mr. Clarks Collections,
(especially this last Volume printed since his Death) and be ashamed of your
selves, and provoked to a holy Emulation in true piety and Zeal; get into a
corner, and tremble to see your selves thus outstript, and implore more Grace
from Heaven.

I have but a word to say concerning this Discourse, the Life of this holy Man
of God; I confess many discouragements lay in the way of this undertaking, not
fit now to be named; the main was, That we were not capable of doing any thing
worthy of him, and it is better do nothing at all, than not to purpose to answer
the fame of him, or expectations concerning him; but my Answer is, that of the
Poet Lucan, Quod si digna tua minus est mea^
pagina laud, at voluisse sat est.
And, difficilium facilis est venia: If I am not able to make a Fine
portraiture of all the Features, it may be this rough draught may exceed some
of our seize and excite usto imitation, and may some way tend to the
glory of our great Master; and then I have my end. If any say its poorly done,
and might have been done better. I confess it, and let them contribute
something to mend it; but this is the best we can find, according to ou^
Information; and if we cannot bring (...) Lamb, our two Turtle Doves may b^
accepted both by God and man. Let the Infinite, Omnipotent, Faithful God, pu^
in laborers into the Harvest, supply Va^ caneies, second his Servants labour^
with his blessing, and continue hi^ Church, Ministry, and presence wit^ these
Nations to the end of the World Amen.

A Narrative of the Life and Death of Mr. John Angier, Minister of the Gospel
at Denton.
MR. John Angier was Born at Dedham in Essex, of Pious Parents, and was
baptized there, October 8th 1605. He was careful(...) Instructed by his Parents
be-times, in ^e Principles of Religion, Educated in ^chool-learning in the same
Place, being ^t and capable, and from his Childhood ^uch inclined to his book,
and very desi^us to be trained up for the Ministry, which he made his early and
earnest choice, (...) appears by this remarkable story which have heard
confidently reported by cre^ble persons. It is this: As this John, who was the
firstborn Son, named after (...) Father) with his three Brethren, Be^eel,
Samuel, and Edmund, were coming ^m School to their Fathers house, there fell a
shower of Rain; they all run under Tree in an Hedge for a shelter; they stand
ing there seeing it Rain apace, begun (...) make their several wishes; one
wished would Rain Learning; another Wool, and there Money, and another Plumbs;
the pleasing themselves with their juvenile fa^ cies; which options manifested
their di^ ferent Inclinations, and became proph^ tick presages of their future
disposals: For behold, a Neighbor over hearing them, a^ quainted their Father,
who ealling them (...) him, examined them one by one, saying Joh^ what did you
wish it might Rain such a tim^ in such a place? He was at present somethin^
abashed, and loath to Answer, but being further urged, said, Sir, I wished it
wou^ Rain Learning: Why, said his Father, wh^ Profession would thou be of? he
Answe^ ed, I would be a Preacher. Come Be^ said the Father, what did thou
wish (...) would Rain? he answered Wool, Wh^ said he, what Calling would thou
choose he answered, I would be of your calling a Clothier: Samuel, said the
Father, wh^ had thou a mind it should Rain? He a^ swered Money, for I have a
mind to be (...) Merchant: And lastly, calling Edmund, d^ manding the same, he
answered that he d^ sired it might Rain Plumbs, for he would choose to be a
Grocer: The Father bei^ an intelligent considerate man, thus obse^ ving every
ones genius; and being furnished with a competent estate, suited to them
Callings according to their wishes; Bezaleel was a rich Clothier in Dedham, a
gracious man; he died October 30. 1678. Samuel the Third Son, being brought up
a Merchant, lived in good repute in Holland beyond Sea, and there died, in
March 1666/7. Edmund the youngest being bound Apprentice to a Grocer, went into
New England, and is the only survivor, has many years kept a Grocers Shop in
Cambridg there, and I suppose is living at the writing hereof.

But to retun to the Eldest Son John, the subject of this discourse. Being
trained up a Scholar, proved a notable instrument of Glory to God, and good to
souls in his generation. And thus they all answered the ends of their
education, and had good success; a good Item to Parents in disposing their
children to Callings, rather to consult their Childrens capacities and
inclinations, than their own humors and conveniences; things do always best
when voluntarily chosen; when the stream of natural affections runs to the
channel of an adapted Vocation, it bears down all oppositions, and attains the
desired Port of a suitable success in the most arduous enterprises; hence Dr.
Harris says, he never attemtped any thing within the verge of his Calling,
though it seemed difficult in the entrance, but with Gods blessing on his
industrious prosecution, he sound it feasible and facile; but, nil invita
Minerva, that which is attempted against heart, or without an adequate
capacity, goes on heavily, and seldom renders the professor of his Calling fit
to manage it to purpose, or arrive at any eminency in it, because it goes
against the grain; wisely therefore did the Athenians, who brought their youth
into a place where the Utensils for all Callings were laid up, that making
their choice thereof, each might have the Calling he had thereby chosen.

And as his proficiency at School was according to his time, so divine grace
did be times begin to reach and touch the heart of this our young Timothy, 2 Timothy 3.15.
who from a child had known the holy Scriptures; for at Twelve years of age the
Lord dealt with his conscience, by some rays of illumination, and darts of
conviction, which more effectually were fastened in him by Mr. Rogers Ministry
after his fathers death; but from his first conviction he had much trouble upon
his spirit, which he kept much to himself, and often retired into a corner,
being ashamed that any one should know of his heartgrief: his Mother being a
choice and gracious Christian, often spoke to him of Soul concerns, wept and
prayed much for him. At a competent age his Father sent him to the University
of Cambridg; he was admitted in Immanuel College, where notwithstanding his
pious education, and hopeful impressions, before mentioned, he sell off to vain
company, and loose practices, (see the slipperiness of youth!) to the great
grief of his parents, and his own present guilt, and after bitterness in the
review. There he continued, and commenced Batchellor in Arts before his fathers
death; who being sick, sent for this his son to come home from Cambridg, but he
came so late; that in, the afternoon, as he approached toward Dedham, he met
the people going from his fathers Funeral, which had a very deep impression
upon him. God took hold of this occasion more effectually to awaken his
conscience, and Alarm him to his duty.

Mr. Angier was kept a season at his mothers house, followed his studies,
attended on Mr. Rogers Ministry; this Mr. John Rogers of Dedham was a mirror
and miracle of zeal and success in his Ministerial labors; it was wont to be
said, Come let us go to Dedham to get a little fire: he was Lecturer there, and
preached once on Lordsday, and a Lecture on the Tuesday, to which multitudes of
people flocked from the parts adjacent; and his plain preaching was blessed
with a large Harvest; however some expressions and gestures he used, would now
seem indecent; yet the gravity of the man, and general reverence people had for
him, rendered them not only not offensive, but sometimes very effectual; his
taking hold with both hands at one time of the supporters of the Canopy over
the Pulpit, and roaring hideously, to represent the torments of the damned, had
an awakening force attending it. Mr. Thomas Goodwin, after Dr. Goodwin, when he
was a Fellow in Cambridg, and an eminent Preacher, much followed and honored,
occasionally hearing Mr. Rogers, fell under such convictions, that he after
professed, that he looked on himself neither as a Christian, nor a Preacher; one
passage Mr. Angier has often mentioned, That Mr. Rogers being called to Preach a
Marriage Sermon, I think insisted on the Wedding garment; God did so set in
with the word, that the Marriage-Solemnity was turned into bitter mourning, so
that all the Ministers that were at the Marriage were employed in comforting,
or advising, consciences awakened by that Sermon. Oh Blessed espousals betwixt
Christ and Souls, such sorrow was better than carnal Laughter, and laid a solid
foundation of Spiritual joy. A Gentlewoman that Traveled ten Miles to hear
plain and powerful Mr. Rogers, being in great troubles of conscience, desired
some conference with him; and after she had related her condition, telling long
and sad stories of her had heart, sad state, Gods wrath due to her, danger of
dropping into Hell, etc. the good old man, hearing all this, at last started
up, and fetched some frisks on the floor, and cried out, God be thanked, God be
thanked; the Gentlewoman thought the old man mad, and was strangely surprised
to see him rejoice in her sorrow; But he knew what he said, and rejoiced in
that sorrow, that was the seed-plot of so blessed an harvest; for that
Gentlewoman proved an eminent Saint, and a lovely Consort in exile and
tribulation to a very holy and eminent Minister of Christ, as her own sister
has told me.

Mr. Angiers manner was, when he attended Mr. Rogers Lecture, after Sermon,
when others staid, discoursed, dispatched business, he for his part went home
to his chamber, meditated, prayed, worked the Sermon upon his heart for about
an hour, and thereby imprinted it so lastingly upon his memory, that he never
forgot many passages; and by that time the family got home, he was ready to
take his dinner with them.

He lived a season at Mr. Rogers house, who sometimes put him upon praying in
the family, which he performed with so much experience, humility, and
tenderness, that Mr. Rogers would often commend him, and say to his friends,
this Mr. Angier will make a choice man in his generation. Another season he was
with one Mr. Witham, whom I often heard him commend as a great Scholar, and a
witty man, of pregnant part, though not so successful in his Ministry, as a
neighbor Minister of far meaner abilities; one being asked the reason,
answered, there was too many for God to work by; I know some say it was Mr.
Hookers expression of the famous Mr. Richardson on the same account; but I
think I have heard it of the aforesaid Mr. Witham: alluding to Gideons first
Army, Judge. 7.2.
of which God said, The People that are with thee, are too many for me to give
the Midianites into their hands; but to whomsoever it was applied, the lesson
is useful, to convince us of the Lords Sovereignty in owning or disowning
persons Ministry; and his Wisdom, lest too much should be ascribed to man, and
God should lose his Glory.

After this, his dear Mother being tender of her sons spiritual good, consulted
with her Christian friends, how to dispose of him; she was one of a thousand
for grace, holiness, charity; one passage I shall make bold to insert, which he
often mentioned, That she would have been displeased, if she had not been
called upon for any work of Charity, saying, she would not have her hand out of
a good work. Oh, the prayers and tears she poured out for all her Children,
especially for this her son, not only because he was her firstborn, but
chiefly because he was devoted to Gods special work in the Ministry, and
because of his former backslidings, and her jealousy of him for the future;
upon consultation with friends, and begging of advice from God, she being
afraid to send him again to Cambridg, resolved to send him to Mr. John Cotton,
at Boston in Lincolnshire, where he was Tabled; he studied, and sometime
Preached; there he contracted an intimate friendship with those three great
Divines, Dr. Tuckney, Dr. Hill, and Dr. Winter; Mr. Anthony Tuckney was Fellow
of Immaunel, and so continued a good while, till he was called to be Vicar of
Boston; he was a serious, settled good man before he went to Boston, afterward
Master of Immanuel, and after that of St. John's in Cambridg. And for Mr. Thomas
Hill, Dr. Preston, when Mr. Hill was Batchelour in Arts, intending to make him
Fellow, sent him to Mr. Cotton for some time, and when he returned thence,
chose him Fellow, designing his settled seriousness in Religion, before his
Election; for which he thought Mr. Cottons family might be a likely means, and
so it proved: afterward Dr. Hill was Master of Trinity-Colledge in Cambridg,
and Dr Winter Master of Trinity-Colledge near Dublin in Ireland; all famous
Lights in the Church of God; Mr. Angier surviving them all.

And by the way it will not be thought impertinent to digress a little, in
giving a few hints concerning Mr. Cotton, that Reverend and Worthy Man, though
his life was at large written by a New England Minister, and Mr. Samuel Clark
after made some Collections out of it: yet some things Mr. Angier has
occasionally mentioned of him to some of his Brethren. Though Mr. Cotton was an
excellent Text man, yet he would never deliver his judgment concerning the
sense of a Scripture, till he had first consulted both the Original and
Context; an excellent pattern: Mr. Angier has sometimes related to his
intimate friends, that Mr. Cotton never went into his Study when called out on
any occasion, but he began his Studies again with Prayer.

A Reverend Minister says, he Traveled with Mr. Angier when it has Rained
smartly; and he told him he had Traveled so with Mr. Cotton; and he has asked
him what use he would make of such a Providence? he said he took every one of
those drops as his Fathers Rod; and he used to consider his call, and to mind
his work the more: this brings to my thoughts, a passage he often told me of Mr.
Rogers comparing a good conscience to a good Wise; if a man ride in a storm and
be ill wet, he will comfort himself, and say, When I come home I have a good
Wife, will make much of me, and bid me welcome home; so a good conscience will
make much of one after a difficult journey, and foul Way and Weather, in a
persecuting boisterous World: and I was Traveling in Cheshire with Mr. Angier,
where the way was exceeding Deep and Foul; he told me what Mr. Cotton used to
say in that respect concerning the state of good Souls; You in this level
Country, says he, i. e. in Lincolnshire, in summertime, when the ways are
Fair and Dry, are apt to think and say, Surely this way will never be Foul and
Dirty again; and in the Winter you think, when the ways are Deep and
Unpassable, it is impossible that these ways should be dry again, or dusty;
just so when God shines on the believers Soul with the Light of his
countenance, he is apt to say, My mountain stands so strong I shall never be
moved; but God hides his face, then he is troubled: when God is withdrawn, oh,
says the Christan, it will never be otherwise; but he lives to see things
changed, the Sun breaks out from under a Cloud, and the black Clouds dispersed,
and so his state comfortably cleared. Again Mr. Cotton observed, that God made
all turns in the world for comfort or correction to his own people, modelled
all things to their condition and necessities.

Thus much for the digression concerning Mr. Cotton, which is not impertinent
To return to Mr. Angier, whom w^ left at Boston with Mr. Cotton, when his
conversation was as became the Go^ spel, only then and afterward he had many
thoughts of heart concerning the work of conversion upon his Soul, from what
time he must date it, whether before his falls at the University, or after:
This case of conscience he opened to an eminent Divine (Mr. White) with the
circumstances o^ both, reasons and aggravations of his sins yet that pious man
gave him encouragement (yet spoke it with some confidence) that he was
persuaded the first work of God upon his heart at Twelve years of age, was a
saving-work, notwithstanding his after miscarriages, and that God might have
gracious ends in permitting such backslidings, for his further humiliation, and
preparation for further service.

At this time there lived in Mr. Cottons Family, a gracious young woman, called
Ellen Winstanly, born near Wigan in Lancashire, Niece to Mrs. Cotton; and it
pleased God to knit this Mr. Angiers heart to her, and hers to him, that within
a year after he came thither, they were Married in the Parish Church at Boston,
April 16th. 1628. and they continued there till his son John was born, who was
baptized in the same Church, June 13th. 1629. Mr. Anthony Tuckney being Vicar
there then; about this time several Ministers and Christians went into New
England, to enjoy the liberty of the Gospel, Mr. Angier had some thoughts of
going also, however he first took a journey into Laneashire to visit his Wives
Relations, and take leave of them; they prevailed with him to preach at Bolton;
R. M. one of Ringley Chapel, hearing him, obtained a promise to come to
Ringley on a weekday, and Preach with Mr. Mather then at Toxtoth-Park Chapel;
and preparing to go into New England, Mr. Mather begun, Mr. Angier was to
succeed; but it being a hot Summer-day, and an exceeding throng, Mr. Angier was
overcome with heat, and swooned, not being able to proceed, but was cut off
about the middle of his Sermon from speaking. Mr. Mather went up, continued the
exercise; that evening many of the Chappelrie followed Mr. Angier to Ellis
Walworths house, in Ringly-fold, and moved him to be Minister at Ringley; he
deferred his answer until Monday sennight after, at which time he was to preach
at the Lecture at Bolton; many of the Chappelrie then heard him, and after the
Lecture at one Widow Rothwels, presented to him a paper, wherein were the Names
of the heads of the Chappelrie, that had votes in public concerns; he asked,
whether the Names of all were in that paper; they told him the names of all
that had votes; but if he plea^ ed all the rest would readily be had; Afte^ Mr.
Angiers return to Boston, a Lette^ was sent to him with the names of all the
Families, Masters, and others, and a Lette^ was returned from Mr. Angier to the
Chap^ pelrie, That if they would fetch him and his Family, he might be theirs;
whereupon in the beginning of September 1630. two good men were sent with
Horses, and furni^ ture, John Jackson, and Francis Critchly who stayed several
days at Boston; Mr. Cot^ton judged the call to be clear, Mr. Angie^ was well
satisfied; the two faithful messenger brought Mr. Angier, his Wife, his Son his
Maid, to Ringley, to the great joy (...) those that feared God in the place.
The Text he preached on was Philem. 22. But withal prepare me also a Lodging,
for I trust that through your prayer I shall be given-unto you. Some time they
were put to sojourn in another Family, till a fitting house was made ready; his
settlement was in Ringly-fold in an ordinary house, with which he was well
content; when people came to Repetition in his little house, and wanted room,
and seats, he said, Better want room than good company; people were kind, and
every way helpful, and the word of God did mightily succeed, and prosper
exceedingly, much people was added to the Lord; ^ow Ringley had her day, a
conversion^ay to not a few, an enlivening-day to many of Gods children, that
flocked thither like Doves to the windows, so that all the Christians that were
capable and willing to ^ttend private days and duties of prayer, ^ould not meet
in one place, two places were often appointed for that work, as some yet ^iving
testify; this was a time of Gods signal appearance, the Lord casting many Souls
into the Mould of the Gospel, and a good impression remains to this very day,
though many of that old stamp are fallen asleep: some can tell observable stories
of Gods remarkable working on hearts, which at present I wave.

As for his investiture in his Ministerial office, he had Episcopal ordination,
Mr. Cotton having interest in Lewis Bailey, a Bishop in Wales (that put forth
the Practice of Pie^y) he writ to him, with Mr. Angier, and he did ordain him
without subscrption; yer Mr. Angier kept a Nonconformist to the Ceremonies,
and therefore had some adversaries, for Dr. Bridgman Bp. of Chester lived at
Great-Leaver at that time, to whom were brought various and grievous complaints
against Mr. Angier for not consoming; the Bp. sent for him, expostulated with
him, being a kind of affront to preach so near him (it being but about two
Miles distant) admonished him, exhorted him to conform; h^ sent for him many
times, yet usually gav^ him very good words, and professed his great respect to
him. God ordered it so by h^ providence, that the Bps. Wife being a gracious
Woman, was at that time much afflicted in conscience, and Mr. Angier by God
blessing was an instrument of much good to her, by his counsels and prayers,
which became a furtherance of his liberty; for the Bishop would usually say,
Mr. Angier, you must see my Wife before you go, and she interceded for him; yet
notwithstanding the Bishop could not be quiet, but some or other solicited
vehemently against Mr. Angier, in so much as he was supsended twice in one
year^ but restored by the mediation of his friends; at last the Bishop said,
Mr. Angier, I have a good will to indulge you, but cannot, for my Lords Grace
of Canterbury, ( i. e. Archbishop Laud) has rebuked me for permitting two
Non-Conformists, the one within a Mile on one hand (that was good Mr. Horrocks
at Dean-Church) another on the other, your self; and I am likely to come into
disfavour on this behalf; as for Mr. Horrocks, says he, my hands are bound, I
cannot meddle with him; ('it is thought he meant by reason of some promises to
his Wife) but as for you, Mr. Angier, you are a young man ^d doubtless may get
another place, and if ^ou were any where at a little further di^ance, I could
better look off you, for I do ^udy to do you a kindness, but cannot as ^ng as
you are thus near me, etc. some ^judg^d that one reason was, the Bishops sons
were ^t this time on the rising ground; and this his ^onnivence might cross his
design in their referment: he did suspend Mr. Angier, who continued a season
under that suspen^on; however he had been ordained, June ^8. 1629. and a
Provincial License was ob^ained for him, at a provincial Visitation at
Manchester, Octobor 23. 1630. He conti^ued, though not without some
interrup^on, about a year and an half at Ringley Chapel; for he was suspended
in that ^me.

One particular I shall make bold to insert ^f the grace of God accompanying
Mr. Angiers Ministry while he was at Ringley, (...) is this, One Richard
Hardman of Ratcliff^ridg, having received good by Mr. Angier's Ministry, a
Sister of his living near to ^doughton Chapel in Dean Parish, came with ^er
Husband to his house at Ratcliff-Bridg, ^n the Saturday Evening, the Night
before that which is called Midlent Sunday, to be ^erry at the Wakes, for that
day Ratcliff-Wakes (which is a mad revelling or feast^g) began, and continued
most of the Week ^ollowing: But God had turned the by as of Richard Hardmans
heart another way and he plainly told his Sister and her Husband, they should
have been more welco^ at another time, but since they were the come, they must
not expect his accompanying them, but rather desired them to go a^ long with
him to Ringley, and after Family duty he went into a private place to pray
where he found so much of Gods presenc^ and help in a special manner for his
Sister that he was satisfied that God would do he good: they both went with him
to Ringl^ to hear Mr. Angier, where God did la^ hold on her heart; by a sound
conviction an^ deep humiliation, formerly she was wont t^ scoff at Religion,
now she set upon the serious practice thereof, so far as could be judged, and
her Husband was much restrained, and both of them as the^ went home on the
Monday, heard M^ Angier at the Lecture at Bolton, she being soeverpressed in
Spirit, could not for bear but went to Mr. Angier at Widow Norris's house, and
had some talk with him; she stuck steadfast in Religion to he^ dying day: But I
shall forbear relatin^ any more particulars.

As for his remove from Ringley to De^ ton, it was thus: he continued suspended
at Ringley near half a year, and the^ was no hopes of his restoration to (...)
former liberty there: and at this time De^ ton. Chapel in Manchestor-parish
was vacant, Mr. Broxholm being banished thence also by a suspension, the People
seeking for a Godly Minister, several were proposed, Mr. Hyde of Norbury and
Mr. Hyde of Denton had pitched on Mr. Henry Root, but Mr. Holland of Denton
consented not, he told them of a little man at Ringley, one Mr. Angier; and
says he, I hear much good of him; if you will give him a call, you shall have
my heart and hand. Accordingly they sent to him, he came and preached at
Denton, they generally approved of him, chose him, he came thither in the year
1632. Preached his first Sermon on Easter-Sunday: when Mr. Holland, and Mr Hide
of Norbury, and M. Hide of D^nton brought him thither, he said by Gods grace he
would take care of his work, but would look to them under God for Maintenance:
there he continued to his dying day, notwithstanding all the public and
personal vicissitudes, by which he met with varions interruptions, which was 45
years 4 months. His remove to a greater distance did not serve him, but even at
Denton ^he found adversaries, and withal he found God his Friend there, who
raised up for him many friends; hear himself relating how the Lord dealt with
him, in his Epistle Dedicatory before his book, called An help to better hearts
for better times, Pinted Anno Dom. 1647. Thus he says, Tho in Nine or Ten
years at Denton-Chappel, I preached not above two separated years (to my best
remembrance) withont interruption: and in that time was twice excommunicated,
tho Sabbath-assemblies were sometimes distractedly and sorrowfully broken up,
and my departure from habitation and people often forced, no means left in
sight of return, yet through the serven^ prayers of the Church, God renewed
liberty.

It was muttered that Mr. Angier had an hand in a certain Book, that reflected
upon the Bishop, upon which he was much hazzarded, being in danger of being
brought into the High Commission Court. I find that the Book was found in
Stockport, importing some reflections upon the Archbishop Speech in
Star Chamber; and though Mr. Angier was suspected of it, yet he professet^ his
innocence in his Diary. But Purse vants came to apprehend him, and this trouble
occasioned him to sell the Land at Ded^ham which his Father left him, worth 40
l. year, turning it into Money, as being less^ visible, and so less subject to
danger: Go^ hid his person, as he did Jeremiah, an^ Baruk: some Lords-days he
has preach^ in his House, because he could not safely go unto the Chapel;
sometime he traveled into Essex, abode there with his friends till the storm
was blown over. R. R. a good stout man once riding with him near to Huntington,
they were in danger of robbing, but he taking a Pistol into his hand, gave Mr.
Angier the Case, and God moved the Thieves to withdraw from them: He once met a
Pursevant on Delamere Forest, Mr. Angier knew the Pursevant at a great
distance, and his Wife was much afraid, but the Pursevant passed by and
discovered him not: there was also one Starkey, ^n agent of the Spiritual-Court
at Chester, ad^erfary to Mr. Angier, who frequently came, and punished him,
whom God took. Mr. Holland Traveled to York for him once, if not oftener;
where he had an old Friend in great office, who told him he would do any any
thing for him he desired: Mr. Angier ^old me as he was once going to York to
get ^ff his suspension, or excommunication, ^rovidence cast him at Wakefield on
the ^ords day, hearing Mr. Lister, Vicar there, ^ked his Preaching exceeding
well, and ^erceiving that the Lord's Supper was to be ^dministred that day in
the Church, Mr. Angier stayed, joined with the Assembly. ^ad his liberty of
gesture, found the Lord ^aciously present with him in the ordinances that day;
having got a good repast, he went on in his journey, prospered in his business
he often enquired after Mr. Lister, to whom he bore a great respect, and indeed
he had Catholic Principles, and loved [ Aliqui^ Christ^] any thing of Christ,
wherever h^ saw it, and continued this good old Purita^ spirit to his dying
day. Mr. Lister, thoug^ his Senior succeeded him, being 80 years (...) age, had
been Vicar of Wakefield 50. yea^ was buried there, Jan. 17. 1678.

When these storms were blown over, an^ New confusions arose in the Kingdom, of
C^ vil dissentions and open Wars, he kept in h^ work and station; and tho he
adhered to the Parliaments part, yet his affectionate pray^ for the King,
temperate spirit, and continuing faithful to his principles, procure him good
will from his greatest adversary he maintaining a good correspendence wi^ all
sober persons of different persuasions (...) politics and Ecclesiastics:
instances where^ I could give, and testimonials concerning him, of his
inoffensive behavior, even from such as much differed from him; but forbear,
his own works justify him before men.

About this time his first Wife dyed, D^ 14. Anno Dom. 1642. shortly after she
h^ born him a Daughter; she had been exce^ing tender in her constitution of
body, (...) of a troubled spirit; he had some exce^ with her, though she was a
gracious woman' yet being of a melancholy constitution, Satan took great
advantage in casting his fiery darts into such combustible matter, which
occasioned much affliction both to her self and her husband, though he bore it
with unparalled wisdom and patience; she died in the beginning of the Wars,
giving intimation to her husband who it was she desired might succeed her,
which in convenient time he complied with, and about a year after did ^arry
her, it was Mrs. Margaret Moseley of Ancots, a very prudent, gracious,
Gentlewoman; they were married very publicly in Manchester Church, in the heat
of the Wars; which was much taken notice of as a great act of faith in them
both, Mr. Horrocks and Mr. Root preaching the marriage S^rmons, providence
directing their thoughts to pitch both on one Text; which was Genesis ^2.18. I
will make him on help meet for him: both presaging what indeed she proved, an
excellent suitable Wife to him, a tender mother to his three Children, and an
useful mother in Isra^l; for though God denied her a fruitful Womb, yet she was
very fruitful in good Works, of excellent parts, and well-ordered activity, of
a public spirit, of rare accomplishments for piety, charity, sobriety; whom he
enjoyed with abundant mutual content above 30 years: she died of a Tympany, and
was buried in Denton Chapel, October. 31. 1675. after whose death he lived
mournfully, till God translated him to her.

Nor was this solemnity in his Marriage, any fruit of vain glory or ostentation,
but upon consideration it was his settled judgment and advice, that Marriage
should be publicly solmenized, yea his apprehension was that a regular
approach should be mad^ to Marriage, by mutual contract; this rule h^ followed
when his Daughter Elizabeth wa^ to be Married to a Yorkshire Minister; they
were contracted in the close of a solemn day of fasting and prayer, in his
Study, by Mr. Nathaniel Rathband, who did excellently discourse on that
subject, from Mat. 1.18^ When as his Mother Mary was espoused t^ Joseph. And
about a month after that, they were solemnly Married before a numerous
Congregation in the Chapel. Mr. Harrion preaching on Ephesians. 5.31. (And the two
shall be one flesh): and then feaste^ above an Hundred persons of several Ranks
Ages, and Sexes; he usually said, he love^ to have a Marriage like a Marriage;
he wa^ far from voluptuousness or prodigality, an^ therefore took care to
prevent sinful excess or vanity, and with all showed a meet distance from
moroseness or for did baseness grounding his apprehensions on our Sav^our
favoring and honoring with his presence, yea and miracle for liberal provisi
on, that Marriage in Cana of Galilee, John 2. Its true Mr. Angier himself could
not be present at that his daughters Marriage, being indisposed by a Goutish
humor in his foot, that he was not able to stir out of his Chamber, and that
raised in him a holy meditation which he has left upon reccord in his Diary.
The Lord stayed my heart with John 2. Christ was at the Marriage, yet there was
a defect in comfort, there wanted Wine, which our Lord made advantage of to his
own Glory, and the help of the faith of his Disciples. He says further, the
week after, my Daughter was ill, so that God began with them betimes, to take
off their hearts from earthly things.

He stayed in that little Chapel at Denton ^n those free times wherein he had
opportunity, and some calls to greater places for getting worldly perferment,
but that was not ^uch considerable in his account. Some of his brethren can yet
restify how much he was ^ourted to greater and more public places; but his
frequent refusal was an instance of ^is great self-denial; few men in his
circumstances did stop the mouths of malignant ^ensurers in that case, so as he
did; and old Mr. Langley of Middle-Wych in Cheshire, who being Minister there
before the Wars (tho (...) years together silenced) yet when he was restored to
his liberty, returned to them; (...) great place, but of very pitiful
maintenance, and continued there to his dying day. And it was observed, before
one of the Bishops of Chester, since the Deprivation of Ministers by the Act of
Uniformity, that it was a signal favor to Mr. Angier, that he should be
permitted to live with that people still, as a reward for his tarrying with
them when he might have removed to his greater advantage: and indeed all his
actings spoke very much self-denial: how much worldly wealth might he have
hoarded up if he had taken what was offered him, and retained what he had? take
an instance or two. Mr. L. sent a man and horses for him before the Wars, into
Craven, 30 or 40 miles, to baptize his child; Mr. Angier went, preached in
Gisborn Church, (which some remember to this day, by some observable tokens
that I have heard of) and God did marvellously work upon his Wives heart^ by
that Sermon; when he returned, Mr. L. gave him five broad pieces of Gold into
his hand, desiring him to accept them; but he^ only took one, and gave him four
back again^ another urging him with a broad piece, he absolutely denied it,
begging an excuse with much modesty Another time preaching a Lecture at
Braintree, a Gentleman came to him, a stranger, desiring him to accept of a 20
s. piece of Gold, which he thanked him for, but refused. But I forbear more
instances.

About this time, the good people of R^ngley, bestirred themselves to obtain
Mr. Angier again to be their Minister, because he was first theirs, and
forcibly driven from them; they thought they had the best right to him,
therefore they writ a large and pathetical Letter to Mr. Angier, which I have
by me, begging of him to return, addressing themselves to Denton people, with
loving terms persuading them to release him, if it were but one year, to settle
things amongst them: and again affectionally urging Ministers that were called
on to give their advice to order him that way. The Letter is full of Christian
bowels, and deserves recording, to manifest the endeared love of a people to
their qu^ndam Pastor, and their high respects to him. Take a few expressions.

Reverend and much Honored Sir,
WE whose Names are here under written, being few in number, and long and not a
little afflicted in condition, of that unworthy Congregation to whom God first
lent you (in this County) having for a long time lain under the sad sense of
the heaviest affliction that this life can bear, (viz.) not the bare fear but
the plain feeling of the Almighties displeasure, and hot indignation gone out
against us, to the throwing down of that hopeful beginning of his house, which
we thought he would have builded us into, whenas he was pleased to cause his
Glory to shine in our public and private assemblies, and for a short time to
set up his standard in our house of Worship; giving many of us, (and others
about us) our first effectual call, and coming near to all his People, laying
great restraint upon those without: but Oh, how soon began our black night,
(nay age) to approach our loving Father (by our Enemies hand) teared you away
from us, turned his back, or hid his face from us, and has in anger, by his
all-disposing Providence thus spoken, and been speaking to this sad place this
20 years, and upward, Let very few or none more of this People be converted;
let this People have little of my presence in their house of public meeting,
let none of my Ambassadors be set over them for their profit; let them be
decreased by death, by schisms, and by scandals; yea, let their public
Assemblies be broken up, and let help and healing be looked for in vain; let
them look for light, but behold obscurity, for brightness but walk in darkness.
For these things, Reverend Sir, we do mourn, and our hearts are troubled, and
to whom (under God) shall we lay open our sad afflictions, thereby to get ease,
but to your self, whom it pleased God once to make his blessed instrument for
planting and watering so many Souls amongst us: we have had experience of your
love to us, for which we desire to be thankful, and do bless God, and do
therefore make bold to acquaint you with our broken condition, entreating your
intercession for us; and, if it were the good will of the Lord, your return to
us, with the consent of your people, without offense, though it could be but a
short space, etc. And thus they go on, imploring it with great importunity, for
the Churches sake, and the Lords sake, though but for one year.


To this are 24 hands subscribed; but the People of Denton having possession,
would by no means yield; and Ministers gave in their judgment, upon due
consideration of circumstances, that for the public good of the Church, Mr.
Angier should continue at Denton, in which he was willing to acquiesce.

As to Mr. Angiers judgment in Ecclesiastical affairs, in free times, as he had
not turned aside to conformity, on one hand, so now he stuck fast and firm to
found and Catholic Principles, not turning aside to any ways of sinful
separation, though some of his intimate friends forsook him, and some of his
brethren censured him for too large Principles and practices in
Church-administration: yet as he had a tender respect to congregational
brethren; so they had (at least many of them) a great reverence for him; he was
a principal member of that Reverend Class, (or Association of Ministers) at
Manchester, and was of great account and use among them; such was their esteem
of him, that they would scarce do any thing of importance without him, he
oftentimes presided as Chairman, or Moderator, frequently attended the
provincial Assembly at Preston, had ruling-elders in his own Congregation, but
loved not dividing principles, or distinguishing Names, or Lordly domineering
by any Arbitrary impositions: I have often heard him say, that in a little
time, who ever lived, should see much of the Government of Christ should be
carried on in particular Churches amongst themselves.

He was of a Sweet, Moderate, Healing Spirit, both at home and abroad; yet very
faithful and plain dealing, whereby some were at present offended, and possibly
some of his principles or actings suited not some persons principles or
humors; yet even those entertained what he spoke with high veneration; and if
at any time they broke out into passions, or unruly animosities, his love and
lenity, his mild carriage and compassionate Spirit, did so mollify and qualify
their Spirits in time, that they were either overcome to a compliance, or won
to endeared apprehensions of his candor and ingenuity: so that I have often
thought of that passage of Melchior Adam one of the German Divines, Melch. Ad.
in vit ger Th. p. 65.
as applicable to Mr. Angier; it was Schwebellius, that had much to do with
Anabaptists, and Swinckfeldians, [ Quorum impetus mansuetudine fregit,
patientia vicit and lenitate in ordinem coegit] thus this good Mr. Angier has
by mildness broke, by patience conquered, and lenity reduced to good order such
as others rigor and severity has exasperated to irreconcilable distances; but
ordinarily an healing virtue followed his gentle hand.

And for his judgment and practice in public and politic affairs, he was
fixed in his apprehensions for Monarchy, and was not wheeled about with the
change of times; he was one of those that bore his Testimony with the Rest of
his Brethren, against that unparalled murder of King Charles the first, and
the Usurpations attending it; he refused to take up the engagement, tho to his
great prejudice, for he told a godly Minister that he lost 200 l. by his
refusal of it. He durst not give God thanks for the Armies success against the
Loyal Scots; he poured out many hearty prayers and tears for his present
Majesty, asserted his right to the Crown in the face of apparent danger; joined
with his Brethren in that solid plea for the Non-subscribers to the Engagement,
which was (to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as it is now
Established without King or House of Lords) for which they were threatened and
endangered, till God broke that snare; some troubles both Mr. Angier and some
Ministers and Gentlemen went through, for owning his Majesty's interest, they
were carried Prisoners to Lever^ pool, and from thence removed to Ormskir^
because of the Plague; they had indeed the liberty of their friends visiting
them, and free intercourse; they spent much time in prayer, and thus
strengthened one another hands in God, and left a good favor be hind them, the
remembrance whereof continues to this day.

At this time was the conception, and afterward the birth of that excellent
Treatise of Mr. Edward Gee's, then Parson of Eccleston (and prisoner with them)
about prayer; the occasion whereof was this: Amongst the rest of the debates
managed by these holy men, this was one great case of Conscience, wherein they
desired satisfaction, viz. Whether God may hide himself from his peoples
prayers, grounded upon his promise, and seem by his providence to answer the
prayers which are contrary thereto? whether this can be paralleld with any
examples? in what sense God may do this? what may be the reason thereof? what
use may be made of Gods proceeding herein? This multifarious question being the
proper subject of that day, and not satisfying themselves in their present
discourses, they judged it fit to refer it to a suller discussion by some able
pen, and pitched upon Mr. Gee, who undertook it, and writ an excellent
treatise, which is extant, and of great use at this day.

Other cases of Conscience did occur in that day, wherein Mr. Angiers advice
was desired; one was, Whether Justices of Peace or other Officers might take
commissions from, and act under those Usurped powers? Mr. Angier thought they
might, bringing instances of Civil Officers acting in their stations the six
years of Athaliah's usurpation: there is a full treatise in writing upon this
subject: many such cases were propounded to him, and solidly resolved; and
indeed he was esteemed by good men, the living Oracle of his time, as Mr.
Hildersham before him, and by some ill-willed persons he was called the Idol of
Lancashire, because of the great value most men set upon him: but more of this
subject shall be subjoyned ^n the close, of his facutly in resolving weighty
cases of Conscience.

He was not a man for Military Exercises, yet his counsels and prayers had
influence on weighty affairs, and this was the sphere he moved in, not
thrusting his Sickle into another Harvest, but declaring his judgment as a
Minister of the Gospel, when consulted with: he could not but enquire now it
went with the Church of God at home and abroad, that he might accordingly order
his prayers; and for this reason its said reverend Mr. Hooker of New Englan^
was a great inquirer after News, and h^ said he did it upon the same account;
and thus did holy Nehemiah make inquiry, no^ out of Athenian curiosity, but
Christian conscientiousness, to sympathize with the Church of God: he had no
hand in public^ revolutions, hence it was that he enjoyed (...) much peace, and
that all parties had an hig^ esteem of him; in the Lord Delamere appearance for
his Majesty's Interest, Mr^ Angier stayed at home, though his hear^ and prayers
were that way; yet he foresa^ the event, and in that God graciously hear^ his
prayers for preventing the effusion o^ blood, and bringing in the King in so
(...) markable a manner the year following, for which Mr. Angier kept solemn
days (...) thankfulness, though he also predicted a^ approaching storm on many
of the Minister of Christ, that could not run the same lengt^ that others
complied with; and at an e^ercise at Eccles he gave remarkable hints o^ what
was coming on, from Exodus 14.1^ in a full assembly of several sorts of hearen
but so wisely, that the most malicious Mo^ could not take advantage from his
Sermon and indeed he might be allowed to spea^ what others could not, his
integrity an^ loyalty, his uprightness and peaceblen^ being deeply engraven in
the Conscienc^ of all that knew him, and his name bei^ precious to all that
heard of him; when the Act of Uniformity came out, he preached very plainly on
Esther 4.1. It was very admirable to observe what pat and proper Scriptures he
chose, pertinent to public or personal occasions, and how sweetly and sutably
he accommodated his matter thereto.

His most natural Genius led him to be a Son of Consolation: he had a peculiar
gift in opening the sweet promises of the Gospel, and pouring oil into wounded
consciences, incouriging drooping Spirits, answering sad objections to abundant
satisfaction; yet he could (and sometimes did) act the part of a Boanerges, to
thunder out the menaces of the Law against secure and sturdy Sinners; and the
Lord blessed his Ministry both ways, for levelling high Mountains, and lifting
up Valley-Souls. He was an excellent Text-man, a solid Expositor; his way was,
comparing one Scripture with another, wherein he had a singular art, showing
the main scope of the Holy Ghost therein, raising pertinent doctrins therefrom;
though he had consulted with Expositors (of which he had store of choice ones)
yet he made no ostentation of his acquaintance with them by numerous
quotations, but extracted the marrow out of them, and pitched upon what seemed to
him most proper.

He did not concern himself with controversies in the Pulpit, but preached the
most plain, practical, experimental truths, and often inculcated the Essentials
of Religion, still teaching the people knowledge, insomuch as the Christians
that were bred under his Ministry were solid, substantial, knowing and peaceble
professors, few warping off to the errors of the times; and i^ he had occasion
to deal with the petulan^ S^epticks or D^gmatizers of this age, h^ rather laid
down positive truths, and solidly confirmed them, than follow the will vagaries
of Erratick Spirits, by disproving them; judging with Zuinglius, [Veris
intellectis, falsa etiam haud difficulter agnoscunter]; when truth is
discovered, error is detected; and is either acknowledged, o^ falls of it self.
But indeed he loved no^ disputes, nor did his studieis or genius carry him out
to controversies, except Gods glory, and the necessary defense of truth
required it, and then also he managed things so calmly, fairly, that he won
adversaries, and won credit to his cause; Dissentions were his burden, unity
his delight, and God gave him his desire, for the Divisions of Reub^ he had sad
thoughts of heart; and for disputes among Divines, was ready to breath^ out
with honest Summerh^ld, that sad word [quis me tandem liberabit ab ista rixosa
Theologia] who at length will set me free from this brawling kind of Theology?
For Mr. Angier still expressed a sad regret upon such unwelcome occasions of
dispute and conten^ion, his usual expression being, This is ^edious work, and
goes on wearily.

It Is true he was a great peacemaker in sacred or civil broises: if any of his
neighbors had quarrels with one another, the matter was brought before him,
and his wisdom sound out some expedient to reconcile them, and his grave
exhortations usually prevailed for accommodation; if not, he laid ^t deeply to
heart, and still made it the matter of his prayer; but God ordinarily blessed
him with success, and gave him the bles^ing pronounced to peacemakers, to be
called one of the Children of God; in some cases of difference, I have known
him (said ^ne that had reason to know it, and is faithful ^n the relation) give
Money out of his Purse, to compose some quarrels: and ^tho those days were most
grievous to him, yet when his success answered his designs, the issue and the
review were sweet to his spirit, and he did not repent his weary labors.

Mr. Angier did not offer to the Lord that which cost him nothing he engaged
his whole man in that which he went about, not doing the work of the Lord
negligently: he took great pains in studying his Sermons, and they were
elaborate, full fraught with Spiritual marrow, very exact, no waste word or
repetitions, but went on smoothly, pertinently, sententiously, though he
studie^ matter rather than words, and never use notes in all his life, but took
pains to comm^ his Sermon to memory, which he had before diligently penned; he
stood not to loo^ proofs, but repeated the words of the Scriptures he quoted
exactly, yet memoriter, (...) improving them to the present occasion holding up
his hands all the time of his Sermon, speaking with an even, audible voice with
much ardency and intention both (...) Spirit and Speech; his Sermons were n^
long nor full of heads, but well compact^ and me hodical (which is an help to
memory) and under those few particulars he ha^ pertinent and plain
inlargements; he preached longer in his younger days, and in his old age about
an hour, scarce any more (...) less, and it exceedingly spent him, usually
sweating at his coming out of the Pulpit; warming a Scarlet Cloth, and laying
it on his Breast, for he was very subject to catch cold after preaching; and I
have hear^ him speak of old Mr. Rogers, that in his younger days when he came
out of the Pulpit, one must have stayed him, to have discoursed with him, then
another, in the open air, when the pores are open; but he found sensible
prejudice by it, and learned to take more care of himself, for people did not
consider it.

It was littel less than a Miracle that a man of such a weak constitution as
Mr. Angier was, could bear up so long under such day^y and indefatigable
labors, his constant preaching, twice every Lords day, most part of his time,
traveling and preaching many exercises abroad on Weekdays, his monthly
attendance in the Classical Presbytery, requent travels to the Provincial
Assembly, ^onstant assisting in the Ordination of Ministers, observing many
private fasts amongst his own People, and abroad; yea extraordinary fasts in
public, especially the monthly fasts kept for Ireland, at that time, ^e
ordinarily kept the fast himself, wherein he spent six or seven hours in
wrestling with God in prayer, or preaching the word; ^e was wonderfully
enlarged, and had a great measure of the Spirit poured upon him, as to the
assistance of his Spirit, and his body was much supported, for he said private
fasts spent his natural strength more than his sabbath days work, for he still
^ept the posture of kneeling; and did affectionately join with others that were
exercised; or he put others on to prayer, and himself losed up the day with a
short but warm melting prayer, being short toward the ^tter end of his days.

His observing fasts with his people was (...) evidence that his delight was in
that ^ind of work; for he has often said, that one great thing that tied and
indear^ him to that poor people, was, that when ever they had occasion, they
appointed fast, and did join together in prayer, and also in praise; and he had
a particular honor to his worthy friend, Col. Richard Holland, on that very
account, that st^ (he said) when he had been in troubles, (...) did constantly
call good people to pray (...) God with him.

He was so constant in his Ministerial wo^ and diligent in his studies and
preaching^ his own people, that though Mr. Harrison of Ashton (his intimate and
entire friend and he, lived near together for twenty year yet never did they
exchange places for o^ day in that time to ease themselves; M^ Herle told him
he had a weak body, yet Venice Glass well looked to, would last considerable
time: and notwithstanding (...) excessive labors, God maintained in him
considerable measure of health, possibly mo^^ than he enjoyed in his younger
years; a^ next to Divine Providence, much may (...) ascribed to his severe
temperance, observance of diet, composedness of mind, a^ care of himself,
according to his experimen^ of what he had found helpful or hurtful (...) him:
and though he was of a far weak^ constitution than Mr. Harrison, and Eld^ by
several years, yet survived him; (...) whom he has sometimes said, Mr.
Harrison you think you can do any thing, but your body will fail you, and
indeed it did, for tho that learned, gracious, zealous man of God had a very
strong, healthful, robust body; yet by his excessive Studies, and assiduous
labors, and watchings, and sitting so close without fire in cold
Winter-Nights, that his nerves were so contracted, and his body so weakened,
that some years before he died he could not stir Hand nor Foot, yet was h^arty,
and would often say, if I were in the Pulpit I should be well. But to return to
Mr. Angier, he was a man much in prayer, and mighty, it may be said of him as
of David; Psalm. 119.164. That he prayed or praised God seven times in a day: at
least twice, (I think thrice) with his Wife, twice alone, and twice with his
Family; in his Family-work he was very profitable, every one got a verse or
more out of the Chapter read at prayers; he gathered some useful instructions,
short, but substantial, and accommodated to the condition of the Family, Eight
of the Clock in the Morning, and betwixt five and six at Night before Supper,
were the ordinary seasons for Family worship, beginning with a Psalm, by which
the Family had notice to come together: his constant course was to have a
Chapter read after Dinner, and Supper, before they rose from the Table, and
before thanks was returned; and he said, he took up that usage of having a
Chapter read at Meals from Mr. Rogers of D^dham; worthy Mr. Samuel Hildersham
had constantly two staves of a Psalm sung after Meals, so had the first
Christian Emperor Constantine the Great, as Euseb^us tells us, and I have known
some use it.

And as Mr. Angier was much in prayer, so he was mighty in prayer, fervent as
well as frequent, he wept and made supplication, Jacob like, yea he was an
Israelite; a Prince with God, he was by some called Weeping Angier; for as he
seldom rose off his knees without Tears, so some have observed, Tears at some
seasons trickle down to his Band, in great abundance: Mr. Isaac Ambrose, in his
Diary Printed with his Media, says, that upon a solemn day of fasting and
prayer in Manchester Church Mr. A. concluding, his prayer was so working, that
I believe it melted all hearts; and for my own, says he, it pleased the Lord
so to soften and to break it, that so far as I remember, it was never in such a
melting frame in any public ordinance before; and as it workt on men's hearts,
so it was prevalent and reached Gods heart, as the event did demonstrate; thus
the inwrought Prayer, [(...)] of a righteous man avails much: certainly Mr.
Angier had many remarkable returns of prayer; whereof it may be something shall
be added out of his own papers hereafter; so great was the esteem of him
generally, that he was frequently sent for to pray with some Melancholy
persons, and some possessed, as was supposed, and sometimes they brought such
persons to him from far, and God was pleased in some cases to hear prayers; but
some particulars much tal^ed of, I dare not relate what I have heard, except I
had clear and undoubted testimony of the truth thereof.

And as he was instant and prevalent in prayer, Seriousness in thankfulness.
so he was excellent and ^und^^ in praises, he exceeded others in
supplications, and himself in thanksgiving; frequent Ejaculations and
expressions o^ Gods grace and Mercy, were in his mind and mouth; they that
conversed with him frequently heard (Deo gratias) thanks be to God, from him.
But as he took more occasions than many others of keeping days of thanksgiving
so God gave him still more occasions of thankfulness: and its usual for God to
put new songs of praise into thankful persons Mouths, it was his frequent
observation, that when a day of thankfulness was appointed, God sent in some
fresh matter to increase joy in the Lord; and sometimes the intervening
providence merited such a day as much as the former: so well does God take an
aspect toward that lovely duty, that he incourageth to it. And oh how enlarged
was he in those Days and Duties! he seemed to be transported into Ecstasies of
Admiration: yea he seemed to be elevated above the Earth, amongst the
Coelestial^ inhabitants; his heart and mouth were enlarged to an high strain,
in rehearsing the loving kindness of the Lord: he expatiated especially upon
Spiritual mercies, to the astonishment of those that joined with him; often
using David's holy Rhapsody, 2 Samuel 7.18, 19, 20 Who am I, O Lord God? and what
is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? it would have done ones heart
good to hear him an hour together, reckoning up the mercies of God, in Infancy,
Childhood, Youth, riper Age, in all Estates, Relations, Conditions,
Afflictions; and then magnifying the free grace of God, in giving his Son for
us, his Spirit to us, promises, privileges, Gospel Ordinances, etc. and then
the great kindness of God to his particular congregation, in public liberty,
for which he kept many days of thanksgiving, and for national mercies; yea
there was not any of his Relations, or in his Congregation, under any
Affliction, Temptation, but as he prayed for them, so he gave God thanks for
their deliverance: he knit his Breast to every ones heart and case; he mourned
with such as mourned, rejoiced with such as rejoiced, God had given him a
sympathizing heart, 2 Cor. 11.29.
he might say, Who is Weak, and I am not weak?

But especially he was deeply concerned for the Church of God both at home and
abroad; he gave God no rest, but was the Lords daily remembrancer, standing
betwixt the living and the dead, in the breach that sin had made, to hold off
wrath. He had great interest at the Throne of Grace, and notably improved it,
by a believing prayer, and filling his mouth with Arguments: he had skill and
will for his work; often was he in the Mount, and conversed with God as a Man
with his Friend: he had an excellent Art in humble expostulation with God;
surely the Church-militant parted with a Friend when he was translated to
Glory, it appeared in the congregation, that God had set him over, what weight
he bore up, by the dreadful consequences attending his death; for thereby the
people lost their privileges; for from the day of his Funeral to this day,
never did Nonconformist preach in his Pulpit, so that it appears for whose
sake the liberty was maintained; Denton has found the smart, its well if
England feel not the fatal fruits of the removal of such Pillars; Methusalem
dyed that year the deluge overspread the World: Hippo was sacked by the Vandals
immediately after Augustines death there: Heedleberg taken after Pareus's
death: Luther dyed a little before the Wars in Germany. Lord prevent temporal
evils threatened, that the prediction may not be accomplshed, that the righteous
is taken away from the evil to come: Isa. 57.1.
this Worthy, fallen in Israel, speaks heavy things to England.

Mr. Earnestness ^n prayer.
Angier was very solemn and grave in all his addresses to God, or in his
delivering messages from God: it was his usual manner, before he spoke a word
in prayer, to pause a considerable while, looking upwards, composed his
thoughts, possessing his heart with awful apprehensions of the Divine Majesty
and by mental ejaculations imploring Gods quickening presence; and after a
season he arrived gradually to a great degree of zeal and warmth in prayer,
agonizing in the duty with sweat and tears, which rendered his speaking; at
some seasons both painful and difficult; yet was he not only made up of zeal
and affection, but had proper and pertinent matter, exact method, and apt
expressions: Mr Harrison was wont to call him a ponderous man, for every word
had its weight and emphasis; he had no waste words either in prayer or
preaching, but as his affections were Boiling, so his Words were few and well
weighed.

He did not use to be long in prayer, except upon extraordinary occasions, and
then not tedious, because variety of matter and patheticalness in the manner,
rendered his prayers acceptable to the joyners; he propounded this Question,
Whether the spirit of God did ordinarily dictate matter of prayer? he did
conceive it might, from Romans 8 26. the spirit helps, for we know not what we
should pray for. Yet he was far from Enthusiasm; nor was he altogether against
forms of prayer, nor joining in public with the Liturgy, though he judged that
inconvenient modes of worship must be our affliction, but may not be our sin,
when we are not in a capacity to remedy; nor did he think that mere presence
does signify consent or approbation of every thing we hear. As for the Lords
prayer, his judgment was, that it was delivered chiefly by our Savior as a
pattern or platform of prayer, to which, (as to several heads) all our prayers
must be referred.

He seldom insisted long upon a Text (except when he took a Scripture before
him) because (as he used to say) a Minister may have frequent occasion in the
course of his Pertinence in Preaching.
Ministry, to return again to the same subject, therefore he needs not to say
all that can be said upon it at once, but extract the marrow of the Text, and
pick out what at present he judges proper to the principal occasion for which
he chose it, and drive that Nail home: yea tho a Minister should say all that
he can find out upon such a Text or Subject, yet he will be forced to leave
some gleanings that he may return again to gather up, and those as pertinent
and useful, as he pressed, as at his first Vintage-reaping: so true is that of
Tertullian, Adora scriptura plenitudinem.
I adore the fullness of the Scriptures. He had a notable observation from Heb.
11.32. For the time would fail me to tell of Gideon; hence he observed, That a
Minister must have respect, not only to what he is to say, but to the time he
is to speak or write it in; all things cannot be spoken at one time; Christ
taught as people were able to hear; people, yea the best people have but a
measure of attention, memory or affection; good old Mr. Horrocks was wont to
say, I would rather leave my hearers longing than loathing.

And as Mr. His Catichising
Angier constantly preached, so he carefully Catechized the youth of his
Congregation, according to the Assemblies Shorter Catechism, and explained it,
opening the principles of Religion in a plain and ^amiliar way; sometimes
taking an account of their proficiency: and if he heard of the breakings out of
sin in any of his hearers, he faithfully admonished them privately, and
sometimes publicly, sometimes sending for the persons, and pleading with them,
with much gravity, humility, and Bowels of compassion. Ordinarily when
strangers came to settle under his Ministry, ^e sent for them, discoursed with
them, counseled, instructed, exhorted them; thus he dealt with new Married
Persons, and indeed God brought several from other places to fix themselves
under his Ministry for the benefit of the Ordinances.

His usual saying was, His selfdenial in receiving.
If God will help me to take care of my duty, I will leave him to take care of
my comfort: his main design was to bring Glory to God in the conversion of
sinners, and edification of Saints: the attaining of these ends was his reward;
when any sent him tokens of their respects; he looked at God in it, and was more
glad of it, as a sign of their proficiency, than a means of his enriching
himself. So Paul, Phil. 4.17. Not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit
that may abound to your account: thus it is said of Bucholser. (Gratiam
munerum, quam munera, and Theologi^^ fructum quam fortuna maluit, he rather
chose, and accepted better a kindness in the giving, than the greatne^ of the
gift; being better pleased with the fruit of his Ministry, than merely their
bounty.

Mr. His diligence in reading Scriptures.
Angier was much conversa^ in the holy Scrpitures, they were dayl^ his delight,
and he had an excellen^ art in choosing and adapting fit Texts t^ Divine
Providence, that the Word might be a comment on the work of God: seldo^ did
any remarkable Providence, or sudden accident fall out, but be either made it
the main subject of his discourse, or particularly applied something he had in
hand thereto he had a singular skill in preaching Funeral Sermons, so that tho
he rarely made Historical reflections on the dead, yet intelligen^ hearers
might gather pertinent instruction or admonitions from his doctrinal
conclusions, and close applications naturally resulting therefrom; he behaved
himself with much reverence in Gods public ordinances minding duly what was
in hand; he constantly writ Sermons, when others preached for example to
others, to prevent diversions and for his own edification; he was so ful^ of
candor and ingenuity that tho me^ gifts were weak, yet if they were honest he
would commend them; never did an^ hear him despise or disparage others, but
(...) he much desired to have young Ministers preach with him; so if they
missed in it, he would plainly and privately tell them of their slips, or
encourage such as did well; what he spoke was from his heart; what others
spoke, he would make a candid construction thereof, if it would admit it; when
the Minister that preached for him came out of the Pulpit, he usually met him
with this Salutation, [thanks be to God, or blessed be the Lord] never
returning thanks to the Minister, (so far as I knew) but to God for his help to
the Minister.

He was very excellent and exemplary in his administration of the Lords supper
both as to Method, Matter, and manner, His Exemplariress in administering the
Lords Supper.
that ordinance was celebrated every month, and he had many hundreds of
communicants, especially in these late times, good People from all adjacent
parts and Counties came flocking thither, and there were feasted and refreshed.
I have known many strangers come ten, yea some twenty miles, yea some thirty
miles to attend on the ordinances at Denton, so that there was often more
communicants than could set on seats in the Chapel, and officers went amongst
them to see if there was no intruders; for either they were known by face to
them, or had testimonials from approved Ministers, or eminent Christians: his
exactness, gravity, and inlargedness, was such, that the first time I partaked
there, a worthy Gentleman bad me observe him diligently, saying he is the
exactest man in Lancashire in this work; and I thought young Ministers might
take notice of him as a pattern worthy imitation^ and oh, how many Souls have
been quickened comforted, and nourished in that ordinance in that place! what
gracious words proceeded out of his Mouth, and what gracious impressions have
been made on commuican^ hearts!

He was very diligent and painful in h^ private Studies, Diligence in Private
Studies.
and was much pleased with his Closet-retirements: its true he was (...) able
to read much in his elder days; but (...) had variety of employment, sometimes
Reading, sometimes Praying, Meditating, Writing; he Writ many choice and
excelle^ Letters; pithy, pertinent, profitable, upon several occasions, some
whereof he copi^ out, were they collected into one entire pi^ they would be of
excellent use: he often complained of his memory, saying he had memory for
nothing but to remember (...) own Sermons: but indeed his memory (...) not to
be slighted, however his solid judgment, clear understanding in divine mysteri^
and gracious experienced heart, shined for in all he did, helped his invention,
and continual exercise did corroborate his memory, and strong affections
especially carried him through all; for a Sanctified heart has never a bad
memory.

He was of a Savoury, holy, His exact convarsation.
heavenly frame of Spirit to eye God, in all, and to improve all occurrences
for spiritual advantage: the like instance of an exact conversation has
seldom been found; I was once riding along with him, and a Minister of my
acquaintance whom I met, asked me who he was, being passed by, I told him; he
said, ^f there be an Angel on Horseback, that is (...): and a servant, that
lived with him many ^ears, and knew his manner of life, attests, that he walked
as near the rule of the word, and pattern of our Savior, as is possible for
^man to attain to on this side Glory, excelling in every Grace, exemplary in
every good work, elevated above the ordinary ^nk of Christians, as it was said
of Bu^^lzer, as to liveliness, Melch. Ad. vit Buchol. p. 556.
(Vivida in eo omnia ^erunt, vivida vox, vividi oculi, vivide ^anus, gestus
omnes vividi;) voice, eyes, hands, gesture, all full of liveliness and viva^y:
thus this man of God, Mr. Angier, ^d act above his strength and years in Gods
work and worship, and was so full of warmth ^d spirit fullness, that it plainly
appeared (...) was acted and animated with a Spirit be^nd his own, for God was
with him, and (...) was much with God.

He was affable to all, His affability, lenity.
amiable in converse with his intimate friends, open-hearted in discovering
himself, without subtle reserves, or peevishness of Spirit; he was so far as
any could discern, [(...)] without anger, or choler; how be it his natural
constitution, being sanguine, might incline him to passion, yet the large
measure of Grace wherewith God had endowed him, and continual Mortification,
had so sugared and lenifyed his disposition, that to all that conversed with
him, he seemed to be compounded of love and sweetness.

But withal he was a person of great gravity, His gravity.
his mildness did not degenerate into fondness or levity, nor his gravity into
moroseness, or austerity, but a kindly mixture of mildness, Majesty, and
attractive sweetness, put such an awful reverence into hi^ countenance, as did
at once daunt impudent profaneness, and animate religious modesty no^e were so
audacious as to be found in any unhandsom act before him whose very look gave
check to debaucheries, and none tha^ knew him were afraid to open their Soul
cases to him, finding him so render and condescending to them upon all
occasions: indeed he was fruitful in holy discourse to all; upon a question or
case of conscience he had the faculty to enlarge suitably and edifyingly, (...)
the satisfaction of the propounder, if company had been silent; himself usually
propounded a profitable question, or a proof of some principle of religion, or
the meaning of some Scripture, as matter of discourse for mutual edification;
sometimes in traveling with a Minister (as one testifies) he would call on him
(when the road was free) to repeat the Heads of the Sermon he Preached or heard
last.

He was exceeding liberal to the Poor, His liberality to the Poor.
both in giving, forgiving and free lending; it was strange to observe how much
he gave out of so little; he had a liberal hand and an open heart, he devised
liberal things, making frequent collections in public, improving his interest
for the indigent, or in public affairs: his left hand knew not what his right
hand did: one instance take, when the Collection was made for Northampton,
1675. he was then indisposed, and went not out of fourteen weeks, or
thereabouts, and therefore desired his kinsman to preach on 2 Cor. 8.7. which
he did, preparing the People in the morning, for the Collection in the
afternoon; at which, because he could not be present, he ^ent his charity by
his servant, which was not inconsiderable, but afterward gave privately three
times as much as he had done ^n public by his servant: yea in cases of
Collections, he would often put on both his Children and servants to give: yea he
sent to poor Widows, Orphans, others, considerable sums, with a charge not to
tell from whence it came: he had not above 20 l. a year from his hearers; and
though he had an estate of his own, yet all things considered, it may seem next
to a miracle that he should so abundantly lay out, and possess any thing, when
his layings in were so small; but God made good that promise, There is that
scatters, and yet increases; The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that
waters, shall be watered also himself, Pro. 11.24, 25.

He was also very free in lending, Forgiving injuries.
and as free in forgiving, and passing by unkindnesses: one instance
particularly was this. When a Neighbor, (an indifferent Husband for worldly
matters) had borrowed Money of him, and broken his word, no^ paying it in many
Months after promise of payment, instead of paying the old debt he comes to beg
a new favor, to borrow more Money, which Mr. Angier lent him and being asked
why he would lend money to a man so dishonest and unfaithful, replied, that he
did it to make a Knave a^ honest man.

He was a man of much says and courag^ in Gods eause, His faith and courage.
and withal of much pruden^ and discretion; his courage was the reli^ of his
faith, not so much of natural magnanimity. When the Act of Uniformity took
place, and Ministers generally concluded to give over, he kept his resolution
to go on in his work, yet not censuring them that desisted, for he plainly saw
all Ministers were not under the same circumstances; he did continue in his
public station without considerable interruption, so that discriminating
providence made little Denton a Goshen, and kept their fleece wet when others
were dry in most places; it was a little sanctuary to many, and Gods ways were
in it of providence and influence: its true, Warrants were now and then issued
out, to apprehend Mr. Angier, but the worst men had no heart to meddle with
him; sometimes they searched, but professed they would not see him for an hundred
pound: some of the Bishops of Chester would inquire of his son, how does the
good old man Mr. Angier? most of the Justices had a great respect for him, some
were nearly related to his Wife, her eldest Brother chiefly, Mr. Mosely of
Ancols, whose Mother and another Sister did sojourn many years with Mr. Angier;
he thought also that his confinement at home, traveling and preaching little
or not at all abroad, was a furtherance of his liberty, they said he is an old
man and cannot live long, let him alone while he lives.

He was exceeding exact and punctual in all he did, His exactness every way.
if in worldly matters, Bargains, Writings, Bonds, Sealings, yea the smallest
concernments wherein there was any danger of litigious su^ts, or controversies
tho it was betwixt nearest relations, he caused things to be firmly done, and
safely kept, which in after times proved of great use; for he said; it does no
hurt to have things done surely; and it may do good; for no body knows into
whose hands such things may fall, for men are mortal; he carefully laid up
Acquittances, Receipts, or any writings of Agreements, which have put things
into readiness since his death: he was also exact in his apparel, ever neat,
tho never splendid; handsome, not gaudy: if he saw any faceing or finery in
others apparel, he would say, I keep my Satin in my Pocket; he used to wear a
Master of Arts Gown, both Lords-days, and Weekdays, at home; he loved to see
persons neat, and would say, one may be cleanly in Rags: he shamed some out of
their slovenliness with friendly rebukes.

He was given to hospitality, Given to Hospitality.
a Bishop indeed, a Gaius, that freely entertained Gods Servants, Ministers and
Christians, so that he seemed to be an host to the Church; it is incredible to
relate what variety of strangers and friends came Weekly, almost daily to his
house, and were handsomely treated, tho not with varieties, yet with ^ufficieny;
he had a standing Table of wholesome fresh meat, Noon and Night. Upon Lords-days
his Table always was well furnished with guests, (besides abundance that had
broth, etc.) so that Mrs. Hide of Norbury, (a religious Gentlewoman, and a dear
friend of his) would have said to him, Mr. Angier, I am ready to think God
works miracles at your Table, in multiplying your provisions; for said she, if
I should set half as many people to more meat than you have, they would eat it
all up, but there is store taken off your Table; And himself has often said, that
there is a blessing ^tendeth housekeeping, as if the supplies thereof were
unaccomptable. A worthy Minister heard him once say, that he knew ^y
experience, that little or much, it was ^ll one, he had as much in his purse,
when ^e had not half so much Means, as he had ^hen when he spoke it; as riches
increase, so ^hey increase that eat.

His government and order of his Family was admirable and imitable, The order
of his Family.
I may truly ^y unparalled. His Family was as a well disciplined Army, where
all knew their pro^r stations, and did carefully attend their ^ost, yea a well
instructed Academy, and (...) organized Church; it was usually numerous and
regular; for a considerable season he had several young Scholars Table with
him, that were sent to him for edu^^tion under his inspection, and God did bl^
his example, instructions and prayers (...) the good of some yet living: some
the were capable he put upon preaching one p^ of the day; several assistants he
had succesively, and gave them most of the encouragement they had. When he was
grown in^ years, and not sit to preach twice a da^ his Brothers Son was with
him Eleven yea^ before his Death, and was a great comfo^ to him.

Lords day was thus spent; How the Lord's Day was spent.
after priv^ devotions in their clo^ets, in the Family, n^ Eight a Clock a
Chapter was read, a Psa^ song, then he went to prayer; and abo^^ Nine a Clock
they went to the Chapp^ which was but a few steps from his do^ according to his
wish and usual saying the Priests went about the Temple; and ^ Noon, immediately
after Dinner, one (...) peats the Forenoons Sermon in his house, (...) the same
time another was repeating in (...) Chapel to many people that stayed ther^
singing Psalms both before and after; the continued till Public ordinances
begun; a^ at their return home shortly after, Mr. Angier sung a Psalm and went
to praye^ then to Supper, and a little season af^ Supper, a Psalm was sung, and
one repeat^d the Afternoon Sermon, and another Psalm being sung, all was
finished with a ^hort prayer, and so the Family was dismissed to their
apartments. And so for the ^est of the Week, servants so ordered their ^ffairs
as to be present at family prayer; on Monday Nights the Forenoon Sermon of the
preceding Lord's Day, and Saturday Nights the Afternons Sermon was reppeated
ordinarily in the Family; on Friday Nights they said their Catechisms, some in
the Assemblies shorter, others in the larger Catechism; some also repeating the
proofs memoriter: he gave order that they should dispatch their worldly
occasions the last day of the Week, that they might prepare for the Lord's Day
approaching, which they did, and were outwardly conformable, for he would
suffer no disorders in his Family, yea most of his Family proved truly
gracious; they were ordinarily loving and affectionate to one another, and
lived many years in great peace, unity and order; the whole number was often
sixteen, or at least Fourteen, seldom under Twelve, tho he had but one
Daughter with him for several years before he died: his carriage was sweet and
obliging to all, yea to the meanest in the Family, and he behaved himself with
such an awful yet lovely deportment, that many have been ready to speak of him
and his Family concerns, with the like words as the Queen of Sheba, accounting
them happ^ that convensed with such an holy man of God and tho they had heard
of his way, 1 Kin. 10.4, 8.
yet the one half was not told them.

Mr. His Friends.
Angier had many worthy Friends of good rank, and great piety, who bor^ a very
great respect to him; and as David chose such as feared God for his Companions
so did this holy man take his delight in the Saints, as most excellent upon
earth: holy Mr. Henry Ashhurst sometimes visited him at his house, and was
visited by him. Mr. Crew of Vtkinton in Cheshire was his dear and intimate
Friend, and had an entire love for him, as the Writer hereof can testify, for
being at his house at Vtkinton, and Mr. Crew showing him and his Wife some
handsome pictures, hanging in a Chamber, (in which he much delighted) amongst
the rest, showed them the Picture of Dr. Wilkins, who (says he) is to be our
Bishop of Chester; but (said he) Mr. Angier is my Bishop: and I have heard that
Mr. Crew often solicited Mr. Angier to sit while his Picture was drawn, and he
would be at the charge of it, but he put it off, saying a Ministers Picture
must be in the hearts and lives of his people: so far was he from pride, or
vainglory, that he never had his Picture drawn, tho doubtless it would have
been a lovely piece, if to the Life, for he was an exceeding comely personage,
tho low in stature, yet of a clear comeplexion, red and white, of a cheerful
countenance, and very graceful; of a vene^able aspect, and pleasant: but he
judged the blessed fruits of a Ministers labors are more elegible than the
most lively effigies of their vanishing carcasses engraven in durable Brass or
Marble.

His heart was much set upon the good of souls, Seeking good of Souls.
and therein God blessed him with abundant success; and this was a considerable
part of his reward. He sometimes related ^old Mr. Dods interpretation of the
laborers in the Vineyard, Mat. 20. which he said were Ministers; some indent
with our Lord for their penny, i.e. preferment, good parsonages, abundant
maintenance, honors, and to live bravely in the world, God gives them these
things, they are at present well pleased therewith, and this is all that God
designs for them, they have their bargain, it was all they asked, and our
bountiful benefactor is not behind-hand with them, they have no reason to
grumble at his kindness to the other, who made no such bargain with him, but
thought themselves obliged to him for their work, and said, Lord if thou will
account me faithful, and put me into the Ministry, and own me with the success
of my labors, I will refer to thee the business of maintenance; I hope thou will not suffor me to want necessaries, and if thou do tho I be persecuted,
imprisoned, impoverished, and be put to beg my bread, yet (...) thou will
glorify thy self thereby, and edify thy Church by my outward ruins, (...) have
enough; such self-denying Minister shall have present supplies, and a better
Penny, good things in this life, and eternal happiness in the other; so the
last shall be first in dignity, glory, and abundant reward and he gives them
more than thy asked; and the first shall be last, those mercenary spirits must
be put off with the poor pittance of the world that undertook the Ministry as a
trade to get a livelihood: this Exposition Mr. Angier mentioned as very savoury
and significant, not determining whether it was the proper meaning of the
Scripture.

He much desired the propagation of Religion, His desire to propagate Religion.
and for that end the education of young men for the Ministry; he had but one
Son and four Grandsons, who were all trained up for Gods immediate service,
some of them by his cost, and others upon his counsel; and he followed them all
with his incessant prayers; and thus indeed did his sollicitous cares issue
themselves; and if he had had no cares, he had not prayed, as Melancthon used
to say; Si nil curarem nil orarem.
and if he had not given vent to his cares and fears by a believing prayer,
they had swallowed him up; he was one of the seed of Jacob in pleading ^he
Covenant, and in nothing more a true ^acobite than in wrestling with God for
Covenant-mercy for the posterity of the faithful; oh the tears, sighs, groans
of that man (...) God, urging God with his promise under his own hand; telling
the Lord, he would not ^et him alone, for himself had encouraged his heart, by
making and sealing that good Covenant, wherein stands our chief comfort; and
God will make it good to some, and why not to the children of the Covenant? how
often has he told the Lord, even in our hearing, that he was resolved he would
not let go that hold that God had given him, but would stick to him, by faith
and prayer, as ^ong as he had a day to live, and die in hopes that God would
make his promise good to his seed, when he was dead and gone.

His opinion for a young man that intended the Ministry, His opinion for young
Scholars.
was to be placed for some time with fomeable Minister, and to preach under
such alones eye and ear, and that it was hazzardous for beginners to live in
great men's houses; he was of excellent use in giving advice to young Scholars
in public and private; in the times when the Sectaries were at the height, at
an ordination at Manchester he gave the Exhortation, four were ordained, and he
said it rejoiced his Soul, to see in these discouraging times so man desirous
of the calling, but says he, it m^ be it is but as a Husbandman with his har^^
toward Night when he sees a storm co^ing, he calls out all that can carry a
she^ to come forth, makes all his force, for (...) may be it is but a short
time, as coming i^ at the Eleventh hour, but one hour to wor^ in; He advised
them to take heed of t^^ things, as in the case of the prophet to J^roboam,
sometimes the hand of Authorit^ may be lifted up against you, yet that man bed
ried up, be not affrighted with it; b^ then the seducer may slay you, consent
not (...) him.

He was wise and happy in his counsel and usually (being a man of much
observato^ he had exceeding pat instances, his grave counsels.
to set on h^ counsels with; as this, It is good for persons to submit to the
Lords hand, and to l^ him choose the Rod for us. A Woman (...) Manchester
burying a Daughter, of t^^ years never looked up, but repined at (...) came
often to the Grave, to mourn over it yet it was a Child miserably infirm, h^^
the Evil running on it in many places; afterward God took away the use of her
Li^^^ and lying in torturing pain, acknowledge that it was nothing to bury a
Child, a^ was now made sensible of her impatien^ under her form^ affliction,
and that no^ God had dealt smartlier with her: And upon this, Mr. Angier
mentioned an Aunt of his, who had great bodily weakness and pain, and she
desired that God would take that affliction away, and lay on her what
affliction he pleased but that; the Lord did take that away, and laid
affliction of spirit upon her, which was far sharper, and she never recovered
it while she lived. So to count the affliction best for us, be it never so
sharp: he sometimes told how Mr. Daniel Rogers his first Wife was a very cross
Woman, and he bore it a long time; at last he made his complaint to his Father
Mr. Richard Rogers, and he gave him this answer, Any thing, Daniel, to bring
thee to heaven.

He was very faithful in admonishing as he saw cause: His faithful admonition.
when an eminent Minister said he ^ook such a thing ill, or unkindly from such
(...) one, Mr. Angier gravely and smiling^y answered, Would I so little favor
^y self as to take unkindness from any one? which says that good man, (...)
thought of since, to my great advantage, for this taking unkindness is
ac^ompined with a fretting within ones self; and so it is a leaving the
offender, and ^lling upon ones self.

Mr. His thoughts of the Dutch War.
Angier was much afflicted with that sad War betwixt the Dutch and us, yet he
comforted himself, that God did not give us over to be corrected by Papists,
but that Protestants are in the hands of Protest ants, tho upon a sad account,
and he hoped that the drops of the storm might begin with the reformed
Churches, but the fury of it should be poured upon the Papists.

It pleased the Lord to lay upon Mr. His afflictions in old age.
Angier many grievous and cutting affliction in his old age; the latter part of
his days according to his own observation, on Joh. 21. concerning Peter, our
Lord told him, that when he was old, he should be carried whither he would not.
That God often exercises his choicest servants, that have been men of eminent
activeness and usefulness in his service, with great afflictions in their old
age, 1 Chronicles. 16.12. Invit. Ger. Maj. 470.
as bodily pain, so Asa in the latter part of his life was diseased in his feet
Melchior Adams tells us of Mr. George Major, that he saw the Funerals of six
sons, whereof one, i. e. Leonard, died by the biting of a mad Dog, several
Daughters, Nephew died; in all this and much more, saying, (Si bona accepimus,
annon mals sustineamus?) shall we receive good, and not bear evil? at last he
died of sore diseases, having kept his bed near three years: thus Mr. Angier
instanced in Mr. Rogers o^ Dedham, who had great pain of the stone, so had
worthy Mr. Storer of Stockport, and Mr. Johnson, Parson also of the same place,
old Mr. Bourn, Mr. Herle, and at that time when he spoke of it, good Mr.
Harrison of Ashton, his neighbor; it may seem a Riddle and an unaccountable
mystery of Providence, why God should think fit to lay the heaviest load on the
weakest Horse; old age is a burden to it self, Mr. Angier gave this account of
it, that thereby God thinks it fit to wean his Children from the World, fit
them for Heaven, and render it more desirable; besides God will make his
Children perfect Christians, exercised every way, in suffering, that they might
be ^ntire, lacking nothing, according to Jam. 1.4.

His old age afflictions were: 1. His Daughters dying.
The death of his beloved, lovely Daughter, Elizabeth, who tho she was Married
and lived with her Husband in Yorkshire, yet being in a deep Consumption, he
sent his own easy going-Horse to fetch her home, in hopes that change of Air
might tend to her recovery; but there she grew worse and anguishing, died May
26. 1661. and was ^d by her own Mother in Denton Chappel^ard, whose death tho
it went near to his heart, yet (being abundantly satisfied that ^he was got
safe to Heaven) he bore it with great composedness and aequanimity; for indeed
she was the mirror of her age for parts and piety: yet it could not but be an
affliction to his spirit, since fo hopeful a blossom of his Family was so
quickly nipt off in the flower of her age.

2. The Churches afflictions laid to heart.
But this presaged more crosses, it was a great affliction to him that things
wen^ so ill with the Church of God, as to public liberty, with which he
sympathized tho he enjoyed his; but himself also must ta^ a few drops of that
cup that many of (...) Brethren has a large draught of: in the Oxford Act that
commenced Mar. 24. 166^ by which Ministers were banished 5 mil^ from the place
where they had formerly preached, it was judged expedient that (...) also
should at present withdraw from (...) House; upon that Act he begun to Trave^
and his son-in-law with him, amongst (...) friends in Cheshire, and visited
several persons of quality, lodging with them so^ Weeks, being kindly treated
and lovingly entertained, being also of very gre^^ use, and leaving his good
counsels a^ blessing where ever he came, notwithstanding in that time he seemed
to be out of (...) element, and longed to return home: (...) was compelled to
return, for wearing (...) Boots daily, a goutish humor seiz^ on his foot, he
then said, Come son, (...) trust God, and go home; so he returned to his own
house, and continued there without further trouble.

3. He was very much afflicted with, Bodily distempers.
and at his stomach, which sorely oppressed him, and he could not find ease of
it by any means he could use; he was advised to take Tobacco, but could never
deal with it.

4. His very dear Wives death about two years before his own, His second wivs
death,
was a grievous and bitter affliction to him, whom he had enjoyed 32 years to
his abundant content every way; and indeed she was a dear and desirable
companion, very helpful in spirituals and temporals, drawing evenly in the same
yoke; of a truly Christian temper; one thing further I shall add of her, noted
to my hand, as a peculiar privilidg, and rare amongst Christians, That God gave
her early assurance of his love, and she said also not long before her death, he
had never withdrawn it from her all her time: this was very observable: and far
different from Gods dealings with his former Wife, of whom Mr. Angier faith in
some remarks left in writing upon her life, that tho God moved her heart to
seek him from 8 years of age, yet he never gave her settled assurance of his
love while she lived: Behold the arbitrary dealings of God with his own dear
Children: but God is infinitely wise in these cases.

But the great affliction, the very accent and quintescence of his affliction,
was the sin and miscarriage of some of his Children; this, this did cut him to
the very heart, and lay as a continual pressing load on his Spirit; his Son,
his only Son, devoted to God not only in Christian profession, but Ministerial
function, miscarrying under such education, with such aggravations, this went
so near him, that such words dropped from Mr. Angiers lips, of bitter complaint
to one related to him, as showed his heavy resentment of some burdens of that
nature; Tho he had paid for his Son 400 l. In a few years, to the prejudicing
of his own estate, yet he saw it did no good, and yet that was all nothing in
comparison of the dishonor to God by his extravagancies: his friend said, Sir,
God has given you much grace, and He is resolved to exercise it; Ah, said he,
but it is hard, very hard to bear; a strange word from such a man: but he could
bear any thing better than sin. But especially in so near a relation; as the
Angel of the Ephesian Church, to whom it is said, Rev. 2.23. Thou can not
bear them which are evil, yet have born, and have patience, and for my name
sake have labored, and have not faeinted: oh sin, sin, in dear relations
against his dearest Heavenly father, cut him to the quick; and Souls of a
sensible spirit know what this means; but God bore up this good man's heart, (as
he did David's) with hopes and confidence in the blessed Covenant, that sure and
well ordered Covenant: this he stuck to, this he pleaded and depended upon;
living and dying; still he spoke well of God, and exercised himself in praising
his name both in duties and discourses, owning the hand of God in all crosses,
to whom he had devoted his all: these various experiences helped him to
compassionate and encouraging counselling of others; for (as was said) he could
speak a word in season to quiet and qualify others spirit; under pressing
burdens; he still said, hold up faith and patience, wait on God, and fear not,
for he will issue all to the best, to his own Glory and your best good.

His usual practice was upon the evening before a fast day, His care to reform
his Family.
to put his Children and Servants upon it, to set themselves seriously about
the work of preparation; to search out and confess their sins; he used such
means as might by Gods help prove effectual for reformation both of himself and
his Family: and upon all such occasions of fasting or thanksgiving, it was his
way to inquire concerning fatherless and Widows, and such as were in necessity,
that something might be sent to them, for whom nothing was provided, as he
often said.

Not long before he fell sick, His review of his life.
he said to one that lay with him, that he slept very little in the nights;
adding, when I lie waking in my Bed, I sometimes run through the course of my
whole life; and if a Penman were ready by me, I could relate many observable
passages of Gods Providence about me: his friend said, Sir, you may do well to
write them down as they come into your thoughts: he made no answer to that.

When money lent by him came in seasonably, Money lent repayed he acknowledged.
though it was his own, yet he admired, and thankfully owned Gods Providence in
it, as if it had been a gift; and said, it is all one, whether it was a debt or
a gift, so God send it in a needful time; the paying of a debt is as great a
mercy from God, as sending a gift.

I must now hasten to the last scene, of this holy man life; His sat sickness.
he longed to be with Christ, and our Lord had been long ripening him for
Glory; he loved his Masters work, and his Master indulged him in his work: when
others were taken off, he was wonderfully maintained in his lot: he did not of
late years preach that day he administered the Lords Supper; the last
Supper-day, was August 12, 1677. and the next Lord's Day after, he preached one
part of the day, August 19. but when he came into his house, he laid his hand
upon his breast, and said, Ah, this will not do, I must give over preaching,
(which yet cut him to the heart to think of) he was very weary that Night, as
usually he was; the next day but one after, he begun to have some Aguish fits,
and had six or seven of those fits; from that time he began to decline apace:
when this his last sickness begun, he ordered his kindsman in the house to
write letters to Mr. Case, (his brother in law) Mr. Tuckney, his brother
Bezaleel, and others, to acquaint them with his condition, hoping for and
desiring their prayers: he expected his own Sons coming daily out of
Lincolnshire, but he came not while he was living: he ordered his Son-in law to
be sent for, a messenger was dispatched to him, but tho he hasted away toward
him, yet he came not till this holy Man of God had breathed his last; a few
hours before, on the same day, his approaching dissolution came on apace, yet
had he the free exercise of his understanding to the last; and as he had been a
man of prayer all his days, so he died praying; that morning he died he prayed
sensibly; the last words which were intelligible, were his request for the
King, and Council; but the particular words they that were about him could not
understand.

The last day of the week, His death.
Sept. 3. 1677, was the last day of that worthy man's life, he dyed about eleven
a Clock that day; and entered into his rest near the Sabbath, a day of rest;
from thenceforth to rest from all his weary labors, and to keep an Eternal
sabbath with his dearest Lord; and and it was his own observation, that God often
takes home his Ministers and people upon or near his holy day, to perfect their
graces, and give them rest on that day of Rest.

Thus fell that bright star, thus set that shining Sun in the firmament of the
Church, or rather hid from our eyes, to shine more gloriously in the upper
Region; the wise, [ i.e. wise Virgins, members of Christ's mystical body] or [as
the word is] Dan. 12.3. Teachers of others, shall shine as the brightness of
the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever
and ever. Thus this Pillar is taken down that bore up an incredible weight, not
discerned so well then, as felt daily by sad experience since his removal from
under ^he fabric: thus is this plant of renown ^ransplanted into a better
soil: this ancient ^ree of Gods own plainting, that had sheltered many with its
shadowing shroud, and ^ed many with its grateful fruit, is at last fallen by
the stroke of death, yet bears both ripe and plentiful fruit in the heavenly
paradise above: he that uttered words of life to others, is dead: he that by
the grace of God quickened others, is himself struck dead: dead, said I, no he
is but asleep, the sting of death was gone, the fear of death was vanished: he
lived an holy life: he died an happy death: he lived desired, and died
lamented, he lived to a good old age: himself would sometimes say, that he had
lived two years beyond the age of a man, for he died in the 72 year of his age,
in the same month wherein he was born: he died in his own house, the house
belonging to the Chapel, to which he had been a great benefactor: he died
amongst his own People, over whom he had been pastor 45 years, with whom he had
been traveling, weeping, fasting, praying; among whom he has left remarkable
seals of his Ministry: some indeed are gone to heaven before him, and some in
other places had benefit by his Ministry, tho but occasionally; one instance I
had from a very eminent divine in or near the City of London, that he being a
young Scholar newly come from Oxford, and being occasionally at Mr. Case^
house, when Mr. Angier was there, Mr. Angier went to prayer, but God so reached
and warmed the young Ministers heart by that prayer, that he has cause to
remember it while he has a day to live, and hopes he shall never forget it;
yea it had influence upon others related, who from that time proved as useful
and succesful instruments of Gods glory, and the good of Souls, as any I have
heard of in those latter times.

The whole Nation and Church of God seem much clouded by the obscuring of this
bright star, but especially that congregation of Denton is sadly eclipsed,
their valley of vision is at least turned into a valley of Division; oh that it
may not also prove a valley of treading down, and desolation: Ah, what
lamentation was there at his funeral! amongst the rest an ancient Christian
came from the grave into the house where the Ministers were sat after the
funeral, with a trembling body, weeping eyes, and with a doleful voice of sad
complaints, saying, Ah sirs, what must we do! what must we do! our loving
pastor is gone, our loving pastor is gone: And now that good man is gone after,
and many others, so John 4.36. he that sowed, and they that reaped, are
rejoicing together: but the sad countenances and weeping eyes of that day, with
that affecting passage of that good old man's bemoaning, cannot be easily
forgotten by the Writer hereof.

That Lords day when Mr. Angiers Corpse lay in his house, two Ministers preached
in his Chapel, two funeral Sermons, the one seeming to be a funeral Sermon to
the people, the other for their Minister.

That which concerned the people carried an ominous presage of the death of
their Gospel privileges, and Sunsetting of their glorious day, sadly predicted
from Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive with man: and oh what a
dreadful verification of that text has providence made there; that being the
last Sabbath that excluded Minister enjoyed the liberty of ordinances in that
place. The other Minister discoursed sweetly and suitably on John 17.4. I have
glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work thou gave me to do.

That Sermon was a lively comment on that good man's holy life, and a fair Copy
let before this surviving people; the perfect precepts in the Scriptures, and
lively pattern set before them for their imitation, makes it apparent that
Gospel rules an^ practicable, may be transcribed by some and will be a sad
testimony against others and tho Mr. Angiers mouth be now stop with dust, and
his voice shall no more be heard in his pulpit, yet oh that Almighty God that
lives for ever would awake carna^ sinners by this astonishing blow and breach
and propagate religion in that place, and by that blessed spirit transfuse the
Doctrine, principles, and practice of that good man into all his hearers, for
they shall one day know there has been a prophet among them.

The next day, being Sept. 5. 1677. the Funeral solemnities were mournfully
observed, on which occasion multitudes of persons, Gentlemen, Ministers,
relations, and Christian friends, besides his hearers and sad neighbors,
attended these dismal and sorrowful obsequies with sad hearts and dejected
countenances, lamenting not only the loss of such a worthy Pastor and Friend,
but their own Spirits did suggest great grounds of presaging fears concerning
the attending consequences of that heavy blow: his Corpse were decently interred
in Denton-Chappel in the Alley before the pulpit, by his last dear Wife, laid
in the same place.

Mr. Angier had requested Mr. Robert Eaton, (a learned pious Minister, who had
married his kinswoman) to preach the Funeral Sermon, and had given him that
Text to insist upon, in Act. 20.32. And now brethren I commend you to God, and
to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified: it was an excelent, seasonable
and pathetical discourse, and well worthy to be annexed to this present
relation, if the worthy Author ^ad judged it fit: however the solemnities of
that day will not easily be forgot^en.

Thus the best must die, Zech. 1 5. ^our Fathers where are they? and the
Prophets, do they live for ever? the holi^st men cannot plead for an exemption,
or expect Enochs privilege of a Translation: only to the godly deaths sting is
plucked ^ut, this swelling Jordan is driven back, the passage is rendered easy
and safe to the heavenly Pilgrim: God brought this ^aithful watchman, through
his long and boisterous sea, to a safe harbor in a ^asonable time, and if we
imbark in the ^ame ship of the Church and have our Lord Jesus with us as our
faithful and skilful pi^t, though in storms and tempests he be (as it were)
asleep, yet believing prayer will awake him, and he will rebuke (...) Winds and
Sea, and there shall be calm, and the Ship shall presently be at land, and the
passengers shall b^ ^afe.

I have now dispatched the History (...) Mr. Angiers life, as far as matters o^
cur to our present observation, a^ have drawn it thus far on till this Thre^ of
his life be cut off, and lets hi^ drop into the Grave, and so cuts o^ the line
of our Historical account (...) him.

THere are yet two things behind which show something of the breathings o^ his
gracious soul living and dying.

1. The first is some observables gather^ out of his own Diary, under his own
hand.

2. His dying Speeches, prayers, counsel^ and admonitions to those about him in
(...) last sickness.

Both these declare much of Gods Grace, and manifest the Holy exactness of his
serious and savoury Spirit.

The first is a considerable paper, respecting his frame of spirit in his
younger days, and reviewed and revsied in his elder years, (...) runs thus.

I do now seriously resolve, between God and my own Soul, to read his word
diligently, morning and evening, before private prayer thereto adjoined, and do
purpose to be constant in respect of time there^o to be allotted; to wit, in
the morning before Chapel, if it may be with convenience; or otherwise without
delay when return from the Chapel; at Night between 5 and 6 of the Clock, if
extraordinary occasions hinder me not, because my spirits being fresher than
after supper, I shall (...) the fitter to do God acceptable service. (...) do
likewise resolve to be diligent in my ^udy, every day for the space of 6 hours
^t least, no day to be overflipped without ^he full accomplishment of them. I
likewise promise faithfully to God, and my own Soul, ^o refrain as from the
common sins of the ^me, to wit, Drunkenness, Licenciousness, (...) the like, so
to strive against those sins (...) am by nature most addicted to, and for ^e
prevention of the like faults to shun (...) the occasions thereunto leading,
enticing, or provoking; as bad company, l^scivious talk, or excess in the use
of the Creature, the which that I may perfor^ according to Gods will and
pleasure, I d^ dain all my own abilities, and fly to his infinite mercy,
desiring his special help an^ assistance, his spirit to instruct me, his spirit
to direct me, his spirit to sanctify me, the I may be kept blameless, being
without sp^ till the day of his appearance: my des^ has been, is and shall be
upon my bended knees for the furtherance of these motion begun and kindled by
his holy spirit which I hope will cherish them till the flame into an holy fire
of Heavenly conversation, the Life of Virtue, the Glory (...) Grace.

Written with my own hand, April 6. 16^^ John Angier
Perused with comfort, May 1. 165^
July 19. 1657. I found a paper in (...) study of May 9. 1626. A Bill for Phys^
when I was in a Fever in Cambridg abo^^ 31 years since, so long has God
lengthened out my life.

My going to New England was ve^ forward, Mr. Newman earnestly invited (...) I
received Letters from Bristol, April (...) 1630. That I was expected there to
ta^ Shipping for N. E. this April, and had m^^ kindness offered me, yet the
Lord overruled it.

Upon the coming on of troubles, I had comfort from Zeph. 2.3. It may be ye
shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. Josiahs mercy was not to see the
evil, Jeremiahs mercy was to be secured in the midst of sight.

My Wife dyed December 12th. One Night after her death, the Children were in
the Parlour Praying together; and hearing a noise, I went to the door, and
heard my Son at Prayer with his Sister; he acknowledged to God that they had
despised Father and Mother, contrary to Gods command, and therefore God has
taken away their Mother; he desired God that they might not provoke him by
their sin to take away their Father also; which did much affect me.

Upon a recovery from a sickness unexpectedly, I was much affected with Isa.
33. ult. and in prayer the Lord brought to my mind, Matt. 8.9. affliction is
Gods servant, if he bid it come, it comes; if he bid it go, it goes.

At Bolton, I was sent for to visit a godly man that was sick at Great-Leaver,
found him in a comfortable condition; he told me, he received his first comfort
by my Ministry ^at Denton, Preaching on 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ ^ur passover is
sacrificed for us; ten years ago: Blessed be God who gave me this
encouragement. He notes in the margent. The fruits of my labors manifested ten
years after.

Nov. 30. -- 47. A day of thanksgiving was kept with some friends for the
recovery of a Child that had been sick; it should seem they were in the
journey, and had small hopes of recovery; the very same day they prayed, the
Child revived at night, and gathered strength in the journey sensibly^ they
were by the sickness of the Child detained against their own minds, and the
minds of the people, but God had a special hand in it; for God sent the
Pestilence into the Family where they were ^o sojourn and had they gone at the
time purposed they had gone into an infected house, and had been shut up there.

June 18 -- 71. God gave rest to our aged afflicted Mother, about 3 in the
afternoon it being Lords day; it is observable, that the day after God took
away our Mother and that supply from her sailed, God se^ me notice of some
supply out of my own estate, as he had formerly done when the rent of my Land
fell in Essex, Phil^ 4.19.

Novem. 19. -- 72 Died good Bishop W^kins of the Stone, a great loss, he d^ed
comfortably, and rejoiced in his moderation whilst he was Bishop: his death was
much lamented in the City of Chester.

Aug. 22. -- 73. upon hearing that Mr. Case going from home 4 or 5 days, they
returning, found themselves Robbed to a great value he subjoyns, Psalm. 73.26.
God a portion for ever.

Octo. 28. -- 75. upon reflecting on his Wives death, he says, that Octo. 25.
she said that in the beginning of her weakness she was something troubled, that
she was taken off her employment, and could do nothing; she was concerned about
the cares of the Family, and concerning me, that she should leave me in such a
condition: But now God had subdued her will, and quieted her heart, she knew
not what direction to give, but she had left all with God, and her heart was
quiet, she had no trouble at all; she told me one Night, that she thought God
sent Hanna Angier into the Family to ^earn her to die. This was a grandchild
of his that came from London, weak, and reached Denton with much ado, and soon
died of a ^nsumption.

Upon a day of Thanksgiving, (about a ^ear before Mr. Angier dyed) for Gods
great mercy to his Kinsman in an easy journey, his heart being much affected
with ^he Providence of God about it; he took occasion to leave upon record in
his diary, these observable circumstances to heighten Gods praises, and quicken
his own, and other^ hearts therein.

Mercies in a Journey, 1673.
1. Direction in the right way; want of this causes wandering, labor, and
sorrow, Psalm. 107.7. 2. Preservation of Man and Beast, of life and health, from
falls, harm, from enemies, robbers, murderers: Some have dyed in the way, as
Rachel, others fallen sick by the way, as 1 Samuel 30.13. It Is mercy when God
supports in travel, to endure heat and cold; for an Horse to die or be lame in
the way, is a great affliction: so daily supply of new strength is mercy. 3.
Comfort in the way and weather when both are good, and company is suitable and
comfortable. 4. Convenient places for rest, and good refreshment for noon and
night. 5. Seasonable provision of necessary food and cheerful entertainment. 6.
Temporary ease from the burden of domestic affairs, both care and labor, the
mind and body both are eased, others take the burden upon them for a time. 7.
Variety of objects to delight the sense fair buildings, fruitful fields,
pleasant meadows. 8. Change of air, pleasantness and healthfulness there, by
refreshing gales in the heat of the day. 9. The society of friends whom we
visit, and the mutual comfort that arises from their meeting after a time of
absence, and from their friendly and hearty converse. 10. Opportunity of
understanding more fully how God has answered our Prayers for them;
opportunity of Soul-help, of doing and receiving good by joynt-prayer, and by
conference, by declaring experiences, by stirring up one another to what is
good. Behold what excellent use a gracious heart and sanctified fancy can make
of those common affairs that many of us pass over with a common Spirit! See
what a notable sense he had of Gods goodness in every thing, to raise up
durable Monuments of Gods Glory with such sweet inscriptions thereon as may at
once both glorify God, and edify men.


When he traveled himself (as he often did) to London, Essex, etc. He was wont
to write down the passages of Gods Providence daily, and upon his return to
collect the sum of them, and to spread them before such neighbors as joined
with him in thanksgiving, partly to help them to special matter of praise; but
chiefly that God might lose no part of Glory that was due to him.

A Very Reverend and Worthy Brother, who was intimately acquainted with Mr.
Angier, has contributed some notices of his own personal knowledge, concerning
Mr. Angiers excellency in giving Counsel in difficult Cases of Conscience,
wherein he had occasion to consult him; the matter of them being of
concernment, and possibly may prove of use to others, I shall here transcribe
them.

The first was about Marriage; the Case is this: In 1654.

A Worthy young Minister, of excellent Parts and Piety. Tabled in an house near
the place where then he was Minister, with a Gentlewoman of serious Piety, of
good Birth and Breeding, at full years of Discretion, being 33. years of Age,
having 800 l. to her Portion, and so in her own hands that none could hinder
her of it; these two upon long time of acquaintance with each other, did desire
to Marry on both sides out of an hearty Principle of goodness, wherein they
agreed; but there was a Mother in the case of another temper, not religious;
had Married a second Husband, and took no care at all of her Daughter, but
rather showed her Inclination for her Daughters marryig with a rich man, tho of
little Religion; yea, the less Religion, they thought, the better it would
please her; so that they doubted much of obtaining her consent; the Case
proposed was, Whether her consent (in case it would not be had) must be
necessarily obtained, or no Marriage; when only a Mother, and she Married to
another, who did diminish the Childrens Estates, and that with the Mothers
Consent? 2. When as the Mother is before prejudiced against a good man, and
most of all against a Minister? 3. The Daughter of such an age? 4. Has her
Estate at her own dispose? etc.

This Case I sent to three Reverend men, and to Mr. Angier; his Answer I shall
transcribe.

Dear Sir,
It shall not be troublesome to me, but contentful, if by the help of God I may
reach forth any the least help to you, or any friend of yours that desires to
guide his way right. I do pity your friends, fearing it might be an hour of
Temptation to them, and a Cause of much Affliction, especially if their
affections be much engaged, which their living together speaks; my advice in
this Case is, That the Gentleman make use of some friend or friends to the
Mother, that have interest in her, to gain her consent, and if he have no
temporal estate equal to hers, or to add something to it; yet to signify that
he seeks the party more than the Portion, and to offer this evidence of it, to
give way that the Portion be laid out for her use, and the use of Posterity, if
the Lord show them that Mercy. If Friends cannot prevail, the Daughter may do
well (and it a very hopeful way) humbly to desire her Mothers consent in her
own Person; if by neither of these likely and due means, they can prevail; I
desire they may be moved still to pray, and wait upon the God of Spirits, who
knows his own Counsels, and can secretly incline all Spirits to comply
therewith. I cannot advise them to Marry without the Mothers consent obtained,
unless she has formerly set her at Liberty, and delivered her into her own
Power. For 1. The Mother has authority over the Child, as well as the Father,
an authority of her own, a joynt-authority with the Father given of God,
(Honor thy Father and Mother) an Authority founded by Nature; the Mother being
a joynt-cause with the Father of the Child's being; and tho the Father be dead,
and the Portion be in the Child's hands, according to the last Will, and his
Authority be ceased; that takes not away the Authority of the Mother, which was
included in the Fathers, but always distinct; and therefore some Wills in
bequeathing a Portion to be paid at Marriage, do make the reasonable consent of
the Mother a just condition. 2. It may be the Mother has just reason to deny
her consent; amongst others, the want of temporal means (i^ that be wanting)
which is a greater defect in Ministers conditions, than usually in others,
because they having large Spiritual means, and living at the height thereof, or
beyond, their Wives at their Death fall so much lower than others, by how much
they live higher; the Mother may say, She will provide a Match where Piety and
Portion meet. 3. If the Mother should unreasonably deny her Consent; yet we
must not run into that we have had so much experience of, of later times, to
right our selves by force and violence, but seek remedy in a regular way. 4. If
the Mother be carnal, and they religious, they must be afraid to lay a
stumbling block before her; and tho the Scandal will not be so great, being to
live in another Country; yet it will be too great, if to any, especially if to
a Mother, whose Souls good the Daughter is bound to pray for in a special
manner, and to seek by all good means. 5. To Marry without Consent of the
Mother, at best, is not a clear Case, but dark and doubtful, and will be an
advantage to Temptation assailing tender Consciences; whereby, if their
Expectations be crossed one in another, or God send Afflictions; their burden
will be much increased, because this Question will soon be moved, Whether they
did well to Marry without or against Consent? 6. If Children be left to their
own Liberty; yet the Duty they owe to their Parents comfort, and the greater
judgment and experience of their Parents, do justly challenge their humble
desires of their Counsel, their serious Deliberation thereupon, and great
unwillingness to Match without their reasonable consent: Advise your Friends
seriously to consider, whether they have not gone out of Gods way in engaging
their Affections mutually, before Consent sought; if the Lord shall help them
herein to repent, it will be a foundation of after-Mercy; the truly Godly are
apt to miss it far in these occasions; but Grace will not allow it, when God
makes a discovery. Thus I have freely imparted my thoughts to you in this Case,
beseeching God to clear the paths of all his Servants, especially his
Ministers, who are to carry the light before the people, I rest

Jan. 22. -- 54. Yours in all brotherly Offices, J. Angier.


(a) The matter of Scandal seems to stick most; and whether, if Providence
dispose of the Minister in another Country, this may not be some relief to
that, is queried.

He received the Opinion of others, as well as this, yet he took mightily with
Mr. Angiers Counsel; for he says, Upon the receipt of your Letter, and Mr.
Angiers advice in it, To pray and wait upon the God of Spirits, who could
sweetly incline all spirits to comply with his counsels; Tho I had prayed daily
for it, yet I was put on upon a more earnest begging that Mercy, in much more
Faith and Hope, that the Lord will so incline spirits. And about a week after,
he had the news that the Gentlewoman had by an humble Letter to her Mother, on
this account, obtained, that the Mother did yield to leave her to her own
disposal.

In a little time after he was settled a Minister in London, and Married, but
shortly fell into a Fever, and into the Small pox, whereof he died; and
particular Friends understood that he was seized with great Melancholy, and
trouble, which (it was thought) killed him; and it was judged it was occasioned
by excessive traveling that had surfeited his Body; but if this matter of
Consent had been doubtful, what work would it have made with him in such a
condition? According to the prudent Suggestion of the fifth Reason in Mr.
Angies Answer.

This was the first Case.

The second Case was about Presence at Common Prayer, which I the rather
insert, to testify his Judgment and Principle in that Case.

The Case was represented from an unknown Person to us, in these words, Jan.
10. 1662.

The grounds of my dissatisfaction concerning the Common Prayer, are,

1. The ineffectualness of forms upon my heart. Tho I do not deny the
lawfulness of forms, nor Question the experience of others in this or other
forms; yet I will say, That tho I have to the utmost endeavored to benefit my
self by the several forms I have been necessitated to hear in public and
private; yet I could never get any impression made on my heart thereby, tho I
have (as much as I could) removed prejudice; yet they have been so to me, as if
I had had nothing; and this I have observed in my self in several tempers of
Spirit, as Joy, Grief, Fear, etc. Nay when my heart has been in the best
frame, and most sensible, then have they been worst of all unto me.

2. As to this form, my prejudice is so great upon several accounts, that I
have no hope of good by it, as having been bred up under its plenty, and tired
with its emptiness, and yet surfeited of it; whereby it has the same effect
that such meats have, on which we surfeit; which besides nauseating, neither
have I had any good by it, but much hurt many ways.

3. I cannot hear it without sin; when I have been surprised with it, it has
instead of stirring up Graces, raised Passion, and such Anger, as has forced
me out of the place; and if it be Worship, it should be attended upon as
Worship, and the heart go along with it; which if it do not, must not be
attended. I find upon the view of my heart at Night, that I have contracted
guilt in my not joining cordially in Gods Worship, and getting good by it; and
by hearing it, increase my sin.

4. The influence that my intent of hearing it, had upon my heart, which I
shall relate something of, tho short of what it was. Being in another Country
amongst my Friends, I was somewhat troubled what to do; but the Minister being
of my acquaintance, tho I could not prevail with him to forbear it while I was
there; yet he promised me to read very little, which did pretty well satisfy
me; but when I heard the first Bell in the Morning, I was something sad to
think what a Snare I was come into; but when the next Bell gave notice, I
(being in secret Duty) was carried on by such trembling and terrors, with
anguish of Spirit, that I was forced from the Duty thereby striving to satisfy
my self with arguing the Case; but the more I did strive, the less I prevailed;
my weeping and sighing was so extreme, that I thought my heart would have
broke. Oh! how was I troubled that ever I set my foot out of doors to come to
that place to sin! nothing but sin, and sinful compliance, could I think it to
be; and this was much set upon my heart, that if I did hear it thus, I should
never have peace in my Conscience more; and the consideration of that great
loss by s^inning against light, did much increase and aggravate my perplexity:
I called in a godly kinswoman, and showed her of my trouble; we both
considered, whether it might not be a Temptation, but could not find it so; she
said if it were a sin in me, my staying from it would occasion more; that the
Lords day would be profaned by the wrath and bitter words of a Superior. But
while I could get no satisfaction, they stayed for me; my nearest Relation bad
me never go, except I was better satisfied; several Messengers were sent by
some, that it seems would not go without me; so to satisfy them I went, but
did not hear any of it; I wish it were (but it is not possible) for me with my
Pen to express what I felt in my Spirit in this half hour: No, my Tongue is not
able to utter it, and still its fresh upon my thoughts of conforming in this
thing, its brought to my remembrance, I am (as it were) bid to remember my
terrors at such a place, on this account.

All this put together, and duly considered, these Queries I make.

1. Whether I ought to hear it, as some press, that it is a sin to forbear? or
whether it be not sinful in me to hear it? Or whether I may sometimes, as
seldom as I can (to avoid the penalties) hear? Or,

2. Whether upon these accounts of my forbearance, I may comfortably suffer
what may be inflicted, and expect support? Or,

3. If you grant the hearing, whether may it be heard as something by the by,
without giving much attention, or with employing my heart with other thoughts
and Ejaculations more edifying?

Thus have I stated my particular Case, owning many Arguments that others use,
keeping only to my own case, which may differ from others, not judging what is
fit for others to do, or censuring them for what they do; and I should never
have put the Question upon this, but upon 2. accounts. 1. Because diverse say,
it is sin not to go; and then my Case is sad, that must sin either way. 2. The
other reason (which was first in my thoughts before I ever heard, or thought
any would have held it a Duty to hear) whether I could comfortably suffer in
such a cause? Thus I must say, I have not been without many serious thoughts
about it (sin I would avoid); Prayers and Tears, and not trouble, I find in my
Spirit upon forbearance, tho I diligently observe, and I have such a Conscience
that will not let me run on in the least sin, but would be telling me often of
it, without leaving me till I have left it, at least, endeavored and prayed
against it; neither do I find any convenience in staying away; but the sending,
and waiting in expectation till that is done, and loss of the Scriptures which I
read at home, at the same time; that of separation weigh not with me, it being
not total, but only from that which is questionable with me, whether it be
Worship, and coming to Singing, and public Sermon, Prayer however, it is some
comfort, that Mr. Ball calls them, Our Brethren of the Separation.

Dear Sir,
The Case you sent me enclosed, calls aloud to the Father of Mercies, and all
h^ Children for compassion and relief, which in his own time he will manifest
through ou^ Lord Jesus Christ. According to your desire, I shall by the favor
and assistance (...) the Father of Lights, freely communicate (...) you my
thoughts in this sad Case.

I do not apprehend any solid Argument to convince the Conscience in the
grounds of dissatisfaction, concerning hearing Common Prayer mentioned in the
Paper. Not in the first, ineffectualness of forms upon the heart. 2. No hope of
good by this. 3. She cannot hear it without sin. 4. The influence the intent of
hearing had upon her heart. To make these firm grounds for conscience to rest
and act upon, must be proved, That set forms in their own nature are the proper
causes of the grievances mentioned, which the judgment of this good Woman does
not deny in the first ground, viz. I do not deny the lawfulness of forms, and
the Paper it self does clearly manifest their natural causes. I conceive
therefore with submission, that there is much of strong temptation in the Case
propounded, which has met with a double great advantage. 1. The Irresolution
of the judgment touching set forms, whether they be lawful or unlawful,
obedience or sin; for tho there has been some apprehensions of lawfulness, as
in the first ground; yet the reasons have not been of such weight as to bring
the Scales of the Judgment to the ground in the case of lawfulness, and there
to hold them; but they have been wavering, and by the strong touch of
dissatisfaction to forms, the Scale has been hurried down on the side of
unlawfulness, and fixed there, which is the true cause of so great trouble
mentioned, in and for hearing Common Prayer. Because the good Woman has been
drawn by some external motive to act contrary to the present Sentence of
Conscience, or at best with a doubting Conscience, which makes an action lawful
in it self, unlawful to him that does it, Romans 14.5, 14, 19. The second great
advantage this temptation has met with, is a strong prejudice deeply rooted in
the affection, and by length of time nourished, and grown to that strength,
that it is become like an old grown disease, too strong for the Physic made
use of; so that when any thing of reason is offered to the judgment tending to
the health of the Soul in this Case, prejudice in the affection (like
distempers in the Stomach) does rise up and forcibly reject it; this is too
manifest in the second ground, and is the cause of what is expressed in the
third.

The remedies which by the blessing of God will be effectual to this good
Woman, must be suitable to the advantages given to temptation, and such as may
take them away. As 1. to endeavor in the use o^ Gods means, with dependence
upon him, t^ resolve the judgment, concerning the lawfulness of joining in
forms in such Societi^ where God calls us to attend upon his public^ Worship.
To this end I conceive there (...) sufficient light and weight of Reason, (...)
Mr. Ball's judicious Trial of Separation; but that will not be enough, unless
the mind be prepared by Prayer, for the guidance of the Spirit of Truth to
receive that Light, and by serious Meditation it prevail to scatter that
darkness which causes doubts, and to dwell there as a guide; this alone will
Answer all the Queries. If public Worship be lawfully performed in that way,
then it is a duty to join, and the heart must be kept with all diligence, that
the way of Communion between God and our Souls be not stopped. 2. The cure of the
old grown disease of Prejudice, will need the skill of the heavenly Phisician;
the cause of this Prejudice was the inward Corruption of the heart, which would
not suffer to take gains in Gods way, but inclined to flightness and weariness;
this corruption was much advantaged by the neglect of it at first, and want of
clear Conviction in the point of set-forms, which was its shelter, together
with an opinion of serving God better. The means of cure must be gradual, to
discern the Corruption of heart which lies at bottom, the neglect of it so long
a time, the advantage given to it, to lay them to heart, humbly to confess them
before the Lord, to crave pardon through the Blood of Christ, through purging
of the heart, and settling of the judgment, which obtained prejudice will be
prayed out, and the heart and head return to soundness. Whilst this cure by
the blessing of God is in working, special care must be taken to prevent
Relapses, by acting with a doubting Conscience.

Besides, the main spoken to, I observe some subtle Temptation insinuated, viz.
1. That when the heart has been in the best frame, and most sensible, they
have been worst. 2. Find no trouble of Spirit upon forbearance; no wonder,
whilst the judgment is unresolved, so great a prejudice remains, and an
apprehension of sin in joining. 3. Find no inconvenience in staying away, but
sending and waiting till that is done, and loss of Scriptures, which we can read
at home the same time. Is loss of part of the public Prayers of the Church, no
loss? and is private teaching to be compared with public reading by an Officer
of the Church, when they stand in competition? Romans 16.20.
The God of peace bruise Satan under our feet shortly.

Sir, I have made it my first weekdays work to answer this Case; and hearing
of this Messenger, have sealed it up, which will necessitate your trouble of
procuring me a Copy at your leisure; for I want time to transcribe, and am too
weary; if your thoughts differ from mine upon the Case, deal freely with me.
The Lord accept and bless our poor endeavors; remove a^ stumbling blocks, and
give light and peace to his dear Servants. Pray for

Yours, John Angier.


Other instances I might add, that his Counsel was asked in many important
Cases, and his advice was savoury, and usually safe, being grounded upon the
Word of God, having the advantage of an holy heart, a clear head, and long
experience; one only I shall subjoyn, of his advice to a Minister, who desired
his Counsel about removing to another place of more advantage for the World,
and greater probability of doing good. His Answer by Letter, was in the
Negative, saying, I bless God that such temptations do drive you and your
people to God the establisher of Zion. -- It was an Expression of Dr. Tuckneys
to me, It is ill transplanting a Tree that thrives in the Soil. -- Think upon
our Saviors Speech, When I sent you without scrip or staff, lacked you my
thing? and they said nothing: Be not solicitous about your means, or the
certainty of it; but set your Soul to the work, and Gods secret shall be upon
your Tabernacle. -- The Minister fixed his staff where he was, according to Mr.
Angiers Example and Advice, and never repented it.

Thus I have briefly given an account of Mr. Angiers solid and grave Answers to
some Cases of Conscience, and but a small taste; for it were easy to fill a
Volume with his various Letters upon like occasions, to several Persons.

I Hasten to the part he acted upon the Stage of this World, in the last Scene
of his Life, I mean in his Sickness, the gracious words that proceeded from
him; for as he lived, so he died; his discourses were Holy, Heavenly,
Ministering Grace to the hearers. His mouth spoke wisdom, his tongue talked of
judgment; Psalm. 37.30, 31.
for the law of his God was in his heart. The nearer approaches he made to
Heaven, still the more he breathed of Heaven; and tho many, yea, most of what
he then spoke, escapt the memory of Spectators or Bystanders; yet some
gleanings they committed to writing, which are as follow.

Upon Thursday, August, 16. 1677. being in a shaking fit, he was more free in
discourse, than ordinarily he had been, and said, I find my self weak and
feeble, and now think as much on my dear Wife, as at the very first; but God
took course to wean me by her long Afflicton. To a Mother he said, Be not sharp
or rash with your Children, lest their affections be alienated; when they
commit a fault, stay a while till your anger be over, and then counsel and
admonish them, maintain love in them, as well as your authority over them.

If it please God, I could be glad to live to see the good of the Church, and
of my Children; if not, I shall dye in the faith of it, that God will remember
them when I am gone, it may be then they will bethink themselves, when they
have not me to depend upon. God can soon alter their temper if he please.

To a young Woman that lived in his Family, he said, As you have lived here
many years, and by Gods help have been of some use, I am glad you are to be
disposed of unto so good a Family that have been Children of the Covenant, for
the mercy of the Lord is upon thousands of them that fear him; and though you
may meet with afflictions, yet I hope God will do you good, and help you to
bear them; this was a true prediction; for God laid an heavy hand of affliction
upon her husband, and then plucked him away by death, under some astonishing and
aggravating circumstances, known to the neighborhood, yet God supported her
very graciously.

Concerning himself he said, God has made my condition comfortable in the
World, I have lived comfortably, and have kept that which my Father left me; he
left me a good Portion, thinking (it may be) that I should never be likely to
get much in the world; and I have left it (or what is equivolent) to my
Children, and if they make it away, the will of the Lord be done. This is my
comfort, I have left no means unused, that I thought might be for their good;
and it may be, God may bring them into straits, when I am gone; and when he
has brought them into the wilderness, speak to their hearts.

My good child Betty! God took away poor Betty! but why should I call her poor?
She is rich, being with her best friend: I have had much grief for the loss of
my dear Wife, she was dear to me, but her happiness I could never yet envy.

God has in some measure given me an humble heart, and has helped to carry
humbly in my place, to Children and to servants; let God have the Glory, in
whom alone I have comfort.

One said to him. Sir, what do you apprehend of your self? he said, I know not,
but I have lived almost two Years above the age of a man; and if God have any
further work for me to do, he will recover me; if not, why should I desire to
live? I have taken great pains all my life, and never desired to live an idle
life, or a life of pleasure, But for me to be with Christ is far better;
henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge will give me.

His next fit was on Saturday, Aug. 25 -- Being very restless, one asked him
where his pain lay? he said, no great pain, but heat is pain enough; he asked
what time a day it was? they said ten a Clock; he said, the day went slowly on,
when one is sick; but when well, we think time goes too fast.

At another time he said, God has set back the time, as in Hezekiahs days; but
said he, if I could go to Chapel to morrow, I should think all well; but I
have no hope of that: But if God have a favor to me, he will bring me back,
and show me both it and his holy habitation; if not, let him do as seems him
good:

His Daughter coming into the Room, he said, Oh that I could see my Children
walking in Gods ways and fear! if I could see my Son, his Wise and Children,
minding the best things, and walking with God, I could dye with comfort. I
could much desire I could live to see it; I have Prayed and long waited for
Gods Salvation: And thou Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy fathers, and
serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind, for the Lord searches
all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts; if thou
seek him, he will he found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee
off for ever: 1 Chronicles. 28: 9.

Aug. 27. -- Early in the morning, after a restless night, and many weary
tossings, being unable to lie still, he said, my strength is spent; and added,
I may say as Hezekiah, I am oppressed, Lord undertake for me: Isa. 38.14.

To his cousin he said, We must not decline Gods service for difficulty.

Upon Tuesday, Mr. Constantine, (a worthy Minister) coming to visit him, he
desired him to Pray with him; and being asked whether it was not fitter for him
to pray for him in another room, because the Physicians advised him to forbear
company; he said no, but let him pray with me; yet to prevent tediousness, he
told them this passage of Mr. Horrocks (which he had often mentioned in his
health) When Mr. Horrocks was sick, Mr. Angier came to visist him, just as Mr.
Pike, (another honest Minister) was gone out from him; Mr. Horrocks said, Mr.
Angier, you must pray with me; but Mr. Pike has killed me with a long prayer.
When Mr. Constatine was gone, Mr. Angier said, In sickness we are wi^ling to
send for the Physician of the Body, and should we not send for the Physician of
the Soul? Ministers are the Souls Physicians; we need their help.

That night he desired that Jam. 5.13. to the end, might be read; and when it
was read, he said, Physicians of the body say, let not the Minister pray with
the sick; but the Apostle says, is any sick among you? let him send for the
elders of the church. When prayer was done, he said, what a mercy is it! my
understanding is as good as ever in all my life; one said to him, Sir I think
you understand every thing well, but your own weakness; he answered, I am
sensible of weakness and weariness, and burnings: but what a mercy is it that
tho my bones are vexed, my soul is not sore vex also, as David's was! I bless
God I am not afraid of death, yet what I may be I know not: Satan may tempt me
when his chain is lengthened. One said, No doubt, you will not want peace; he
answered, I know not that; tho Satan could find no sin in our Savior, yet he
may find matter enough in me; and added, that he had not in his health been
altogether free from Satan's Temptations, he had met with his Temptations both
in a married and single condition.

The same night while one rubbed his feet, he said, what a wonderful mercy is
it, that the great God should think upon, and bestow his love upon such a poor
worm as I am. This he spoke weeping; then said he, I die, but God shall be with
you, saying, I cannot leave you a greater comfort than the gracious presence of
the great God: he then added. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the
first resurrection, on such the second death has no power: His feet being
cold, and swearing, one rubbed them; he said, my body is weak and feeble, an
old tree will soon wither, but it must be cherished, and be tenderly cared for,
as well as the Soul; for it is the Temple of the Holy Ghost; and does keep in
it an immortal Soul, for a while.

Although the pangs of death were on him; yet he said, Blessed be God, I feel no
pain, but your cold hand; I would wait on God for a little sleep. Lord I wait
on thee, remember thy covenant, and thy word to thy Servant, which I have hoped
for, and it has been my support and strength in mine affliction; and through
thy strength I have been doing thy will, and endeavoring to keep thy
commandments, although in much weakness,; now Lord own thine own servant, do thine
own work, make good thy own words; I believe in thee, I hope and wait for thee;
hear the Prayers of thy servant, come Lord Jesus.

Then said he, I love Christ, and he loves me, and there is no love lost betwixt
us; I am his, and he is mine, and my desire is toward him.

One being present with him from Manchester, he asked of all his friends and
acquaintance there, and desired to be remembered to them, charging them to live
in love and peace; he said, entreat them to pray to God for me, and that will
do me more good than their presents; and being told that many of the people of
God were praying for him, he said, Who am I a poor creature, that Gods people
should be so concerned for me! I fear lest they should offend in being too
earnest with God for my life, for who knows but the Lord may hear prayers, and
may bring me back from the greve, as he is wont to do?

Afterward he perceiving that others did suspect his death, he desired the
48th of Genesis is to be read, where (said he) old Jacob blessed his Sons, and
the 49. Where alter he had spoken to them by a Spirit of Prophecy, and
commanded them, Genesis 49. v. 33.
he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people. And when they had done reading, he spoke to them one
by one, and prayed for a blessing for them; kissing the Children, he took leave
of them, and desired a Psalm to be sung, and he said, sing it cheerfully (
Psalm. 45.) It contains Christ's love to the Church, and the Churches love to
Christ.

Then he appointed his Grandson to read a Chapter, ( Jer. 23.) it concerns,
says he, slothful Shepherds, Gods Soul abhorred them, and he will curse their
labors, they shall not profit the people; they are fit for no use; adding, God
will make a Besome, and sweep all such out of his house; no man, said he, will
have a tenant that will not Till his land, but let house and ground go to ruin:
God will take special care of his house.

Then he said, John, take counsel at your best friends, they will give you good
Counsel, and set you good Example; meddle not with wicked, light, and vain
persons: remember the words of your dying Grandfather; then he desired the 14th
of John to be read, concerning Christ's sending the Spirit.

Then he prayed earnestly for the Church, that God would hear the Prayers of
his people, and return to these nations, and set at liberty his Ministers and
People; Oh, said he, that God would magnify the riches of his Grace, for his
poor Church, for the sake of Christ, for we are an unworthy people; but thy Son
dyed to purchase the pardon of sin, and reconciliation, and is set at thy right
hand, pleading our cause; Father hear him, for us, and be at peace with us.
Remember what has been done and suffered for reformation, and the precious
Blood of thy Saints, which has been shed, this is the seed of thy Church;
remember the prayers of such as are now with thee, and of such as are yet
alive, in the behalf of their seed, and the seed of thy Church, and setch in
such as are going astray from thee, and put a stop to their course of sin;
rebuke that profane spirit that is gone out in the Nation; revive the work of
reformation, of tenderness of conscience, and brokenness of heart, that
sometimes thy people have ^ad; remove the hardness of heart, and that lukewarm
frame of spirit that has ^ized upon us: return, O Lord, to the many thousands
of those that are seeking thee in ^hese Nations; how long, Lord, will thou ^e
angry with thy people in these Nations, and deny to answer their prayers? O
Lord, thy poor people have been many ^ears pleading with thee, for the Kings
Majesty; make him indeed a Josiah, a Nursing Father to thy Church; make him a
terror to ^vil doers, and an encouragement to them that do well; Father, thy
people are wait^ag on thee, when will thou return to thy ^oor broken scattered
flock? Lord hum^le them for sin that has provoked thee to ^is great heat of
thy wrath; thou have ^ercy in store, and waitest to be gracious, ^t we are not
fit for mercy; But Lord, ^ake thy people fit; thou have bid us ask ^at we will
in thy sons name, and thou will ^ve it. Lord increase our faith, and work (...)
thy great Name, and thy own Glory; ^vance thy Sons Kingdom, and bring down ^e
Kingdom of Satan; purge and purify thy Church, but destroy it not; thou ha^
appeared for thy Church many times when it has been very low, and thy people
have sinned grievously against thee, as we have done; and thereby brought
themselves into straits, yet thou have heard their cries, and wrought for thy
name, that it should not be polluted. Zion lies in the dust, thy Church is sore
broken; many of thy servants are gathered to thy self (...) they are not to be
seen or heard any more in the World; their prayers are ceased tha^ stood in the
gap, to turn away thy wrath from us. Lord revive conversion-work; le^ not the
Womb of thy Church be barre^ and unfruitful; is thy work quite done (...) O
Lord, art thou resolved to leave this Nation? have not thou many elect Souls
ye^ to be brought in? dear Father, hear tho^ the Prayers of Parents for their
poor Chi^dren; do not cast off the seed of the Church; let them not be as
unfruit^^^ Branches that are fit for no use, but to bu^ Lord prevent Popery and
Idolatry; let (...) not leave our Children worse than our P^rents left us; let
there be pure Doctri^^ Worship, and discipline in thy house accor^ing to thy
mind; continue the priviled^^ purchased with the blood of thy Son, (...) the
use of thy Church, which thy pe^ stand in so much need of, that we and our
posterity may praise thee, and future generations may set their hope in God,
and declare what thou have done.

And for the Congregation, he said, Thine they were, and thou have committed
them to me, thy p^or servant; for this 46 years I have been laboring among
them; according to my poor ability thou have bestowed on me I have endeavored
to bring them over to thee; now I am no more to be with them; Father I commit
them to thee again, as I have done many a time; take thou the charge of them,
see to them, provide for them; double thy spirit on thy servant; bless his
labors among them, let many Souls be brought into thy Kingdom of Grace, and
made fit for the Kingdom of Glory; let thy word abide with them; Lord, tarry
with thy people here, send down thy Spirit so freely, so plainly, so sully --
these last words he often repeated.

These were the workings of his gracious heart, vented Godwards in Heavenly
ejaculations, and uttered in such broken expressions; ^he was restless, and in
several postures; one said, Sir are you not sore pained? he said ^o, blessed be
God, I feel no pain, but the flesh will stir.

On Wednesday Night, about two a clock Aug. 29. 1677 he begun to speak after
this manner. -- I commit my self into the hands of that God, who gave me my
being, who has been a good God, and a loving Father to me, and into the hands
of Jesus Christ my Savior, who loved me, and gave himself for me, and bare the
burden of my sins; and into the hands of the Holy Spirit, who has sanctified
me throughout in Soul, Body, and Spirit -- And for my Children that have been a
great grief of heart to me, that have been very sinful; good Lord pardon their
sins in the Blood of thy own Son. -- For my Son that has greatly played the
Prodigal, hedge up his way with thorns, and make a stone-wall, bring him into
such straits, that he may begin to bethink himself, and say, In my Fathers
house is Bread enough. -- That at last he may return. -- For my Childrens
Children, Lord I commit them into thy hands, and all my dear Friends and their
Children. -- And for my People whom I received from thy hands, to take care of,
and instruct, to Preach thy word unto, and pray for, Lord thou know, in some
measure of uprightness of heart I have done it, and in some measure my life
has been according to my doctrine. -- Lord forgive the sins of my life, the
sins of my ministry, and the sins of my People. -- I desire to bless thee for
what good thou have done by my Ministry among them, and for those Souls thou
have already brought into Heaven. -- And now Lord, I commit them into thy
hands, who art the chief shepherd, they are thy flock, help them to live in
love and peace; Oh that strifes and contentions might cease. -- And thou who
have kept an open door for thy people in this place, when it has been shut
elsewhere for a long space; Lord keep it open still, until thou shall open the
rest. -- Oh, remember thy Ministers. Take care of them, -- provide for this
congregation; and if thou shall incline the heart of my Kinsman to stay amongst
them, (who has been trained up in my Family for these ten years, and they have
known his manner of life, his Doctrine, his parts, and abilities for the
Ministry) -- if thou see it good, make way in the heart of thy servan^ H. And
those that have power in this place, to use their endeavor, that he may
continue here. -- This is my desire. -- Lord remember thy People in these
nations, -- Papists are striving, and some of the mere formalists care not what
becomes of the Protestant interest. -- If Popery comes in like a flood, -- Lord
put a stop to it. Yea, put an end to it. -- Stir up the heart of our King, and
the King of the Swedes., against the Whore of Rome, that thinks she sits as a
queen and is no widow. -- Oh stir up the ten Kings against her --

Then he added a request for accommodation of a difference betwixt two persons
(whom he names) in his congregation, that he might see it healed before he die
-- And for some others that had made detection in practice, and were sallen off
to looseness, and vain company-keeping, who were children of Godly Parents,
that at last God would bring them home by sound repentance. -- Concluding, he
begs that the Lord will bring down ill houses of iniquity, meaning Alehouses.

He added that night -- Whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord; but when we are absent from the body, then we shall be present with
the Lord, therefore we labor. --

The just shall live by his faith. --

Read we the 20th of Acts where Paul fent for the elders of the Church of
Eph^su^, and gave them charge, and took his leave of them.

Read the 1. These. 4.12 to the end; adding, It is a great priviledg^, that the
dead in Christ shall rise first, and be with him, before they that are alive at
his coming shall be changed.

Thus his Holy Soul mounting upwards by gradual ascents, breathes out its self
into the bosom of God, being mellowed and ripened for Glory. In all these we
may take notice of, 1. His publick-spiritedness, still his heart was carried
out for the Church, No man like-minded, Phil. 2.20.
who naturally cared for the spiritual state of souls, and of Sion. 2 His
hatred of sin, Love to Holiness, Righteousness, Peace, and earnest desires to
promote the interest of Christ, living and dying, at home, abroad. 3. His sweet
serenity and composedness of Spirit, looking this grim sergeant of Death, the
King of Terrors, full in the face without amazement, meeting it is his friend,
giving him possession of his Fathers house. 4 His endeared love to the word of
God, delighting to have it read, sounding in his ears, and tipping his tongue
with Scripture Language, because his heart was thoroughly drencht therein. Thus
this Holy man lived, and thus he dyed; thus he believed, thus he Preached,
professed his hopes of a life to come; and thus he entered into his rest, and
possesses that purchased and perfect inheritance; who would not thus live!
what Atheist would not thus dye! however a carnal heart may possibly say as
that wicked Roister who with his companion visited dying Ambrose, and hearing
his Holy discourses and confident welcoming approaching death with comfort, he
turns him to that swaggering Russian, saying, Oh that I might live with thee,
and dye with Ambrose! and thus could Balaam, Num^ 23.10. that devilish
Wizzard, and covetou^ conjurer, say, let me die the death of the righteous, and
let my last end be like his, [ Heb. Let my Soul or my life be with the
Righteous] but they that would follow this blessed Saint into the upper region,
must enter in at the right door by sound conversion, and go forth, and go on in
the footsteps of the flock, traveling gradually in the paths of sanctity,
till we advance to the mount of God: and tho it be a rare thing to follow these
Worthies, [passubus aequis] with such long strides, and quick motion; yet
sincerity in our setting out, diligence in pursuit, and perseverance in holding
on to the end, may by the blessing of God bring us to the goal and garland of
Glory; and tho we cannot attain the exploits and honor of the first three of
King David's worthies, yet may we be faithful soldiers in this noble Army of
the followers of the Lamb, at last the Crown of Glory may be by the grace of
God set upon our triumphant heads; and if there be degrees of Glory, yet the
least vessel shall be filled, and the meanest Saint shall be sully laden with
that exceeding and eternal weight of Glory: for such and so great is that joy,
that it cannot enter into the most extensive and capacious receivers, but they
must enter into their Masters joy; as if ten thousand millions of Bottles of
different sizes were cast into the vast ocean, they would all be abundantly
filled; so every Saint shall say with David, Psalm. 17.15 As for me I will
behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy
likeness.

Nor is it difficult for an Angelified Soul set at liberty from the prison of
the flesh, to soar aloft with speed into these celestial regions, especially
having such a royal guard of Angels to attend it, tho it is said that from
Earth to Heaven it is an hundred and sixty millions of miles; yet how quickly
and safely can that blessed Convoy convey it into the presence chamber of that
Glorious King? Oh how well did this gracious Soul know the way thither, where
he had been daily visiting the great God by faith and prayer; he was not a
stranger to the laws of that Country, nor unacquainted with the manner of that
Court above; but as he walked with his God, and was joined to that heavenly
soicety; so doubtless he kept up some communion with those blessed spirits
above, as they have an ineffable way of intercourse and correspondence amongst
themselves; yet have we no Scripture ground to pray to, or expect answers from
them; happy they that have faithfully improved their gifts and graces whilst
conversant below; remember their dying speeches, and imitate their lovely
lively examples.

IT might now be expected that I should further unfold Elijahs Mantle, by
recording those pithy and pertinent Speeches that dropped from him. But as that
has been occasionally rehearsed already, in the preceding Narrative; so I fear
those that were conversant about him, were not so observant of those gracious
words that proceeded from him in his health, as in his sickness; otherwise we
might have enriched the world with some useful and Holy observations, suitable
to several occasions, sacred and civil.

1. An eminent Divine took notice, that Mr. Angier said, he would not be rich,
or that he wished not to be rich, or have his Relations rich; nay, that he was
really afraid of it; probably respecting it not, mentioning that of the Apostle
1 Timothy 6.9, 10. or that Prove. 30.8, 9.

2. Again, he used to observe, that Religion was most in the Country, rather
than Towns and Cities: or that ordinarily the power of Godliness, simplicity,
sincerity, are found among Husbandmen rather than tradesmen.

3. That in Cities, Towns, and among the trading part, there was much excess in
diet, apparel; that they spoiled their bodies. and were less serious in
discourse, and laborious in their callings.

4. That he did not judge it fit to call any Gentlewoman, Madam, except she was
a Lady indeed; adding, that men never called women, Madams, but since they
loved other women better than their wives.

5. Again, he used to say, there is nothing wherein Godly persons are more apt
to miss it, than in the business of Marriage, both upon their own account, and
their Children.

6. Again, he used to say, it is an hard matter to see another blessed with
success in his Ministry, and our own labors blasted, and not to grudge or be
discontented thereat.

7. Again, if God will help me to take care of my duty, I will leave him to
take care both of my maintenance, and of the fruit of my labors.

8. He said, when persons have laid their dead relations, or friends, in the
grave, they say, they have been performing the last office for them; but they
are mistaken, for they have yet something to do for their names or posterity.

I cannot at present call to mind any more, tho this must be imputed rather to
our non-observance than to his barrenness; yet there is some passages that I
meet with in the life of David Chytreus, a German Divine, the are so pat to the
frame of this holy man^ Spirit, and consonant to his ordinary language, that I
shall conclude this Narrative therewith: summa me a sapientia est, qu^^ scio me
nihil sapere, etc. The chiefest part of my wisdom is to know that I want
wisdom; nor do I expect to receive any thing upon the confidence of my own
understanding, but I still setch both counsels and reasons of all that I am to
do from God alone; and keep my self within the limits of my calling; the sum of
my piety is, that I daily acknowledge and bewail my own impiety, and would
willingly be more Godly; Christ is the Glory and splendour of our name, who for
us is made Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, with whom we
shall live to all eternity. Indeed we neither own nor desire a glorious name,
nor popular splendor upon earth; and if we were formerly tickled thereby, our
repentance has made us contemn it; and are taught by long and sweet
experience, and now find the comfort of it, when death approaches, That the
life of Christ within us, and a life to Christ, will afford us the greatest
comfort; tho alas too late begun, Isa. 38.3, 4. Then Hezekiah turned his face
toward the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, and said Remember now O Lord, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight.

2 Cor. 1.12. for our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, sit by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to unwards.

1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin.

HALLELUJAH.

FINIS
Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
SERMONS on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Colossians, by Mr. J.
Daille, translated into English by E.S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwin's, and Dr. John
Owens Epistles Recommendatory.

An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Matthew. 4. and Peter's Sermon to
Cornelius; and circumspect walking, by Dr. Tho. Tailor.

A practical Exposition on the 3d Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul to
the Cor^ithians, with the Godly man's choice, on Psalm. 4 v 6, 7, 8. by Anthony
Burgess.

Dr. Donns 4 to Sermons, being his 3 Volumes.

Pareus Exposition on the Revelations.

Choice and practical Expositions on 4 select Psalms, viz. The fourth Psalm in
eight The forty second Psalm in ten The fifty first Psalm in twenty The sixty
third Psalm in seven Sermons


Forty six Sermons upon the whole eighth Chapter of the Epistle of the Apostle
Paul to the Romans. Both by Tho. Horton, D. D. late Minister of Saint Hellens.

An Analytical Exposition of Genesis, and of twenty three Chapters of Exodus,
by George Hughes, D D.

One hundred Select Sermons on several Texts, by Tho. Horton.

The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinnock,
M. A.

An Antidote against Quakerism, by Steph. Scandret.

An Exposition on the five first Chapters, of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon, by William Greenhil.

The Gospel Covenant opened, by Pet. Bulkley.

The Fiery-Jesuit, or an Historical-Collection of the rise, increase, doctrines
and deeds of the Jesuits, exposed to view for the sake of London.

Horologiographia optica; Dyaling, universal and particular, speculative and
practical; together with a description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method;
by Sylvanus Morgan.

The practical Divinity of the Papists discovered to be destructive to true
Religion, and Men's souls, by J. Clarkson.

The Creatures goodness as they came out of Gods (...), and the good-mans (...)
to the bruit-creature, in two Sermons by Tho. Hodges, B.D.

Certain considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst Protestants.

The Saints triumph over the last enemy, in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr.
James Janeway, by Nath. Vincent.

The Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the principal errors of the Church of
Rome detected and confuted in a Morning Lecture, preached by several Ministers
of the Gospel in or near London.

Four useful discourses: (1) The art of improving a full and prosperous
condition for the Glory of God; being an appendix to the art of Contentment, in
three Sermons, on Philip. 4.12. (2) Christian submission, on 1 Samuel 3.18. (3)
Christ a Christians life and death is gain, on Phil. 1.21. (4) The Gospel of
peace sent to the sons of peace, in six Sermons, on Luke 10.5, 6. by Jeremiah
Buroughs.

Dr. Wilds Letter of Thanks or Poems.

A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands.

Canaans Calamity.

The intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or the
particular believing soul: in several Lectures on the whole second Chap. of
Cant by John Calli^s, D.D.


